Title: Worcester County Public Schools
Date: 11/01/2010
Type: Local School Systems
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5a945d39cc9d72404c150a48
Extracted: 2025-06-18T10:51:12.501059
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Financial Management Practices Performance Audit Report
Worcester County Public Schools
November 2010
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
 This report and any related follow-up correspondence are available to the public through
the Office of Legislative Audits at 301 West Preston Street, Room 1202, Baltimore,
Maryland 21201. The Office may be contacted by telephone at 410-946-5900, 301-970-
5900, or 1-877-486-9964.
 Electronic copies of our audit reports can be viewed or downloaded from our website at
http://www.ola.state.md.us.
 Alternate formats may be requested through the Maryland Relay Service at 1-800-735-
2258.
 The Department of Legislative Services – Office of the Executive Director, 90 State Circle,
Annapolis, Maryland 21401 can also assist you in obtaining copies of our reports and
related correspondence. The Department may be contacted by telephone at 410-946-
5400 or 301-970-5400.

--- Page 3 ---
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY
November 1, 2010
Karl S. Aro Bruce A. Myers, CPA
Executive Director Legislative Auditor xxx
Senator Verna L. Jones, Co-Chair, Joint Audit Committee
Delegate Steven J. DeBoy, Sr., Co-Chair, Joint Audit Committee
Members of Joint Audit Committee
Annapolis, Maryland
Ladies and Gentlemen:
We conducted an audit of the financial management practices of the Worcester
County Public Schools (WCPS) in accordance with the requirements of the State
Government Article, Section 2-1220(e) of the Annotated Code of Maryland. WCPS is
the seventh smallest public school system in Maryland based on the number of
students enrolled. The educational services are delivered in 14 schools, with fiscal
year 2009 expenditures of $129 million. The objectives of this audit were to
evaluate whether WCPS procedures and controls were effective in accounting for and
safeguarding its assets and whether its policies provided for the efficient use of
financial resources.
Our audit disclosed that, in many cases, WCPS had procedures and controls in place
to ensure the safeguarding of assets and the efficient use of financial resources.
Nevertheless, our report contains 20 recommendations to WCPS to enhance controls
and to implement best practices used to improve operations in such areas as
procurement, transportation, food services, facilities, and equipment inventory. For
example, WCPS had not developed comprehensive policies to govern the
procurement of goods and services, including construction-related activities. We
noted that WCPS used the same construction management firm for three
consecutive major school building projects, but had only bid these services for the
first project. The failure to bid certain contracts violates State law governing
procurements by local boards of education. Also, WCPS did not have a written policy
establishing the criteria for calculating the bus contractor payment rates, which
included payments for the cost of the vehicle, bus driver wage rates, and
maintenance cost reimbursements. Furthermore, certain components of the formula
used to establish bus contractor payment rates should be reevaluated, as the rates
appear to result in unnecessarily high payments, and could cost WCPS approximately
$3.9 million over the life of the new buses put into service since 1996. Also, WCPS
should establish better controls over critical information technology systems. In
addition, WCPS should establish a comprehensive performance measurement
system to evaluate key operations.

--- Page 4 ---
An executive summary of our findings can be found on page i, immediately
following this cover letter, and our audit scope, objectives, and methodology
are explained on page 63. WCPS’ response to this audit is included as an
appendix to this report. We wish to acknowledge the cooperation extended to
us during our audit by WCPS.
Respectfully submitted,
Bruce A. Myers, CPA
Legislative Auditor

--- Page 5 ---
Executive Summary
The Office of Legislative Audits has conducted an audit to evaluate
the effectiveness and efficiency of the financial management
practices of the Worcester County Public Schools (WCPS) in
accordance with the State Government Article, Section 2-1220(e) of
the Annotated Code of Maryland. State law requires the Office to
conduct such an audit of each of the 24 public school systems in
Maryland and provides that the related audit process be approved
by the Joint Audit Committee. Since the Committee approved the
audit process in September 2004, we have issued audit reports
related to 22 school systems; WCPS represents the 23rd to date.
The approved process included 11 functional areas to be audited at
each system. The following are summaries of the findings in these
areas at WCPS.
Revenue and Billing Cycle (see pages 9 through 12)
According to WCPS’ audited June 30, 2009 financial statements,
$132.7 million in revenue was received from all sources during
fiscal year 2009, the majority of which was received via electronic
fund transfers from other governmental entities. Procedures and
controls for significant revenue sources and for accounts receivable
were generally found to be adequate. However, based on our audit,
cash receipts received at the central business office were not
adequately controlled. For example, checks were not restrictively
endorsed upon receipt, and collections were not independently
verified to deposit documentation.
Federal Funds (see pages 13 through 15)
Annually, WCPS is subject to an audit of its federally funded
programs (often referred to as the Single Audit, a requirement of
Circular A-133, which is issued by the U.S. Office of Management
and Budget). Due to parallels between that work and the scope of
our audit, we placed significant reliance on the results of the
independent audit of the fiscal year 2009 grant activity, for which
reported expenditures totaled $7 million. The related report stated
i
Office of
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 6 ---
that WCPS complied, in all material respects, with the requirements
applicable to its major federal programs. In addition, with respect to
internal controls over compliance with, and the operation of, major
federal programs, the auditors reported no matters considered to be
material weaknesses and no significant deficiencies.
WCPS had established a procedure to identify children eligible for
Medicaid-subsidized1 services and recover related costs. WCPS
also fully participated in the federal E-Rate program, which provides
funding for telecommunications expenses.
Procurement and Disbursement Cycle (see pages 17
through 20)
According to WCPS records, non-payroll disbursements totaled
approximately $54 million during fiscal year 2009. WCPS used
existing governmental contracts as a way to obtain discounts and
reduce procurement costs. However, WCPS had not developed any
Board approved policies governing procurements. Also, WCPS
procedures did not require Board approval of any contracts,
although generally construction related contracts were approved by
the Board. In addition, WCPS should improve controls over its
automated system used for invoice payment. Finally, our tests
disclosed that WCPS did not always competitively bid procurements
or provide justification for sole source procurements.
Human Resources and Payroll (see pages 21 through 23)
WCPS employed 1,156 full-time equivalent employees as of October
2008, and associated payroll costs during fiscal year 2009 totaled
$75 million. WCPS uses a centralized hiring and approval process
to help control payroll costs. WCPS should improve controls over its
payroll processing and develop a comprehensive workforce plan by
addressing key non-instructional personnel.
1 The Federal Medical Assistance Program, or Medicaid, is not a grant program under
Circular A-133 and is not included in the Single Audit.
ii
Office of
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 7 ---
Inventory Control and Accountability (see pages 25
through 27)
WCPS should improve its policies and procedures to ensure that
accountability and control is effectively maintained for its
equipment inventory. According to the WCPS audited financial
statements, as of June 30, 2009, the capital equipment inventory
had an undepreciated cost of $3.2 million.
Information Technology Services (see pages 29 through
31)
WCPS maintains and administers a computer network, computer
operations, and a number of significant administrative and
academic-related information system applications. A master
technology plan, which is periodically updated to address current
and future school needs, has been developed. WCPS, however,
needs to improve certain computer system security policies and
develop a comprehensive disaster recovery plan to adequately
safeguard applications and data systems.
Facilities Construction, Renovation, and
Maintenance (see pages 33 through 37)
WCPS maintains 14 schools and several other facilities (such as
administration and support offices) with a staff of 84 custodial and
maintenance personnel. WCPS uses a comprehensive and public
process to plan for construction and renovation of school facilities.
Plans are long-term, updated annually, and reflect input from the
Board. WCPS should develop formal policies over critical
construction procedures to help ensure compliance with State law
and establish a performance measurement system to better
manage its maintenance operations.
iii
Office of
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 8 ---
Transportation Services (see pages 39 through 46)
WCPS is responsible for the safe transportation of approximately
6,300 eligible students, of which one percent is disabled.
WCPS uses several best practices to increase the efficiency of
transporting students, such as staggering school start and stop
times so buses can provide multiple trips on the same day.
However, WCPS should establish comprehensive bus routing
procedures and should consider using automated routing software
to help efficiently plan bus routes. WCPS should develop a written
policy establishing the criteria for determining bus contractor rates
and reevaluate the formula used to determine certain payments to
bus contractors. The current payment methodology may result in
WCPS paying $3.9 million more than necessary over the life of new
buses put into service since 1996. Also, WCPS should perform an
analysis to determine if it is cost beneficial to continue outsourcing
its transportation services and develop performance measures to
evaluate its transportation operations.
Food Services Operations (see pages 47 through 51)
WCPS currently uses a number of best practices in its food services
operations. For example, it uses available USDA commodities and
has procedures in place designed to maximize participation in the
National School Meals Programs. However, WCPS should improve
controls over the procurement of food supplies and reflect all costs
(including indirect costs) when evaluating its food service
operational performance. WCPS should also evaluate the meals per
labor hour performance of its food services operations and consider
practices to improve production.
School Board Operations and Oversight (see pages 53
through 59)
The seven-member Board has adopted policies governing certain
operations of the Board and WCPS and exercised oversight of
financial activities through independent audits. WCPS should
obtain the required approval from the State Ethics Commission for
its ethics policy and take measures to ensure full compliance with
the policy. To enhance oversight, the Board should adopt
comprehensive performance measures in key operational areas,
such as transportation, food service, and facilities management.
iv
Office of
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 9 ---
The Board should also consider establishing an internal audit
function and a confidential reporting process to receive reports of
possible fraud, waste, or mismanagement.
Other Financial Controls (see pages 61 through 62)
WCPS has appropriate practices in place to govern its cash and risk
management.
v
Office of
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 10 ---
vi
Office of
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 11 ---
Table of Contents
Executive Summary i
Background Information 7
Oversight 7
Statistical Overview 7
External Audit of Fiscal Year 2009 Activity 8
Chapter 1: Revenue and Billing Cycle 9
Background 10
Controls Over Revenue and Billing Cycle Activity Were Generally Adequate for 11
Significant Revenue Types
Controls Over Cash Receipts Received at the Central Business Office 11
Need to Be Improved
Recommendation 12
Chapter 2: Federal Funds 13
Background 14
WCPS Established Adequate Internal Controls Over Federal Grants and 14
Complied with Federal Grant Requirements
WCPS Properly Managed Medicaid-Subsidized Services for Eligible Students 14
WCPS Participated in the Federal E-Rate Program 15
1
Office of
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 12 ---
Table of Contents
Chapter 3: Procurement and Disbursement Cycle 17
Background 17
WCPS Used Several Best Practices to Address Its Procurement 18
and Disbursement Needs
WCPS Should Develop Comprehensive Procurement Policies and 18
Procedures to Control Procurements
WCPS Had Not Established Adequate Internal Control Over Invoice 19
Processing and Disbursements
WCPS Should Strengthen Internal Controls Over Procurements and Contracts 19
Recommendations 20
Chapter 4: Human Resources and Payroll 21
Background 21
Human Resources and Payroll Internal Controls Need to Be Strengthened 22
Workforce Planning Should Be Expanded to Include Non-Instructional 23
Positions
Recommendations 23
Chapter 5: Inventory Control and Accountability 25
Background 25
Existing Controls and Procedures Over Equipment Should Be Improved 26
Recommendation 27
2
Office of
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 13 ---
Table of Contents
Chapter 6: Information Technology Services 29
Background 29
Technology Plans Were Developed to Address Current and 30
Future Needs of WCPS
Steps Should Be Taken to Ensure Adequate Security Over IT 30
Applications
WCPS Should Develop a Comprehensive Disaster Recovery Plan 31
Recommendations 31
Chapter 7: Facilities Construction, Renovation, and 33
Maintenance
Background 33
A Number of Best Practices Were in Place to Enhance the 34
Efficiency and Effectiveness of the WCPS Facilities and
Maintenance Department
WCPS Should Develop Formal Policies Over Critical Construction 35
Procedures
Certain Processes Should Be Implemented to Increase the 36
Effectiveness of Maintenance and Custodial Operations
Recommendations 36
3
Office of
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 14 ---
Table of Contents
Chapter 8: Transportation Services 39
Background 40
Several Best Practices Were in Place to Enhance Student Transportation 40
Services
Routing Procedures Should Be Enhanced 41
Bus Contractor Rates Paid Were Not Based on Documented Criteria 42
More Can Be Done to Ensure Cost-Effective Operations 43
Control Over Payments to Bus Contractors Should Be Enhanced 44
Performance Should Be Measured and Reported Regularly to the Board 45
Recommendations 45
Chapter 9: Food Services Operations 47
Background 47
Certain Best Practices Were in Place 49
Internal Controls Over Purchasing of Food Supplies Need to Be Improved 49
Food Services Operations Should Recognize All Applicable Costs and 50
Performance Measures Should Be Developed to Assess Efficiency
Recommendations 51
Chapter 10: School Board Operations and Oversight 53
Background 53
Certain Oversight Has Been Put in Place Regarding WCPS Operations 55
The Board Should Obtain Required Approval for Its Ethics Policy and 55
Ensure Compliance With the Policy
The Board Should Take Additional Steps to Improve Its Oversight Functions 57
Recommendations 58
4
Office of
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 15 ---
Table of Contents
Chapter 11: Other Financial Controls 61
Risk and Cash Management Best Practices Were in Place 61
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology 63
Response of Worcester County Public Schools Appendix
5
Office of
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 16 ---
6
Office of
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 17 ---
Background Information
Oversight
Worcester County Public Schools (WCPS) is governed by a local
school board, consisting of seven elected members and three non-
voting student members. The vast majority of WCPS funding is
provided by the State and the Worcester County government. In
addition, the Maryland State Department of Education (MSDE)
exercises considerable oversight through the establishment and
monitoring of various financial and academic policies and
regulations, in accordance with certain provisions of the Annotated
Code of Maryland. MSDE also works with WCPS to comply with the
requirements and mandates of the federal No Child Left Behind Act
of 2001. Oversight by the Worcester County government is
principally exercised through the County approvals of the WCPS
annual operational and capital budgets.
Statistical Overview
According to MSDE student enrollment records, WCPS is the
seventh smallest school system based on student enrollment
among the 24 public school systems in Maryland. From fiscal year
1998 through 2008, the total kindergarten through grade 12
regular and special education pupil population has increased 3.2
percent from 6,462 to 6,671 with projected decreases to 6,320 by
2017.2 For the 2009-2010 school year, WCPS had 14 schools,
consisting of 5 elementary, 1 intermediate, 3 middle, 3 high
schools, and 2 other schools. According to the fiscal year 2009
audited financial statements, operating expenditures were $102.4
million and capital expenditures were $26.9 million. The largest
expenditure category is salaries and wages, including benefits,
which accounted for approximately 74 percent of the operating
expenditures during fiscal year 2009. WCPS budgeted full-time
positions in fiscal year 2009 totaled 1,189, which consisted of 893
instructional and 296 non-instructional employees.
2 Source: Maryland Department of Planning, Planning Data Services.
7
Office of
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 18 ---
Certain statistical information contained in this report was taken
from unaudited reports distributed by MSDE and represents the
most current comparable information available at the time of our
audit. These reports are based on self-reported data from the 24
Maryland public school systems, and MSDE does not warrant the
comparability or completeness of the data.
External Audit of Fiscal Year 2009 Activity
Annually, WCPS engages a certified public accounting firm to
independently audit its fiscal year-end financial statements.
Additionally, the auditor conducts what is referred to as a Single
Audit of WCPS federal grant programs (as required by federal
regulations). The two resulting audit reports for the 2009 fiscal year
were issued in October 2009. Neither report disclosed any material
weaknesses or significant deficiencies on WCPS record keeping,
processes, and controls.
8
Office of
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 19 ---
Chapter 1
Revenue and Billing Cycle
According to the WCPS audited financial statements for the fiscal
year ended June 30, 2009, $132.7 million of revenue was received
by WCPS during fiscal year 2009. Due to similarities between the
work of the independent certified public accounting firm that
audited the WCPS financial statements and the scope of our audit
in this area, we placed significant reliance on the results of the audit
of the fiscal year 2009 financial statements for revenue
transactions, including State, local, and federal sources and other
sources of revenue (such as student activity fund3 cash receipts of
$2.1 million) and for accounts receivable (for example, amounts
due from other governments). The firm’s procedural review and
testing disclosed no material weaknesses4 and no significant
deficiencies.5 Such testing included the most significant revenue
3 The Board has a fiduciary responsibility to ensure that the school activity fund is used
only for intended purposes by those to whom the assets belong. Receipts for the school
activity fund are not included in the $132.7 million revenue total because the Board
cannot use these assets to finance its operations.
4 A material weakness is a significant deficiency, or combination of significant deficiencies,
that results in more than a remote likelihood that a material misstatement of the financial
statements (or, with respect to Single Audit, material noncompliance with a type of
compliance requirement of a federal program) will not be prevented or detected by the
entity’s internal control.
5 A significant deficiency is a control deficiency, or combination of control deficiencies,
that adversely affects the entity’s ability to initiate, authorize, record, process, or report
financial data reliably in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles (or,
with respect to Single Audit, to administer a federal program such that there is more
than a remote likelihood that noncompliance with a type of compliance requirement of
a federal program) that is more than inconsequential will not be prevented or detected
by the entity’s internal control.
9
Office of
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 20 ---
types—the majority of which related to electronic fund transfers from
other government entities—as well as school activity funds and food
service cash receipts.
Our audit of cash receipts received at the central business office,
which totaled $21 million during fiscal year 2009, disclosed that
controls over these collections need to be improved.
Background
WCPS revenues consist primarily of funds received from the State,
Worcester County, and the federal government. Other sources
include receipts from the sale of food, facility rentals, and interest
income. Chart 1 (see below) shows the breakdown of WCPS fiscal
year 2009 revenues of $132.7 million by major source.
Chart 1
Sources of All Fiscal Year 2008 Revenues
($132.7 Million)
Other
State of
$1,312,381
Maryland
1%
$26,903,472
20%
Federal
$8,025,555
6%
Worcester
County
$96,434,436
73%
Source: WCPS fiscal year 2009 audited financial statements
and supporting WCPS records
10
Office of
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 21 ---
In addition to the revenues in Chart 1, schools also collected funds
for various purposes, such as student activity groups including
yearbook and student activity funds. These school activity funds are
accounted for separately by each school and are reported in
summary in the audited financial statements. According to the
audited financial statements, fiscal year 2009 school activity fund
receipts totaled $2,128,969 and the June 30, 2009 balance was
$894,543.
Controls Over Revenue and Billing Cycle Activity Were
Generally Adequate for Significant Revenue Types
Due to similarities between the work of the independent certified
public accounting firm that audited the WCPS financial statements
and the scope of our audit in this area, we placed significant
reliance on the results of the independent audit of the fiscal year
2009 financial statements. The auditor’s procedural review and
testing disclosed no material weaknesses or significant deficiencies
regarding the collection of any accounts receivable or revenues
from local, State, federal and other sources (such as food service
operations), including electronic fund transfer transactions. Student
activity funds and cafeteria cash operations were also audited by
the firm, including a review of internal controls and bank account
reconciliations. The independent auditors identified some
bookkeeping errors involving student activity funds at certain
schools, which were addressed by school management.
Controls Over Cash Receipts Received at the Central
Business Office Need to Be Improved
Receipts received by the central business office (primarily consisting
of checks) were not properly controlled; such collections totaled
$21 million during fiscal year 2009. Specifically, collections were
not recorded and checks were not restrictively endorsed upon
receipt. In addition, certain collections initially received by the
business office were transferred to other departments that were
responsible for maintaining the related accounts receivable records
without first being logged in the business office. Finally, verifications
that recorded collections were subsequently deposited were not
performed.
11
Office of
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 22 ---
Recommendation
1. WCPS should ensure that all receipts are immediately recorded
and that checks are restrictively endorsed upon receipt. In
addition, an employee independent of the cash receipts process
should verify that all recorded receipts were deposited.
12
Office of
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 23 ---
Chapter 2
Federal Funds
Annually, WCPS is subject to an audit of its federally-funded grant
programs (often referred to as the Single Audit, and required by
Circular A-133, which is issued by the U.S. Office of Management
and Budget). The report on the audit of fiscal year 2009 federal
grant activity was issued by an independent certified public
accounting firm on October 5, 2009.
In that report, the auditor stated that WCPS complied, in all material
respects, with the requirements applicable to its major federal grant
programs. In addition, with respect to internal controls over
compliance with, and the operation of, major federal programs, the
auditors noted no matters considered to be material weaknesses
and no significant deficiencies.
WCPS had established a procedure to identify children eligible for
Medicaid-subsidized6 services that also assured proper billing and
reimbursement. WCPS also participated in the federal E-Rate
program, which provides funding for telecommunications expenses.
6 The Federal Medical Assistance Program, or Medicaid, is not a grant program under
Circular A-133 and is not included in the Single Audit.
13
Office of
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 24 ---
Background
WCPS receives funds primarily from the State, Worcester County,
and the federal government. Most funds received from Worcester
County and from the State are unrestricted; however, federal funds
are generally restricted for use for a specified program (such as the
School Lunch Program or Special Education). According to the
audited Schedule of Federal Awards, fiscal year 2009 expenditures
of federal award funds totaled $7 million.
WCPS Established Adequate Internal Controls Over
Federal Grants and Complied with Federal Grant
Requirements
Because of the accounting firm’s work on WCPS federal fund
expenditures, we relied on the auditor’s results. Besides expressing
an opinion on WCPS compliance with the terms of several grant
programs, the auditor also considered the existing internal control
structure’s impact on compliance and audited the fiscal year 2009
required Schedule of Federal Awards (which includes claimed and
reported grant-related expenditures). In its report, the firm stated
that WCPS complied, in all material respects, with the requirements
applicable to its major federal grant programs. In addition, with
respect to internal controls over compliance with, and the operation
of, major federal programs, the auditors noted no matters
considered to be material weaknesses and no significant
deficiencies.
WCPS Properly Managed Medicaid-Subsidized
Services for Eligible Students
WCPS had established a procedure to identify children eligible for
Medicaid-subsidized7 services and used a process that assured
proper billings and complete reimbursement for eligible services
rendered.
7 The Federal Medical Assistance Program, or Medicaid, is not a grant program under
Circular A-133 and is not included in the Single Audit.
14
Office of
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 25 ---
WCPS Participated in the Federal E-Rate Program
WCPS had a process in place to request and receive reimbursement
for technology expenditures from the federal School and Libraries
Universal Service Program (E-Rate). WCPS received $222,276 in
federal E-Rate funding for fiscal year 2009. The E-Rate program
provides funding to schools for telecommunications expenses (such
as Internet access). The funding is based on the level of poverty
and the rural status of the school district.
Recommendation
None
15
Office of
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 26 ---
16
Office of
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 27 ---
Chapter 3
Procurement and Disbursement Cycle
WCPS often used existing contracts procured by other governmental
entities (referred to as “piggybacking”) as a way to obtain discounts
and reduce procurement costs. However, WCPS needs to establish
a comprehensive procurement policy and improve its procurement
procedures. For example, WCPS did not have any Board approved
policies governing procurements and did not require Board approval
of any contracts, although generally construction-related contracts
were approved by the Board. In addition, WCPS needs to improve
internal controls over its automated accounts payable system. A
number of employees were assigned incompatible system
capabilities, including the ability to add, delete, and adjust vendor
information, process vendor invoices, and print checks. In addition,
based on our tests, WCPS did not always competitively bid
procurements or provide justification for sole source procurements.
Background
WCPS uses a manual system for purchasing goods and services and
an automated system for paying the related invoices. Requisitions
are manually prepared by departments and are subject to
supervisory approval within the requesting departments. Ordering
departments or schools generally select vendors and prepare
purchase orders. Construction and other facility related acquisitions
are administered by the Facilities and Maintenance and Operations
Departments, and the Department of Technology administers
information technology purchases. Generally, purchases of goods
17
Office of
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 28 ---
over $25,000 are required by State Law to be formally bid and, in
accordance with WCPS procedures, are required to be approved by
the area supervisor and the Chief Financial Officer.
The ordering department documents the receipt of goods and
services by signing a copy of the related purchase order or packing
slip, which is forwarded to the accounting department where an
accounting associate ensures that the purchase order, packing slip,
and invoice are in agreement. Payments are then processed on the
automated system by the finance office accounts payable unit.
According to WCPS records, non-payroll disbursements (including
capital expenditures) totaled $54 million during fiscal year 2009.
WCPS Used Several Best Practices to Address Its
Procurement and Disbursement Needs
WCPS had instituted certain best practices that should enhance the
cost effectiveness of its procurements. These include
“piggybacking” onto contracts already procured by the State and
other local governments, and participating in cooperative
purchasing organizations. These practices saved WCPS certain
costs associated with the procurement of the contracts and may
provide larger discounts as a result of the combined purchasing
power of multiple entities.
WCPS Should Develop Comprehensive Policies and
Procedures to Control Procurements
WCPS did not have a written procurement policy. As commented
upon later in this chapter, our tests disclosed a number of WCPS
purchases were not handled in a manner that would help ensure
WCPS received the best value. Furthermore, Board approval was
not required for any contracts, such as those valued over $25,000,
although our tests disclosed that some construction related
contracts were submitted to and approved by the Board.
18
Office of
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 29 ---
WCPS Had Not Established Adequate Internal Control
Over Invoice Processing and Disbursements
WCPS had not separated duties adequately to establish effective
internal controls over its automated invoice processing application.
Specifically, we noted that seven employees had been assigned
system capabilities that allowed them to perform critical
incompatible functions (such as entering and posting payment
transactions, adding vendors, and printing vendor checks). One of
these employees also reconciled the bank account and another
employee was responsible for entering vendors, entering invoices,
and printing vendor checks on the automated system. Furthermore,
three employees with access to the signature plate and check stock
also had access to enter invoices, add vendors, and print checks.
WCPS Should Strengthen Internal Controls Over
Procurements and Contracts
WCPS did not always competitively bid or provide sole source
justification for purchases. Specifically, our test of 19
disbursements totaling $1.2 million disclosed 5 purchases totaling
$115,000 that were not competitively bid or supported by sole-
source justifications. These purchases included three separate
consulting contracts individually ranging in value from $28,900 to
$45,000.
In addition, we noted 4 procurements totaling $529,600 for which
WCPS did not ensure that vendors charged the agreed upon rates.
For example, WCPS purchased from a vendor certain computer
items totaling approximately $221,800 under a University System of
Maryland (USM) contract. However, WCPS did not document that it
received the specified discounts from the list price. USM’s contract
allows for Maryland school systems to purchase computer
equipment and associated peripherals from selected vendors for an
agreed upon percentage discount from the manufacturer’s
suggested retail price.
WCPS could not provide documentation that it performed an
analysis to determine whether extending contracts was more
beneficial than re-bidding contracts. One contract (for waste
management) has been renewed annually for at least ten years; the
19
Office of
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 30 ---
amount paid to this vendor in fiscal year 2009 totaled $80,040.
WCPS used the same law firm for 19 years without obtaining quotes
from other firms. The firm was paid $85,500 during fiscal year
2009. In general, contracts should include the option for
extensions only for specific limited periods, and when the period of
the original contract expires, the terms should be reevaluated to
ascertain whether extending the contract represents the best value.
Recommendations
2. WCPS should develop procurement policies that address all
categories of goods and services purchases. The policies should
specify the procurement methods to be used, when contracts
should be in writing, the mandatory contract provisions and the
approval requirements, including when Board approval is
required (for example, procurements over a specified amount).
These policies should be approved by the Board.
3. WCPS should improve controls over its invoice processing
system by segregating incompatible functions and assigning
critical system functions to only those employees who need the
capabilities to perform their job duties. Furthermore, WCPS
should restrict access to the signature plate to employees who
are independent of the invoice processing functions.
4. WCPS should obtain goods and services through a properly
documented competitive procurement process. If a competitive
procurement process is not deemed appropriate (such as when
only one vendor can provide the required services), then
documentation justifying the decision should be maintained.
Furthermore, WCPS should ensure vendors charge the agreed
upon rates, should limit the number of contract extensions, and
should prepare analyses to determine whether exercising
contract extensions is more beneficial than re-bidding contracts.
20
Office of
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 31 ---
Chapter 4
Human Resources and Payroll
WCPS uses automated systems to maintain human resources
information, to record employee time and track leave, and to
process and record payroll transactions. In addition, WCPS uses a
centralized hiring and approval process to help control payroll costs.
However, WCPS should address certain procedural deficiencies with
respect to payroll processing. These deficiencies included the
assignment of incompatible payroll system capabilities and the lack
of supervisory review of certain payroll transactions. Additionally,
although WCPS had implemented workforce planning, it did not
address the needs and processes for employees other than
teachers and related instructional positions.
Background
Payroll costs represent the largest single cost component in the
WCPS budget. According to WCPS records for fiscal year 2009,
salary, wage, and benefit costs totaled $75 million. According to
MSDE reports, as of October 2008, WCPS had 1,156 full-time
equivalent employees, of which 285 (25 percent) were non-
instructional. The 5.8 to 1 ratio of WCPS students to full-time
equivalent employees (both instructional and non-instructional) is
lower than other similarly sized school systems (see Table 1 on the
next page).
21
Office of
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 32 ---
Table 1
Comparison of Student to Employee Ratios – Fall 2008 (Unaudited)
Number of Full-
Number of Student to
Time Equivalent
School System Students Employee
Employees
(as of September 30, Ratio
2008) (as of October 1,
2008)
Worcester Co. 6,671 1,156 5.8 to 1
Allegany Co. 9,232 1,385 6.7 to 1
Caroline Co. 5,513 787 7.0 to 1
Dorchester Co. 4,560 656 7.0 to 1
Queen Anne’s Co. 7,859 970 8.1 to 1
Source: MSDE Student /Staff Publications
Note: School systems selected for comparison are those with student enrollments
closest in number to WCPS.
Human Resources and Payroll Internal Controls Need
to Be Strengthened
WCPS did not adequately separate duties to establish effective
internal control over its automated payroll systems and related
processes, and certain verification processes could be improved.
 One employee had been assigned certain incompatible payroll
system functions. These critical functions included creating
manual checks and deleting employees, changing employee
addresses, changing employee pay rates and direct deposit
account information, entering time and attendance information,
and preparing checks. In addition, this employee also had
access to the check printer and signature plate. In addition, two
other employees were assigned capabilities that allowed them to
process payroll adjustments and deductions without supervisory
approval.
 WCPS generated reports of payroll transactions and adjustments
recorded and processed each pay period for independent review
and approval. However, the employee responsible for approving
these reports did not use supporting documentation to verify the
propriety of the adjustments.
22
Office of
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 33 ---
 WCPS did not ensure that final payouts were subject to
independent review and approval. Specifically, we noted that
one employee was responsible for processing final payouts for
unused annual and sick leave for terminated employees.
However, these payouts, which totaled $138,000 during fiscal
year 2009, were not subject to independent review and
approval.
Workforce Planning Should Be Expanded to Include
Non-Instructional Positions
Although WCPS had implemented workforce planning for
instructional positions, WCPS should expand its formal workforce
planning efforts to include non-instructional positions which, as of
October 2008, represent 25 percent of its workforce (285 non-
instructional professional and support staff, out of 1,156 full-time
equivalent positions). The WCPS Master Plan sets the strategic
direction and provides coordination and focus for initiatives to
address challenges faced by WCPS. The Plan includes a number of
objectives and strategies to address human resource needs—which
is evidence of workforce planning. However, it addresses only the
recruitment and retention of highly-qualified instructional staff (that
is, teachers and certain instructional aides).
Non-instructional positions play a key role in the ultimate success of
WCPS in providing quality education and, therefore, should be
included in workforce planning. WCPS indicated that it had
contemplated workforce planning for non-instructional positions but
agreed that there was no formal or documented planning for non-
instructional staff.
Recommendations
5. WCPS should improve controls over the payroll system by
segregating incompatible functions and by ensuring that payroll
transactions are reviewed by independent supervisory personnel
using supporting documentation.
6. WCPS should expand its workforce planning to include key non-
instructional positions in critical operational units.
23
Office of
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 34 ---
24
Office of
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 35 ---
Chapter 5
Inventory Control and Accountability
Our audit disclosed that although WCPS has developed written
procedures and policies governing the acquisition and disposal of
assets, those procedures need to be enhanced to improve
accountability and control over its equipment inventory.
Background
According to the WCPS audited financial statements, as of June 30,
2009, the undepreciated cost of capital equipment was $3.2
million. Equipment items include computers, audio and video
items, and various other items. All furniture and equipment items
with a cost of $1,000 or greater are to be included in the
centralized inventory system. Generally, WCPS orders materials and
supplies on an as-needed basis and does not maintain a central
inventory location.
25
Office of
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 36 ---
Existing Controls and Procedures Over Equipment
Should Be Improved
While WCPS had written policies regarding the acquisition and
disposal of assets, we noted several areas where controls and
procedures over equipment were in need of improvement.
 WCPS policies and procedures did not address segregation of
recordkeeping, inventorying, and custodial duties, uniform
reporting of lost and stolen items, or tracking of sensitive items
(such as computers and other electronic equipment) costing less
than $1,000 and susceptible to theft.
 There was an inadequate separation of duties between custody
and physical inventory responsibilities. Specifically, employees
designated as custodians were responsible for ensuring the
completion of the related physical inventories. Furthermore,
WCPS had not established a policy to verify the accuracy of the
inventory counts reported by the custodians.
 WCPS detail records frequently lacked information to specifically
identify individual items. For example, 138 of 1,593 items in
the computer category lacked serial numbers to identify the
items. In addition, equipment items were not always tagged
when received. Our test of 10 items values at $41,505
disclosed that 2 items totaling $6,294 were not properly tagged.
 Deletions of certain non-IT items from the inventory were not
approved. Specifically, when physical inventories were
performed, certain items were marked for deletion and were
subsequently deleted from the inventory records by central
administration staff without documented explanation or
supervisory approval. For fiscal year 2009, we noted 44 non-IT
items with a cost of approximately $122,000 which were
deleted from the inventory without approval. In addition, there
was no independent review or approval of adjustments made to
the inventory detail records.
 WCPS did not adequately restrict access to the automated
inventory records. Six employees were assigned critical
capabilities, such as adding and deleting assets, which were not
required as part of the employees’ routine job responsibilities.
26
Office of
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 37 ---
Recommendation
7. WCPS should improve the accountability for its equipment by
developing and enforcing comprehensive written policies and
procedures to govern the accounting and safeguarding of
equipment that includes the segregation of duties, tagging fixed
assets, uniform reporting of lost or stolen items, and tracking
sensitive items prone to theft. In addition, WCPS should ensure
that items are properly tagged and adjustments made to the
inventory detail records are reviewed and approved by
supervisory personnel. Finally, WCPS should assign critical
inventory system capabilities only to employees who require
such capabilities to perform their job duties.
27
Office of
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 38 ---
28
Office of
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 39 ---
Chapter 6
Information Technology Services
WCPS maintains and administers a computer network, with Internet
connectivity, which connects the individual school local networks to
the computer resources located at the WCPS central offices. WCPS
has established a written technology plan, which includes a
comprehensive assessment of the technical needs of the schools.
The plan provides a vision and mission for technology in WCPS and
includes measurable goals and objectives.
However, we identified several areas in need of improvement. For
example, WCPS needs to strengthen its password policies, enable
the logging and reporting of security events, properly document the
sanitation of disposed computer equipment, periodically review the
capabilities assigned to active system users, and improve its
disaster recovery plan.
Background
WCPS operates a wide area network connecting the various schools
within Worcester County. The WCPS Department of Technology
maintains and administers the WCPS network, academic and
financial information applications, and other general computer
operations.
29
Office of
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 40 ---
Technology Plans Were Developed to Address Current
and Future Needs of WCPS
WCPS has developed a written technology plan, which includes a
comprehensive assessment of the technology needs of the schools.
The plan identifies each school’s information technology (IT) needs
and the actions to be taken to address those needs. The plan also
includes measurable goals and objectives, and addresses
professional development and IT related budgets. The plan is
periodically updated and monitored for implementation status of
identified actions.
Steps Should Be Taken to Ensure Adequate Security
Over IT Applications
Enhancements should be made to existing procedures to
improve system security – Our review disclosed several
deficiencies in computer application security which increased the
vulnerability of certain WCPS automated systems, programs, and
data:
 WCPS policies for controlling passwords did not require
automatic password expirations nor establish a minimum
password length (to make the passwords more difficult to
hack).
 Logging and reporting of security events for a critical
database was not enabled.
 An unnecessary service was enabled on a database that
would allow users to run certain commands, which could
compromise security.
 The sanitation of disposed computer equipment was not
properly documented.
 WCPS did not establish procedures to periodically review, for
appropriateness, the capabilities assigned to active users on
its financial and payroll applications.
30
Office of
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 41 ---
Physical controls over data processing functions should be
improved – We identified seven individuals, who did not need
access to the computer server room, were provided a key to the
room. In addition, nine individuals who did not need access to the
room used to store computer media awaiting disposal were
provided a key to the room. Access to these rooms should be
restricted to help prevent the unauthorized disclosure of sensitive
data, the corruption of critical systems, and the theft and/or
destruction of critical IT equipment.
WCPS Should Develop a Comprehensive Disaster
Recovery Plan
WCPS did not have a comprehensive disaster recovery plan (DRP)
for its computer systems. Specifically, WCPS had made no provision
for the following critical elements of a DRP:
 Alternate site processing arrangements
 Contact information
 Restoring network connectivity
 Testing of the DRP
 Storage of a copy of the DRP at an offsite location
Recommendations
8. WCPS should implement appropriate security measures to
safeguard its applications and data systems by improving
password protection policies, enabling logging and reporting of
all critical security events, and eliminating unnecessary service
accounts. WCPS should also maintain documentation that
substantiates the proper sanitation of disposed computer
equipment and should establish procedures to periodically
review the capabilities assigned to active users on its financial
and payroll applications. Finally, WCPS should establish
adequate physical controls and safeguards for its computer
and storage rooms.
9. WCPS should develop and implement a comprehensive
disaster recovery plan.
31
Office of
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 42 ---
32
Office of
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 43 ---
Chapter 7
Facilities Construction, Renovation, and
Maintenance
WCPS uses a comprehensive and public process to plan for
construction and renovation of school facilities. Six-year plans are
prepared and updated annually, and reflect input from the Board.
WCPS has followed a number of best practices that should enhance
project results and cost effectiveness in its Facilities and
Maintenance Department.
Nevertheless, WCPS did not have policies in place over critical
construction procedures, and for its maintenance and custodial
operations, WCPS had not established formal performance
measures and related benchmarks.
Background
WCPS maintains 14 schools and other administrative and support
offices with a staff of 70 custodial and 14 maintenance personnel.
WCPS uses a six-year Capital Improvement Plan (CIP) to identify
ongoing and projected needs for new buildings and major
renovations. In the fiscal year 2010 CIP, necessary major
renovations, repairs, and systemic improvements to existing schools
over the next six years were estimated to cost $161 million.
33
Office of
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 44 ---
Table 2 below compares WCPS fiscal year 2008 plant costs (that is,
maintenance and operational costs) with other similarly sized school
systems in Maryland. The table presents two measures used to
assess plant costs: cost per student and cost per square foot.
These statistics show that WCPS plant costs are generally higher
than its peer group. WCPS advised that the higher costs are due to
the age of many of its schools and the fact that all of its schools are
air conditioned.
Table 2
Plant Cost Comparison Per Student and Per Square Foot
Fiscal Year 2008 (Unaudited)
Plant Costs Square Total
Per Per Footage Gross
School System
Total Student Square Per Square
 Foot Student Footage
Worcester Co. $7,666,568 $1,141.66 $7.22 158.12 1,061,804
Allegany Co. 9,977,926 1,062.84 5.62 189.08 1,775,082
Caroline Co. 4,244,012 757.60 5.10 148.57 832,272
Dorchester Co. 4,548,546 987.35 5.48 180.26 830,410
Queen Anne’s Co. 7,544,340 967.86 6.93 139.57 1,087,959
Average of
Comparable $6,578,706 $943.91 $5.78 164.37 1,131,431
Schools
Sources: MSDE Financial Data, MSDE Fact Book, Maryland Public School Construction Square Footage
Data (most recent data available)
 - Based on Average Daily Enrollment 2007-2008
A Number of Best Practices Were in Place to Enhance
the Efficiency and Effectiveness of the WCPS Facilities
and Maintenance Department
WCPS has instituted several best practices to enhance project
results and cost effectiveness in its Facilities and Maintenance
Department.
 A six-year Capital Improvement Plan has been developed that
reflects a comprehensive process involving the Board, public,
and county officials.
34
Office of
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 45 ---
 Value engineering is used in school construction and major
renovations to ensure that costs are minimized without
sacrificing project requirements.
 Various processes have been implemented in order to reduce
the need for additional construction, including the use of
portable classrooms and the periodic evaluation of school
district boundaries.
 WCPS performed an analysis to identify, quantify, and prioritize
projects to include a deferred maintenance program and has a
formal plan to address deferred maintenance needs.
 WCPS has recently implemented an in-house energy
conservation program directed toward reducing energy costs.
 WCPS participates in a consortium with other Eastern Shore
entities to purchase energy at reduced costs due to the pooled
buying power of the consortium members.
WCPS Should Develop Formal Policies Over Critical
Construction Procedures
WCPS had not developed formal policies to establish internal
control over critical construction procedures:
 There was no written policy to govern the bidding and awarding
of construction contracts. We reviewed the procurement of
construction management services for two construction projects
and noted that competitive bid proposals were not obtained for
either project. The two construction management contracts
were awarded in 2006 and 2007. WCPS used the same
construction manager for the projects we reviewed as for a prior
project. WCPS stated that it based its selection solely on the
satisfaction with the performance of the construction manager
for the prior project during which a competitive procurement
process was used to select the construction manager. The
contract amounts for these projects were valued at $1,691,500
and $2,213,384. To ensure the best value is obtained, State
law requires that bids be solicited for school construction
contracts, including construction management services,
35
Office of
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 46 ---
exceeding $25,000. In addition, we noted that although
construction contracts were submitted to the Board for review,
there was no documentation that the two construction
management contracts were approved by the Board.
 There was no written policy that specified what approvals were
required based on the dollar thresholds for change orders, and
there was no requirement for Board review and approval.
Nevertheless, we noted that the Facilities Department did have
informal procedures for the processing of change orders, and
our testing disclosed that change orders were approved by the
Superintendent and routinely reported to the Board.
Certain Processes Should Be Implemented to Increase
the Effectiveness of Maintenance and Custodial
Operations
WCPS should develop a performance measurement system
that establishes standards and expectations for
maintenance and custodial operations – WCPS had not
implemented a performance system to measure and assess the
efficiency of its maintenance and custodial operations, both for
internal self-evaluation purposes and for comparisons with other
systems. Furthermore, we were informed that WCPS had not
compared the costs of maintenance and custodial operations to
similarly sized districts in Maryland or other states. Comparability
with other systems in Maryland could not necessarily be done
unilaterally since there would need to be a consensus on the
measures and methodology; however, other states (for example,
Michigan, Florida, and Minnesota) have established measures and
benchmarks (such as maintenance expenditures per square foot) to
assist their school systems in the evaluation of costs and practices.
Recommendations
10. WCPS should develop formal policies governing construction
contract procurements and establish internal control
procedures to ensure that WCPS complies with State law and
is receiving the best value for its procurements. The policies
should address the requirements for bidding, awarding and
36
Office of
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 47 ---
approving construction contracts, and approving change
orders.
11. WCPS should develop a performance measurement system
that establishes standards and expectations for maintenance
and custodial operations, and report the measurement results
to the Board.
37
Office of
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 48 ---
38
Office of
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 49 ---
Chapter 8
Transportation Services
WCPS used a number of recognized best practices to increase
student transportation efficiency, such as staggering school arrival
and dismissal times to enable certain buses to perform multiple
runs, combining middle school and high school bus runs to take
advantage of their close proximity and using central collection
points for certain buses.
In several areas, improvements should be made in an effort to
reduce WCPS transportation costs. For example, WCPS did not
establish comprehensive bus routing procedures nor use
automated routing software to help efficiently plan bus routes. Also,
WCPS did not have a written policy establishing the criteria for
determining bus contractor payment rates. The methodology used
to reimburse the bus contractors for the purchase cost of buses
may result in paying $3.9 million more than necessary for buses
purchased over a 15-year period. In addition, WCPS had not
conducted any recent documented cost benefit analysis of its
decision to outsource student transportation services nor developed
formal performance measures to monitor and evaluate the
efficiency and effectiveness of transportation services. Finally,
WCPS should ensure its criteria for selecting bus contractors
complies with applicable laws.
39
Office of
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 50 ---
Background
WCPS is the seventh smallest school system in Maryland based on
student enrollment. Approximately 6,280 students are eligible for
student transportation. WCPS students were transported on a fleet
of 73 buses owned by 73 contractors hired by the school system.
Fiscal year 2009 transportation costs totaled $5.3 million. Of the
1,516,605 reported route miles for the 2008-2009 school year, 14
percent were for transporting disabled students.
Table 3 below shows that the fiscal year 2008 WCPS cost per rider
was reasonable when compared with similar-sized school systems.
WCPS cost per mile was lower than one of the four comparable
school systems.
Table 3
Comparison of Transportation Costs per Rider and per Mile
Fiscal Year 2009 (Unaudited)
Number of Eligible Miles Average Annual
Riders (in thousands) Expenditures Cost per
School System
Non- Non- (in
Disabled Disabled Rider Mile
Disabled Disabled thousands)
Worcester Co. 6,213 67 1,306 211 $5,498 $875 $3.62
Allegany Co. 5,947 199 1,296 310 6,371 1,037 3.97
Caroline Co. 4,626 70 981 167 4,005 853 3.49
Dorchester Co. 4,241 86 814 120 3,196 739 3.42
Queen Anne’s Co. 7,737 77 1,728 544 6,138 785 2.70
Average of
5,638 108 1,205 285 $4,927 $853 $3.39
Comparable Schools
Sources: MSDE 2008-2009 Fact Book
Several Best Practices Were In Place to Enhance
Student Transportation Services
The WCPS transportation department used several practices to
enhance bus operations:
 Staggering school arrival and dismissal times so buses can
make multiple runs on the same day
 Using central collection points for transportation to reduce the
need for additional buses to transport the affected students
40
Office of
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 51 ---
 Combining middle school and high school students on the same
bus to take advantage of the close proximity of the schools and
to avoid sending multiple buses
 Assigning bus routes to drivers based on their proximity to the
routes to reduce the number of miles driven with no students on
the bus (deadhead miles)
 Providing transportation services only to students residing
outside the limits specified for walking to school or when the
conditions for walking are not considered safe
 Combining regular and disabled students, when appropriate, to
reduce the number of buses
Routing Procedures Should Be Enhanced
Bus routing procedures should be more comprehensive –
WCPS needs to better document the bus routing procedures to
include all appropriate factors that should be considered.
Specifically, WCPS does not have adequate documented procedures
that instruct routers on how to plan, review, and revise bus routes.
The existing procedures provide only a general guideline for routing
and do not establish documented policies for related areas such as
bus loads (capacity) and maximum student ride times.
WCPS should consider using automated routing software –
WCPS does not use routing software to assist in developing efficient
bus routes. Using routing software is a recognized best practice that
can be used to reduce the time it takes to design efficient routes,
reduce student ride time, and help ensure that routes minimize the
number of buses needed to transport students. In addition, the use
of routing software can automate current manual processes, such
as electronically mapping student addresses and developing routes.
It is current WCPS practice to use existing bus routes and then
manually make changes on an as-needed basis versus periodically
reviewing routes for efficiency. The WCPS transportation
department relies on school administrators and bus drivers to notify
it of problems with existing bus routes (for example, the number of
students exceeds the bus capacity). Consequently, this policy
forces personnel from the transportation department to correct
problems reactively without necessarily ensuring the most efficient
solution is found. This practice could also have a potentially
41
Office of
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 52 ---
negative impact on route efficiency. Our analysis of the WCPS
2008-2009 bus stop forms prepared by bus drivers, which listed the
number of students at each stop on given days, disclosed that the
buses were operated on average at 76 percent of WCPS capacity
but that in March of 2009, 13 of 83 runs were below 50 percent
capacity.8 Implementation of the electronic routing system could
help in the development of more efficient bus routes and assist in
the periodic evaluation of routes. We were advised by another
school system that a concerted effort to maximize the use of routing
software (along with manual processes) for the 2008-2009 school
year allowed it to eliminate 13 percent of existing bus stops,
eliminate 6 buses due to route consolidation, and avoid the
purchase of 10 new buses.
Bus Contractor Rates Paid Were Not Based on
Documented Criteria
WCPS does not have a written policy establishing the criteria for
calculating the bus contractor payment rates, which included an
annual per vehicle allotment (PVA), bus driver wage rates,
maintenance and fuel costs per mile, and auxiliary fixed costs per
bus. In addition, WCPS personnel informed us that the bus rates
are adjusted each year to be competitive with similarly sized local
education agencies (LEAs) by comparing its rates to other schools’
rates and then selecting rates that are close to the other LEAs. (For
example, WCPS’ PVA is largely based on that used by Wicomico
County Public Schools.) However, WCPS had not reviewed the basis
for the rates paid by other LEAs and had not established criteria for
determining its rates.
WCPS assumes nearly all of the risks for bus operations while
essentially guaranteeing a profit to the contractors each year for the
life of each bus. Specifically, contractors are paid a per vehicle
allotment each year, which is designed to cover the depreciation
cost of the bus and provide a return on investment for the
contractor’s investment in the bus. In addition, the contractors
receive a per-mile rate for operating and maintenance costs (which
8 Like other LEAs, WCPS uses a lower capacity rate than the manufacturer’s stated bus
capacities. For example, WCPS determined the capacity for high, middle, and
elementary schools routes at 50, 55, and 60 respectively based on 72 passenger buses
(manufacturer stated capacity).
42
Office of
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 53 ---
includes fuel costs), a driver per-hour payment to cover the
contractor’s labor costs, and an annual administrative cost
payment. WCPS also pays for the liability insurance, including
property damage, and medical coverage, for all contractor buses.
More Can Be Done to Ensure Cost-Effective
Operations
Contractor pay should be periodically revised based on
current market conditions – WCPS pays contractors an annual
PVA for each bus. The PVA formula includes reimbursement for the
cost of the bus and a flat rate of return on the investment (ROI).
WCPS contractors receive the annual PVA payment for the life of the
bus. In this regard, Maryland law allows WCPS to use a 15-year life
of the bus, rather than the 12- year life used by most other LEAs.
We were advised that WCPS has, for at least the past 5 years, been
paying bus contractors an annual PVA based on amounts paid in
other school systems (primarily Wicomico County). Specifically,
WCPS was using a flat 9.5 percent return on investment (ROI),
which was not adjusted to reflect market conditions. In addition, the
cost reimbursement component of the PVA was calculated as if the
bus would be in operation for only 10 years. Thus, since WCPS uses
a 15-year bus life, bus contractors are paid 150 percent of the bus
cost over the life of each bus (10 percent of the cost each year for
15 years).
The PVA is one of several elements used to determine payment
amounts to bus contractors. Bus contracts usually run for one-year
terms and are renewable from year-to-year without either party
being required to give notice of renewal and generally are renewed
for the lifetime of the bus (15 years).
To estimate the financial impact to WCPS of paying 150 percent of
the bus cost and using a 9.5 percent ROI over the life of a bus, we
calculated the PVA for each of the past 15 years (1996 to 2010)
using a 15-year depreciation rate and the prime interest rate9 as the
ROI. Compared to our PVA results, WCPS annual PVA payments per
bus were from $1,520 to $7,874 higher than the payments would
9 We used the prime rate since this rate was recommended in a November 1999 study
commissioned by another Maryland school system. Also, in 1975 an MSDE study
recommended the prime rate as a reasonable prevailing interest rate.
43
Office of
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 54 ---
have been had the prime rate that existed at the time of purchase
and a 15-year depreciation rate been used in the calculation. The
effect is that, over the 15-year life of the 66 new buses put into
service by contractors since 1996, we estimate that WCPS will pay
out approximately $3.9 million more than if the prime rate and a 15-
year cost reimbursement rate had been used. Of the $3.9 million,
$1.7 million has already been paid out through fiscal year 2010
and, unless changes are implemented, the remaining $2.2 million
will be paid out during fiscal years 2011 to 2024. This analysis does
not include the effects for any new bus purchases that may be
made after fiscal year 2010 and the lost interest income that could
have been earned by WCPS on the excess amounts paid.
Bus contractor selection criteria should be revised – WCPS,
like many other Maryland school systems, uses an application
process and selects bus contractors based on certain criteria.
However, one of the requirements to be a WCPS bus contractor is
residency in Worcester County. WCPS believes this requirement
helps to promote business within the County. However, this policy
precludes bus contractors outside of the County from providing
student transportation services. According to an Assistant Attorney
General we contacted, this policy may be in violation of State and
federal laws dealing with equal protection and privileges and
immunities.
Periodic cost benefit analysis should be performed – WCPS
had not formally reevaluated its decision to have a bus fleet owned
by contractors. WCPS believes that a contractor-owned fleet is
beneficial due to the up-front capital outlay needed to buy buses,
the cost to operate maintenance shops, and the personnel-related
costs (such as healthcare) associated with an in-house fleet.
However, experiences in other states and Maryland school systems
have found that an in-house fleet, or even a mixture of an in-house
and outsourced fleet, may be more cost beneficial.
Control Over Payments to Bus Contractors Should Be
Enhanced
WCPS did not ensure the accuracy of certain payments to the bus
contractors. Three times each school year, the contractors’ drivers
completed a manifest, which included the total time and miles
44
Office of
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 55 ---
driven on each route. WCPS uses the data recorded on these
manifests to calculate the bus driver wages and maintenance and
fuel cost components of the monthly payments to the contractors.
WCPS only observed a portion of each route (that is, the total time
and miles were not verified), Therefore, WCPS cannot be assured
that the amounts from the manifest are accurate. As a result,
WCPS could unknowingly overpay bus contractors.
Performance Should Be Measured and Reported
Regularly to the Board
WCPS did not have a formal performance measurement system for
its transportation services. Performance measures that could be
developed and reported regularly to the Board include ridership
compared to bus capacity, transportation cost per student, bus
operating costs per mile, and number of accidents. This data
should also be used to provide ongoing monitoring of performance
and ensure overall accountability. The Government Finance Officers
Association recommends that program and service performance
measures be developed and used as an important component of
long-term strategic planning and decision making.
Recommendations
12. WCPS should better document the procedures used to
determine bus routes, including all appropriate factors that
comprise the route planning process and should determine
whether routing software could improve route efficiencies.
13. WCPS should establish a written policy on how components of
the bus contractor payment rates are to be determined each
year. WCPS should maintain documentation that shows the
basis for the rates established each year.
14. WCPS should analyze bus contractors pay (including the PVA)
to determine whether the rates are reasonable. In addition,
WCPS should ensure that its bus contractor selection
requirements comply with all applicable laws and regulations.
Furthermore, WCPS should periodically prepare a documented
analysis to determine whether continued use of outside
45
Office of
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 56 ---
contractors to provide student bus services is, in fact, cost
beneficial for the school system.
15. WCPS should perform observations of entire bus routes and
use its observations of bus route times and distances to
ensure that the applicable payments to contractors accurately
reflect the actual bus services provided.
16. WCPS should develop a performance measurement system for
transportation services and periodically report the results to
the Board.
46
Office of
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 57 ---
Chapter 9
Food Services Operations
WCPS has implemented a number of best practices to help reduce
food service costs, such as participation in the United States
Department of Agriculture commodity program and membership in a
multi-county food-purchasing cooperative. WCPS also has adequate
procedures in place to identify students eligible for free and
reduced-price meals under the federal National School Meals
Programs. However, WCPS should improve internal controls over
the procurement of food supplies and properly reflect all costs in
determining its food service department operating costs. In
addition, WCPS should evaluate the meal per labor hour (MPLH)
performance of its food services operations and consider practices
to improve production.
Background
WCPS has a cooking cafeteria in which food is prepared and served
at each of its 12 regular schools. WCPS has 20 full-time and 35
part-time cafeteria employees (as of June 2009). Fiscal year 2009
food service sales totaled $1 million. WCPS reports for food service
operations indicated that food service expenditures exceeded
revenues by $23,481 for fiscal year 2009. See Table 4 on the next
page for information regarding food services.
47
Office of
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 58 ---
Table 4
Food Service Activity for Fiscal Year 2009
Average cost per meal $ 2.76
Number of meals served
Breakfast
Paid 74,134
Free 106,981
Reduced Price 14,993
196,108
Lunch
Paid 228,463
Free 270,828
Reduced Price 53,222
552,513
Meal Equivalents
A La Carte Meal 134,018
Snacks 18,575
Summer Meals 22,235
174,828
Total Meals Served 923,449
Schools 12
Full Kitchens 12
Full-time Employees 20
Part-time Employees 35
Revenues
Federal
Cash Payments $1.353,189
USDA Commodities $ 60,982
$ 1,414,171
Sales and other sources 1,048,856
State aid 64,774
Total Revenue (all sources) $ 2,527,801
Total Expenditures 2,551,282
Excess Expenditures over Revenues $ (23,481)
Source: WCPS Fiscal Year 2009 Audited Financial Statements, MSDE 2009data,
and WCPS data
48
Office of
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 59 ---
Certain Best Practices Were in Place
WCPS has implemented several practices to improve food
service operations – These practices helped to both increase
operational efficiency and reduce food supply and material costs.
 WCPS participated in the United States Department of
Agriculture (USDA) commodities program, which is a free food
program. According to WCPS records, $60,982 in USDA
commodities was received in fiscal year 2009.
 WCPS participated in a food purchasing cooperative in order to
maximize its buying power and reduce food costs.
 WCPS maximized the use of convenience foods (heat and serve
items) to reduce the labor needed to prepare foods.
 WCPS monitored food consumption, adjusted food production,
and repackaged uncooked leftover food to reduce waste.
WCPS used several best practices to encourage
participation in the free and reduced-price meal programs
– The best practices used by WCPS included establishing a family
application process (instead of individual student applications) to
simultaneously qualify more students for the free or reduced-priced
meal programs. WCPS also used an automated point-of-sale system
in cafeterias which helps to prevent easy identification of
participating students thereby reducing any stigma associated with
participating in the program. For fiscal year 2008, 72 percent of
WCPS students eligible to receive free lunches and 65 percent of
the students eligible to receive reduced-price lunches actually
participated in the programs.
Internal Controls Over Purchasing of Food Supplies
Need to Be Improved
Our test of 19 fiscal year 2009 invoices totaling $194,206, related
to 10 purchase orders from seven vendors, disclosed the following
deficiencies:
 Supervisory personnel did not approve purchases before orders
were placed with the vendor for 9 of the 10 purchase orders
tested.
49
Office of
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 60 ---
 Formal contracts did not exist for purchases made from 2 of the
7 vendors included in our test. Purchases from these 2 vendors
totaled $93,782 during fiscal year 2009.
 For all payments tested, we noted that the employee responsible
for making the purchase also signed documenting the receipt of
the items and performed the monthly inventory.
Food Service Operations Should Recognize All
Applicable Costs and Performance Measures Should
Be Developed to Assess Efficiency
All applicable expenditures for food service operations were
not recognized – Although WCPS management stated that its
food service operations were designed to be self-sufficient, we
noted that WCPS general funds have been used to cover certain
costs for food service operations. For example, the WCPS food
service department did not pay for the cafeterias’ share of utility
and custodial costs at WCPS schools; rather, these costs were
funded by general funds. WCPS did not include these and other
indirect costs in the annual budget prepared for food service
operations. According to documentation prepared by MSDE for
WCPS, estimated indirect costs totaled $340,000 for the food
service department for fiscal year 2007 (the most recent year for
which such costs were determined). If these indirect costs had
been included as a cost of food service operations, the operation
would have incurred a $373,000 deficit for fiscal year 2007 rather
than the reported deficit of approximately $33,000. Assuming those
indirect costs are relatively consistent from year to year, a much
larger deficit than the $23,481 shown in Table 4 would have been
incurred for fiscal year 2009 as well.
WCPS had not assessed the meals per labor hour efficiency
of its food service operations – Best practice models
recommend the use of benchmarks and goals to help school
districts identify ways to increase efficiency and reduce food service
costs. One of the industry recognized performance indicators,
meals per labor hour (MPLH), was not used by WCPS. Our
calculation of the MPLH for WCPS food services operations
indicated that the food service operations may be overstaffed. For
50
Office of
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 61 ---
example, for all schools, from April 2008 to March 2009, WCPS
produced 12.2 MPLH versus the industry guideline of 16 MPLH for a
school system with WCPS’ characteristics.10 The difference
between operating at 12.2 MPLH instead of 16 MPLH is significant.
If WCPS had operated at 16 MPLH from April 2008 to March 2009,
it could be saved 14,664 labor hours or $176,454 based on WCPS’
average hourly rate for cafeteria workers (excluding fringe benefit
costs).
Recommendations
17. WCPS should improve controls over its purchase of food
supplies by requiring advance approval by independent
supervisory personnel for purchases, and by entering into
formal contracts with food suppliers, when applicable. In
addition, duties should be properly segregated over the
procurement and receipt of food service items.
18. WCPS should identify all food service department costs,
including utility and custodial costs, to properly reflect the
department’s full operating costs. In addition, WCPS should
periodically evaluate the meals per labor hour performance of
its food service operations and consider instituting efficiency
measures.
10 Industry guidelines for WCPS-sized cafeterias are based on the publication Cost Control
for School Foodservices, Third Edition, by Dorothy Pannell-Martin, revised July 2000.
51
Office of
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 62 ---
52
Office of
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 63 ---
Chapter 10
School Board Operations and Oversight
Generally, the Board has adequate polices to govern the operations
of the school system. The Board meets periodically with the certified
public accounting firm to review the results of the audits of the
annual financial statements, the school activity fund, and federal
funds. In addition, the Board is actively involved in the development
of the WCPS annual budget.
Several opportunities exist for the Board to improve its oversight.
The Board should obtain approval from the State Ethics Commission
for changes to its ethics policy to ensure that it conforms to
requirements established in State law, and take measures to
ensure full compliance with the policy. Also, the Board should adopt
comprehensive performance measures in key operational areas,
such as transportation, food service, and facilities management. In
addition, the Board should consider establishing an internal audit
function and a confidential reporting process to receive reports of
possible fraud, waste, or mismanagement.
Background
WCPS is governed by a seven-member board (excluding three
student representatives) elected by the voters of Worcester County.
The Board does not have an established committee structure due to
its size and generally acts in whole to carry out its oversight duties.
To assist in its oversight function, the Board has contracted with an
53
Office of
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 64 ---
independent auditor to conduct audits of the WCPS financial
statements, federal programs, and student activity funds.
The Board is ultimately accountable for the success of the WCPS in
providing the children of Worcester County with a quality education,
while wisely spending local, State, and federal funds. Following is
the WCPS Board’s stated philosophy and mission:
Philosophy and Mission
I. We believe that every student can learn and must have equal access to a public
education which promotes optimal individual growth. Education should motivate
and enable students to develop physically, intellectually, emotionally and socially.
Students must be prepared for a lifetime of learning as responsible and
productive participants in a democratic society and a diverse and changing world.
We believe that every child is unique and different from every other child. Each
child's pattern of growth is right for that child and can be compared with no other.
We believe that the public school program must be based on the needs,
characteristics, interests, and capacities of the children it serves. Educators have
an obligation to provide every child with appropriate and challenging
opportunities to learn.
We believe that the student, family, educators, and community must be involved
in the educational process.
II. The mission of the Worcester County Public Schools is to enable all students to
develop physically, intellectually, emotionally, and socially to become responsible
citizens and enjoy productive lives.
In fulfilling this mission, the Worcester County Public Schools will….
affirm individual worth and dignity, recognize cultural diversities, and encourage
students to make a personal commitment to their own education;
enable students to build character, commit to a healthy lifestyle, learn to assume
civic responsibility and participate effectively in our democratic society;
enable students to acquire knowledge, skills, and ability to enter into the world of
work and/or postsecondary educational experiences;
prepare students to successfully meet the challenges of an ever-changing and
technologically demanding world;
provide a relevant and challenging curriculum that fosters the development of
skills in communication, decision making, problem solving and thinking; as well
as encourage involvement in creative arts and recreational activities;
maintain a safe and healthy environment that is conducive to effective learning;
maintain a staff of competent, culturally diverse, and highly motivated
professionals;
provide the necessary human, fiscal, and material resources to assure a quality
education.
Source: http://www.worcester.k12.com/media/Section_1.pdf
54
Office of
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 65 ---
Certain Oversight Has Been Put in PlaceRegarding
WCPS Operations
The WCPS Board uses a number of methods to oversee the
operations of WCPS.
 The Board hires an independent certified public accounting firm
to audit its financial statements, federally funded grant
programs and student activity funds, and annually meets with
that firm to review the results.
 The Board receives and discusses detailed budget and
expenditure information as part of the budget approval process.
 Board members receive and approve a detailed expenditure
report each month.
The Board Should Obtain Required Approval for Its
Ethics Policy and Ensure Compliance With the Policy
The Board needs to have its ethics policy approved by the
State as required – The Board had adopted an ethics policy that
was approved by the State Ethics Commission on December 21,
1983. However, the changes made to the policy by the Board in
August 1990, February 2003, October 2005, and May 2010 were
not approved by the State Ethics Commission. State Law requires
local boards of education to submit their ethics policies to ensure
the provisions comply with State law requirements.11 Our review of
the May 2010 policy (which was effective subsequent to the audit
period) disclosed that while certain provisions were added, other
provisions included in the October 2005 policy were eliminated.
For example, the composition of the Ethics Panel, which interprets
ethics policies and provides advice on policy implementation, has
been reconstituted to provide the opportunity for more
independence. Under the October 2005 policy, the Panel consisted
of three members - two of which, as specified by the policy, were
11 State law requirements for local board of education members were expanded effective
October 1, 2010. Chapter 277, Laws of Maryland 2010, requires that conflict of
interest and financial disclosure provisions for board members to be equivalent to or
exceed the State requirements in Subtitles 5 and 6 of Title 15 of the State Government
Article of the Annotated Code of Maryland.
55
Office of
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 66 ---
positions under WCPS employment (as a regular employee and a
contractor). The May 2010 policy changed the Panel’s composition
whereby there are now five members, four of which are to be
appointed by the Board. (The four members could be individuals
not under WCPS employment.) However, the May 2010 policy
excluded certain conflict of interest provisions included in its
October 2005 policy and suggested by the State ethics regulations
for the local boards of education. For example, the October 2005
policy prohibited WCPS officials and employees (whether or not they
participated in decision-making) from holding an interest of $1,000
or 10 percent or greater in a business entity that has a contract of
$5,000 or more with the school system. Under the May 2010
policy, this prohibition only applies to individuals participating in
decision-making on a matter in which they have a direct financial
impact as a business entity in which they hold an interest of 10
percent or greater. As noted in the following section, the changes
could be significant for WCPS.
The Board should ensure its ethics policy is followed – We
noted certain arrangements that existed during our audit period that
appeared in opposition to the WCPS’ October 2005 ethics policy.
That policy prohibited Board of Education officials, such as Board
members, and employees from participating on behalf of WCPS in
any matter in which they maintain a direct financial interest in a
business entity under authority or contract to the school system.
The policy also prohibited such persons from holding an interest of
$1,000 or 10 percent or greater in a business entity that has a
contract of $5,000 or more with the school system or be employed
by a business entity that has a contract of $50,000 or more with
WCPS. Furthermore these arrangements had not been formally
addressed by the WCPS Ethics Panel.
 A Board member was a paid bus contractor for several years
(for example, fiscal year 2009 payments under the contract
exceeded $50,000). Historically, the Board approved the
payments to bus contractors only as part of the overall
budget approval process. However, on February 16, 2010,
the Board recorded its first specific approval of the table of
rates to be paid to bus contractors (for fiscal year 2011).
This Board member abstained from the vote because the
member was a bus contractor receiving payments from
WCPS. Although it appeared to be common knowledge that
the Board member was also a school bus contractor, the
56
Office of
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 67 ---
Board member had not filed a statement with the Ethics
Panel to disclose this business interest as required by the
WCPS ethics policy. Such statements are public records
available for public inspection and copying. While the Board
member, in this one instance, did not participate in the rate
approval process, it is unclear how the relationship did not
violate other prohibitions regarding officials and employees
affiliated with business entities having contracts with the
school system.
 A WCPS transportation employee was also a bus contractor
for several years. (For example, fiscal year 2009 payments
under the contract exceeded $50,000). Although this
employee was not required under the policy to file a
disclosure statement reporting this relationship, it is unclear
how the relationship did not violate the prohibitions
regarding employees affiliated with business entities having
contracts with the school system.
 Another Board member was paid in excess of $5,000 under
a contract for certain services at a WCPS facility. This
contract was not subject to a competitive procurement
process and the Board member had not filed a statement
with the Ethics Panel to disclose this business interest as
required by the WCPS ethics policy. Furthermore, it is
unclear how the relationship did not violate the prohibitions
regarding officials affiliated with business entities having
contracts with the school system.
The Board Should Take Additional Steps to Improve
Its Oversight Functions
The Board should ensure that comprehensive performance
measures are adopted and reported for key operations –
WCPS had not adopted any key performance measures for financial
operations. Performance information can assist the Board in
overseeing and evaluating the progress of its budget and Master
Plan. Examples of useful performance measures may include
transportation and facility cost per student, cost per school meal
served, and meals produced per labor hour. When implemented
correctly, financial and efficiency performance measures can be
57
Office of
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 68 ---
used to assist in decision-making processes, such as allocating
resources and budgeting, and to report on departmental
effectiveness and efficiency.
The Board should consider establishing an internal auditor
function – WCPS does not have an internal auditor. The use of an
internal auditor, independent of school system management, is a
recommended best practice of the Government Finance Officers
Association (GFOA). The GFOA notes that internal auditors
commonly assist directors in monitoring the design and proper
functioning of internal controls and procedures, and can play a
valuable role in conducting performance audits, special
investigations, and studies. As cited in this report, our audit
identified certain deficiencies in the WCPS system of internal
control, such as procedures over disbursements. While WCPS may
determine it is unable to afford the additional costs for a full-time
internal audit position based on its size (as the seventh smallest of
all 24 public school systems in Maryland), it should determine if
such a position could be shared with other local Boards.
Alternatively, the Board could consider expanding the scope of work
performed by its independent auditor.
The Board should consider establishing a confidential
hotline – We noted that a confidential hotline had not been
implemented to enable employees and others to report suspected
fraud, waste, or mismanagement. If such a process was
established, the internal audit position could conduct the initial
investigations of information received via the hotline or direct the
information to appropriate officials, such as law enforcement.
Recommendations
19. The Board should obtain approval from the State Ethics
Commission for all changes to its ethics policy to ensure
consistency with State law requirements. WCPS should ensure
that persons subject to the policy comply with the
requirements and that any potential conflicts are formally
addressed by the Ethics Panel.
20. The Board should adopt comprehensive performance
measures in key operational areas, such as transportation,
58
Office of
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 69 ---
food service, and facilities management, to assist in its
oversight duties; such data should be periodically reviewed by
the Board. In addition, the Board should also enhance its
oversight of WCPS operations by considering the
establishment of an internal audit function and a hotline for
the confidential reporting of operational issues and suspected
fraud, waste, and mismanagement.
59
Office of
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 70 ---
60
Office of
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 71 ---
Chapter 11
Other Financial Controls
This chapter addresses the management of cash, risk, and long-
term debt such as lease/purchase agreements. WCPS had
procedures in place to govern its cash and risk management, and
WCPS is not permitted to issue bonds or other long-term debt
instruments to finance capital or operational needs.
Risk and Cash Management Best Practices Were in
Place
For risk management, WCPS uses a combination of self-insurance
and membership in the Maryland Association of Boards of
Education (MABE) Workers Compensation Pool. The school system
participates in the MABE Group Insurance Pool and the Workmen’s
Compensation Group Self-Insurance Fund for its general liability,
property, and workmen’s compensation insurance coverage.
According to the audited financial statements as of June 30, 2009,
settlements have not exceeded insurance coverage for the past
three years. To control workers’ compensation costs, WCPS used a
variety of methods such as an informal return to work program.
Furthermore, WCPS invested its cash in either the Maryland Local
Government Investment Pool (MLGIP), FDIC insured deposits or
deposits that are collateralized with collateral that is held in WCPS’
name. These investments are in accordance with the types
permitted by the Annotated Code of Maryland. According to the
61
Office of
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 72 ---
WCPS audited financial statements, investments totaled $4.5
million as of June 30, 2009.
Recommendation
None
62
Office of
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 73 ---
Audit Scope, Objectives,
and Methodology
Scope
We conducted a performance audit to evaluate the effectiveness
and efficiency of the financial management practices of the
Worcester County Public Schools (WCPS). We conducted this audit
under the authority of the State Government Article, Section 2-
1220(e) of the Annotated Code of Maryland and performed it in
accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards.
Those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to
obtain sufficient, appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable
basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit
objectives. We believe that the evidence obtained provides a
reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our
audit objectives.
Objectives
We had two broad audit objectives:
1. To evaluate whether the WCPS procedures and controls were
effective in accounting for and safeguarding its assets
2. To evaluate whether the WCPS policies provided for the
efficient use of financial resources
In planning and conducting our audit, we focused on the major
financial-related areas of operations based on assessments of
materiality and risk. Our audit approach, including the specific
objectives of our local school system audits, was approved on
63
Office of
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 74 ---
September 14, 2004 by the Joint Audit Committee of the Maryland
General Assembly in accordance with the enabling legislation. As
approved, the audit objectives excluded reviewing and assessing
student achievement, curriculum, teacher performance, and other
academic-related areas and functions. We also did not review the
activities, financial or other, of any parent teacher association,
group, or funds not under the local board of education’s direct
control or management. Finally, we did not evaluate the WCPS
Comprehensive Education Master Plan or related updates.
Methodology
To accomplish our objectives, we reviewed applicable State laws
and regulations pertaining to public elementary and secondary
education, as well as policies and procedures issued and
established by WCPS. We also interviewed personnel at WCPS, the
Maryland State Department of Education (MSDE), and staff at other
local school systems in Maryland (as appropriate12). Our audit
procedures included inspections of documents and records, and
observations of WCPS operations. We also tested transactions and
performed other auditing procedures that we considered necessary
to achieve our objectives, generally for the period from January 1,
2008 through June 30, 2009. For our audit work on revenue and
federal grants, we primarily relied on the results of an independent
audit of fiscal year 2009 activity.
In addition, we contacted a number of other state auditors’ offices
and legislative program evaluation agencies that had a history of
conducting audits or reviews of local school systems. We
interviewed those officials and inspected their work programs and
resultant reports to identify specific audit techniques and
operational practices at schools that could be adapted for our
school system audits. Finally, we used certain statistical data--
including financial and operational--compiled by the MSDE from
various informational reports submitted by the Maryland local
school systems. This information was used in this audit report for
background or informational purposes, and was deemed
reasonable. For comparison purposes, information provided was
generally limited to those Maryland school systems of similar sizes,
based on student enrollment and/or system budget. In many cases,
this information was self reported by the school systems. The data
12 During the course of the audit, it was necessary to contact other systems to
identify policies or practices for comparative purposes and analysis.
64
Office of
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 75 ---
were neither audited nor independently verified by us. Finally,
information provided in this report was obtained from various
reports readily available during our fieldwork.
Other Independent Auditors
When developing the approach for the audits of school system
financial management practices, a consideration was the reliance
on the work of other independent auditors to the extent practicable
to avoid unnecessary duplication of audit effort. With respect to
WCPS, the results of other auditors that we considered were
reported in three distinct audit reports: one related to the
administration of its federal grants; second, the management letter
from the audit of its financial statements audit; and third,
independent audits of the school activities and cafeteria funds.
During the course of this audit, we relied on these results. We
performed certain steps to satisfy ourselves as to the reliability of
the reported results of the independent federal grants audits of the
WCPS federal financial assistance programs for compliance with
federal laws and regulations and the WCPS financial statement and
school activity and cafeteria funds audits. Accordingly, we
significantly reduced the scope of our work in Chapter 1 “Revenue
and Billing Cycle,” and in Chapter 2 “Federal Funds.”
Limitations of Internal Control
WCPS management is responsible for establishing and maintaining
effective internal control. Internal control is a process designed to
provide reasonable assurance that objectives pertaining to the
reliability of financial records, effectiveness and efficiency of
operations including safeguarding of assets, and compliance with
applicable laws, rules, and regulations are achieved.
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud
may nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of
any evaluation of internal control to future periods are subject to the
risk that conditions may change or compliance with policies and
procedures may deteriorate.
In addition to the conditions included in this report, other less
significant findings were communicated to WCPS that did not
warrant inclusion in this report.
65
Office of
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 76 ---
Fieldwork and WCPS Responses
We conducted our fieldwork from September 2009 to May 2010.
The WCPS response to our findings and recommendations is
included as an appendix to this report.
66
Office of
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 78 ---
Worcester County Public Schools:
A Leader in Student Achievement
Worcester County Public Schools has been a leader in student achievement for over a
decade. Consistently ranking at the top levels of performance in Maryland – a state which is
distinguished as providing the best public education in the nation, the school system has
repeatedly been nationally highlighted as a model of success. In 2010, the success continues.
When comparing the percent of students system-wide who are achieving at proficient or
advanced levels on the 2010 Maryland School Assessments (MSA), Worcester County Public
Schools (at 90.5 percent) ranks third overall in the state, out of 24 school systems. Once again,
the school system ranks first in the state in Mathematics (at 91.3 percent), as well as sixth in the
state in Reading (at 89.6 percent), when comparing 2010 MSA scores with all 24 school systems.
Worcester County Public Schools also ranks in the top of the state for preparing its
students to be career and college ready, a key measure in evaluating the success of a school
system. In 2010, the school system’s graduation rate of 93.43 percent ranks fourth overall in the
state, and its dropout rate of 1.32 percent is the third lowest in the state. Worcester County
outperforms the state, both in 2010 standards and in state averages.
As Worcester County Public School students graduated in 2010, 81 percent pursued post-
secondary education, enrolling in two year, four year, or specialized institutions of higher
education. Twelve percent of 2010 graduates, many of whom were trained at the acclaimed
Worcester Technical High School, pursued careers, while seven percent of the graduates entered
the military. In addition, 2010 graduates were offered over $12 million in merit-based
scholarships.
Rigor, high academic standards, and high expectations are inherent in the educational
programs provided by Worcester County Public Schools. In the nation, Maryland ranks number-
one in terms of the graduating seniors who achieve a mastery score (of 3, 4, or 5) on Advanced
Placement exams, thus able to earn college credit while in high school. Compared to the state’s
AP mastery of 28.8 percent in 2010, Worcester County Public Schools’ AP mastery is at 49
percent, which includes all AP test takers, not just seniors in the class of 2010. This far exceeds
the national average of 15.9 percent. In addition, in the class of 2010, 99.8 percent of Worcester
County Public School seniors met the High School Assessment (HSA) requirement.
By rising to the top in a state that is recognized as being number-one in the nation for
public education, Worcester County Public Schools has earned many national accolades, such as:
 MGT of America, an independent firm selected by MSDE to evaluate the effectiveness
of state aid to local school systems, stated in its final report in December of 2008, that “in
the period between 2004 and 2007, the Worcester County Local School System (LSS)
achieved the best overall results in the state in closing the proficiency gap of it students,
as well as moving students from ‘proficient’ to ‘advanced’ between 2004 and 2007 for
grades 3 through 8 in combined reading and math.” In addition, the report stated that
“Worcester LSS students are among the best performing in Maryland.”
 Secretary of Education Arne Duncan said of Worcester County Public Schools at the
2010 National Conference for the American Association of School Administrators, “The
1

--- Page 79 ---
district’s high-performing schools reflect not only the district’s innovative after-school
instruction programs that extend the learning day in local churches, but an award-winning
arts immersion program, the provision of AP classes, and college and career prep courses
in engineering and other STEM subjects.”
 Out of 1,455 Maryland public schools in 2007, Ocean City Elementary School was the
first school in the state to achieve 100-percent proficiency in Mathematics and Reading,
as measured by the 2007 Maryland School Assessment (MSA). The accomplishment led
to a school visit in June of 2008 by the Region III Deputy Representative for the former
U.S. Secretary of Education, who concluded, “We wanted to know what the formula for
success is. The expectations and attitudes of the faculty are contagious, and our hope is
that we can bottle it and pass it on.”
 In 2010, Snow Hill High School was named a U.S. News & World Report National
Silver School, for the second consecutive year, for its success in preparing college-ready
students. The school was also recognized as a Naval Honor School, making its MC
JROTC program one of the top 20 percent in the nation.
 Pocomoke Elementary School was named a 2010 National Panasonic School Change
Winner for moving students from underachieving to top performing. Only six schools in
the nation received this recognition. Sixty-four percent of the students at Pocomoke
Elementary School come from households of poverty and qualify for Free and Reduced
Meals.
 In 2008, Berlin Intermediate School was recognized by the John F. Kennedy Center for
the Performing Arts as a National School of Distinction in Arts Education. The school
was one of only five schools in the nation to receive this recognition.
 On September 29, 2010, Pocomoke Middle School was featured on NBC’s “Today
Show” (as part of “Education Nation”) as an example of a public middle school that is
using innovative strategies to help students succeed. Pocomoke Middle is currently
showcased on the U.S. Department of Education’s “Doing What Works” website, for the
school’s outstanding Literacy program. In addition, the school was named a 2008
MetLife-NASSP Breakthrough School, a national recognition for moving students from
underachieving to top performing.
On a state level, Worcester County Public Schools has also risen to the top, earning many
prestigious accolades, including:
 Eight of the 12 eligible schools are Maryland Blue Ribbon Schools of Excellence, one of
the highest concentrations in the state. In addition, four of the schools are National Blue
Ribbon Schools.
 All 14 schools are accredited by the Middle State Association of Colleges and Schools,
an accomplishment that few Maryland school systems have achieved.
 Ten schools are Positive Behavior Intervention Supports (PBIS) Schools, with six of
them receiving Gold designations (the highest honor), and one receiving a Silver
designation.
2

--- Page 80 ---
 An impressive 98.1 percent of core-content courses (from Pre-K to 12) are taught by
highly-qualified teachers.
 The school system ranks in the top-five for dollars spent in the classroom when
compared with all 24 school systems. Eighty-one (81) cents of every dollar are spent on
instructional programs.
With poverty exceeding that of the state average (38 percent), Worcester County Public
Schools (with 39 percent FARMS) is progressing toward the elimination of achievement gaps.
Since 2003, the four subgroups identified as having the largest achievement gaps have made the
greatest improvements over the seven year period. Below are some percentage-point increases
from 2003 to 2010 on the MSA:
 In the English Language Learners (ELL) subgroup, performance on the Reading MSA
has improved by 75.2 percentage-points, starting at 13 percent in 2003 and improving to
88.2 percent in 2010.
 In Special Education, performance on the Math MSA improved by 48.4 percentage-
points, starting at 23 percent in 2003 and improving to 71.4 percent in 2010.
 In the Free and Reduced Meals subgroup, performance on the Reading MSA has
improved by 35.7 percentage-points, starting at 47.1 percent in 2003 and improving to
82.8 percent in 2010.
 In the African American subgroup, performance on the Math MSA improved by 41.3
percentage-points, starting at 37.2 percent in 2003 and improving to 78.5 percent in 2010.
Worcester County Public Schools’ formula for success is very simple. “We recruit and
hire excellent staff members,” said Superintendent Dr. Jon Andes. “We keep class sizes small;
we provide tools for teaching and learning; we monitor student progress; we provide enrichment
and remediation during the day or in our after-school and summer school programs to meet
student needs; we encourage parents to stay involved in the learning process; we survey our
parents to seek constructive feedback; we use the Accreditation for Growth school improvement
process to always seek better strategies and programs to help our students; and we acknowledge
and attack our challenges.”
“The supports that we have in place and which are making a difference for our students
have required a vision, coupled with the necessary resources,” said Board of Education President
Robert Hulburd. “Our results show that we are using resources wisely to have the greatest
impact on our students.”
3

--- Page 81 ---
Recommendation Response
1. WCPS should ensure that all receipts Current Status
are immediately recorded and that checks Cash receipts have always been posted
are restrictively endorsed upon receipt. In daily to both the automated AS400
addition, an employee independent of the Financial System and an EXCEL
cash receipts process should verify that all spreadsheet when received. An employee
recorded receipts were deposited. independent of the cash receipts process is
currently verifying that all recorded
receipts are deposited. WCBOE finance
department is currently restrictively
endorsing checks when received.
Response
WCBOE will continue to ensure that all
receipts are recorded when received.
WCBOE is now restrictively endorsing all
checks when received by the finance
department. An employee independent of
the cash receipts system is now verifying
that all receipts were deposited.
2. WCPS should develop procurement Current Status
policies that address all categories of goods The Worcester County Board of Education
and services purchases. The policies follows existing state procurement policy
should specify the procurement methods to as outlined under the Annotated Code of
be used, when contracts should be in Maryland Education Article 5-112. Items
writing, the mandatory contract provisions requiring a bid are submitted to the Board
and the approval requirements, including for their review and approval as outlined in
when Board approval is required (for our Accounting Procedures Manual section
example, procurements over a specified 6.4. The Board will continue to review our
amount). These policies should be policies and procedures and verify that we
approved by the Board. remain in compliance with all State and
Federal laws.
Response
WCBOE will review and evaluate all
existing procurement policies and
procedures. WCBOE will also review the
cost/benefit of developing additional
independent procurement policies and
revise as appropriate. WCBOE will begin
this review during FY10/11.
4

--- Page 82 ---
Recommendation Response
3. WCPS should improve controls over its Current Status
invoice processing system by segregating The WCBOE has various controls currently
incompatible functions and assigning in place over invoice processing. The
critical system functions to only those Chief Financial Officer or Finance
employees who need the capabilities to Manager’s signature is required prior to the
perform their job duties. Furthermore, payment of invoices. There is a separation
WCPS should restrict access to the of duties between the employee who prints
signature plate to employees who are checks and the employee who signs checks.
independent of the invoice processing The Chief Financial Officer reviews and
functions. approves all voucher check listings. The
signature plate is kept in a locked location.
The WCBOE has an independent audit
performed annually by a public accounting
firm and has always received an
unqualified opinion.
Response
WCBOE will conduct a review of all
existing internal controls over invoice
processing and access to the signature
plate. WCBOE will begin this review
during FY10/11. It should be noted that
achieving further segregation of duties will
require hiring additional staff in the finance
department. As our school system
continues working toward our goal of
making sure each of our students is
successful, additional staff will also likely
be required in our instructional positions.
5

--- Page 83 ---
Recommendation Response
4. WCPS should obtain goods and services Current Status
through a properly documented WCBOE policy has always been to follow
competitive procurement process. If a state procurement guidelines as outlined in
competitive procurement process is not the Annotated Code of Maryland Education
deemed appropriate (such as when only one Article 5-112. This policy is now located
vendor can provide the required services), in section 6.4 of WCBOE Accounting
then documentation justifying the decision Procedures Manual. Invoices are reviewed
should be maintained. Furthermore, WCPS for pricing and to confirm delivery of items
should ensure vendors charge the agreed before payment is processed. The contracts
upon rates, should limit the number of cited in the auditor’s report are for
contract extensions, and should prepare contacted services which under Annotated
analyses to determine whether exercising Code of Maryland Education Article 5-112
contract extensions is more beneficial than are not required to be bid. The Board
re-bidding contracts. attorney is appointed annually by the Board
of Education.
Response
WCBOE will review and revise
procurement practices as appropriate to
continue to ensure that procurements are
properly documented and contract
extensions are more beneficial than re-
bidding. WCBOE will begin this review
during FY10/11.
6

--- Page 84 ---
Recommendation Response
5. WCPS should improve controls over the Current Status
payroll system by segregating incompatible WCBOE has existing controls over our
functions and by ensuring that payroll payroll system. Currently, all pay rates and
transactions are reviewed by independent schedules are initiated by the Human
supervisory personnel using supporting Resources Department. This information is
documentation. entered into the payroll system and updated
employee information is provided to the
Supervisor of Human Resources to review.
Requests for adjustments are also reviewed
and approved by the Chief Financial
Officer. WCBOE has always received
unqualified opinions on our independent
audits and the Legislative audit team found
no evidence of unauthorized payments.
The WCBOE is constantly reviewing
internal controls and will continue to
evaluate additional separation of duties to
the extent possible with available staff.
Response
WCBOE will review all existing controls
over our payroll system. WCBOE will
begin this review during FY 10/11. It
should be noted that additional segregation
of duties would require additional staff. As
our school system continues working
toward our goal of making sure each of our
students is successful, additional staff will
also likely be required in instructional
positions.
7

--- Page 85 ---
Recommendation Response
6. WCPS should expand its workforce Current Status
planning to include key non-instructional WCBOE currently works to identify and to
positions in critical operational units. provide training to prepare future non-
instructional leaders. WCBOE offers
extensive staff development opportunities
and also offers tuition reimbursements.
Response
WCBOE will work to formalize and
document our existing informal workforce
planning for non-instructional positions.
WCBOE will begin this process during
FY10/11.
7. WCPS should improve the Current Status
accountability for its equipment by WCBOE follows procedures regarding
developing and enforcing comprehensive equipment as outlined in our Accounting
written policies and procedures to govern Procedures Manual section 6.4. Those
the accounting and safeguarding of procedures include adding items with a
equipment that includes the segregation of cost of $1,000 or more to our inventory
duties, tagging fixed assets, uniform listing. These items are also tagged. The
reporting of lost or stolen items, and inventory list is reviewed and updated
tracking sensitive items prone to theft. In regularly. An auction is held annually to
addition, WCPS should ensure that items sell obsolete inventory. The inventory
are properly tagged and adjustments made listing is then updated to reflect those items
to the inventory detail records are reviewed sold.
and approved by supervisory personnel.
Finally, WCPS should assign critical Response
inventory system capabilities only to WCBOE will review all existing policies
employees who require such capabilities to and procedures over equipment and make
perform their job duties. additions as appropriate. WCBOE will
review all staff capabilities related to
inventory and make changes as appropriate.
WCBOE will begin this review in FY
10/11.
8

--- Page 86 ---
Recommendation Response
8. WCPS should implement appropriate Current Status
security measures to safeguard its WCBOE currently utilizes password
applications and data systems by improving security for our systems. Safeguards for our
password protection policies, enabling computer rooms are routinely reviewed.
logging and reporting of all critical security WCBOE is also working with software
events, and eliminating unnecessary service vendors to enable logging and reporting of
accounts. WCPS should also maintain critical systems and security events.
documentation that substantiates the proper WCBOE has also migrated to an on-site
sanitation of disposed computer equipment AS400 system for our finance and payroll
and should establish procedures to applications and updated user capabilities
periodically review the capabilities as part of this process.
assigned to active users on its financial and
payroll applications. Finally, WCPS Response
should establish adequate physical controls WCBOE will review and work to improve
and safeguards for its computer and storage policies and procedures in all of our
rooms. information and data systems areas.
WCBOE has initiated this review and will
continue in FY 10/11.
9. WCPS should develop and implement a Current Status
comprehensive disaster recovery plan. WCBOE currently has a disaster recovery
plan and stores backup data offsite. A
disaster recovery review of our student
information system was conducted in the
summer of 2010 and identified additional
items that would strengthen our disaster
recovery plan.
Response
WCBOE will review and expand our
existing disaster recovery plan as necessary
to ensure the protection of all data and
software. WCBOE performed a test this
summer and is currently revising our plan
as a result of observations from this test.
The revised plan should be completed in
FY 10/11.
9

--- Page 87 ---
Recommendation Response
10. WCPS should develop formal policies Current Status
governing construction contract The WCBOE policy has always followed
procurements and establish internal control State law, Maryland Interagency
procedures to ensure that WCPS complies Committee for Public School Construction
with State law and is receiving the best (IAC) guidelines, and AIA contract
value for its procurements. The policies requirements in all aspects of school
should address the requirements for construction. In response to the contract for
bidding, awarding and approving construction management, as noted by the
construction contracts, and approving auditors, this service went through a
change orders. competitive bid process for the Ocean City
Elementary Project. As a result of their
strong performance, the same firm was
selected for the Worcester Technical High
School.
Response
WCBOE will review and revise as
appropriate local policies and procedures
related to bidding, awarding, and approving
change orders. WCBOE will begin this
review in FY 10/11.
10

--- Page 88 ---
Recommendation Response
11. WCPS should develop a performance Current Status
measurement system that establishes WCBOE currently has performance
standards and expectations for maintenance measures in place for evaluating
and custodial operations, and report the maintenance operations. All of our school
measurement results to the Board. buildings are inspected annually by our
Supervisor of Maintenance and rated on
their condition. Custodians at buildings
which receive a superior rating are
recognized annually at a Board of
Education meeting. Each year, parent
surveys are sent home with each of our
students. Questions including the condition
of our school buildings are included in this
annual survey. The maintenance section of
the parent survey consistently receives
favorability ratings of over 90%. Results of
these surveys are shared with the Board at
our annual public input meeting to begin
our budget process for the new year. Each
year, our Board receives a copy of the cost
per pupil information published by the
Maryland State Department of Education.
The latest ranking indicates that our school
system ranks 23 out of 24 in the category
of maintenance based on spending per
pupil.
Response
WCBOE will review all existing
performance measures currently reported to
the Board and develop additional
performance measures as appropriate to
maintain custodial operations and facilities.
WCBOE will begin this review during FY
10/11.
11

--- Page 89 ---
Recommendation Response
12. WCPS should better document the Current Status
procedures used to determine bus routes, The WCBOE develops bus routes as
including all appropriate factors that outlined under our Policies and Procedures
comprise the route planning process and Manual. The Worcester County Board of
should determine whether routing software Education’s main goal in developing bus
could improve route efficiencies. routes is the safety of our students. The
number of students on each bus and travel
time is also considered when developing
and evaluating bus routes. Our school
system is located in a coastal community
and many homes are located on peninsulas
at the end of dead end streets. WCBOE has
researched electronic routing software and
currently believes the benefits of this
software would not justify the cost. It
should be noted that the legislative audit
team confirmed our transportation costs are
reasonable when compared to other similar
sized school systems in the state.
Response
WCBOE will review existing documented
policies and procedures related to
developing our bus routes and revise as
appropriate. WCBOE will begin this
review in FY 10/11. WCBOE has
researched bus routing software in the past
but found it to be cost prohibitive. WCBOE
will continue to routinely review the
potential benefits/drawbacks of purchasing
routing software.
12

--- Page 90 ---
Recommendation Response
13. WCPS should establish a written Current Status
policy on how components of the bus Contractor rates are established by the
contractor payment rates are to be Board of Education as outlined in our
determined each year. WCPS should Policies and Procedures Manual.
maintain documentation that shows the Documentation including proposed rates,
basis for the rates established each year. approved rates, and comparison of
contractor rates in other LEA’s is
maintained by our Supervisor of
Transportation and reviewed annually by
the Board. WCBOE approves contractor
rates each year based upon available
funding.
Response
WCBOE will review existing policies and
procedures governing bus contractor rates
and make revisions as deemed necessary.
WCBOE will begin this review in FY
10/11. Documentation for the
establishment of annual rates is maintained.
14. WCPS should analyze bus contractors Current Status
pay (including the PVA) to determine The WCBOE PVA is in line with other
whether the rates are reasonable. In Maryland school systems as demonstrated
addition, WCPS should ensure that its bus by a review recently performed by a
contractor selection requirements comply committee from MSDE. The requirements
with all applicable laws and regulations. for bus contractors are clearly stated in our
Furthermore, WCPS should periodically Policy and Procedures Manual and have
prepare a documented analysis to been reviewed by our Board attorney.
determine whether continued use of outside WCBOE believes the decision to use
contractors to provide student bus services contractors to provide student bus
is, in fact, cost beneficial for the school transportation is a local decision. The
system legislative audit team concluded that
WCBOE transportation costs were
“reasonable” when compared with other
similar-sized school systems.
Response
WCBOE will continue to annually review
our contractor rates. WCOBE will review
existing selection procedures to ensure
continued compliance with applicable laws
and regulations. WCBOE will begin this
review in FY 10/11.
13

--- Page 91 ---
Recommendation Response
15. WCPS should perform observations of Current Status
entire bus routes and use its observations of WCBOE currently meets observation
bus route times and distances to ensure that requirements as outlined in COMAR and
the applicable payments to contractors MSDE regulations. Staff also randomly
accurately reflect the actual bus services verifies information (hours, miles) listed in
provided. the contractor’s manifest. Verification
methods include riding with or following
the contractor. Online travel resources are
also utilized to verify mileage and time.
WCBOE will continue to utilize all
appropriate methods to ensure that
payments reflect actual bus services
provided.
Response
WCBOE will review existing policies and
procedures related to driver observations
and adjust as appropriate to continue to
ensure payments to contractors accurately
reflect services provided. WCBOE will
begin this review in FY 10/11.
16. WCPS should develop a performance Current Status
measurement system for transportation WCBOE does receive and evaluate
services and periodically report the results performance measures. These include
to the Board. transportation costs per student as provided
by MSDE and comparison of contractor
rates to other lower shore school systems.
WCBOE is very proud of our impeccable
safety record in transporting our students to
and from school.
Response
WCBOE will review existing
transportation performance measures
reported to the Board and revise as deemed
appropriate. WCBOE will begin this
review in FY 10/11.
14

--- Page 92 ---
Recommendation Response
17. WCPS should improve controls over Current Status
its purchase of food supplies by requiring WCBOE has existing internal controls over
advance approval by independent the purchase of food supplies including the
supervisory personnel for purchases, and Supervisor of Food Services reviewing and
by entering into formal contracts with food authorizing payment of invoices. As noted
suppliers, when applicable. In addition, in the audit report, WCBOE does
duties should be properly segregated over participate in a multi-county purchasing
the procurement and receipt of food service cooperative for the purchase of food to
items. increase purchasing power and keep costs
lower.
Response
WCBOE will review food service internal
controls and make revisions as appropriate.
WCOBE will continue to review food
service contracts to ensure the purchase of
the best product at the most reasonable
cost. WCBOE will begin this review in FY
10/11.
15

--- Page 93 ---
Recommendation Response
18. WCPS should identify all food service Current Status
department costs, including utility and As a practice, WCBOE has never applied
custodial costs, to properly reflect the indirect costs to our food service
department’s full operating costs. In operations. The purpose of our food service
addition, WCPS should periodically program is to provide healthy meals to our
evaluate the meals per labor hour students at an affordable price. Forty
performance of its food service operations percent of Worcester County students are
and consider instituting efficiency eligible for free or reduced meals. WCBOE
measures. staff meets regularly to monitor and
evaluate our food service operation.
Performance measures reviewed include
meals served per day, student participation,
labor cost as a percentage of sales, food
cost as a percentage of sales, and profit/loss
statements by school. WCBOE has also
had two independent consultants review
our food service operations over the past 10
years. Meals per labor hour were included
in the FY09 study and WCBOE is in the
process of implementing recommendations
from that report to increase operational
results. The food service operation did
show a profit for the year ended June 30,
2010.
Response
WCBOE will review the indirect costs of
our food service operations and adjust as
appropriate. WCBOE will begin to review
the indirect costs of our food service
operations in FY 10/11. WCBOE will
continue to monitor food service operations
and work to identify and implement
opportunities for increased quality and
operational efficiencies.
16

--- Page 94 ---
Recommendation Response
19. The Board should obtain approval Current Status
from the State Ethics Commission for all The Ethics Policy of the WCBOE was
changes to its ethics policy to ensure originally adopted in 1984 and revised in
consistency with State law requirements. 1990, 2003, 2005, and in 2010. The policy
WCPS should ensure that persons subject has been reviewed by our Board attorney to
to the policy comply with the requirements ensure consistency with state laws. Since
and that any potential conflicts are formally 1996, only one complaint has been filed.
addressed by the Ethics Panel.
Response
Based upon the recommendation of the
legislative audit team, our policy was
revised in May, 2010. The revised policy
has been submitted to the State Ethics
Committee for their review and approval.
20. The Board should adopt Current Status
comprehensive performance measures in The WCBOE agrees that performance
key operational areas, such as measures are useful in evaluating
transportation, food service, and facilities operations. Each year, the WCBOE
management, to assist in its oversight prepares a comprehensive Master Plan,
duties; such data should be periodically Maintenance Plan, Facilities Plan, and a
reviewed by the Board. In addition, the Capital Improvement Plan. Performance
Board should also enhance its oversight of measures include student performance,
WCPS operations by considering the staff retention rates, and budget to actual
establishment of an internal audit function rates. Other performance measures include
and a hotline for the confidential reporting cost per student by category, energy usage
of operational issues and suspected fraud, by school, number of custodians per square
waste, and mismanagement. foot, and salary comparisons. Food service
performance measures already in place
include participation rates, labor and food
costs as a percentage of sales, and cost per
labor hour.
Response
The WCBOE will review all existing
performance measures currently shared
with our Board and make revisions as
deemed appropriate. WCBOE will begin
this review in FY 10/11. An internal
auditor position was included in prior
budget requests but was not approved. A
request for this position will be included in
future years as the economy improves.
WCBOE believes current methods for
confidential reporting exists. These include
voice mail, email, and anonymous note.
WCBOE will consider implementing a
hotline when economic conditions
improve.
17

--- Page 95 ---
Summary
Our goal is to make sure that each graduate is college or career ready. To accomplish this
goal, we have undertaken a decade of continuous systemic improvement through the
Accreditation for Growth model. As a result of our work, Worcester County Public Schools
ranks third in the state in student achievement. To create a high performing school system, we
use a simple formula: hire the best people; maintain low class sizes; provide teachers and
students with the needed tools for learning and teaching; monitor student progress and intervene
with remediation and enrichment as needed; provide academic after-school and summer-school
programs for all students; and acknowledge and aggressively address our challenges. Our
challenges include closing the achievement gap and infusing more and new rigorous academic
programs in challenging fiscal times.
Essential to the success of our students is a sound financial management system that
directs the vast majority of funds to our classrooms. As a school system, we rank first in the state
in expenditures on instructional programs; third in the area of expenditures on textbooks and
instructional supplies; and fourth in the area of special education; expenditures on administration
rank twenty first in the state; and maintenance expenditures rank twenty-third in the state. As a
school system in Maryland, during the last three years we have undergone seventeen separate
audits and program reviews. All audits and program reviews were characterized as a “clean”
audit with no major findings.
The audit team from the Department of Legislative Services spent approximately six
months in our school system reviewing eleven major areas. In two areas, no recommendations
were made and in nine areas, a total of twenty recommendations were made. As we continuously
strive to improve our delivery of educational services for our students, families, and our
community, we will review the areas noted in the “Financial Management Practices Performance
Audit Report”.
18

--- Page 96 ---
A T
UDIT EAM
Stephen C. Pease, CPA
Audit Manager
Richard L. Carter, CISA
Information Systems Audit Manager
Ken H. Johanning, CFE
Senior Auditor
Omar A. Gonzalez, CPA
Information Systems Senior Auditor
R. Frank Abel, CPA, CFE
Roger E. Jaynes III, CFE
Joseph E. McWilliams
Staff Auditors