Title: Talbot County Public Schools

NOTE: In accordance with Chapter 261, 2016 Laws of Maryland, this system has obtained an exemption from one audit which extends the time until the next audit from 6 years to 12 years.
Date: 07/17/2013
Type: Local School Systems
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5a945d38cc9d72404c150a3a
Extracted: 2025-06-18T10:48:54.085072
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Financial Management Practices Audit Report
Talbot County Public Schools
July 2013
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
 This report and any related follow-up correspondence are available to the public through
the Office of Legislative Audits at 301 West Preston Street, Room 1202, Baltimore,
Maryland 21201. The Office may be contacted by telephone at 410-946-5900, 301-970-
5900, or 1-877-486-9964.
 Electronic copies of our audit reports can be viewed or downloaded from our website at
http://www.ola.state.md.us.
 Alternate formats may be requested through the Maryland Relay Service at 1-800-735-
2258.
 The Department of Legislative Services – Office of the Executive Director, 90 State Circle,
Annapolis, Maryland 21401 can also assist you in obtaining copies of our reports and
related correspondence. The Department may be contacted by telephone at 410-946-
5400 or 301-970-5400.

--- Page 5 ---
Table of Contents
Executive Summary 5
Background Information 7
Statistical Overview 7
Oversight 7
External Audits of Fiscal Years 2011 and 2012 7
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report 8
Findings and Recommendations 9
Revenue and Billing Cycle 9
Federal Funds
Procurement and Disbursement Cycle
* Finding 1 – Internal Control Deficiencies Could Allow Improper Payments 11
 Finding 2 – TCPS Did Not Always Ensure That Procurements Were 11
Competitively Procured as Required or Justified as Sole Source
Procurements
Human Resources and Payroll
* Finding 3 – Certain Users Had Unneeded System Capabilities and 12
Personnel and Payroll Changes Were Not Adequately Reviewed for
Propriety
Inventory Control and Accountability
 Finding 4 – TCPS’ Policies and Physical Inventory Procedures Need 14
Improvement to Safeguard Equipment
Information Technology
 Finding 5 – Administrative Access to the TCPS Network Was Excessive 15
and Database Monitoring and Password and Account Controls Over
Critical Systems Were Not Sufficient
 Finding 6 – TCPS Did Not Have an Information Technology Disaster 16
Recovery Plan and Anti-Virus Protection Was Frequently Not Installed
or Up-to-Date
Finding 7 – TCPS’ Network Was Not Properly Secured 17
* Denotes item repeated in full or part from preceding audit report
3

--- Page 6 ---
Facilities Construction, Renovation, and Maintenance 18
Transportation Services
 Finding 8 – TCPS’ Routing Procedures Were Not Comprehensive and 19
Its Routing Software Capabilities Were Not Fully Utilized
Finding 9 – TCPS Did Not Follow Proper Procurement Procedures 21
for Bus Maintenance and Contractor Services
Food Service Operations
Finding 10 – Internal Controls Over the Purchasing of Food Supplies 22
Should be Strengthened
School Board Operations 23
Other Financial Controls
 Finding 11 – TCPS Had Not Properly Collateralized Certain Cash 24
Deposits
 Finding 12 – TCPS Had Not Established a Debt Management Policy 24
Finding 13 – TCPS Had Not Implemented Procedures to Ensure the 25
Propriety of Health Care Costs
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology 27
Agency Response Appendix
*
Denotes item repeated in full or part from preceding audit report
4

--- Page 7 ---
Executive Summary
Legislative Audit Report on the Talbot County Public Schools (TCPS)
July 2013
According to data compiled by the Maryland State Department of Education,
TCPS ranks 21st in student enrollment among the 24 public school systems in
Maryland. During the fiscal year ending June 30, 2011, TCPS had a total full-
time regular and special education pupil population of 4,547 at its 8 schools.
TCPS’ operating and capital expenditures totaled $60 million during fiscal
year 2011, and revenues totaled $60 million.
The Office of Legislative Audits has conducted its second audit of TCPS’
financial management practices. Our current audit identified a number of
opportunities for TCPS to improve internal controls, to adopt more cost-
effective processes, and to enhance policy direction. Most of these issues
were identified in our first audit report issued in December 2007.
TCPS Needs To Improve Internal Controls and Accountability
TCPS needs to improve internal controls in several critical areas. We noted
that TCPS lacked an independent review to ensure that critical personnel
actions and payroll payments processed in the human resource and payroll
system were proper. In addition, we identified a number of employees who
have access to certain human resource and payroll functions that were not
necessary. Furthermore, we also noted one employee who had complete
access to certain modules of the purchasing and accounts payable system
that could allow this employee to process improper payments. Internal
controls are also needed to ensure that competitive procurement methods
are used whenever possible or justified as sole source procurements.
TCPS also needs to implement adequate security measures and monitoring
procedures to protect critical computer network resources. For example,
some users were given capabilities which would allow them to process
unauthorized modifications to critical data. Also, TCPS had not developed a
disaster recovery plan to restore its systems after an emergency event.
TCPS Should Consider Implementing Certain Steps to Improve Cost
Effectiveness
TCPS should take steps to ensure the efficiency of its bus operation. Our tests
disclosed that ridership was significantly lower than bus capacity. In addition,
TCPS did not effectively use automated bus routing software. Furthermore,
5

--- Page 8 ---
TCPS did not procure bus maintenance services and certain bus contractor
services via a competitive process to ensure the services were obtained at the
best possible cost.
TCPS also needs to implement procedures to ensure that health insurance
claims paid by the third-party administrator are reviewed for propriety. In
addition, the eligibility of dependents enrolled in the health insurance program
should be verified.
TCPS Needs to Establish Certain Comprehensive Policies
TCPS needs to develop formal policies pertaining to student bus
transportation (such as bus capacity utilization) and debt management.
6

--- Page 9 ---
Background Information
Statistical Overview
According to Maryland State Department of Education (MSDE) student
enrollment records, the Talbot County Public Schools (TCPS) ranks 21st in
student enrollment among the 24 public school systems in Maryland. From
fiscal years 2001 through 2011, the total full-time regular and special
education pupil population has increased 1 percent from 4,516 to 4,547
students. For the 2011-2012 school year, TCPS had 8 schools, consisting of
5 elementary, 1 middle, 1 combined (middle and high) and 1 high school.
According to TCPS’ audited financial statements, fiscal year 2011
expenditures were $60 million and revenues were also $60 million. The
largest expenditure category was salaries and wages which, including
benefits, accounted for approximately 66 percent of total expenditures during
fiscal year 2011. According to MSDE records, as of October 2011, TCPS had
616 budgeted full-time positions, which consisted of 387 instructional and
229 non-instructional employees.
Oversight
TCPS is governed by a local school board, consisting of seven elected voting
members and one non-voting student member. The State and the Talbot
County government provide the vast majority of TCPS funding. In addition,
MSDE exercises considerable oversight through the establishment and
monitoring of various financial and academic policies and regulations, in
accordance with certain provisions of the Annotated Code of Maryland. MSDE
also works with TCPS to comply with the requirements and mandates of
federal law. Talbot County government exercises authority over TCPS
primarily through the review and approval of TCPS’ annual operating and
capital budgets.
External Audits of Fiscal Years 2011 and 2012
TCPS engages a certified public accounting firm to independently audit its
annual fiscal year-end financial statements. Additionally, the auditor conducts
what is referred to as a Single Audit of TCPS federal grant programs, as
required by federal regulations. The resulting financial statement and Single
7

--- Page 10 ---
Audit reports for fiscal year 2011 were issued in September 2011. Neither
report included any material weaknesses1 or significant deficiencies2 in TCPS’
record keeping, processes, and controls.
The financial statement and Single Audit reports for fiscal year 2012 were
issued on September 28, 2012. Neither report included any material
weaknesses or significant deficiencies.
Due to similarities between the work of the independent certified public
accounting firm that audited the TCPS financial statements and conducted
the Single Audit, and the risks and scope of our audit in certain areas, we
relied on the results of the independent audit of the fiscal year 2011 financial
statements and Single Audit to reduce the scope of our audit work related to
revenues, federal grant activity, and school activity fund disbursements.
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report
Our audit included a review to determine the status of 20 of the 24 findings
contained in our preceding audit report dated December 3, 2007 (the 24
findings resulted in 18 detailed recommendations in that report). We followed
up on these 20 findings based on our current assessment of significance and
risk relative to the audit objectives. We determined that TCPS satisfactorily
addressed 9 of these findings. The remaining 11 findings are repeated as 9
findings in this report.
1 A material weakness is a significant deficiency, or combination of significant deficiencies, that results
in more than a remote likelihood that a material misstatement of the financial statements (or, with
respect to Single Audit, material noncompliance with a type of compliance requirement of a federal
program) will not be prevented or detected by the entity’s internal control.
2 A significant deficiency is a control deficiency, or combination of control deficiencies, that adversely
affects the entity’s ability to initiate, authorize, record, process, or report financial data reliably in
accordance with generally accepted accounting principles (or, with respect to Single Audit, to administer
a federal program such that there is more than a remote likelihood that noncompliance with a type of
compliance requirement of a federal program) that is more than inconsequential that will not be
prevented or detected by the entity’s internal control.
8

--- Page 11 ---
Findings and Recommendations
Revenue and Billing Cycle
Background
Talbot County Public Schools (TCPS) revenues consist primarily of funds
received from Talbot County, the State, and the federal government.
According to the TCPS audited financial statements, revenues from all sources
totaled $60 million during fiscal year 2011. In addition, TCPS collects funds
for various purposes, such as student activity groups and clubs and school
publications. These school activity funds are accounted for separately by
each school and reported in summary in the audited financial statements.
Although this revenue is raised through student-related activities, TCPS has a
fiduciary duty to safeguard these funds. For fiscal year 2011, school activity
fund collections totaled $943,000 and the June 30, 2011 balance was
$166,000. These funds were audited by an independent certified public
accounting firm.
External Audit Disclosed No Reportable Conditions Regarding Revenue
Activities
Due to the similarities between the work of the independent certified public
accounting firm that audited the TCPS financial statements and the objectives
of our audit in this area, we placed significant reliance on the results of that
audit for revenues including those of school activity funds. The auditor's
procedural review and testing disclosed no material weaknesses or
deficiencies regarding significant revenue types, accounts receivable, or
school activity funds. Such testing included the most significant revenue
types, the majority of which related to electronic fund transfers from other
governmental entities, and also included receipts for school activity funds.
Federal Funds
Background
TCPS receives funds pertaining to federal government programs that are
generally restricted for use for a specific program (such as the School Lunch
Program or Special Education). According to the audited Schedule of Federal
Awards, fiscal year 2011 expenditures totaled $5 million, not including
federally funded fee-for-service programs such as Medicaid reimbursement
for special education services.
9

--- Page 12 ---
Single Audit Report Disclosed No Reportable Conditions Regarding Federal
Grant Management
Due to work performed by the independent certified public accounting firm
that conducted the Single Audit of the TCPS federal grants and the objectives
of our audit in this area, we relied on the auditor's work and results. Besides
expressing an opinion on TCPS compliance with the terms of several grant
programs, the auditor also considered the existing internal control structure's
impact on compliance and audited the fiscal year 2011 required Schedule of
Federal Awards (which includes claimed and reported grant expenditures).
The related report stated that TCPS complied, in all material respects, with the
requirements applicable to its major federal programs. With respect to
internal controls over compliance with, and the operation of, major federal
programs, the auditors did not identify any material weaknesses or significant
deficiencies.
Medicaid Funds Were Received for Eligible Services
TCPS had established a procedure to identify children eligible for Medicaid-
subsidized services. Our test of 16 services provided to students receiving
Medicaid-subsidized services disclosed that reimbursement was requested for
all services provided. According to TCPS records, fiscal year 2011
reimbursement for Medicaid-subsidized services totaled $196,349.
Procurement and Disbursement Cycle
Background
According to TCPS records, non-payroll disbursements totaled $20.1 million
during fiscal year 2011. Requisitions are computer generated by the
requesting department and must be approved by supervisory personnel (such
as a respective department head). The TCPS Finance Department is
responsible for procuring goods and services requested by individual schools
and departments. TCPS purchasing policy generally requires that
procurements over $25,000 be made through a formal competitive bid
process. The policy also requires solicitation of quotes (either verbal or
written) for purchases under $25,000. Payments are processed by the
finance department through an automated system that prints vendor checks
and also posts the payment to the financial records.
10

--- Page 13 ---
Finding 1
Internal control deficiencies could allow improper payments.
Analysis
Our review identified internal control deficiencies over the automated
accounts payable and procurement system. Specifically, we noted that one
finance office supervisory employee was provided system capabilities, in
excess of what the employee’s job duties required, allowing this individual to
independently record and process critical accounting and procurement
transactions. For example, this employee could add a vendor, create a
purchase order, process an invoice, and print checks. Furthermore, checks
were generated with the authorized signature automatically printed on the
checks by the system. Consequently, this employee could process improper
transactions without detection since there was no independent review of this
employee’s activity.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that TCPS implement effective internal control over its
accounts payable and procurement system (repeat). Specifically, we
recommend that TCPS
a. restrict employees’ capabilities on the system to only those needed to
perform their job duties and eliminate incompatible functions, and
b. ensure that a verification of disbursement transactions to supporting
documentation is performed for all transactions by an employee not
having the capability to process the related transactions.
Finding 2
TCPS did not always ensure that procurements were competitively procured or
justified as sole source procurements.
Analysis
Our test of 55 disbursements totaling $1.96 million disclosed 11
disbursements for which TCPS only received a single quote and did not
include any explanation as to why no other quotes were received as required
by TCPS policy. The total amount paid to the vendors for which competitive
quotes were not obtained, related to the aforementioned 11 disbursements,
totaled approximately $132,000. For purchases of $25,000 and under,
TCPS’ policy requires that two or more quotes are necessary to establish
competitive prices, and if only one quote is used a note of explanation should
accompany the purchase requisition. In addition to the aforementioned 11
disbursements, for one additional vendor, the total paid to the vendor for
11

--- Page 14 ---
fiscal year 2011 totaled $72,000 but was not competitively bid as required.
Specifically, TCPS’ policy requires a formal competitive bid process when the
total amount of the purchase exceeds $25,000.
Recommendation 2
We recommend that TCPS ensure that all procurements are performed in
accordance with TCPS policies (repeat), and specifically should
a. adhere to the competitive procurement policies and procedures; and
b. adequately document the justification for sole source procurements, when
appropriate.
Human Resources and Payroll
Background
Payroll expense represents the largest single cost component in the TCPS
budget. According to TCPS records, fiscal year 2011 salary, wage, and benefit
costs totaled $40 million. According to MSDE reports, as of October 2011,
TCPS had 616 full-time equivalent positions.
TCPS uses an automated integrated human resources and payroll system to
maintain personnel information, record employee time, track leave usage, and
process and record payroll transactions. The system automatically generates
biweekly time records and any adjustments are processed by central payroll
personnel. The system generates payroll checks and direct deposit advices.
Payroll processing involves both automated processes (such as compiling
leave and running edit reports) and manual processes (such as data entry of
new employee information).
Human Resources and Payroll
Finding 3
Certain system users had unneeded capabilities in the automated human
resources and payroll system, and reports of personnel and payroll changes
were not generated for review.
Analysis
TCPS did not establish adequate internal controls over its automated human
resources and payroll system and related processes. Our review disclosed the
following conditions:
12

--- Page 15 ---
 TCPS did not adequately restrict employee capabilities in its automated
human resources and payroll system to those functions required by the
employees to perform their job duties. In this regard, five employees had
been assigned system capabilities that allowed them to perform certain
incompatible system functions (including the ability to add employees and
process payroll adjustments), even though these employees did not
require such access to all components of the system in order to perform
their job duties.
 TCPS lacked an independent review to ensure that critical personnel data
and payroll payments were proper. Specifically, we noted that there was
no report generated for changes to employee data entered or updated
(such as salaries), and there was no independent review of payroll
transactions entered and processed (such as overtime amounts) in the
system.
Similar conditions were commented upon in our preceding audit report.
These conditions are significant internal control deficiencies that could permit
unauthorized changes or transactions to be made without detection. Our test
of personnel and payroll transactions did not disclose any unauthorized or
questionable transactions.
Recommendation 3
We recommend that TCPS ensure adequate internal controls are in place over
the human resources and payroll system (repeat). Specifically, we
recommend that TCPS
a. restrict employees’ capabilities on the system to only those needed to
perform their job duties and eliminate incompatible functions; and
b. periodically generate a report of changes and perform an independent
supervisory review of the changes processed for payroll and personnel
data, including agreeing changes to appropriate supporting
documentation at least on a test basis.
Inventory Control and Accountability
Background
According to TCPS’ audited financial statements, the undepreciated value of
its capital equipment inventory totaled $21.6 million as of June 30, 2011. All
furniture and equipment items with a cost of $500 or more are recorded upon
purchase, and items with a cost of $1,000 or more are capitalized for
financial statement purposes.
13

--- Page 16 ---
Finding 4
TCPS’ policies and physical inventory procedures need improvement to
safeguard equipment.
Analysis
Our review disclosed that TCPS’ procedures and controls were not adequate
to ensure accountability over equipment. Specifically, we noted the following
conditions:
 TCPS equipment policies did not address segregation of duties regarding
custody, record keeping, and physical inventory counts or requirements for
periodic physical inventories. No complete and documented physical
inventory of equipment has been performed in over five years, other than
for approximately 3,700 laptop computers that were accounted for at the
end of each school year.
 TCPS policy does not contain appropriate procedures to be followed (such
as investigations and management notification) when equipment items
are identified as lost or stolen.
 Our test of 10 equipment items with a cost totaling approximately
$194,000 that were removed from the equipment records during fiscal
years 2012 and 2011 disclosed that all items were disposed of without
the supervisory approval required by TCPS policy.
 We noted that essentially all non-computer equipment was not tagged to
identify TCPS ownership. TCPS inventory records include 11,248 non-
computer equipment items with a total cost of approximately $18.6
million. TCPS’ procedures require all furniture and equipment to be
tagged. However, only information technology items (such as laptops,
computers, and smart-boards) were regularly tagged.
Recommendation 4
We recommend that TCPS develop and implement policies and procedures to
ensure that accountability and effective control is maintained over all of its
equipment (repeat). Specifically, TCPS
a. should update its policies to require proper segregation of duties, to
establish periodic physical inventory requirements, and to require
documented follow up on lost or missing items;
b. should ensure all disposals of equipment are approved by supervisory
personnel as required by TCPS policy; and
14

--- Page 17 ---
c. should ensure all equipment items are properly tagged or otherwise
identified as TCPS property as required by TCPS policy.
Information Technology
Background
The TCPS Information Technology Department maintains and administers the
TCPS computer network, computer operations, and information systems
applications. TCPS operates a wide area network, with Internet connectivity,
which connects the individual schools’ to the computer resources located at
its headquarters and data center. The data center hosts critical devices
including the Internet firewall and computer servers that support critical
applications including the student information system, the accounts payable
and procurement system, and the human resources and payroll system.
Finding 5
Administrative access to the TCPS network was excessive, and database
monitoring and password and account controls over critical systems were not
sufficient.
Analysis
Administrative access to the TCPS network was excessive, and database
monitoring and account and password controls over critical systems were not
sufficient to properly protect critical network resources. Specifically, we noted
the following conditions:
 At least seven accounts (assigned to seven users) were improperly
classified as domain administrators. As a result of this condition, these
accounts had full control over the applicable computer resources and
could make unauthorized modifications to critical data without detection
by management. These accounts did not require domain administrator
capabilities to perform their job functions. Similar conditions were
commented upon in our preceding audit report.
 The student information system database was not configured to log any
sensitive database activity. Examples of database activities which should
be logged and analyzed include direct changes to critical data tables,
changes to database security settings, and use of certain critical
privileges. This condition could result in unauthorized or inappropriate
activities (affecting the integrity of the production database information)
going undetected by management. Best practices as prescribed by the
15

--- Page 18 ---
State of Maryland Department of Information Technology (DoIT)
Information Security Policy state that information systems must generate
audit records for all security-relevant events and procedures must be
developed to routinely review audit records for indications of unusual
activities or suspected violations.
 Application, network, and database password and account controls were
not sufficient to properly protect critical resources. Password age, length,
complexity, and history were not in accordance with the best practices
prescribed by the aforementioned DoIT Information Security Policy. For
example, the student information system application password aging and
complexity requirements were not enforced and password length was set
to one character for administrators and teachers. In addition, account
lockout was not enforced for the network and application accounts and as
of February 22, 2012, we identified 31 active network accounts that had
not been used for more than 370 days. Similar conditions were
commented upon in our preceding audit report.
Recommendation 5
We recommend that TCPS
a. limit the individuals in the domain administrator group to employees who
require such capabilities for their job responsibilities (repeat),
b. implement proper database logging and monitoring, and
c. implement appropriate password controls and ensure account lockout is
enforced for network and application accounts (repeat).
Finding 6
TCPS did not have an information technology disaster recovery plan and anti-
virus protection for TCPS computers was frequently not installed or up-to-date.
Analysis
TCPS did not have an information technology disaster recovery plan and anti-
virus protection for TCPS computers was frequently not installed or up-to-date.
Specifically, we noted the following conditions:
 TCPS did not have an information technology disaster recovery plan for
recovering computer operations from disaster scenarios (for example, a
fire or flood). Without a complete disaster recovery plan, a disaster could
cause significant delays (for an undetermined period of time) in restoring
operations above and beyond the expected delays that would exist in a
planned recovery scenario. The State of Maryland Information Technology
(IT) Disaster Recovery Guidelines provide detailed guidance in preparing a
16

--- Page 19 ---
disaster recovery plan. A similar condition was commented upon in our
preceding audit report.
 Our tests of nine computers disclosed that six of these computers,
including one critical production database server, did not have any anti-
virus software installed. In addition, two of the computers with anti-virus
software installed, were not configured to perform automatic updates of
virus definitions and had virus definitions that, as of March 15, 2012, had
not been updated for more than 250 days. Best practices identified in the
DoIT Information Security Policy, state that agencies, at a minimum, must
protect against malicious code by implementing protections such as anti-
virus software.
Recommendation 6
We recommend that TCPS
a. develop and implement a comprehensive disaster recovery plan that is in
accordance with the State of Maryland Information Technology (IT)
Disaster Recovery Guidelines (repeat), and
b. install an effective anti-virus program on every TCPS computer and that
the virus definitions be kept current via an automated update process.
Finding 7
The TCPS network was not properly secured.
Analysis
The TCPS network was not properly secured. Specifically, we noted the
following conditions:
 Firewall rules allowed numerous insecure and unnecessary connections to
critical network devices. For example, firewall rules were not configured to
adequately secure connections into the TCPS network from the Internet.
The DoIT Information Security Policy requires firewalls be configured to
achieve a “least privilege” security strategy that grants privileges only
needed to perform assigned tasks.
 Eleven publicly and widely accessible servers were located on the TCPS
internal network rather than isolating these servers in a separate
protected network zone. These servers, which could potentially be
compromised, exposed the internal network to attack from external
sources. Recommended security procedures, established by the National
Institute of Standards and Technology Guidelines on Firewalls and Firewall
17

--- Page 20 ---
Policy include placing publicly accessible servers in an external protected
zone to protect those servers as well as an entity’s internal network.
 TCPS did not adequately secure its internal network from improper
network level access from certain TCPS high school computer lab
workstations or privately-owned laptops used by students. Specifically,
TCPS did not use network access control software or network level traffic
filtering to protect its network from activity emanating from these
computer lab workstations and privately-owned laptops. Such access
should be limited to devices and ports necessary for students to perform
required tasks.
Recommendation 7
We recommend that TCPS
a. configure its firewalls to achieve a “least privilege” security strategy giving
individuals and devices only those privileges needed to perform assigned
tasks,
b. segregate publicly and widely accessible servers in a separate protected
network zone, and
c. implement controls to limit network level student access to only
authorized local school and headquarters network resources.
Facilities Construction, Renovation, and Maintenance
Background
TCPS maintains 8 schools (totaling 697,250 square feet) and an
administrative building with a staff of 35 custodial and 9 maintenance
personnel. TCPS uses a six-year Capital Improvement Plan (CIP) to identify
ongoing and projected needs for new buildings and major renovations. The
annual CIP was developed using student demographic data and input from
various sources, including public meetings, and was approved by the Board.
In the fiscal year 2013 CIP, necessary construction, major renovations, and
systemic improvements to TCPS over the next six years were estimated to cost
$2 million.
An Inclusive Process is Used to Plan for School Facility Construction, Major
Renovation, and Repair Projects
TCPS uses a comprehensive process, which includes the solicitation of input
from various sources, to plan for future school construction, major renovation,
and repair projects. For example, TCPS uses public meetings, student
demographic data and other internal sources (such as current curriculum
mandates) to develop its six-year CIP. The CIP is presented to and approved
18

--- Page 21 ---
by the Board, as well as elected local officials. In addition, the Educational
Facilities Master Plan that is used to guide overall TCPS operations
incorporates certain CIP objectives and strategies related to school facilities.
Our review of the fiscal year 2013-2018 CIP disclosed that it appeared to
address the needs of TCPS based on items such as student demographics
and facility assessments. In addition, our test of project expenditures
disclosed contracts were properly procured, and related payments were
properly supported by a formal inspection process and were approved by
management.
Processes Are in Place to Minimize Energy Costs
TCPS utilizes an energy management system that monitors and accounts for
energy usage and employs an energy management program manager trained
in conservation techniques and energy monitoring practices (such as usage
reports and year-to-year comparisons). According to reports prepared by the
program manager (which we did not audit), TCPS has achieved net savings of
approximately $1.2 million in energy costs during the six years since
implementation of the program in November 2005.
Transportation Services
Background
TCPS has approximately 4,354 students eligible to receive student
transportation services. These students were transported using 44 school-
owned buses. According to MSDE records, fiscal year 2011 transportation
costs totaled $2.3 million, with $1.3 million (57 percent) representing
payments for salaries. Of the 738,000 reported route miles for the 2010-
2011 school year, 14 percent represented miles traveled to transport
disabled students.
Finding 8
TCPS’ bus routing procedures were not comprehensive and automated
routing software capabilities were not adequately used to develop more
efficient routes.
Analysis
Although TCPS has a process for planning, reviewing, and changing existing
bus routes, its process was not comprehensive. For example, the process did
not consider all relevant factors, such as bus ridership targets, the optimal
number of riders on a bus given its size, and student ride times, when
determining the most appropriate bus routes.
19

--- Page 22 ---
Furthermore, TCPS did not adequately use automated bus routing software
capabilities to develop more efficient routes. For example, the automated
routing system has the capability to generate reports of bus routes with
student ride times and bus occupancy. Although our review disclosed that the
TCPS transportation department uses certain reporting capabilities of the
routing software primarily to map out existing routes, it did not factor in
student ride times and actual bus ridership when planning routes. Rather,
TCPS uses existing bus routes and makes modifications to accommodate
students’ school assignments without periodically reviewing all routes for
efficiency on a system-wide basis. Using routing software is a recognized best
practice that can be used to reduce the time it takes to design efficient
routes, reduce student ride time, and help ensure that routes minimize the
number of buses needed to transport students.
The lack of a system-wide route analysis could have a potentially negative
impact on route efficiency. Our analysis of student ridership disclosed that
ridership was significantly less than bus capacity. Specifically, our review of
TCPS’ December 2010 and November 2011 bus manifests for 141 bus runs
disclosed that 97 runs were below 75 percent of TCPS’ ridership goal.3 On 51
of these 97 runs, student ridership was less than 50 percent of available
capacity.
Utilizing the full capabilities of the automated routing software could help
develop more efficient bus routes and assist in the periodic evaluation of
routes.
Increasing bus ridership may be difficult in rural systems with smaller
populations since the schools are often spread out over a larger area and
there are fewer concentrated population centers, making the length of trips a
concern. Therefore, to achieve savings, TCPS should also consider using
smaller buses on routes with low ridership. TCPS primarily used 78-passenger
and 84-passenger buses (17 percent and 57 percent of total fleet,
respectively) for routine student transportation. Smaller buses (for example,
64-passenger buses) are less costly to purchase and are generally less costly
to operate. For example, the purchase prices for 64-passenger buses
purchased for the 2011-2012 school year by other Maryland school systems
averaged approximately $88,770, whereas the purchase prices for 78 and 84
passenger buses purchased by TCPS for the 2011-2012 school year averaged
$109,278.
3 TCPS does not have a formal, documented bus ridership target. School bus capacities are
lower than manufacturer stated capacities and differ depending on the school. We used
target capacities based on TCPS’ informal bus ridership goals for high/middle and elementary
schools routes at 67% and 83% of the manufacturers stated capacity, respectively.
20

--- Page 23 ---
Similar conditions were commented upon in our preceding audit report.
Recommendation 8
We recommend that TCPS take action to increase the cost-effectiveness of
bus operations (repeat). Specifically, we recommend that TCPS:
a. establish policies delineating student bus ridership targets and travel
times,
b. require periodic evaluation of actual bus ridership relative to target
capacities,
c. fully use its automated routing software to assist in periodically
reevaluating all routes on a system-wide basis in order to establish more
efficient bus routes and increase utilization, and
d. reduce costs by considering the use of smaller school buses on routes
with a small number of riders.
Finding 9
TCPS did not solicit bids when procuring bus maintenance and certain bus
contractor services, or enter into contracts for the services.
Analysis
Our review of current transportation procurement practices disclosed that
bids were not solicited for bus maintenance or bus contractor services for
extracurricular school activities. Additionally, TCPS did not enter into
contracts for these services. TCPS’ policy requires two or more quotes to
establish competitive prices for purchases of $25,000 and under and a
formal competitive bid process for purchases exceeding $25,000.
 TCPS outsourced its major bus repairs (such as brakes, transmission, and
tires); however, TCPS did not use a competitive bid process or enter into
contracts for these services. In fiscal year 2011, expenditures for bus
maintenance totaled approximately $197,000 with $174,000 being paid
to two vendors.
 TCPS used bus contractors for some of its extracurricular transportation
needs. However, TCPS did not solicit bids for these services, or enter into
formal contracts. In fiscal year 2011, payments to bus contractors for
extracurricular services totaled approximately $112,000, the majority of
which was paid to two vendors. In addition, TCPS did not verify the time
and mileage used to bill for these bus contractor services. As a result of
these conditions, TCPS could be overpaying for these bus contractor
services.
21

--- Page 24 ---
Recommendation 9
We recommend that TCPS:
a. adhere to TCPS’ competitive procurement policies and procedures for the
procurement of transportation related services,
b. ensure that formal contracts are executed for significant purchases in
accordance with TCPS policies, and
c. verify the propriety of bus contractor charges.
Food Service Operations
Background
TCPS has a cooking cafeteria at 6 of its 8 schools. Food and related supplies
are received and stored at each school. In fiscal year 2011, TCPS had 41
food service positions (consisting of 39 cafeteria positions and 2
administrative positions). According to TCPS’ audited financial statements,
food service operations expenditures ($1,902,096) exceeded revenues
($1,833,421) by $68,675 for fiscal year 2011.
Finding 10
TCPS should strengthen internal controls over the purchasing of food
supplies.
Analysis
TCPS should strengthen its internal controls over the purchasing of food
supplies. According to TCPS records, food expenditures for fiscal year 2011
totaled $954,000. Specifically, our test of food purchases from 5 vendors,
with expenditures totaling $888,500 for fiscal year 2011, and 10 related
invoices totaling $10,750 (2 invoices for each vendor) disclosed:
 A formal contract was not executed with one vendor from whom purchases
totaling $184,875 were made during fiscal year 2011.
 For the 8 invoices that had a formal contract, there was no evidence that
TCPS agreed invoiced prices to contracted prices prior to or after making
payments.
As a result of these conditions, there was a lack of assurance that TCPS paid
the correct amount for food purchases.
22

--- Page 25 ---
Recommendation 10
We recommend that TCPS ensure:
a. that formal contracts are executed for significant purchases in accordance
with established TCPS policies, and
b. that invoiced prices are compared to contract prices prior to payment.
School Board Operations
Background
TCPS’ Board of Education is composed of seven elected voting members and
one non-voting student representative. In its oversight responsibilities, the
Board contracted with a certified public accounting firm for independent
audits of the TCPS financial statements and federal programs. Due to the size
of TCPS, a committee structure is not used, but rather individual members are
periodically informed of and become involved with all aspects of operations
and governance.
TCPS Adopted an Ethics Policy that Met the Current Requirements of State
Law
The Board has adopted a detailed ethics policy that conforms to State Law
and includes provisions for conflicts of interest and financial disclosure and
was approved by the State Ethics Commission. Provisions of this policy are
applicable to Board members as well as all TCPS employees. TCPS
established an Ethics Panel consisting of three members who are not subject
to the authority of the Board of Education to interpret ethics policies and
provide advice on policy implementation. The Panel also reviews and rules on
any reported complaints of ethics violations. According to the ethics policy,
annual financial disclosure statements are required to be filed by Board
members, candidates for the Board, the Superintendent, Assistant
Superintendents, and a number of other administrators (such as school
principals and department heads) by April 30th of each year. Our test
indicated that financial disclosure forms for calendar year 2011 were
submitted as required.
23

--- Page 26 ---
Other Financial Controls
Finding 11
TCPS had not properly collateralized certain cash deposits.
Analysis
TCPS cash deposits as of June 30, 2011 totaled $10,142,330. The notes to
the fiscal year 2011 audited financial statements indicate that $3,942,662 of
the TCPS’ bank balance was exposed to custodial credit risk (that is the risk
that, in the event of a bank failure, TCPS’ deposits may not be returned to it)
because it was not insured by the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation and,
although fully collateralized by securities held by the pledging financial
institution’s trust department or agent, the collateral was not held in the
Board’s name. A similar condition was commented upon in our preceding
audit report.
Recommendation 11
TCPS should ensure all deposits are properly secured with collateral held in
the Board’s name (repeat).
Finding 12
TCPS had not developed a formal debt management policy.
Analysis
TCPS had not adopted formal policies governing its use of debt to finance
operations, as recommended by the Government Finance Officers Association
(GFOA). TCPS does use notes and capital lease payables to purchase buses.
According to the TCPS’ audited financial statements, notes and capital lease
payables totaled $499,195 at June 30, 2011.
In addition, TCPS has an outstanding debt to the State Retirement and
Pension System of Maryland totaling $488,127 at June 30, 2011 to cover an
actuarially determined unfunded pension liability. According to TCPS’ audited
financial statements, State law permits TCPS to pay the unfunded liability
using a payment schedule through 2036 which, including interest, totals
$1,399,845 for all years from 2012 to 2036.
Consideration of funding for multi-year arrangements is especially important
to TCPS due to potential limited revenues in future years. Specifically, TCPS
disclosed in the “Management Discussion and Analysis” in the 2011 audited
financial statements that one of the most significant factors bearing on the
24

--- Page 27 ---
Board’s future is the “revenue cap” instituted in November 1996 as the result
of a County Referendum. There is a two percent cap4 on annual increases in
the amount of revenue that Talbot County government can raise in any fiscal
year from real property taxes. The cap limits the benefit the County receives
from growth of the assessable tax base for real property. TCPS believes that
the cap severely restricts the county’s ability to raise revenue to meet
population growth and accompanying services.
GFOA recommended practices for government entities include establishing a
detailed debt management policy. Debt levels and their related annual costs
are important long-term obligations that must be managed within available
resources. An effective debt management policy provides guidelines for a
government entity to manage debt in line with its resources. Debt
management policies are written guidelines and restrictions that affect the
amount and type of debt issued, the issuance process, and the management
of the debt portfolio.
Recommendation 12
TCPS should adopt a formal policy governing management of long-term debt
in accordance with best practices recommended by GFOA (repeat).
Finding 13
TCPS had not verified the eligibility of dependents enrolled in TCPS’ health
insurance program and had not ensured that claims paid by the third-party
health care administrator were reviewed for propriety.
Analysis
TCPS did not verify the eligibility of health care coverage enrollee dependents
or ensure that health care claims paid were reviewed for propriety. TCPS
provides health care coverage to employees and eligible dependents through
the Eastern Shore of Maryland Educational Consortium Health Alliance.
However, neither the Alliance, nor TCPS, verified the eligibility of enrollee
dependents by reviewing birth certificates or marriage licenses. As of
November 2011, TCPS provided health care coverage to 813 employees,
retirees, and dependents.
Additionally, TCPS did not conduct or contract for any recent comprehensive
claim reviews to ensure that the vendor paid claims only for eligible
individuals in accordance with the contract terms, and did not review claims
4 The cap, or ceiling, is the lower of two percent or the Consumer Price Index for all urban customers’
percentage of change for the latest calendar year, as determined by the U.S. Department of Labor.
25

--- Page 28 ---
documentation to ensure that services were actually provided or were
medically necessary and appropriate. The most recent claims review was
performed in 2008 covering claims for 2005, 2006, and 2007.
The Alliance contracts with a health care provider and each of the members
pays premiums directly to the provider. As TCPS is self-insured, to the extent
that premiums paid each year exceed actual and anticipated claims, TCPS is
eligible for a refund (TCPS would reimburse the provider if claims exceeded
premium payments for the year). According to its records for fiscal year 2011,
TCPS paid the health care provider $5.7 million. Based on the Alliance’s year-
end settlement, TCPS received a refund of $803,722 applicable to fiscal year
2011. According to TCPS personnel, refunds are credited to TCPS’ account to
offset costs for the following year.
Recommended practices published by the GFOA state that health care cost
containment is a critical component of long-term financial planning and
budgeting. The Maryland Department of Budget and Management, which has
similar claims processing contracts for State employees, contracts with a
third-party vendor (other than the vendor processing claims) to conduct
reviews of claims paid.
Recommendation 13
We recommend that TCPS institute processes to
a. verify the eligibility of dependents claimed by enrolled health care program
participants; and
b. verify the propriety of claims paid by the third-party administrator, at least
on a test basis.
26

--- Page 29 ---
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We conducted a performance audit to evaluate the effectiveness and
efficiency of the financial management practices of the Talbot County Public
Schools (TCPS). We conducted this audit under the authority of the State
Government Article, Section 2-1220(e) of the Annotated Code of Maryland,
and performed it in accordance with generally accepted government auditing
standards. Those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to
obtain sufficient, appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our
findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives. We believe that the
evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and
conclusions based on our audit objectives.
We had two broad audit objectives:
1. To evaluate whether the TCPS procedures and controls were effective
in accounting for and safeguarding its assets
2. To evaluate whether the TCPS policies provided for the efficient use of
financial resources
In planning and conducting our audit of TCPS, we focused on 11 major
financial-related areas of operations as approved on September 14, 2004 by
the Joint Audit Committee of the Maryland General Assembly in accordance
with the enabling legislation. The scope of the work performed in each of
these areas was based on our assessments of significance and risk.
Therefore, our follow-up on the status of findings included in our preceding
audit report on TCPS dated December 3, 2007, was limited to those findings
that were applicable to the current audit scope for each of the 11 areas.
The audit objectives excluded reviewing and assessing student achievement,
curriculum, teacher performance, and other academic-related areas and
functions. Also, we did not evaluate the TCPS Comprehensive Education
Master Plan or related updates, and we did not review the activities, financial
or other, of any parent teacher association, group, or funds not under the
direct control or management of the Talbot County Board of Education.
To accomplish our objectives, we reviewed applicable State laws and
regulations pertaining to public elementary and secondary education, as well
as policies and procedures issued and established by TCPS. We also
interviewed personnel at TCPS, the Maryland State Department of Education
27

--- Page 30 ---
(MSDE), and staff at other local school systems in Maryland (as appropriate).5
Our audit procedures included inspections of documents and records, and
observations of TCPS operations. We also tested transactions and performed
other auditing procedures that we considered necessary to achieve our
objectives, generally for the period from July 1, 2010 through December 31,
2011. For certain areas within the scope of the audit, we relied on the work
performed by the independent accounting firm that annually audits TCPS’
financial statements and conducts the federal Single Audit.
We used certain statistical data—including financial and operational—
compiled by MSDE from various informational reports submitted by the
Maryland local school systems. This information was used in this audit report
for background or informational purposes, and was deemed reasonable.
TCPS’ management is responsible for establishing and maintaining effective
internal control. Internal control is a process designed to provide reasonable
assurance that objectives pertaining to the reliability of financial records,
effectiveness and efficiency of operations including safeguarding of assets,
and compliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations are achieved.
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate. In
addition to the conditions included in this report, other less significant
findings were communicated to TCPS that did not warrant inclusion in this
report.
We conducted our fieldwork from January 2012 to November 2012. The
TCPS response to our findings and recommendations is included as an
appendix to this report. As prescribed in the State Government Article,
Section 2-1224 of the Annotated Code of Maryland, we will advise TCPS
regarding the results of our review of its response.
5 During the course of the audit, it was necessary to contact other systems to identify policies
or practices for comparative purposes and analysis.
28

--- Page 32 ---
Talbot County Board of Education
Financial Management Practices Performance Audit
FINDINGS LEGISLATIVE AUDITOR BOARD OF EDUCATION DATE AGREE
RECOMMENDATION ACTION/RESPONSE (Yes or
No)
PROCUREMENT AND
DISBURSEMENT CYCLE
Internal control deficiencies 1 a. Restrict employees’ a. The Director of Finance access 1/22/13 Yes
could allow improper capabilities on the system to is now limited to review and
payments only those needed to perform approval process only. The
their job duties and eliminate TCPS finance department is
incompatible functions, and limited to 5 individuals
including the Director of
Finance. Segregation of duties
is not always possible with a
small staff and cross training of
staff and access to the finance
system is necessary to provide
backup.
b. Ensure that a verification of b. The Director of Finance access 7/1/12 Yes
disbursement transactions to is now limited to review and
supporting documentation is approval process only. In an
performed for all transactions effort to increase internal
by an employee not having the control, duties have been
capability to process the reassigned among the staff in
related transactions. the finance department. FY
2012 the Talbot County
Government reduced its
appropriation to TCPS
$1,800,000 below maintenance
of effort. This resulted in the
reduction of 18 positions and
major cuts in all categories.

--- Page 33 ---
Talbot County Board of Education
Financial Management Practices Performance Audit
FINDINGS LEGISLATIVE AUDITOR BOARD OF EDUCATION DATE AGREE
RECOMMENDATION ACTION/RESPONSE (Yes or
No)
TCPS did not always ensure 2 a. Adhere to competitive a. Board of Education approves all 1/22/13 No1
that procurements were procurement policies and purchases over $25,000 that is
competitively procured or procedures: and competitively bid. TCPS follows
justified as sole source state law and its policy.
procurements.
b. Adequately document the b. To monitor the compliance with 1/22/13 Yes
justification for sole source policy TCPS has developed a
procurements, when quotation form to attach to
appropriate. purchases and for justification
of sole source procurements.
Certain system users had 3 a. Restrict employees’ a. As of 1/22/13 TCPS has 1/22/13 Yes
unneeded capabilities in the capabilities on the system to changed the access codes so
automated human resources only those needed to perform that the Director of Finance will
and payroll system, and their job duties and eliminate be limited to view status only.
reports of personnel and incompatible functions; and The TCPS finance department is
payroll changes were not limited to 5 individuals
generated for review. including the Director of
Finance. Segregation of duties
is not always possible with a
small staff and cross training of
staff and access to the finance
system is necessary to provide
backup.
b. Periodically generate a report b. Each month the Human 6/13/13 Yes
of changes and perform an Resources Department
independent supervisory generates a report detailing all
review of the changes payroll adjustments and
processed for payroll and changes for the month. TCPS
personnel data, including Board Members review the
agreeing changes to personnel report each month
appropriate supporting during the closed session of the
documentation at least on a board meeting as part of an
test basis. independent review. This
report details all changes in
staffing and is voted on during
regular session by the Board
Members. Human Resources
have the ability to monitor
payroll changes on a daily basis.
1 Auditor Comment: It is unclear from the response why TCPS does not agree with the finding and/or recommendation. When
previously discussed with them, TCPS management acknowledged that certain purchases costing $25,000 or less were made
without two or more documented quotes, as required by its policies. The response indicating that the Board of Education approves
all purchases over $25,000 that are competitively bid is not germane to this finding.

--- Page 34 ---
Talbot County Board of Education
Financial Management Practices Performance Audit
FINDINGS LEGISLATIVE AUDITOR BOARD OF EDUCATION DATE AGREE
RECOMMENDATION ACTION/RESPONSE (Yes or
No)
TCPS’ policies and physical 4 a. Should update its policies to a. Administration Regulation 4.5 3/20/13 Yes
inventory procedures need require proper segregation of was updated 3/20/13 to reflect
improvement to safeguard duties, to establish periodic all purchases of equipment over
equipment physical inventory $500 to be recorded in
requirements, and to require inventory. Annually, TCPS
documented follow up on lost school administrators are given
or missing items detail inventory list of items
located in their building and
asked to review and notify the
Finance Department of any
changes.
b. Should ensure all disposals of b. Supervisory personnel will 3/20/13 Yes
equipment are approved by adhere to inventory procedures
supervisory personnel as as outlined in Board Policy 4.5
required by TCPS policy: and and related Administrative
Regulation.
c. Should ensure all equipment c. As of 3/20/13 all equipment 3/20/13 Yes
items are properly tagged or over $500 is tagged and bar
otherwise identified as TCPS coded.
property as required by TCPS
policy.
Administrative access to the 5 a. Limit the individuals in the a. As of 3/30/12 TCPS has 3/30/12 Yes
TCPS network was excessive, domain administrator group removed administrator
and database monitoring and to employees who require accounts.
password and account such capabilities for their job
controls over critical systems responsibilities.
were not sufficient
b. Implement proper database b. TCPS will request that vendors 8/30/12 Yes
logging and monitoring, and implement the additional
procedures specified in the
audit on their proprietary
software in order to guarantee
that TCPS remains within the
confines of its support
agreements.
c. Implement appropriate c. As of 9/30/12 TCPS is 9/30/12 – Yes
password controls and ensure implementing automated 9/30/13
account lockout is enforced for password policies on user and
network and application application accounts. TCPS is
accounts. also in the process of
incorporating HTML based
password management to
enforce automated password
policies across device
platforms.

--- Page 35 ---
Talbot County Board of Education
Financial Management Practices Performance Audit
FINDINGS LEGISLATIVE AUDITOR BOARD OF EDUCATION DATE AGREE
RECOMMENDATION ACTION/RESPONSE (Yes or
No)
TCPS did not have an 6 a. Develop and implement a a. A fully documented disaster 9/30/13 Yes
information technology comprehensive disaster recovery plan is in its final
disaster recovery plan and recovery plan that is in stages and will be approved for
anti‐virus protection for TCPS accordance with the State of publication.
computers was frequently Maryland Information
not installed or up‐to‐date. Technology (IT) Disaster
Recovery Guidelines, and
b. Install an effective anti‐virus b. As of 7/31/12 anti‐virus 7/31/12 Yes
program on every TCPS applications have been
computer and that the virus standardized on all desktop and
definitions be kept current via server systems.
an automated update process.
The TCPS network was not 7 a. Configure its firewalls to a. TCPS has transitioned to secure 12/31/13 Yes
properly secured achieve a “least privilege” socket layers on all critical web
security strategy giving based services and
individuals and devices only administrative interfaces
those privileges needed to available for the internet. TCPS
perform assigned tasks will continue to modify edge
firewall policy to meet “least
privilege” strategy.
b. Segregate publicly and widely b. TCPS is currently working on 12/31/13 Yes
accessible servers in a the redesign of the network to
separate protected network ensure it’s properly secured.
zone, and
c. Implement controls to limit c. TCPS will be segregating device 8/30/13 Yes
network level student access access by students and
to only authorized local school restricting physical access to
and headquarters network those networks. Such controls
resources. will be implemented by TCPS as
part of the restricted service
zone.

--- Page 36 ---
Talbot County Board of Education
Financial Management Practices Performance Audit
FINDINGS LEGISLATIVE AUDITOR BOARD OF EDUCATION DATE AGREE
RECOMMENDATION ACTION/RESPONSE (Yes or
No)
TCPS bus routing procedures 8 a. Establish policies delineating a. TCPS follows its policy and 7/1/12 No2
were not comprehensive and student bus ridership targets state law.
automated routing software and travel times
capabilities were not
adequately used to develop
more efficient routes b. Require periodic evaluation of b. TCPS uses the upgraded routing 7/1/12 Yes
actual bus ridership relative to software to match student ride
target capacities time to bus capacity. Student
information is updated and
evaluated daily.
c. Fully use its automated c. The reorganization of the 7/1/12 Yes
routing software to assist in transportation department
periodically revaluating all included an administrative
routes on a system‐wide basis assistant position to improve
in order to establish more the efficiency and use of the
efficient bus routes and routing software. July 2012
increase utilization TCPS upgraded its routing
software so that the student
information system used in the
schools can be uploaded on a
daily basis to the transportation
routing system. This provides
the most up‐to‐date addresses
on all school children and
develops more efficient bus
routes. This individual
monitors each route and
reroutes buses to optimize
seating capacity.
d. Reduce cost by considering d. TCPS uses the upgraded routing 7/1/12 Yes
the use of smaller school buses software to match student ride
on routes with a small number time to bus capacity. Student
of riders information is updated and
evaluated daily.
2 Auditor Comment: It is unclear from the response why TCPS does not agree with the recommendation to establish student bus
ridership targets and travel time. Such policies help ensure that management’s intentions regarding the factors that influence bus
routing decisions are considered during the scheduling process. In addition, other Maryland school systems have established these
policies to help develop efficient and reasonable bus routes.

--- Page 37 ---
Talbot County Board of Education
Financial Management Practices Performance Audit
FINDINGS LEGISLATIVE AUDITOR BOARD OF EDUCATION DATE AGREE
RECOMMENDATION ACTION/RESPONSE (Yes or
No)
TCPS did not solicit bids 9 a. Adhere to TCPS competitive a. As of 7/1/13 TCPS will adhere 7/1/13 Yes
when procuring bus procurement policies and to competitive procurement
maintenance and certain bus procedures for the policies and procedures for
contractor services, or enter procurement of transportation extracurricular activities when
into contracts for the service related services a TCPS bus is not available.
TCPS implemented in July 2012
a bus maintenance and repair
schedule so that all buses can
be tracked and serviced at the
proper time. TCPS employs a
part time mechanic that has
become ASE Certified as a
school bus technician. This
reduces the need for external
school bus repairs.
b. Ensure that formal contracts b. TCPS will review all contracts to 7/1/13 Yes
are executed for significant ensure they are in compliance
purchases in accordance with with its policies.
TCPS policies and
c. Verify the propriety of bus c. As of 1/22/13 all invoices for 1/22/13 Yes
contractor charges transportation services for
extracurricular activities
include odometer readings and
start/stop times of drivers.
This information is then
compared to MapQuest to
ensure mileage is being charged
correctly. .
TCPS should strengthen 10 a. That formal contracts are a. TCPS is changing its procedure 2/14/13 Yes
internal controls over the executed for significant to ensure that all purchases
purchasing of food supplies purchases in accordance with have supervisor approval.
established TCPS policies, and
b. That invoiced prices are b. TCPS is changing its procedure
compared to contract prices to ensure that all purchases 2/14/13 Yes
prior to payment. have supervisor approval.
Invoices are compared and
verified to contract prices.
TCPS had not properly 11 a. TCPS should ensure all a. TCPS transfers daily to 1/28/13 Yes
collateralized certain cash deposits are properly secured Maryland Local Government
deposits with collateral held in the Investment Trust all funds that
Board’s name. exceed two weeks operating
expenses. MLGIT is an
investment trust fund of the
State of Maryland and is
administered by the Maryland
Office of the State Treasurer.
TCPS has been working closely
with its independent auditors to
ensure it meets all federal and
state requirements.

--- Page 38 ---
Talbot County Board of Education
Financial Management Practices Performance Audit
FINDINGS LEGISLATIVE AUDITOR BOARD OF EDUCATION DATE AGREE
RECOMMENDATION ACTION/RESPONSE (Yes or
No)
TCPS had not developed a 12 a. TCPS should adopt a formal a. TCPS will adopt a formal debt 8/21/13 Yes
formal debt management policy governing management management policy
policy of long‐term debt in
accordance with best practices
recommended by GFOA.
TCPS had not verified the 13 a. Verify the eligibility of a. TCPS will work with an 5/1/13 Yes
eligibility of dependents dependents claimed by independent consultant to
enrolled in TCPS health enrolled health care program verify eligibility of participants
insurance program and had participants; and and their dependents. The new
not ensured that claims paid enrollment process includes
by the third‐party health care verification of dependent
administrator were reviewed eligibility.
for propriety.
b. Verify the propriety of claims b. Blue Cross/Blue Shield 6/30/13 Yes
paid by the third‐party performs various audits to
administrator, at least on a ensure all claims are valid
test basis.

--- Page 39 ---
AUDIT TEAM
Stephen C. Pease, CPA
Audit Manager
Richard L. Carter, CISA
Stephen P. Jersey, CPA, CISA
Information Systems Audit Managers
Ken H. Johanning, CPA, CFE
J. Alexander Twigg
Senior Auditors
Eric Alexander, CPA
John C. Venturella
Information Systems Senior Auditors
R. Frank Abel, CPA, CFE
Joseph E. McWilliams
Staff Auditors