Title: Department of Health and Mental Hygiene - Spring Grove Hospital Center - Possible Improper Procurement Activities Related to Certain Maintenance Projects
Date: 11/10/2008
Type: Fraud, Waste, and Abuse
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5a945d33cc9d72404c1509e4
Extracted: 2025-06-18T06:02:26.104755
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Special Review
Department of Health and Mental Hygiene
Spring Grove Hospital Center
Questionable Transactions Involving One Contractor Totaled $167,106
The Maintenance Department Directed Projects Totaling $232,000 to Contractors
That Employed a Certain Individual
Projects Were Awarded to Several Contractors That Had Personal Relationships
with Center Employees
November 2008
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
• This report and any related follow-up correspondence are available to the public through the
Office of Legislative Audits at 301 West Preston Street, Room 1202, Baltimore, Maryland
21201. The Office may be contacted by telephone at 410-946-5900, 301-970-5900, or 1-877-
486-9964.
• Electronic copies of our audit reports can be viewed or downloaded from our website at
http://www.ola.state.md.us.
• Alternate formats may be requested through the Maryland Relay Service at 1-800-735-2258.
• The Department of Legislative Services – Office of the Executive Director, 90 State Circle,
Annapolis, Maryland 21401 can also assist you in obtaining copies of our reports and related
correspondence. The Department may be contacted by telephone at 410-946-5400 or 301-
970-5400.

--- Page 3 ---
November 10, 2008
Senator Verna L. Jones, Co-Chair, Joint Audit Committee
Delegate Steven J. DeBoy, Sr., Co-Chair, Joint Audit Committee
Members of Joint Audit Committee
Annapolis, Maryland
Ladies and Gentlemen:
We conducted a review of allegations received through our fraud hotline
regarding possible improper procurement activities related to certain maintenance
projects by the Spring Grove Hospital Center (SGHC), a unit of the Department
of Health and Mental Hygiene. Our review of SGHC records indicated that the
allegations related primarily to maintenance projects that were individually less
than $25,000. It is significant to note that projects under that amount do not
require outside control agency approvals (such as the Department of General
Services).
Our review disclosed questionable transactions totaling $167,106 involving one
contractor. In this regard, the bidding processes for numerous projects awarded to
this contractor appeared to have been significantly compromised. Specifically,
competing bids were purportedly submitted by two or three contractors but all of
the bids were, in actuality, faxed to SGHC by the winning low bidder. In other
instances, faxed bid documents had been tampered with to eliminate references as
to where the bids had originated. In addition, projects were often awarded to this
contractor without using a competitive bid process, or as sole source
procurements for repairs that appeared to be routine in nature. SGHC was also
unable to substantiate that certain equipment items purchased from this contractor
had been received.
We also noted that SGHC directed maintenance projects totaling $232,000 to
three other contractors during the period when these contractors employed a
certain individual. We were advised by management personnel of SGHC’s
Maintenance Department that the projects were directed to the contractors that
employed this individual because the management personnel liked the work
performed by the individual. The projects were generally awarded without using
a competitive bid process and involved other questionable procurement practices
(such as awarding projects as sole source procurements without any written
justification).

--- Page 4 ---
Our review also disclosed that personal relationships existed between certain
SGHC employees and contractors. These relationships and related transactions
may have violated State Ethics Laws and a related Governor’s Executive Order.
Based on the aforementioned conditions, we referred these matters to the Office
of the Attorney General’s Criminal Division.
Respectfully submitted,
Bruce A. Myers, CPA
Legislative Auditor
2

--- Page 5 ---
Table of Contents
Scope, Objectives, and Methodology 4
Background Information 5
Agency Responsibilities 5
Procurement Regulations 5
SGHC Maintenance Department Procurement Procedures 5
Findings and Recommendations 7
Questionable Transactions Were Identified Related to One Contractor
Finding 1 – Questionable Transactions with One Contractor Totaled 7
$167,106
Work Was Directed to Contractors That Employed a Specific Individual
Finding 2 – Projects Totaling $232,000 Were Directed to Three Contractors 9
That Employed a Certain Individual
Personal Relationships Existed Between Employees and Contractors
Finding 3 – Projects Were Awarded to Contractors That Had Personal 12
Relationships with Certain SGHC Employees
Questionable Insurance Claim Submitted to the State Treasurer
Finding 4 – SGHC Submitted a Questionable Insurance Claim to the State 14
Treasurer’s Office Totaling $35,022
Agency Response Appendix
3

--- Page 6 ---
Scope, Objective, and Methodology
We conducted a review of allegations received through our fraud hotline related
to the Spring Grove Hospital Center (SGHC), a unit of the Department of Health
and Mental Hygiene (DHMH). The allegations related to possible improper
activities regarding the procurement of certain maintenance projects. Our review
of SGHC records indicated that the aforementioned allegations related primarily
to maintenance projects that were individually less than $25,000. It is significant
to note that projects under that amount do not require outside control agency
approvals (such as the Department of General Services).
The purpose of our review was to determine whether the allegations we received
were valid. This review was performed in accordance with State Government
Article, Section 2-1220 of the Annotated Code of Maryland.
Our review consisted of tests, analyses, observations, and discussions with SGHC
personnel and others as we deemed necessary to achieve our objectives. Our
review did not constitute an audit conducted in accordance with generally
accepted government auditing standards. Had we conducted an audit in
accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards, other matters
may have come to our attention that would have been reported. Our review was
conducted primarily from April 2008 through July 2008.
DHMH’s response, on behalf of SGHC, to our findings and recommendations is
included as an appendix to this report. As prescribed in the State Government
Article, Section 2-1224 of the Annotated Code of Maryland, we will advise
DHMH regarding the results of our review of its response.
4

--- Page 7 ---
Background Information
Agency Responsibilities
Spring Grove Hospital Center (SGHC), which is located in Catonsville,
Maryland, provides a wide range of comprehensive mental health services to
residents of Baltimore City, and Baltimore and Harford Counties. The SGHC
Maintenance Department has a staff of 47 employees responsible for certain
building maintenance activities (such as heating and air conditioning, plumbing
and electrical) for SGHC’s 99 buildings. According to the State’s records, during
fiscal year 2008, related salary and fringe benefit expenditures totaled
approximately $2.4 million. Additionally, SGHC expended approximately
$581,000 during fiscal year 2008 for building maintenance equipment, materials
and supplies, and contractual services.
Procurement Regulations
State Procurement Regulations were established to help foster competition so that
State purchases are made in a cost effective manner. Requirements are more
stringent as the dollar amount of the procurement increases. SGHC is required to
seek competition to the extent practical for procurements up to $2,500. The
Regulations require that bids be obtained from at least two vendors for
procurements between $2,501 and $10,000. Sole source procurements must meet
certain specified requirements (situations in which there is only one available
source for the subject of the contract) and the reasons for any such procurement
are to be documented in writing by the agency’s procurement officer. The
Regulations also require that written and published solicitations be used for all
procurements over $10,000. Furthermore, procurements in excess of $25,000
require the approval of control agencies (such as the Department of General
Services and the Department of Budget and Management).
The intent of State Procurement Regulations is to provide for increased public
confidence in public procurement, to ensure the fair and equitable treatment in
both fact and appearance of all persons who deal with the State procurement
system, and to foster effective broad-based competition.
SGHC Maintenance Department Procurement Procedures
Maintenance Department employees complete a request for purchase form when
equipment is needed or when contractors are needed to provide maintenance
services. The Department is responsible for conducting the competitive bid
5

--- Page 8 ---
process, including receiving and evaluating the bids, and for ensuring compliance
with all aspects of the State Procurement Regulations. The aforementioned form
is to include a description of the work to be performed, the cost of the related
equipment or services, and the contractor to whom the Department intends to
award the project. The forms are generally initially authorized by Maintenance
Department management and then forwarded to SGHC management for final
approval. Once approved, the form is forwarded to the Accounting Office for
preparation of the State purchase order. Equipment items purchased are received
either directly by the Maintenance Department or at a central receiving location.
Regardless of the location where items are received, receiving reports are
prepared to document receipt of the items purchased and are approved by
Department personnel. Invoices from contractors are initially received by the
Department or the Accounting Office and generally require the approval of
Department management personnel prior to payment.
6

--- Page 9 ---
Findings and Recommendations
Questionable Transactions Were Identified Related to One
Contractor
Finding 1
Numerous questionable transactions totaling $167,106 were noted related to
one contractor. For example, the Maintenance Department’s bidding
process for services procured from this contractor appeared to be
significantly compromised.
Analysis
We noted numerous questionable transactions totaling $167,106 related to one
contractor. For example, the Maintenance Department’s bidding process for
items procured from this contractor appeared to be significantly compromised.
Payments made by SGHC to the contractor during the period from July 2005
through February 2008 totaled approximately $200,000. We noted the following
questionable transactions:
• The Maintenance Department awarded this contractor 12 projects totaling
$43,658 through a purported competitive bid process for replacement
equipment (for example, steam coils). For each of these projects, competitive
bids were purportedly received from two or three contractors, that is, the
winning contractor and at least one of the two other contractors which were
located in Pennsylvania and Massachusetts. Although the bid documents
purportedly received from the out-of-state contractors were prepared on
letterhead of the respective companies, the bids were submitted to the
Maintenance Department via fax by the contractor that was subsequently
awarded the projects as the low bidder.
• The Department awarded this same contractor 21 additional projects totaling
$87,548 through a purported competitive bid process for additional
replacement equipment. However, we noted that the competing bids for these
projects, which appeared to have been submitted directly to the Maintenance
Department by fax, were tampered with. Specifically, the top portion of the
bid documents, which would have identified the sender of the bids, was
destroyed (that is, either torn-off or cut-off). For all 21 projects, the losing
bids appeared to have been submitted on the letterhead of the same two out-
of-state contractors referred to in the preceding bullet.
7

--- Page 10 ---
• Although bids were on file from at least one of the out-of-state contractors for
all 33 of the aforementioned projects, we contacted management personnel at
both of the out-of-state contractors who advised us that they only recalled
submitting bids for a limited number of projects. Consequently, there is some
question as to the legitimacy of the bids purportedly submitted by these
contractors for a majority of the projects.
• Based on our review with SGHC personnel, we were unable to substantiate
that specific equipment items purchased from this contractor were received.
Specifically, for 14 equipment purchases tested totaling $50,610, made during
the period from December 2006 to November 2007, the Department was
unable to substantiate that the specific items purchased were received. In
summary, 2 items (totaling approximately $7,000) could not be located at all,
7 items (totaling approximately $29,000) had model numbers that were
different from the items ordered and paid for, and 5 items (totaling
approximately $15,000) lacked detailed information as to the items purchased
(such as model numbers) making identification inconclusive.
• The Department awarded the same contractor 7 projects totaling $18,112 as
sole source procurements for repairs that appeared to be routine in nature (for
example, steam coil repairs). The Department’s written justification for
awarding these projects as sole source procurements indicated that no other
vendor near Baltimore was able to complete the repairs. However, the
Department was unable to document or explain why no other contractor could
provide the needed service. In our opinion, the Department’s classification of
these apparent routine repairs as sole source procurements is highly
questionable.
• The Department frequently paid this contractor a premium to have
replacement equipment orders expedited. For example, this contractor
charged the Department twice the regular purchase price for these items (a
100 percent premium) to have an equipment order delivered by the
manufacturer within 48 hours. Our test of $36,597 in premium payments
made to the contractor for 25 replacement equipment purchases disclosed that
13 of these equipment items, with premium payments totaling $26,777, had
not been delivered within the expedited time frame paid for by the
Department. However, there was no documentation on file to substantiate that
the Department questioned the premium charges or obtained reimbursement
when the equipment was not delivered within the required timeframe.
8

--- Page 11 ---
• The Department awarded the same contractor 13 projects totaling $27,066
(including 4 projects totaling $9,278 noted in the $18,112 in sole source
procurements noted above) without using a competitive bid process. Rather,
contrary to State Procurement Regulations, the Department appeared to have
artificially divided the projects so that the individual project costs were below
the $2,500 threshold that would have required the Department to obtain bids
from at least 2 vendors. For example, the Department allowed this contractor
to submit separate cost estimates for 3 similar projects (repair steam coils)
within the same building that were each under $2,500, and all of which were
prepared on the same day.
Based on the above findings, we referred these matters to the Office of the
Attorney General – Criminal Division.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that SGHC comply with State Procurement Regulations in
the bidding and awarding of all contracts. Specifically, SGHC should obtain
written bids (through independent sources) as required, limit the use of sole
source procurements to only those instances authorized under the
Regulations, and not artificially divide procurements to avoid bid
requirements. We also recommend that SGHC obtain reimbursement for
the aforementioned $26,777 in premium overpayments. Moreover, we
recommend that SGHC, in conjunction with DHMH – Office of the Inspector
General, perform a complete verification of equipment items purchased from
this contractor (including model and serial number) to determine if the items
purchased from this contractor were received. Finally, we recommend that
SGHC consult with the Office of the Attorney General – Criminal Division
regarding any further action to be taken.
Work Was Directed to Contractors That Employed a Specific
Individual
Finding 2
Projects totaling $232,000 were frequently directed by the Maintenance
Department to three other contractors that employed a certain individual.
No competition was sought for these procurements and certain other
questionable practices were identified.
Analysis
The Maintenance Department frequently directed certain heating, ventilation, and
air conditioning work to three contractors that had employed a specific individual.
9

--- Page 12 ---
The work was generally awarded without any competitive process being
considered. We were advised by Department management that the work was
directed to the contractors that employed this individual, because the management
personnel liked the work performed by the individual. We noted that this
individual functioned interchangeably as a technician and/or account
representative on projects at SGHC. In addition, we noted a number of other
questionable transactions between the Department and these contractors. During
the period that these companies employed this individual, the Department
awarded projects totaling approximately $232,000 to these contractors. We noted
the following conditions:
• The Department awarded 96 projects (each under $2,500) totaling $96,284 to
two of the contractors without any indication that a competitive process was
considered. Procurement regulations stipulate that, in such circumstances,
competition should be sought to the extent practicable.
• The Department awarded six projects totaling $29,992 to the three contractors
as sole source procurements, without any written justification as required. For
four of these projects totaling $12,586, the Department prepared the related
request for purchase (RFP) one to four months after the contractor’s invoice
indicated the work had been completed. Additionally, one other project for
$5,500 was awarded as a sole source procurement, and the Department’s
justification for not bidding the project was because the contractor “can do the
best”.
• For four projects (each in excess of $2,500) completed by two of the
contractors totaling $18,288, the purported competitive bid process used was
questionable. Specifically, one of the losing bids for a project in the amount
of $3,617 was submitted to the Maintenance Department via fax by the
aforementioned employee who, at the time, worked for a different company
that received the project award. This project was awarded for ductwork in a
building that was unoccupied. For two other projects totaling $5,704, the
Department’s bid evaluation form indicated that the bids were evaluated on
June 12, 2007 even though the winning contractor’s bids were dated June 26,
2007, two weeks after the bids were purportedly evaluated. For the one
remaining project, competitive bids were received from this contractor and
one other bidder. After the bids were received, this contractor met with the
Department to discuss a modification to the specifications and submitted a
revised bid for $8,967 (an increase of $2,176) to the Department to account
for this modification. The Department awarded the project to this contractor
without giving the other bidder an opportunity to submit a revised bid based
on the subsequent modification.
10

--- Page 13 ---
• The Department awarded one contractor a project for $19,419 without
preparing a written bid solicitation or publishing the solicitation as required by
State Procurement Regulations. In effect, the Department restricted
competitive bidding on this project because bids were only solicited from two
contractors. The losing bid, in the amount of $20,768, was submitted to the
Department via fax before the winning bid was submitted. Furthermore, the
comparability of the two bids received is questionable since a written bid
solicitation describing the technical aspects of the project was not prepared.
• The Department awarded one contractor two projects totaling $11,358 as
emergency procurements; however, the Department prepared the respective
RFPs more than a month after the contractor’s invoice indicated that the work
had been completed.
• On January 23, 2008, the Department awarded five projects totaling $12,349
to one contractor with the explanation that the air conditioning unit was not
working in a certain building. However, the invoices submitted by the
contractor for these projects, and paid by SGHC, represented that the work
was performed more than six months earlier (that is, on five days between
May 16, 2007 and July 11, 2007). In addition, the invoices included charges
totaling $8,114 for supplies that had not previously been recorded (on service
receipts) as used by the contractor’s employee at the time the work was
reportedly performed.
Based on the above findings, we referred these matters to the Office of the
Attorney General – Criminal Division.
Recommendation 2
We recommend that the Department strictly comply with State Procurement
Regulations. We also recommend that SGHC consult with the Office of the
Attorney General – Criminal Division regarding any further action to be
taken.
11

--- Page 14 ---
Personal Relationships Existed Between Employees and
Contractors
Finding 3
Projects were awarded to several contractors that had personal relationships
with certain SGHC employees. At a minimum, the awarding of these
projects created an appearance of conflicts of interest that may have violated
State Ethics Law and a related Governor’s Executive Order.
Analysis
SGHC awarded projects to several contractors that had personal relationships with
two Maintenance Department employees and a SGHC senior management
employee that worked outside of the Maintenance Department. At a minimum,
the awarding of these projects created an appearance of a conflict of interest that
may have violated State Ethics Law and a related Governor’s Executive Order.
We noted the following conditions:
Maintenance Department Supervisory Employee
A Maintenance Department supervisory employee and an executive of a certain
contractor resided at the same home address at the time projects totaling
approximately $25,000 were awarded to this contractor. The executive of the
contractor was also named as the primary beneficiary of this supervisory
employee’s State pension benefits. We noted that this supervisory employee’s
initial employment at SGHC was during fiscal year 2007 and that no projects had
been awarded by SGHC to this contractor prior to this employee’s starting date.
Additionally, we noted that, for one project awarded to this contractor in which a
competitive bid process was reportedly used, the losing company’s bid was
printed from the email account of this supervisory employee. We were advised
by Department management personnel that this supervisory employee generally
had no responsibilities relating to the bidding process. However, the fact that the
losing bid was printed from the supervisory employee’s email account appears to
contradict that representation.
Maintenance Department Senior Management Employee
According to an internal memorandum prepared by a SGHC senior management
employee during the hiring process of a Maintenance Department senior
management employee (Grade 18), SGHC relied, in part, on a personal reference
provided by the president of a plumbing and heating contractor. This Maintenance
Department senior management employee was hired during fiscal year 2008. We
noted that no projects had been awarded by SGHC to this plumbing and heating
contractor prior to the employment of this senior management employee at
SGHC. Eight days after being hired, this senior management employee approved
12

--- Page 15 ---
an $8,800 project that was awarded to this contractor. We noted inconsistencies in
the related bid documents. Specifically, documentation indicated that this
contractor had submitted its bid three days before the request for purchase (RFP)
was approved. In addition, the bid records indicated that this bid and the lone
losing bid were evaluated one month before both the RFP was prepared and the
winning contractor submitted its bid. The losing bid did not indicate the date of
preparation or the date submitted to the Maintenance Department.
Furthermore, we noted that a subordinate of this senior management employee
approved a supplemental RFP in the amount of $2,042. In addition, we noted that
less than a month after this senior management employee was hired, a subordinate
of this senior management employee approved a no-bid emergency project to this
contractor for $9,700. Furthermore, this senior management employee
subsequently approved another no bid emergency project to this contractor for
$3,976. The Maintenance Department ultimately made payments to this
contractor totaling approximately $40,000 during fiscal year 2008. Furthermore,
we were advised that, as of July 2008, this senior management employee had not
filed a Financial Disclosure Statement for calendar year 2007 with the State
Ethics Commission as required by State law.
SGHC Senior Management Employee
A SGHC senior management employee was married to the president of an
organization of contractors to which SGHC paid membership and seminar
registration fees totaling $4,450. These fees were paid on behalf of Maintenance
Department employees, as well as the senior management employee who was
hired during fiscal year 2006. No payments had been made by SGHC to the
organization prior to this individual’s hiring date. We noted that the senior
management employee directly approved payments to the organization totaling
$2,375 during the period from June 13, 2007 to June 25, 2008, and SGHC paid
the organization $1,350 for membership dues and registration fees on behalf of
this employee beginning on August 9, 2006. We also noted that during the period
from October 18, 2006 to July 23, 2007, this senior management employee
authorized SGHC to award three no-bid projects totaling $6,560 for interior
design services, to a firm whose owner served as an associate board member of
the aforementioned organization.
In our opinion, the aforementioned relationships and related transactions, at a
minimum, create the appearance of conflicts of interest. In addition, the
conditions noted may violate certain provisions of State Ethics Law. For
example, the State Government Article of the Annotated Code of Maryland
provides that an employee may not participate in a matter if a qualifying relative
of the employee (such as a spouse) has an interest in the matter and the employee
13

--- Page 16 ---
knows of the interest. Moreover, these conditions may violate several provisions
of a February 2007 Governor’s Executive Order related to standards of conduct
for Executive Branch employees. Specifically, the Executive Order states, in part,
that an employee shall act impartially and not give preferential treatment to any
private organization or individual. The Order further states that employees shall
avoid any actions creating the appearance that they are violating applicable law or
the ethical standards.
Based on the above findings, we referred these matters to the Office of the
Attorney General – Criminal Division.
Recommendation 3
We recommend that SGHC take appropriate action to ensure compliance
with the State Ethics Law and the Governor’s Executive Order. We also
recommend that SGHC take immediate action to refer the above information
to the State Ethics Commission. Moreover, we recommend that SGHC
consult with the Office of the Attorney General – Criminal Division
regarding any further action to be taken.
Questionable Insurance Claim Submitted to the State Treasurer’s
Office
Finding 4
SGHC submitted, and was reimbursed for, a questionable insurance claim
made to the State Treasurer’s Office totaling $35,022.
Analysis
SGHC submitted a questionable claim for $35,022 to the State Treasurer’s Office
(STO) for damages that reportedly occurred on October 27, 2005. According to
the claim, a tree fell on a building’s chiller (air conditioning) unit during a storm
on that date. SGHC subsequently advised the STO that “There is extensive
damage to the top fans and sides” of the unit but that “…the extent of the damage
cannot be known, without having the unit looked at…” However, we noted that
the chiller unit continued to operate for the 16-month period between October 27,
2005 (reported date of insurance loss) and March 3, 2007 (date of unit
replacement). In that regard, we noted that, on April 11, 2006 (over five months
after the unit had been initially reportedly as extensively damaged), SGHC
submitted an Emergency Purchase Report to the Maryland Department of General
Services (DGS) for the purpose of making an emergency procurement for
14

--- Page 17 ---
replacement of this unit. SGHC represented to DGS that the chiller was
“unrepairable” and that patient safety would be at significant risk because the
affected building housed “patients with breathing problems and medical
conditions.”
More than a year after damages to the chiller reportedly occurred, internal emails
dated January 11, 2007 among SGHC personnel (a senior fiscal management
employee and Maintenance Department employees) questioned the rationale for
processing this as an emergency procurement since the chiller was operational
during the summer of 2006 and would run again during the upcoming summer. In
response to this concern, the senior fiscal management employee stated that “We
may lose out on funds if maintenance does not follow through with this order in
the near future, since the State Treasurer may not reimburse the hospital for the
claim since it has not been timely.” The chiller was subsequently replaced on
March 3, 2007, and we were advised by STO management that the cost of the
replacement equipment was reimbursed to SGHC by the STO in May 2007 from
the State Insurance Trust Fund.
The Fund is a self-insurance program designed to cover State agencies and
employees for claims related to property, motor vehicles, torts, and officer and
employee liability. A unit of State government can submit a claim for
reimbursement from the Fund for an occurrence of loss, damage, or liability,
subject to certain exclusions.
Recommendation 4
We recommend that, in the future, SGHC only submit insurance claims to
the State Treasurer’s Office for losses that are actually incurred.
15

--- Page 19 ---
Special Review
Department of Health and Mental Hygiene
Spring Grove Hospital Center
Department’s Response
October 2008
1

--- Page 20 ---
Background Information
Regarding Spring Grove Hospital Center
Spring Grove Hospital Center is Maryland’s oldest and largest State Hospital. It
operates 425 beds and serves over 1,000 patients a year. It is also the least expensive of
the State hospitals to operate, per occupied bed.
Although certain similarities exist between Spring Grove and seemingly similar State
facilities, Spring Grove is unique in a number of important ways:
• The Spring Grove Hospital Center includes a very large number of buildings.
There are over ninety buildings (90) that are distributed fairly evenly
throughout its entire 190‐acre campus.
• The large majority of the buildings at Spring Grove are occupied and in use.
The Spring Grove Maintenance Department is responsible for the care and
maintenance of each of the buildings. The Spring Grove Maintenance
Department’s responsibilities include the care and maintenance of the various
buildings that are occupied by tenants, well as the buildings that are occupied as
part of the Center’s hospital operations.
• The Spring Grove campus is the host site of a number of other State agencies.
These include the Mental Hygiene Administration, the Department’s Office of
Healthcare Quality, the Dental Board, the Alcohol and Drug Abuse
Administration, the Occupational Therapy Board, and the Maryland Psychiatric
Research Center. The campus also includes over 25 on‐campus housing units
for employees and two dormitories for students in professional training. While
other State campuses have tenants, it is believed that the Spring Grove Hospital
is unique and distinguished by the fact that so many of its buildings are
occupied by tenants, and by the fact that its Maintenance Department is
responsible for the maintenance of each of the tenant buildings.
2

--- Page 21 ---
• The Spring Grove campus is historic, and as such has a number of older
buildings. Its oldest building, which dates to 1853, is still in use. The large,
four‐story Bland Bryant Building, which is the site of the Office of Health Care
Quality, was built in 1930. Most of the occupied patient care buildings date to
the 1950’s and 1960’s. While the older buildings were well‐constructed, their
aging infrastructure poses special challenges for the Hospital’s Maintenance
Department.
• A comprehensive Energy Management Project is currently underway at Spring
Grove. By 2010 this project will replace the aging heating plants throughout the
campus and result in substantially improved energy efficiency and, it is hoped,
improved reliability.
3

--- Page 22 ---
Findings and Recommendations
Questionable Transactions Were Identified Related to One Contractor
Finding 1
Numerous questionable transactions totaling $167,106 were noted related to one
contractor. For example, the Maintenance Department’s bidding process for services
procured from this contractor appeared to be significantly compromised.
Legislative Auditor’s Recommendation
We recommend that SGHC comply with State Procurement Regulations in the
bidding and awarding of all contracts. Specifically, the SGHC should obtain
written bids (through independent sources) as required, limit the use of sole source
procurements to only those instances authorized under the Regulations, and not
artificially divide procurements to avoid bidding requirements. We also
recommend that SGHC obtain reimbursement for the aforementioned $26,777 in
premium overpayments. Moreover, we recommend that the SGHC, in conjunction
with DHMH­Office of the Inspector General, perform a complete verification of
equipment items purchased from this contractor (including model and serial
number) to determine if the items purchased from this contractor were received.
Finally, we recommend that SGHC, consult with the Office of the Attorney General­
Criminal Division, regarding any further action to be taken. Based on the above
findings, we referred these matters to the Office of the Attorney General – Criminal
Division.
Department’s Response
The Department agrees that it must comply with State Procurement Regulations in the
bidding and awarding of all contracts and that SGHC should obtain written bids
(through independent sources) as required, limit the use of sole source procurements
to only those instances authorized under the Regulations, and not artificially divide
procurements to avoid bidding requirements.
Transactions cited by the OLA include: procurement of HVAC custom components,
urgent and/or emergency maintenance purchase orders, sole source procurements, and
4

--- Page 23 ---
payment for expedited delivery associated with the HVAC work. While there is no
excuse for not following the prescriptive elements of COMAR, there are reasonable
explanations for what was done within a hospital environment. We do not expect these
to fully satisfy the finding but we also will comment on what has been instituted to
prevent future deficiencies.
Numerous and varied coil replacements have been necessary at SGHC for years due to
the aging physical plant. Indeed, there is a large project underway (“NORESCO”) that
will modernize the occupied buildings on the campus. In the interim, the maintenance
objective has been to minimize outlay for spare parts yet provide adequate heating and
cooling for patients and staff. When there is an equipment failure, the decision is made
concerning the severity of the incident. If it is something that is currently, or may
shortly affect the health or safety of patients or staff the needed item(s) and/or
service(s) is/are obtained as quickly as possible. Vendors who are known to have
trained and experienced staff are initially called and when a job is satisfactorily
completed there has been a tendency to rely on one competent vendor. While this was
the case with most of the transactions cited, it is in violation of COMAR and has been
stopped. Current procedures require a documented attempt to obtain at least two bids
in any emergency situation and to place the item and/or service on eMaryland
Marketplace if of an urgent need and time permits. In addition, as of September 22,
2008 all procurements over $500 are reviewed by the Director of the Office of
Procurement and Support Services (“OPASS”). He also has an additional check on all
SGHC procurements by independently obtaining purchase order records from the
FMIS system as well as credit card reports. This level of oversight will continue until
the Director of Office of Procurement and Support Services is fully satisfied that all
local staff have been properly instructed and are performing fully within the
requirements of the procurement rules.
As to sole source procurements, there have been many vendors at SGHC over the years
that either claim or provide proof that they have unique capabilities and have been
deemed to be “sole source” vendors. Incomplete documentation resulted in the OLA
finding that some of them were not justified. The procedure today is that any vendor
that SGHC believes is a sole source must be documented by SGHC and approved by
the Director of the Office of Procurement and Support Services. We believe that this
will eliminate any improperly classified sole source vendor.
5

--- Page 24 ---
To avoid the repetitious use of a vendor without a contract in place, the Director of
Facility Management has prepared a Request for Proposal (RFP) for a standing contract
for all planned and emergency HVAC work. This RFP has been approved for
placement on eMaryland Marketplace and the Department anticipates having the
contract awarded by the end of November 2008. Pricing will be locked in for one year.
Since it is being overseen by the Office of Procurement and Support Services, it will be
capped at $50,000.
There were allegations of bids not being received properly. To address the possibility
of any future procurement violation, a “bid committee”, independent of the
Maintenance Department, has been established by the Finance Department at Spring
Grove. This committee receives, opens, and reviews all bids. The bid committee also
awards the bid. The committee consists of the Chief Financial Officer (CFO), an
Administrative Specialist II, and an Agency Buyer I. The bids are received via
eMaryland Marketplace or in a sealed envelop and are date‐stamped. Bids may be
received by fax or email in certain circumstances. The Spring Grove Chief Financial
Officer ensures the integrity of the bids received, the process by which they are
opened, and the selection that is made. In addition, the Department’s Office of
Procurement and Support Services approves the selected vendor/contractor in each
instance.
The Department does not agree that it intended to artificially divide projects so as to be
below the $2,500 threshold. There have been instances when, without warning,
multiple pieces of similar or identical equipment within the same building break in
fairly rapid succession This may occur on the same day but at different times. For
example, this has been known to occur when the strain caused when a malfunction in
one piece of HVAC equipment causes additional demands on the systems that are still
operating. This, in turn, may cause one or more of these other systems to fail after a
fairly brief period of time while we are already in the process of making repairs. Thus,
the issuance of two, or more, purchase orders under $2500 which add up to be over the
$2500 threshold. Our policy now is to have a vendor stop work and we seek bids if
there is likelihood that we will exceed $2500 on the initial work. We also want it known
that procurements over $2,500 are now being routinely secured through eMaryland
Marketplace.
6

--- Page 25 ---
The Department does not find that it is owed a refund for the $26,777 that it paid in
premium payments or that it overpaid for premium service. It must be noted that the
Department paid a premium for expedited fabrication of customized HVAC
components. The timelines for the expedited fabrication does not take into account the
time required for shipping and delivery. A letter of explanation from the company’s
president explaining this has been provided to OLA.
The Department wishes to further emphasize that many of our non‐routine HVAC
repairs involve steam coils that are located in patient care areas of the hospital. Leaks
from broken coils frequently can result in hazardous mold, extreme internal
temperature fluctuations within the buildings (in either direction), and other
environmental hazards that compromise the safety of those individuals who are
confined to the buildings or patient‐care units. This same concern applies to the safety
of the staff that care for the patients. Thus, it is very important that such repairs are
completed as quickly as possible.
Because of the Department’s fiduciary obligation to its patients, individuals who are
confined to buildings that generally do not include alternative spaces for patient care
activities; the Hospital often is compelled to pay a premium for expedited delivery of
HVAC equipment for the patient care buildings. Decisions to pay a premium for
expedited fabrication and delivery of HVAC equipment is generally based on several
variables. These include extremes in the climate at the time of the equipment failure,
building conditions, the vulnerability of the persons served therein (including an
assessment of their ability to handle temperature extremes), and available alternatives
that may exist at the time.
The Director of Facility Management or, as the Director’s designee, the Multi‐Service
Center Manager (MSCM) will now routinely document the Director’s verification that,
in all instances, such equipment was received within an expedited delivery time prior
to the invoice being paid.
The Department has performed a review of all items purchased from this contractor
and has investigated the allegation that certain equipment was purchased, paid for, but
never received. These allegations primarily involve one component of the many
HVAC systems: steam coils. In one instance, we found that our person accompanying
the OLA auditor took him, inadvertently, to the wrong area. We went back to the
7

--- Page 26 ---
proper area and photographed the “missing” item in its installed location. Also, six
additional coils have been removed and disposed of as part of the “NORESCO” energy
conservation project at Spring Grove. This is on‐going and was in process during the
audit investigation. Contemporaneous receiving records as well as freight bills of
lading exist as documentation that the items had been received even though the items
are not available today since they were destroyed during the renovations. An
additional seven steam coils have been received and installed. Receiving records,
photographs, and freight bills of lading exist to show that we did receive what had
been ordered and paid for.
Another reason that the auditors were unable to locate certain coil model numbers
had to do with the process utilized by the contractor to issue a replacement. The
Department has on hand a letter from the contractor verifying that when a coil breaks
and a custom‐manufactured replacement coil is ordered, the vendor identifies the
standard product that most closely approximates the coil that must be custom‐built.
The standard product number is supplied so that a Purchase Order can be generated
for the necessary custom coil – for which we do not have a model number. The vendor
then field‐measures in order to obtain accurate sizing and other specifications. When
the correct field measurements are received by the manufacturing plant, the coil is
custom‐made and the uniquely sized coil is typically given a new model number. In
that way, the custom‐made coil is not confused with one of the standard coils.
Although in such instances the Purchase Order model number and installed model
number do not match, the packing slip for shipping date matches the manufactured
time. A letter from the company’s owner verifying this process has been provided to
OLA. Effective immediately, any discrepancies regarding model numbers will be fully
noted, explained and filed with the paperwork for future reference.
Lastly, the Department has consulted with the Office of the Attorney General Criminal
Division regarding any further action to be taken.
8

--- Page 27 ---
Work Was Directed to Contractors That Employed a Specific Individual
Finding 2
Projects totaling $232,000 were frequently directed by the Maintenance Department to
three other contractors that employed a certain individual. No competition was sought
for these procurements and certain other questionable practices were identified.
Legislative Auditor’s Recommendation
We recommend that the Department strictly comply with State Procurement
Regulations. We also recommend that SGHC consult with the Office of the
Attorney General – Criminal Division regarding any further action to be taken.
Department’s Response
The Department acknowledges that it did not strictly comply with proper procurement
procedures in the instances cited, and it agrees with the recommendation that State
procurement regulations be strictly followed. However, we want to point out that the
Department’s investigation into the various occurrences cited by the auditors does not
lead us to conclude that appropriate value was not received or that waste occurred as a
result. We are also able to identify corrective actions that have already been taken.
With reference to the finding that the Maintenance Department frequently directed
certain work to contractors that employed a certain individual, it should be noted that
the previous leadership of Spring Grove’s Maintenance Department was pleased with
the work of the individual in question, and when this individual changed companies
the Maintenance Department continued to seek his expertise because of his experience
and familiarization with the maintenance issues at SGHC. Although the individual’s
job title may have changed as he changed companies, the Department’s finding is that
his role in relationship to the Hospital and its specific HVAC repair needs did not. The
Department also recognizes that even though its intentions were good, that this practice
did not follow proper procurement procedures.
9

--- Page 28 ---
Procurement rules specify that procurements over $2,500 require competitive bids
while these under $2500 rely upon the judgment of the procurement officer. The
Department maintains that some projects (each under $2,500) did not require a
competitive bid under the applicable procurement rules given the urgency of the
needs for the repairs and our fiduciary obligation to our patients. The interest of the
Department in such instances is always to complete HVAC repairs as quickly as
possible in order to preserve patient safety and comfort.
The Department also wishes to note that many of the projects cited were for amounts
that were well under $2,500. For example, 20 of the 34 projects that were awarded to
one of the vendors were completed for costs that were below $1,000. Nearly half of
these 20 were below $500 each. Only 2 of the 24 projects were for costs that were in
excess of $2000.
The Director of Facility Management for Spring Grove, however, has prepared an RFP
for a standing contract for HVAC repairs throughout the campus. A similar RFP has
also been prepared for a standing contract for steam coil replacements. The RFPs
have been approved by the Director of DHMH’s Office of Procurement and Support
Services and will be placed on eMaryland Marketplace in the near future. The
successful bidder will provide select preventive maintenance work and routine as
well as emergency repair work within a specified turnaround time and at fixed rates.
Spring Grove had conducted a survey of hourly rates in an effort to pay only the
current going rate, which was $85 per hour. However, the Department acknowledges
that the proper procurement procedures were not strictly followed. Today, under the
system that has subsequently been put in place, an Emergency Request Form
is always completed.
To reiterate, the following steps have been taken to avoid future violations of
COMAR:
Purchases over $2,500 are now being routinely secured through eMaryland
Marketplace. Further, effective September 22, 2008, the Office of Procurement and
Support Services staff began approving all Maintenance Department purchase orders
over $500. This level of oversight will continue until the Director of Office of
Procurement and Support Services is fully satisfied that all local staff have completed
10

--- Page 29 ---
all necessary procurement trainings and are performing fully within the requirements
of the procurement rules. For emergency procurements that cannot be accomplished
through eMaryland Marketplace, a bid committee that is independent of the
Maintenance Department has been established by the Finance Department at Spring
Grove. This committee opens and reviews all bids received. The bid committee also
awards the bid. The committee consists of the Chief Financial Officer (CFO), an
Administrative Specialist II, and an Agency Buyer I. The bids are received sealed and
are date‐stamped in. The Spring Grove Chief Financial Officer ensures the integrity of
the bids received, the process by which they are opened, and the selection that is
made. In addition, the Department’s Office of Procurement and Support Services
approves the selected vendor/contractor in each instance. We believe this separation
of powers first from the Maintenance Department by use of a new Committee and
then from Spring Grove by approval at DHMH’s Office of Procurement and Support
Services will bring much better controls to the entire process.
The Department would also like to emphasize that the two new standing contracts for
HVAC coil replacements and repairs will substantially reduce the frequency of
purchases of goods and services by the Hospital’s Maintenance Department.
We also acknowledged instances of vendor’s invoices being paid for work that had
been performed more than 6 months earlier. These delays in payment came as the
result of improper invoicing by the vendor. More specifically, a particular vendor
placed costs of all jobs onto one service ticket and billed it all on one invoice. The
Hospital’s Maintenance Department notified the vendor that the invoice could not be
honored unless the Hospital was provided with an itemized breakdown of the
charges by individual building so that it could verify the work performed in each
building, As evidenced by written correspondence and a scheduled meeting among
Spring Grove and the vendor’s representatives, there had been multiple contacts
made between the vendor’s accounting department and our Maintenance staff in an
effort to rectify the irregularities in the invoice.
The Department has consulted with the office of the Attorney General – Criminal
Division.
11

--- Page 30 ---
Personal Relationships Existed Between Employees and Contractors
Finding 3
Projects were awarded to several contractors that had personal relationships with
certain SGHC employees. At a minimum, the awarding of these projects created an
appearance of conflicts of interest that may have violated State Ethics Law and a
related Governor’s Executive Order.
Legislative Auditor’s Recommendation
We recommend that SGHC take appropriate action to ensure compliance with the
State Ethics Law and the Governor’s Executive Order. We also recommend that
SGHC take immediate action to refer the above information to the State Ethics
Commission. Moreover, we recommend that SGHC consult with the Office of the
Attorney General – Criminal Division regarding any further action to be taken.
Department’s Response
The Department concurs that SGHC should take action to ensure compliance with the
State Ethics Law and the Governor’s Executive Order. Further, we agree that the
analysis may give the appearance of a possible conflict of interest in certain instances.
However, the Department does not find that prestige of office was used for the
Department’s employees’ private gain, and we do not believe that State Ethics Law and
a Governor’s Executive Order were violated. However, the matter has been referred
by the Department to the State Ethics Commission for further consideration.
With specific reference to the finding that pertains to the hiring of a Maintenance
Department senior management employee, the Hospital’s Chief Operating Officer
(COO) obtained a reference from a vendor that had been used by the potential
employee in his last position. Given the extended length of time this Maintenance
Department management employee was employed by his then‐current employer, the
source of references was limited. The Chief Operating Officer sought a reference from
someone who had worked with the prospective employee and was familiar with his
management and leadership expertise. This was one of three favorable references
12

--- Page 31 ---
obtained and was used only as additional verification of capability. In other words, the
applicant’s selection was not dependent upon a favorable reference by the contractor.
Further, the Director of the Office of Procurement and Support Services has audited all
projects that were subsequently awarded to the heating and plumbing contractor and
was unable to determine if preferential treatment was given to any private
organization or individual. The matter has, however, been referred by the Department
to the State Ethics Committee for their determination.
The newly hired Maintenance Department Senior Management employee allowed the
above company to supply competitive bids for certain types of SGHC projects when he
first arrived. For example, three competitive bids were obtained for the patient shower
replacement project in the White Building, D Unit. The company in question was paid
an additional $2,042 for work that was unforeseen. This renovation involved a patient
shower room and was part of the energy management program under a critically tight
timeframe for completion. The other work cited was for an emergency sewage issue at
the power plant ($9,700). Not only was the sewage running into a high voltage
manhole but also due to the back‐up, proper blow down procedures were not able to
be performed on the boilers. SGHC considered this an emergency situation and
completed the Emergency Request Form.
With respect to the emergency repair to the deaerator tank at the SGHC Power Plant
($3,976) the power plant will only be in operation until November 2009 and then will
be decommissioned. Having received competitive quotes for the deaerator tank repair
ranging from $20,000 to $120,000, the Director believed it to be in best interests of the
Hospital and the Department to spend $3,796 on a “patch” repair. The plumbing and
heating company recommended the alternative to full repair. In retrospect, the
alternative suggestion could have been used to solicit additional bids if this was not a
time critical event.
It does appear that several of the documents reviewed may have been inadvertently
misdated. For example, a bid sheet appears to have been mistakenly misdated at the
beginning of a new month and, accordingly, should have read 3/6/08 rather than
2/6/08.
Management personnel above a grade 16 file a Financial Disclosure Statement with the
Ethics Commission on an annual basis. The Director of Personnel will add this
13

--- Page 32 ---
documentation to the hiring process. Upon notification of the requirement, the
Maintenance Department senior management employee has filed a Financial
Disclosure Statement.
The Department does not believe that a SGHC senior management employee’s conduct
violated State ethics law or a February 2007 Governor’s Executive Order related to
standard of conduct. In particular, the non‐profit professional association mentioned
exists to benefit administrators/managers in facility management through education
and exchange of information via monthly meetings and an annual seminar. Facility
Directors in the region’s major healthcare facilities belong to this organization.
Recognized national leaders in the field of Facility Management have been engaged to
speak at meetings. There was full disclosure to the Hospital’s Chief Executive Officer
in advance, and the Chief Executive Officer approved the plan for the hospital to join
the organization and to send representatives to their annual meetings. The Chief
Executive Officer believed that it was in the best interests of the hospital and that there
were substantial benefits from the educational opportunities for Maintenance
Department Employees. No viable competing organization is known to exist and
many local hospitals and other health care facilities are members. The seminars that
are provided to members serve as an outstanding source of up‐to‐date information on
accreditation standards, emergency preparedness, fire protection and other safety
engineering, infectious disease risks, such as legionella, and other issues facing health
care organizations today. We do not agree that any actual conflict of interest existed.
The President of the organization received no personal or professional aggrandizement
or personal/financial gain from SGHC personnel joining the organization.
The three (3) no bid projects awarded to an interior design firm who happened to be a
member of the same organization were for minimal and unrelated projects. The
Hospital’s need was for a firm that specialized in health care, was familiar with design
elements and products that are geared towards hospitals, and could envision the
finished project. Each of three projects were completed for under $2,500.
14

--- Page 33 ---
Questionable Insurance Claim Submitted to the State Treasurer’s Office
Finding 4
SGHC submitted, and was reimbursed for, a questionable insurance claim made to the
State Treasurer’s Office totaling $35,022.
Legislative Auditor’s Recommendation
We recommend that, in the future, SGHC only submit insurance claims to the State
Treasurer’s Office for losses that are actually incurred.
Department’s Response
The Center concurs with the recommendation that the Department should only submit
insurance claims to the State Treasurer’s Office for losses that are actually incurred.
The aforementioned chiller was damaged on 10/27/05 by a fallen tree. According to
maintenance department personnel, the chiller was only marginally serviceable, but
was able to “limp along” after being damaged for a period of time. Damage to the
chiller was analogous to damage to a car involved in an accident: it is still drivable, but
it has received significant damage. This was not an issue of an inappropriate claim,
but rather lack of proper and timely paperwork. Under the new Chief Financial
Officer and Facility Management Director, such claims will be coordinated and filed in
a timely manner.
15