Title: Video Lottery Operations Revenue - Small, Minority, and Women-Owned Businesses Account

NOTE: Chapter 49, 2016 Laws of Maryland, eliminated the requirement that OLA annually audit and evaluate the utilization of the funds that are allocated to small, minority, and women-owned businesses by eligible fund managers.
Date: 10/23/2015
Type: Performance
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5a945d3acc9d72404c150a59
Extracted: 2025-06-18T10:53:33.389243
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Performance Audit Report
Video Lottery Operations Revenue
Small, Minority, and Women-Owned Businesses Account
October 2015
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
For further information concerning this report contact:
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
301 West Preston Street, Room 1202
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Phone: 410-946-5900 · 301-970-5900
Toll Free in Maryland: 1-877-486-9964
Maryland Relay: 711
TTY: 410-946-5401 · 301-970-5401
E-mail: OLAWebmaster@ola.state.md.us
Website: www.ola.state.md.us
The Office of Legislative Audits operates a Fraud Hotline to report fraud, waste, or abuse
involving State of Maryland government resources. Reports of fraud, waste, or abuse may
be communicated anonymously by a toll-free call to 1-877-FRAUD-11, by mail to the Fraud
Hotline, c/o Office of Legislative Audits, or through the Office’s website.
The Department of Legislative Services does not discriminate on the basis of age, ancestry,
color, creed, marital status, national origin, race, religion, gender, gender identity, sexual
orientation, or disability in the admission or access to its programs, services, or activities. The
Department’s Information Officer has been designated to coordinate compliance with the
nondiscrimination requirements contained in Section 35.107 of the Department of Justice
Regulations. Requests for assistance should be directed to the Information Officer at 410-
946-5400 or 410-970-5400.

--- Page 5 ---
Table of Contents
Background Information 5
Overview 5
Video Lottery Terminal Licensees 5
Board of Public Works’ Authority 6
Department of Business and Economic Development Responsibilities 6
Grant and Fund Management Service Agreements 7
Businesses Targeted by the Program 9
Fiscal Year 2014 Small, Minority, and Women-Owned Businesses 10
Account Activity
Fiscal Year 2014 Fund Manager Activity 11
Projection of Small, Minority, and Women-Owned Businesses Account 13
Revenue
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology 15
Conclusions 17
Findings and Recommendations 19
Program Goals and Objectives
Finding 1 – Formal Goals, Objectives, and Related Measures Had 19
Not Been Established for Directing and Evaluating the Program
and Fund Manager Performance
Finding 2 – DBED Did Not Establish Interim Financial Reporting 22
Requirements or Ensure Fund Managers Submitted Audited
Financial Statements of Grant Activity in Accordance With the
Contract
Finding 3 – DBED Had Not Established a Formal Process to Verify 23
Fund Manager Compliance with Key Program Contractual
Requirements
Finding 4 – DBED Had Not Established a Formal Evaluation Process 25
to Assess the Performance of Fund Managers
Finding 5 – DBED Authorized a Contract Modification for One Fund 26
Manager Without Obtaining BPW Approval
3

--- Page 6 ---
State Checking Accounts
Finding 6 – DBED Had Not Established Effective Oversight of the 27
Transactions Processed Through the Fund Managers’ State
Checking Accounts
Finding 7 – DBED Had Not Established Comprehensive Policies 29
Governing the Process for Requesting Additional Grant Funds to
Replenish the State Checking Accounts
Agency Response Appendix
4

--- Page 7 ---
Background Information
Overview
State Law generally requires that 1.5 percent of video lottery terminal (VLT)
proceeds at each licensed video lottery facility be paid into the Small, Minority,
and Women-Owned Businesses Account (the Account). This Account was
created by legislation enacted in the 2007 special legislative session of the
General Assembly, and is a special, non-lapsing fund under the authority of
the Board of Public Works (BPW).
State Law specifies that the purpose of the Account is to provide investment
capital and loans to small, minority, and women-owned businesses in the
State. The law further specifies that at least 50 percent of such activity must
be allocated to eligible businesses in the jurisdictions and communities
surrounding a video lottery facility (referred to as ‘targeted areas’).
Video Lottery Terminal Licensees
Licenses have currently been awarded to operate VLTs in six casinos within
the State. For each casino, Table 1 provides the date that the license was
issued and VLT gaming operations began, and includes the number of VLTs
authorized by the license of as June 30, 2014. VLT gaming operations have
not yet begun at MGM National Harbor in Prince George’s County.
Table 1
Video Lottery Terminal Licensee Operations Data
Number of
Date Authorized
Casino Name Local Date of
Operations VLTs as of
(Video Lottery Facility) Jurisdiction License
Began June 30,
2014
Hollywood Casino
Cecil 10/21/2009 9/27/2010 1,158
Perryville
Casino at Ocean Downs Worcester 9/23/2009 1/4/2011 800
Maryland Live! Casino Anne Arundel 12/7/2009 6/6/2012 4,170
Rocky Gap Casino Resort Allegany 4/26/2012 5/22/2013 577
Horseshoe Casino
Baltimore City 7/31/2012 8/26/2014 2,500
Baltimore
Prince
MGM National Harbor 8/14/2014 Future 3,600
George's
Source: Video Lottery Facility Location Commission
5

--- Page 8 ---
Board of Public Works’ Authority
Although BPW has authority over the Account, State law created a mechanism
for disbursing the funds to eligible businesses via the use of fund managers.
Under State law, BPW was to develop criteria to define eligible fund managers
(entities with significant financial or investment experience) to whom BPW
would make grants, and who in turn would use those grant funds to provide
investment capital and loans to businesses. The process of awarding grant
funds and the subsequent loan activity is collectively referred to by BPW as
the Program. To assist it in its required duties, on August 22, 2012, BPW
entered into a Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) with the Department of
Business and Economic Development (DBED), whereby DBED serves as
BPW’s agent to administer the Program.1
Although BPW retains overall authority for the Account and the Program, the
MOU delegated certain administrative and operational responsibilities to
DBED. DBED has the authority to conduct the procurement of fund managers,
recommend approval of fund managers to BPW, enter into agreements with
fund managers on BPW’s behalf and, pursuant to those agreements, disburse
grants in amounts approved by BPW to the fund managers. Nevertheless,
according to the MOU, BPW has the sole discretion to designate fund
managers, the amount and timing of grants to each fund manager, and the
amount of each grant that may be used by the fund managers for
administrative-related expenses.
BPW is responsible for approving the grant awards for each fund manager. As
noted in our preceding audit report, on April 17, 2013, BPW approved the
award of grant funds to three fund managers; however, as of June 30, 2013,
no Account funds had been disbursed to the fund managers.
DBED Responsibilities
According to the MOU, DBED is responsible for:
 Participating, along with BPW, via a competitive procurement process,
in the solicitation of prospective eligible fund managers, through the
preparation of the draft Request for Proposals (RFP), the issuance of
the RFP, collecting bidder proposals, and recommending proposed
awards for BPW review and approval;
 Disbursing and reconciling Account proceeds;
1 Chapter 141, Laws of Maryland, 2015, effective October 1, 2015 created the Department of
Commerce as successor to DBED.
6

--- Page 9 ---
 Monitoring fund manager reporting, and collecting and forwarding
reports to BPW; and
 Annually, submitting a report to BPW that details the Program activities
for the year, including an itemized list of businesses to which fund
managers provide investment capital or loans.
The MOU did not intend for DBED’s administration of the fund to have a fiscal
impact on DBED, so each fiscal year, DBED was to be allocated $50,000 from
the Account for Program administration (such as staff time, underwriting, and
management services). If DBED’s administrative expenses are greater than
$50,000 in any given fiscal year, DBED can request BPW to approve
reimbursement for the excess.
Grant and Fund Management Service Agreements
State law specifies that BPW shall make grants to fund managers to provide
investment capital and loans to small, minority, and women-owned
businesses in the State. BPW is required also to ensure that fund managers
allocate at least 50 percent of the grant funds to businesses in the
jurisdictions and communities surrounding a video lottery facility (targeted
areas). To accomplish this, DBED, with the approval of BPW, executed Grant
and Fund Management Services Agreements with the three fund managers
effective May 1, 2013 (which were modified on May 30, 2013). These fund
manager agreements (which incorporate by reference the RFP requirements
and other procurement documents) include descriptions of the services to be
provided by and the responsibilities of the fund managers.
Each agreement generally contained similar terms and conditions, but
differed in terms of the actual grant awards for each fund manager. These
agreements were for an initial five-year period and renewable for another five
years at the option of BPW. The fund managers may request to receive grant
funds from available VLT proceeds. Those funds, plus any repaid loan
principal, are then available for new investment capital and loans.2 Currently,
except for fund manager compensation, all grants, loan assets, and related
records remain the property of the State and are held by each fund manager
in trust for the benefit of the State.
Under the aforementioned agreements, the fund managers are compensated
for their costs related to the Program generally by origination and transaction
fees paid by the business, interest earned on loan assets, and an expense fee
2 At the time of this audit, there was minimal principal repayment due to the newness of the
loans. Consequently, the fiscal year 2014 loans made by the fund managers were financed
by the grant funds.
7

--- Page 10 ---
paid from the Account, which during the first year of the Program was not to
exceed eight percent of the initial grant funds.
The fund manager agreements contained the following general duties and
services to be provided by the fund managers:
 Make loans or investments to eligible targeted businesses located in
the State of Maryland, with at least 50 percent of the loans or
investment made to businesses in three targeted areas in Maryland.
 Provide fund management services, which are defined as:
o Identifying potential borrowers or investment opportunities,
o Originating loans or investments,
o Advertising,
o Outreach to minority businesses, women-owned businesses,
and other under-served communities that is directed to such
businesses in a targeted area or areas or within the State,
o Underwriting,
o Loan placement,
o Documenting and closing transactions,
o Loan and investment account administration, accounting, and
reporting.
 Establish an interest bearing checking account for all Program activity
in the name of the State of Maryland at a financial institution approved
by the Maryland State Treasurer. The fund manager will designate its
personnel who will be authorized signors and have access to the
account (the agreement also requires a DBED employee be designated
as an authorized signor with account access). Although a State
account, each fund manager has custody over its checking account
and is responsible for related record keeping and reconciliation
functions.
 Submit a report to DBED, by January 31 of each year, on a DBED
provided form, detailing the use of the Fund and the fund manager’s
earnings from its related operations during the preceding calendar
year. This report is to be accompanied by unaudited financial
statements for the same period.
 By March 31 of each year, submit to DBED audited financial
statements for the Fund prepared by an independent certified public
accountant in accordance with generally accepted accounting
principles.
8

--- Page 11 ---
 Pay all costs and expenses of establishing and administering the Fund,
bank fees, and the performance of all functions and duties under the
agreement. (Fund managers receive an expense fee from the Account
to assist with these costs. During the first year of the Program, the
expense fee was eight percent of the grant award to each fund
manager.)
Under the agreements, DBED’s Division of Business and Enterprise
Development is designated as the grant administrator with the authority to
represent the BPW in all matters relating to the services provided by the fund
managers and the disbursement and use of grant funds (by the fund
managers) in the course of implementing the Program. Finally, DBED was
expressly empowered to issue and enforce any all directives to the fund
managers reasonably necessary for the fulfillment of the provisions of this
agreement and the RFP to ensure the implementation of the Program.
Businesses Targeted by the Program
In accordance with the scope of services in the RFP, the fund managers are
required to make loans to targeted businesses, which are minority businesses
and women-owned businesses certified by the Maryland Department of
Transportation, or small businesses as defined by the U.S. Small Business
Administration (SBA). To qualify as a small business, SBA has established
size standards that are, for the most part, expressed in either millions of
dollars of receipts or average number of employees, and vary based on the
industry in which the business is engaged. According to the current SBA size
standards (effective as of July 14, 2014), the current maximum dollar
threshold is $38.5 million in receipts and the maximum average employee
threshold is 1,500. The agreements encourage fund managers to make loans
and investments in microenterprises. A microenterprise is a business that
employs fewer than 10 persons and with annual revenue not exceeding $2
million.
As previously mentioned, fund managers are required to allocate at least 50
percent of their grant funds to businesses in three targeted areas in Maryland.
These targeted areas were defined in the agreements using a county and zip
code description, and generally consist of an area within a ten mile radius
surrounding each of the three video lottery facilities in Hanover, MD; Berlin,
MD; and Perryville, MD.
The agreements also identified prohibited purposes for loan or investment
transactions, including the refinancing of existing debt, effecting a partial
change in business ownership, the reimbursement of funds owed to an owner
9

--- Page 12 ---
(or injection of capital for the business’ continuance), and repaying delinquent
State or federal withholding taxes. Finally, seven types of organizations were
generally identified as being prohibited from taking part in the Program:
 Real estate investment firms,
 Firms involved in speculative activities that develop profits from
fluctuations in price,
 Firms involved in lending activities, such as banks, finance companies,
and leasing companies,
 Pyramid sales plans,
 Firms engaged in activities that are prohibited by federal or local laws,
 Gambling activities, and
 Charitable, religious, or other non-profit institutions, etc.
Fiscal Year 2014 Small, Minority, and Women-Owned Businesses
Account Activity
The Small, Minority, and Women-Owned Businesses Account began receiving
funds during fiscal year 2011 when the first VLT facility began gaming
operations. During our preceding two audits of the Account (the first of which
included the initial fiscal year 2011 activity) and during this audit through
June 30, 2014, we determined that the Account has been properly credited
with VLT proceeds as specified by law. As of June 30, 2013, Account
disbursements consisted of a legislatively authorized transfer of $1,867,000
to the Education Trust Fund on June 1, 2012, and a $50,000 transfer to
DBED during fiscal year 2013 for administrative costs as provided for in the
MOU.
A summary of Account activity for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2014 is
presented in Table 2 that is based on the results of our current audit and the
Comptroller of Maryland’s accounting records.
10

--- Page 13 ---
Table 2
Summary of Account Activity for Fiscal Year 2014
Account Balance – July 1, 2013 $ 10,945,566
Revenues 8,421,677
Disbursements to Fund Managers (6,837,800)
Transfer to DBED for Administrative Fees (50,000)
Account Balance – June 30, 2014 $ 12,479,443
Fiscal Year 2014 Fund Manager Activity
As of June 30, 2014, DBED had disbursed $6.8 million in grant awards from
the Account to the three fund managers who had used $6.4 million of these
funds to provide loans to small, minority, and women-owned businesses in the
State. No capital investments were made. During fiscal year 2014, interest
and fees collected on these loans by the fund managers from borrowers
totaled $168,000, and DBED, as provided for by the one-time fund
establishment expense fee provision in the MOU, reimbursed the fund
managers $744,000 from the Account for administrative costs related to the
Program.
Table 3 provides a summary by fund manager of each manager’s fiscal year
2014 activity. Subsequent to our audit fieldwork, BPW approved four new
fund managers and authorized disbursements totaling approximately $9.1
million to the now seven fund managers. During fiscal year 2015, 64 loans
totaling $8.4 million were made by the seven fund managers, and this activity
will be subject to review during our next audit of the Account.
11

--- Page 14 ---
Table 3
Grant and Fund Manager Activity for the Fiscal Year Ending
June 30, 2014
Fund Manager (By Headquarters Location)
Measurement Statistic Total
Anne Arundel Wicomico Baltimore
County County City
Summary of Grant Authorizations
DBED Grant Award Authorizations $3,360,000 $1,000,000 $3,500,000 $7,860,000
Grants to Fund Managers 3,260,800 750,000 2,827,000 $6,837,800
Remaining Grant Award Not Yet
99,200 250,000 673,000 $1,022,200
Released to Fund Managers
Allocation of Grants to Fund Managers
Grants to Fund Managers
$3,260,800 $750,000 $2,827,000 $6,837,800
(from above)
Amounts Provided For Loans to
2,992,000 700,000 2,547,000 $6,239,000
Be Made by Fund Managers
Amounts Provided for Fund
Manager Establishment Expenses 268,800 50,000 280,000 $598,800
per Grant Agreement
Fund Manager Income
Interest and Fees Received from
$71,825 $56,365 $39,718 $167,908
Borrowers
Establishment Expenses
268,800 50,000 425,0003 $743,800
Reimbursed by State
Total Fund Manager Income 340,625 106,365 464,718 $911,708
Fiscal Year 2014 Loan Data
Fund Manager Loans Made to
$2,992,000 $807,8694 $2,574,5005 $6,374,369
Businesses
Number of Loans Made 21 27 18 66
Average Annualized Interest Rate
Charged Businesses by Fund 3.3% 8.8% 6.2% 6.3%
Managers
Sources: Fund Manager schedules, Fund Manager agreements, and DBED’s annual activity report as of
June 30, 2014
3Fund Manager spent more than its allowed administrative expenses (see Finding #6).
4Fund Manager used its own funds to make loans and had not yet been reimbursed by DBED.
5Fund Manager used available grant funds to make loans in excess of amounts requested for reimbursement
at year end. Presumably, this would be funded by unreleased grant award.
12

--- Page 15 ---
Projection of Small, Minority, and Women-Owned Businesses
Account Revenue
Table 4 summarizes annual VLT revenue activity since inception in fiscal year
2011 projected through fiscal year 2019. As of June 30, 2014, on a
cumulative basis, approximately $21 million had been deposited into the
Account from VLT revenues. During the next five years, VLT revenue allocated
to the Account is projected to increase annually. The most significant
increase in annual VLT revenue is expected to occur during fiscal 2017, with
the commencement of gaming operations at the MGM National Harbor Casino
in Prince George’s County.
Table 4
Account Revenue By Fiscal Year
Fiscal Actual and Projected Revenue
Year Actual / Projected Annual Cumulative6
2011 Actual $ 1,546,992 $ 1,546,992
2012 Actual 2,926,396 4,473,388
2013 Actual 8,389,178 12,862,566
2014 Actual 8,421,677 21,284,243
2015 Projected 10,048,000 31,332,243
2016 Projected 10,603,000 41,935,243
2017 Projected 16,124,000 58,059,243
2018 Projected 16,988,000 75,047,243
2019 Projected 17,216,000 92,263,243
Sources: DBED Annual Reports and Bureau of Revenue Estimates
6Cumulative revenues do not consider amounts distributed from the Account. Although we
were not readily able to calculate the actual amounts available in each year for loans, it
should be noted that as funds distributed from the Account in early years in the form of loans
are repaid, they will become available (recycled) for new loans.
13

--- Page 16 ---
14

--- Page 17 ---
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
Audit Scope
As required by Section 9-1A-35 of the State Government Article of the
Annotated Code of Maryland, we conducted an audit to evaluate the utilization
of the video lottery terminal (VLT) funds that are allocated to small, minority,
and women-owned businesses as loans and investment capital by fund
managers. The source of these funds are grants made by the Board of Public
Works (BPW) to fund managers from the Small, Minority, and Women-Owned
Businesses Account (Account), and the law further provides that BPW shall
ensure that fund managers allocate at least 50 percent of the funds from this
Account to eligible businesses in the jurisdictions and communities
surrounding a video lottery facility (targeted area). The collective BPW grant
and fund manager loan activities are referred to as the Program.
Our audit covered Account and Program activity for the period beginning July
1, 2013 and ending June 30, 2014. Our audit was performed in accordance
with generally accepted government auditing standards. Those standards
require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient, appropriate
evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions
based on our audit objectives. We believe that the evidence obtained
provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our
audit objectives.
Objectives and Methodology
Our audit included the following objectives related to Account or Program
activity:
1. To determine if the appropriate VLT proceeds were paid into the Account.
2. To evaluate the use of VLT grant funds by fund managers to make loans to
eligible businesses, including disbursing at least 50 percent of the grant
funds as loans to eligible businesses in targeted areas, and pay for fund
establishment expenses.
3. To determine if BPW and the Department of Business and Economic
Development (DBED), acting as its administrative agent, had established
adequate oversight of, and accountability over, the VLT funds allocated to
the Account and awarded as grants to the three fund managers.
To accomplish our objectives, we reviewed applicable State laws, and the
policies and procedures established by BPW, DBED, and the fund managers,
15

--- Page 18 ---
governing the use of the Account and the grants funds disbursed to the three
fund managers. We interviewed appropriate personnel at the various parties
(BPW, DBED, and the fund managers), inspected the State’s and fund
managers’ documents and records, and observed DBED operations related to
the management and oversight of the Program.
We conducted a number of tests of the allocation of VLT proceeds to the
Account (based on records of the Maryland Lottery and Gaming Control
Agency), various Account activity (including revenues and disbursements to
and from the Account), compliance with fund manager contract provisions,
and fund manager establishment expenses. We also performed extensive
testing of fund manager loan activity, including loan applications, loans made,
compliance with targeted area requirements, and loan repayments. Although,
our tests consisted of reviews of 100 percent of activity in a limited number of
cases, generally, transactions were selected for testing based on auditor
judgment, which primarily considers risk. Unless otherwise specifically
indicated, neither statistical nor non-statistical audit sampling was used to
select the transactions tested. Therefore, unless otherwise noted, the results
of the tests cannot be used to project those results to the entire population
from which the test items were selected.
Our audit did not include a review of the procurement of the fund managers
by DBED, as that was subject to review and testing during our regular fiscal
compliance audit of DBED.
Fieldwork and Agency Response
Our fieldwork was completed during the period from May 2014 through
February 2015. A copy of the draft report was provided to BPW. Its response
to our findings and recommendations appear as an appendix to this report.
As prescribed in the State Government Article, Section 2-1224 of the
Annotated Code of Maryland, we will advise BPW regarding the results of our
review of its response.
16

--- Page 19 ---
Conclusions
Our audit found that the appropriate amount of VLT proceeds, which totaled
$8,421,677, was distributed to the Account for fiscal year 2014 and that,
based on our testing of 20 of 66 loans issued by the fund managers, the
loans appeared to be made to eligible small, minority, and women-owned
businesses. We also concluded that each fund manager awarded at least 50
percent of its grants funds as loans to eligible businesses in targeted areas in
accordance with the requirements of State law.
Although BPW and DBED had established certain protocols and processes for
awarding grants, and directing and monitoring fund manager activities,
oversight and controls could be improved. BPW and DBED’s oversight could
be enhanced by establishing Program goals, objectives, and related measures
to direct the lending and investing activities and to measure and evaluate the
success of the Program and fund manager performance. Consequently,
neither BPW nor DBED had specified the overall expectations as to what
should be achieved by the Program and the fund managers, beyond meeting
the requirements of State law (that is, making loans or providing investment
capital to eligible businesses, a certain portion of which are to be made to
those within targeted areas). Program goals and objectives could be
established pertaining to desired economic impact, targeted industries (or
types of businesses) and geographic distribution of loan and investment
activity. We noted that businesses in 12 of the 24 State jurisdictions did not
receive any of the 66 loans made by fund managers during fiscal year 2014.
We also found that DBED oversight of the fund managers needs to be
improved in the areas of financial reporting, contract compliance monitoring,
and fund manager performance. For example, fund managers were not
required by DBED to submit interim financial reports of grant activity and the
audited financial statements for one fund manager were not prepared in
accordance with contract terms. DBED also had not established a formal
process to verify that fund managers complied with their primary contractual
responsibilities, and other requirements as identified in the annual grant
agreements. For example, DBED did not ensure that the fund managers’
loans and investments were made only to eligible businesses, appropriate
loan underwriting standards and practices were used, and insurance
requirements were met. Although each fund manager reported to DBED that
at least 50 percent of its activity was for businesses in targeted areas, DBED
did not verify the businesses were actually located in targeted areas. In
addition, DBED had not established a formal annual evaluation process to
assess the performance of fund managers, including whether desired results
were achieved. Such evaluations could be used by DBED to recommend
17

--- Page 20 ---
actions to improve fund manager performance, and to help make decisions
regarding subsequent year grant fund distributions and fund manager
retention.
DBED did not comply with all terms and conditions in the agreements that fall
under BPW authority. DBED authorized a contract modification for one fund
manager that increased the fund establishment expense fee for
administrative costs by $145,000 without BPW approval. Consequently,
these funds, which would otherwise had been available for lending and
investing purposes, were used by the fund manager for administrative costs.
DBED lacked effective oversight of the financial transactions processed by
fund managers through the State checking accounts established to disburse
loan and investment funds and pay the fund managers’ expenses.
Specifically, DBED did not ensure that effective controls were established over
the account activity and that all transactions processed were proper.
Consequently, DBED was unaware of certain account activity processed by
one fund manager, including $75,611 that was paid from its checking
account for the manager’s expenses without prior authorization or sufficient
support of costs incurred. Also, the amounts paid for that fund manager’s
expenses exceeded the budget by $9,000. DBED also authorized payments
for establishment expenses of two fund managers totaling $130,000 even
though the requests were untimely. Under the terms of the fund manager
agreements, DBED was not obligated to authorize payment of these
expenses. Finally, DBED had not established comprehensive policies
governing the process for fund managers’ requests for additional grant funds
to replenish the State checking account to make additional loans and
investments.
18

--- Page 21 ---
Findings and Recommendations
Program Goals and Objectives
Finding 1
Formal goals, objectives, and related measures had not been established for
directing the lending and investment activities and for evaluating Program
and fund manager performance.
Analysis
The Board of Public Works (BPW) and the Department of Business and
Economic Development (DBED) had not established a process to define the
goals and objectives of the Program, which could be used to direct the lending
and investing activities and to measure and evaluate Program and fund
manager performance. Neither BPW nor DBED had specified the overall
expectations as to what should be achieved by the Program and the fund
managers, beyond meeting the requirements of State law (that is, making
loans or providing investment capital to eligible businesses, a certain portion
of which are to be made to those within targeted areas).
The fiscal years 2014, 2015, and 2016 budget documents for DBED’s
Division of Business and Enterprise Development (the DBED unit designated
by BPW as the administrator for the Program) showed that Managing For
Results performance data had been established for a number of its programs,
but not for the Small, Minority, and Women-Owned Businesses Investment
Program.
The establishment of goals, objectives and related outcome measures could
help ensure DBED and fund managers are working together to achieve the
desired results. For example, goals, objectives, and measures could be
established that address: 1) desired economic impact, 2) targeted industries,
and 3) geographic distribution.
Desired Economic Impact
Many of the programs operated by DBED seek to achieve certain defined
results pertaining to Maryland’s economy. However, BPW and DBED had not
determined whether the Program should seek to promote certain economic
benefits such as creating and retaining jobs and leveraging private
investment.
19

--- Page 22 ---
Targeted Industries
The plans established by the fund managers regarding their intended uses of
the Program funds disclosed that one of the three managers intended to
provide loans for new business technology start-ups and two fund managers
planned to “emphasize” loans to microenterprises (companies with less than
10 employees and annual revenues not exceeding $2 million), which was
encouraged by DBED. Generally, however, the plans lacked specificity
regarding the types of industries to be targeted. DBED had not assessed the
desirability of directing a certain portion of the loan and investing activity
towards particular industries (such as manufacturing and new technologies)
or businesses of a certain size (microenterprises).
Geographic Distribution
None of the fund manager plans specifically mentioned serving Western and
Southern Maryland counties. Further, only one fund manager mentioned
serving Eastern Shore counties outside of the Berlin targeted area and
another mentioned serving “non-target areas throughout the State of
Maryland.” Given the focus on serving targeted areas, all three fund
managers also planned on serving the Hanover and Berlin targeted areas,
while only one mentioned Perryville. Although we were advised by DBED that
it had verbally instructed the fund managers to make loans outside of
targeted areas, this requirement was not formalized nor had DBED developed
any targets with respect to the loan and investment activity among the
targeted areas and the rest of the State.
Our review of loan activity disclosed that businesses in 12 of the 24 State
jurisdictions did not receive any of the 66 loans made by fund managers
during fiscal year 2014. Furthermore, in one of the three targeted areas, we
noted that only two loans were made. While we recognize that fiscal year
2014 was the first year for loan activity and that this may have contributed to
this situation, BPW and DBED should consider establishing regional targets to
promote fairness in lending and investing activities.
20

--- Page 23 ---
Table 5
Fiscal Year 2014 Fund Manager Loans By Local Jurisdiction
Total Loans Jurisdiction
Number of
Local Jurisdiction Made Percentage of
Loans Made
(Dollar Totals) Total Loans
Allegany 0 - -
Anne Arundel 18 $1,987,249 31.2%
Baltimore City 12 882,797 13.8%
Baltimore 10 1,400,000 22.0%
Calvert 0 - -
Caroline 0 - -
Carroll 0 - -
Cecil 1 150,000 2.3%
Charles 0 - -
Dorchester 0 - -
Frederick 0 - -
Garrett 0 - -
Harford 2 280,000 4.4%
Howard 3 355,000 5.6%
Kent 0 - -
Montgomery 2 300,000 4.7%
Prince George's 1 150,000 2.3%
Queen Anne's 1 50,000 0.8%
Somerset 0 - -
St. Mary's 0 - -
Talbot 1 10,000 0.2%
Washington 0 - -
Wicomico 1 13,000 0.2%
Worcester 14 796,323 12.5%
Total Loans Made 66 $6,374,369 100.0%
Loans in Targeted
40 $4,098,821
Areas7
Source: Fund Manager Schedules
7 Each of the three fund managers awarded at least 50 percent of its grant funds as loans to
businesses within targeted areas.
21

--- Page 24 ---
Recommendation 1
We recommend that BPW and DBED establish Program goals, objectives, and
related measures to direct the lending and investing activities and to evaluate
Program and fund manager performance.
Finding 2
DBED did not establish interim financial reporting requirements and did not
ensure the fund managers submitted audited financial statements of grant
activity in accordance with the contract requirements.
Analysis
DBED did not establish interim financial reporting requirements and did not
ensure the fund managers submitted audited financial statements of grant
activity in accordance with the contract requirements.
Except for the requirement to provide annual audited financial statements,
the only other financial reporting provision established in the fund manager
agreements required the fund managers to provide a report (including
unaudited financial statements) by January 31 detailing their use of the VLT
Program monies during the immediate preceding calendar year. Realizing it
needed more timely transaction information, DBED began requesting fund
managers to report certain Program information in January 2014, but this was
not a contract requirement and the information was not accompanied by
sufficient substantiating documentation. Required periodic reporting of grant
activity provides an overall accounting of grant activity during the grant year,
would provide more timely information regarding a fund manager’s use of
funds, and help assist DBED in monitoring a fund manager’s requests for
additional grant funds.
Furthermore, one of the three fund managers had not met the audit
requirement for calendar year 2013. Specifically, the fund manager’s audited
financial statements comingled its Program activity with its other business
operations. According to the agreements, each fund manager was required to
maintain separate financial records for Program activity and obtain annual
audits of the related Program financial statements by an independent
certified public accountant. In addition, the financial statement reporting
period for the fund manager ended as of September 30, 2013, instead of
December 31, 2013, as required by the contract.
The comingling of financial activity hampers DBED’s ability to monitor Program
activity and the reporting for a different period makes comparability with the
other fund managers difficult. DBED advised us that contract audit provisions
22

--- Page 25 ---
were not strictly enforced because the fund managers expressed concerns
about the added costs of the audits. Nevertheless, fund managers are
responsible for complying with the terms of their agreements and we noted
that the two other fund managers did comply with the audited financial
statement reporting requirement.
Recommendation 2
We recommend that BPW require DBED to
a. develop interim financial reporting requirements and, accordingly, amend
the applicable provisions of the fund manager contracts; and
b. enforce fund manager compliance with the financial reporting
requirements.
Finding 3
DBED had not established a formal process to verify fund manager
compliance with key Program contractual requirements.
Analysis
DBED had not established a formal process to verify that fund managers
complied with their primary contractual responsibilities and other
requirements as identified in the Grant and Fund Management Services
Agreements. For example, DBED did not ensure that the fund managers’
loans and investments were made only to eligible businesses, that 50 percent
of the activity was made to businesses actually located in targeted areas, that
appropriate loan underwriting standards and practices were used, and that
insurance requirements were met.
Eligible Businesses
DBED did not have a documented process to review fund manager activity to
ensure that loans and investments were only made to eligible businesses,
defined in the contract as meeting the federal government’s small business
definition or a minority or women-owned business as certified by the Maryland
Department of Transportation. Our test of 20 loans made by the fund
managers (10 from one fund manager and 5 each from the other two fund
managers) disclosed that there was no evidence that DBED had verified
business eligibility. Based on our test results, the businesses that received
these loans appeared to meet the eligibility requirements.
Targeted Areas
DBED also did not sufficiently verify that businesses receiving loans were
actually located in the targeted areas. Although DBED determined that the
borrowers’ zip codes reported by fund managers matched the targeted areas
23

--- Page 26 ---
identified in the fund manager agreements, DBED did not verify that the
businesses were actually located in those zip codes. As part of our review, we
conducted a verification test of the 50 percent minimum target area
requirement for each fund manager using business information on file at the
State Department of Assessments and Taxation. Our test results confirmed
that each of the fund managers had provided at least 50 percent of its loans
to businesses that were located in the targeted areas.
Loan Underwriting
DBED had not reviewed loan underwriting processes established by each fund
manager nor ensured that the loans were properly underwritten to reduce the
risk of default. Consequently, DBED lacked assurance that fund managers
had used appropriate standards and practices for evaluating loan applicants
for suitability and credit worthiness. Underwriting is the process used to
determine if the risk of offering a loan to a particular borrower under certain
parameters is acceptable. Included is an analysis of the borrower’s credit
worthiness (for example, credit scores), capacity to make payments on the
loan, and available collateral. The lack of appropriate underwriting standards
and practices can expose the Program to greater risk of loss than might be
desirable, and provides fund managers with wide latitude considering that
State funds are at risk.
Our review found that the fund managers’ technical proposals made little or
no mention of the underwriting standards and processes each would follow.
For example, one fund manager simply stated that “all loans will be
underwritten using standard underwriting practices” and another made no
overt mention of its underwriting practices.
Consequently, we noted that the fund managers generally did not perform
background investigations to determine applicant suitability. We also noted
certain variations in fund managers’ loan underwriting practices. For
example, one fund manager had established a minimum credit score rating
while the other two managers had not. Our tests of 20 loans issued by the
three fund managers disclosed that although the borrowers appeared to be
suitable, two fund managers made two loans totaling $105,000 to
businesses with at least one partner who had either a bad credit score (below
500 - industry standards generally require minimum scores of 620) or no
credit score. In the latter case, for the partner with no credit score, the
partner had filed for personal bankruptcy 13 months earlier. These loans
were approved based on projected cash flows, other partner scores, third
party guarantees, or equipment liens. We also noted that one fund manager
made two equity loans totaling $450,000 to early development stage
24

--- Page 27 ---
technology companies, which did not require loan repayment for up to five
years, but also did not require collateral.
Insurance
DBED did not verify that fund managers had met the insurance requirements
established in the agreements prior to the May 1, 2013 contract award and
commencement of the services. Our review disclosed that as of July 21,
2015, DBED did not have certificates of insurance on file for two of the three
fund managers for three of the four types of insurance coverage required
(worker's compensation in the amount required by statute, and both public
and automobile liability insurance policies of not less than $1 million).
Furthermore, the certificate of insurance that was provided for fidelity
insurance by one of the aforementioned two fund managers did not name
DBED as an insured party as required. The agreements stated that no
disbursement from the Account may be made before DBED approved the
insurance policy or bond as satisfactory in form and substance, yet the two
fund managers in question received Program funds totaling $3,577,000
during fiscal year 2014.
Recommendation 3
We recommend that BPW ensure that DBED establishes formal processes for
verifying fund manager compliance with key contractual requirements, which
at a minimum, address business eligibility, targeted areas, underwriting
standards and practices, and insurance requirements.
Finding 4
DBED had not established a formal evaluation process to assess the
performance of fund managers.
Analysis
DBED had not established a formal annual evaluation process to assess the
performance of fund managers, including whether desired results were
achieved. Such evaluations could be used by DBED to recommend actions to
improve fund manager performance, and to help make decisions regarding
subsequent year grant fund distributions and fund manager retention.
The fund manager agreements establish several requirements that could be
used by DBED to evaluate fund manager performance. For example, the fund
managers are responsible for identifying potential borrowers or investment
opportunities, advertising, and outreach to eligible businesses and other
under-served communities in a targeted area or areas or within the State. The
fund managers are also required to provide specific plans for the use of grant
25

--- Page 28 ---
funds both in and outside of targeted areas and for assuring geographic and
demographic distribution of the funds. As previously noted, during fiscal year
2014, businesses in half the jurisdictions were not served and only two
eligible businesses in one targeted area received loans. During a formal
evaluation process, the reasons for this result could be identified, which in
turn could be used by DBED to provide any recommendations to improve
performance (such as, enhance outreach efforts).
In addition to the contractual requirements, other performance attributes
could be evaluated, including operational efficiency (the percentage of grant
funding spent on administrative expenses) and lending and collection
effectiveness (percentage of loan delinquencies, loan loss ratios).
Furthermore, with the establishment of more definitive program goals and
objectives (finding 1), other attributes to measure effectiveness, such as job
creation and retention, could be used to evaluate fund managers.
Recommendation 4
We recommend that DBED establish a formal process to annually evaluate
fund manager performance.
Finding 5
DBED authorized a contract modification for one fund manager without
obtaining BPW approval.
Analysis
DBED authorized a contract modification for one fund manager that increased
the one-time fund establishment fee from 8 percent of the initial grant funds
to 12 percent, without BPW approval. As stipulated by State law and the
MOU, only BPW is authorized to set the maximum amount of grant money that
each fund manager may use to pay expenses for administrative, actuarial,
legal, and technical services. In addition, the fund manager agreements state
that the agreement may be amended only as the BPW and the fund manager
may mutually agree in writing.
DBED approved the increase based on a budget schedule showing the fund
manager’s increased expenses, which was not accompanied by any support to
justify the need. DBED did not question why this fund manager required a
greater percentage of grant funds to cover the initial Program start-up costs
than what was needed by the other two fund managers. As a result, the fund
manager was allowed to increase its budgeted fund establishment expenses
by $145,000 (from $280,000 to $425,000), which reduced the amount of its
grant funds available to make loans or investments.
26

--- Page 29 ---
Recommendation 5
We recommend that BPW require DBED to submit all contract modifications,
including the aforementioned contract modification, and related justifications
to BPW for its review and approval.
State Checking Accounts
Background
State checking accounts were established for each of the three fund
managers to receive grant funds from the Account to disburse loan funds to
eligible borrowers, conduct other related loan business, and pay the fund
manager’s establishment expenses. Based upon requests made to the BPW,
funds from the Account are periodically transferred to a DBED controlled
Program account. DBED then periodically disburses a portion of the awards
from the Program account to the fund managers’ State checking accounts
upon receipt of acceptable funding requests. Initially, DBED deposited
$250,000 into each fund manager’s checking account from its Program
account as allowed per the contract. Designated employees from DBED and
the fund managers have signatory authority over these checking accounts;
however, the fund managers have custody over the accounts and are
responsible for related record keeping and reconciliation functions. Fund
managers are required to submit written funding reimbursement requests to
DBED to replenish their State checking accounts.
Finding 6
DBED had not established effective oversight of the transactions processed
through the fund managers’ State checking accounts.
Analysis
DBED lacked effective oversight of the financial transactions processed by
fund managers through their State checking accounts. Specifically, DBED did
not ensure that effective controls were established over the account activity
and that all transactions processed were proper.
Although DBED began transferring grant funds to the fund managers’
checking accounts in July 2013, no account monitoring procedures had been
established by DBED until January 28, 2014. At that time, DBED established
a reporting process for checking account activity by requiring fund managers
to begin submitting copies of their monthly checking account bank statements
and certain related detailed records (for example, check registers, check
copies, and an expense activity spreadsheet) to DBED. The fund managers
27

--- Page 30 ---
were also required to submit the same documents from the dates the
accounts were opened. However, DBED did not require the fund managers to
provide monthly bank reconciliations of their State checking accounts, nor did
DBED attempt reconciliations with the information provided. DBED also did
not obtain available copies of cancelled checks for disbursements from the
fund managers’ State checking accounts directly from the issuing bank to
verify the reported payees.
DBED was also unaware of certain account activity processed by one fund
manager after the reporting process had been instituted. During the period
from April 2014 to August 2014, the fund manager paid establishment
expenses from monies in its State checking account totaling $75,611 without
obtaining advanced approval from DBED as required by the fund manager
agreement. In addition, the expenses claimed by the fund manager were
based on fee schedules rather than supported by actual costs incurred.
Furthermore, the total amount paid from the State checking account to the
fund manager applicable to the one-time fund establishment expense
($434,000) exceeded the DBED approved budget by $9,000.
DBED also authorized payments for establishment expenses of two fund
managers even though the requests were untimely. The fund manager
agreements, as amended on May 30, 2013, stipulate that “Any part of the
expense fee not requested by the Fund Manager before the date one year
after the date of this Agreement shall revert to and become part of the fund
(that is, the Account) and shall not be subject to any claim of the Fund
Manager.” Although the reimbursement requests should have been
submitted before June 2014, we noted that two reimbursement requests from
the aforementioned fund manager were received in November 2014
($25,000) and March 2015 ($75,000). Another fund manager submitted a
request for reimbursement in August 2014 ($30,000). Accordingly, under the
terms of the agreements, DBED was not obligated to authorize payment of
these expenses totaling $130,000.
Recommendation 6
We recommend that BPW
a. ensure that DBED establishes effective checking account monitoring
procedures and controls, which include obtaining and thoroughly reviewing
appropriate documentation of account activity (for example, cancelled
checks);
b. require DBED to obtain repayment of the excess expenses of $9,000 paid
to one fund manager; and
c. assess whether the two fund managers should repay establishment
expenses requested after the period stipulated in the agreement.
28

--- Page 31 ---
Finding 7
DBED had not established comprehensive policies governing the process for
requesting additional grant funds to replenish the State checking accounts.
Analysis
DBED had not established comprehensive policies governing the process for
fund managers’ requests for additional grant funds to replenish their State
checking accounts to make additional loans and investments. Specifically,
DBED did not require the fund managers to provide adequate support to
substantiate that they had fulfilled DBED’s mandate that 80 percent of the
funds previously received had been loaned or committed. Although the fund
manager request included an itemized listing of closed and pending loans,
DBED did not require the submission of loan closing and commitment
documents and cancelled checks. Our test of four requests for additional
grant funds totaling $2.75 million paid by DBED to the three fund managers
disclosed that none of the requests were supported by loan documents and
cancelled checks. In addition, DBED had not established a policy stipulating
the period of time within which pending loans had to be closed before funds
can be requested. Consequently, fund managers could have access to funds
well in advance of actual need.
Recommendation 7
We recommend that BPW require DBED to establish comprehensive formal
procedures requiring the submission of sufficient documentation (for
example, loan closing statements) justifying the use of existing grant funds
and the need for additional funds, and specify a maximum time frame for a
pending loan to close before allowing its inclusion in the fund managers’ grant
requests (for example, 30 days from date of the grant request).
29

--- Page 33 ---
VIDEO LOTTERY OPERATIONS REVENUE
SMALL, MINORITY, AND WOMEN-OWNED
BUSINESSES ACCOUNT
Joint Response of the
Board of Public Works
and the
Department of Commerce
to the
Office of Legislative Audits
Performance Audit Report
October 21, 2015
Board of Public Works Department of Commerce
80 Calvert Street, Room 117 401 E. Pratt Street
Annapolis, Maryland 21401 Baltimore, Maryland 21202
Contact: Sheila McDonald, Esq. Contact: Darla Garrett
Executive Secretary Program Manager, Office of Finance

--- Page 34 ---
NOTE: DBED is the predecessor name of the Department of Commerce.1
Recommendation 1
We recommend that BPW and DBED establish Program goals, objectives and
related measures to direct the lending and investing activities and to evaluate
Program and fund manager performance.
We agree with the OLA recommendation.
DBED will develop Program-specific goals, objectives, and performance metrics
during fiscal year 2016. When the Board of Public Works approves DBED’s
proposed guidelines, DBED will used them in Program administration, including
evaluating fund manager performance.
Recommendation 2
We recommend that BPW require DBED to
1. develop interim financial reporting requirements and, accordingly, amend
the applicable provisions of the fund manager contracts; and
2. enforce fund manager compliance with the financial reporting
requirements.
We agree with the OLA recommendation.
In fiscal year 2014, DBED’s requirements that Fund Managers submit financial
reports were not memorialized in the written contracts.
Since then – beginning with fiscal year 2015, DBED has included in its written
contracts with its Fund Managers requirements that the Fund Managers submit:
 annual audited financial statement
 monthly bank statements and reconciliations
 monthly activity reports through DBED’s Salesforce portal
Fund Managers submit the monthly activity reports through DBED’s Salesforce
portal. DBED uses its portfolio servicing tickler system Portfol to notify Fund
Managers when they are past due for reporting. These tools will further hone
DBED’s capacity to monitor Fund Managers to ensure they report timely,
accurately, and fully.
1 See Executive Order 01.01.2015.22 (Oct. 1, 2015).

--- Page 35 ---
Recommendation 3
We recommend that BPW ensure that DBED establishes formal processes for
verifying fund manager compliance with key contractual requirements, which at a
minimum, address business eligibility, targeted areas, underwriting standards and
practices, and insurance requirements.
We agree with the OLA recommendation.
The VLT Account statute states that Fund Managers are to use Board grants “to
provide investment capital and loans to small, minority, and women-owned
businesses.”2 Moreover, half of the grant funds must be used to fund “small,
minority, and women-owned businesses in the jurisdictions and communities
surrounding a video lottery facility.”3 In fiscal year 2014 (and subsequently), the
State has interpreted “jurisdictions and communities surrounding a video lottery
terminal” to encompass areas within a ten miles of the facilities.
Eligible Businesses. DBED relies on the Fund Managers to verify that businesses
are eligible to participate in the Program. An eligible business is a minority-owned
or women-owned business that is MBE-certified under State law4 or a small
business as defined by the U.S. Small Business Administration.5 Fund Managers
are selected because of their expertise in, among other things, identifying the
many businesses that fall into the General Assembly’s broad parameters of those
to whom the VLT proceeds are intended to spur economic growth and
development.
Targeted Areas. DBED has established a formal process for verifying that the
Fund Managers are lending to and investing in businesses located in the targeted
areas. Specifically, DBED will use the State Department of Assessments and
Taxation database to verify that half of the businesses are located in the target
areas.
Loan Underwriting Standards. The Fund Manager agreements identify
underwriting as a service to be provided by the Fund Managers. DBED will in the
future verify that each Fund Manager is in compliance with the underwriting
standards the Fund Manager has set for evaluating applicants’ suitability and
creditworthiness.
2 Section 9-1A-35(c)(2), State Government Article, Annotated Code of Maryland.
3 Id. at section 9-1A-35(c)(3).
4 These businesses appear in the MDOT MBE Certification Directory.
5 13 C.F.R. Part 121.

--- Page 36 ---
Insurance. DBED has completed its review of insurance documents for the
contract years of 2014 and 2015. At this time, all Fund Managers are in
compliance with insurance requirements. To regularly ensure that coverages and
updated policies are in place to protect the State’s investments, DBED intends to
track insurance certificates using its portfolio monitoring system Portfol, and
plans to notify Fund Managers via email when insurance certificates are up for
renewals.
Recommendation 4
We recommend that DBED establish a formal process to annually evaluate fund
manager performance.
We agree with the OLA recommendation.
DBED will develop Program-specific goals, objectives, and performance metrics
during fiscal year 2016. When the Board of Public Works approves DBED’s
proposed guidelines, DBED will used them in Program administration, including
evaluating fund manager performance.
Recommendation 5
We recommend that BPW require DBED to submit all contract modifications,
including the aforementioned contract modification, and related justifications to
BPW for its review and approval.
We agree with the OLA recommendation.
DBED will request Board of Public Works approval for contract modifications,
including the fiscal year 2014 expense amount modification. As Program
guidelines develop, DBED will work with the Board of Public Works to ensure an
appropriate process for approval of future expense-reimbursement requests.

--- Page 37 ---
Recommendation 6
We recommend that BPW
a. ensure that DBED establishes effective checking account monitoring
procedures and controls, which include obtaining and thoroughly reviewing
appropriate documentation of account activity (for example, cancelled
checks);
b. require DBED to obtain repayment of the excess expenses of $9,000 paid
to one fund manager; and
c. assess whether the two fund managers should repay establishment
expenses requested after the period stipulated in the agreement.
We agree with the OLA recommendation to the extent explained
below.
a. DBED follows its established procedures for collecting and reviewing bank
statements and bank reconciliation for State-operated checking accounts.
DBED has notified the Fund Managers that they may not draw on the State
checking account for any purpose other than loan disbursements and
compensation without advance approval from DBED. Specifically, the
Fund Managers may not draw on the VLT Account for expense
reimbursement without DBED advance approval. As explained above, in
the response to recommendation no. 2, DBED does require and review
monthly bank statements and reconciliations.
b. DBED will request retroactive Board of Public Works approval for
reimbursing one Fund Manager for fiscal year 2014 expenses that exceeded
the amount that the Board pre-approved for fiscal year 2014.
c. DBED concludes that allowing Fund Managers to make late requests for
reimbursement may be appropriate when assessed on a case by case basis.

--- Page 38 ---
Recommendation 7
We recommend that BPW require DBED to establish comprehensive formal
procedures requiring the submission of sufficient documentation (for example,
loan closing statements) justifying the use of existing grant funds and the need for
additional funds, and specify a maximum time frame for a pending loan to close
before allowing its inclusion in the fund managers’ grant requests (for example, 30
days from date of the grant request).
We agree with the OLA recommendation.
DBED will develop Program-specific goals, objectives, and performance metrics
during fiscal year 2016. When the Board of Public Works approves DBED’s
proposed guidelines, DBED will used them in Program administration. In the
meantime, DBED has adopted a formal procedure for Fund Managers to use to
request disbursements that includes providing copies of commitment approvals or
promissory notes. The procedure also establishes a timeframe for loan closings.

--- Page 39 ---
A T
UDIT EAM
Raymond G. Burton, CPA, CFE
Audit Manager
Jonathan H. Finglass, CPA
Senior Auditor
Nathan H. Suffin, CPA
Staff Auditor