Title: State Corporate Purchasing Card Program
Date: 03/26/2014
Type: Performance
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5a945d3acc9d72404c150a62
Extracted: 2025-06-18T10:54:11.923532
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Performance Audit Report
State Corporate Purchasing Card Program
Additional Data Analysis Techniques Should Be Employed to Strengthen
Program Integrity
March 2014
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
 This report and any related follow-up correspondence are available to the public through
the Office of Legislative Audits at 301 West Preston Street, Room 1202, Baltimore,
Maryland 21201. The Office may be contacted by telephone at 410-946-5900, 301-970-
5900, or 1-877-486-9964.
 Electronic copies of our audit reports can be viewed or downloaded from the Internet via
http://www.ola.state.md.us.
 Alternate formats may be requested through the Maryland Relay Service at 1-800-735-
2258.
 The Department of Legislative Services – Office of the Executive Director, 90 State Circle,
Annapolis, Maryland 21401 can also assist you in obtaining copies of our reports and
related correspondence. The Department may be contacted by telephone at (410) 946-
5400 or (301) 970-5400.

--- Page 5 ---
Table of Contents
Executive Summary 5
Background Information 7
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology 11
Findings and Recommendations
Finding 1 – The General Accounting Division Had Not Required 14
State Agencies to Use Level-3 Data to Monitor Their
Cardholders’ Purchasing Activities
Finding 2 – Certain Aspects of CPC Transactions Can Be 15
Evaluated on a Global Basis Using Computer Matching
Processes of the Bank’s Online System to Identify
Circumstances or Trends that May Indicate the
Inappropriate Use of CPCs
Exhibit – Cases With Inappropriate Purchases 19
Agency Response Appendix
3

--- Page 6 ---
4

--- Page 7 ---
Executive Summary
Legislative Audit Report on the State Corporate Purchasing Card Program
March 2014
We conducted a performance audit of the State’s Corporate Purchasing Card
(CPC) Program to identify processes and data analysis techniques that could
be used to enhance the integrity of the Program.
The State introduced the CPC Program to streamline procurement and
accounts payable functions for small purchases by eliminating required
paperwork (such as requisitions, purchase orders, and invoice and payment
processing documents). For fiscal year 2013, State CPC purchases totaled
$260 million. Due to the large amount of purchases made, it is important to
maintain and enhance the integrity of the Program.
The Comptroller of Maryland – General Accounting Division has established
certain policies and practices to help ensure that CPCs are used for
appropriate purposes. The policies stipulate the acceptable purchasing card
uses, and require cardholders to acknowledge that they understand the
policies and that they can be held liable for unauthorized purchases. Both
automated and manual process controls have been established. Some
controls are preventive, such as automatically limiting the type of merchants
where the CPCs can be used (based on merchant codes), limiting the amounts
that can be purchased by each cardholder, and requiring multiple
authorizations to establish an individual cardholder account. Other controls
are detective, such as strict recordkeeping requirements for each transaction
and monthly post-purchase reviews of each transaction by supervisory
personnel.
The integrity of the Program relies primarily on the cardholders using the CPCs
in accordance with the acceptable use policies and on the cardholders’
immediate supervisor conducting a thorough review of individual cardholder’s
purchase transactions to ensure compliance with the policies. However, with
respect to supervisor reviews of CPC transactions, our audits of State
agencies have disclosed instances where the reviews were not evident, were
cursory or incomplete, were performed without having received all required
documentation from the card user, and appeared to be performed without
adequate diligence to protect State funds.
Our audit disclosed that GAD had not required State agencies to use L-3 data
to assist in monitoring cardholders’ purchasing activities. We found L-3 data
to be a very useful tool for evaluating the propriety of CPC transactions. L-3
data, which are available from the purchasing card bank, includes significant
5

--- Page 8 ---
descriptive information captured by certain merchants for each purchase,
such as item description and quantity, combined with detailed merchant
information and cardholder information.
Our examination of L-3 data identified four cardholders who made
inappropriate CPC purchases which, based on our investigation and the
investigations of the agencies involved, totaled approximately $255,000. We
found that L-3 data item descriptions alone can raise suspicion, such as the
purchase of obviously inappropriate items like guitars and toy soldier figures.
Also, attempts to conceal improper purchases are obvious when the items
purchased described in the L-3 data do not agree to the cardholders’
descriptions of the items purchased as recorded in their purchase activity
logs.
Since the L-3 data are available and easy to use, we believe that GAD should
require all State agencies using CPCs to use the L-3 data and provide
guidance on how the data can be incorporated into the agencies’ verification
processes. For the State agencies, the process can be done centrally at the
agency or by the immediate supervisors that review their subordinates’ CPC
transactions. However, since not all vendors supply L-3 data, it’s important
that other controls remain in place to ensure the integrity of the CPC Program.
Our audit also identified other automated analysis techniques, which we have
described in this report that could be useful under specific circumstances.
6

--- Page 9 ---
Background Information
Program History and Description
In fiscal year 1997, the State implemented its Corporate Purchasing Card
(CPC) Program upon approval by the Board of Public Works. The Program was
intended to streamline procurement and accounts payable functions by
eliminating paperwork (requisitions, purchase orders, and the associated
invoice processing) for many small purchases. For fiscal year 2013, State
CPC purchases totaled $260 million and the average CPC purchase was
$353. Since inception of the CPC Program through June 30, 2013, State
agency CPC purchases have totaled approximately $3 billion. Additionally, the
card vendor pays the State an annual rebate based on the State’s total
purchase volume for each 12-month period. We were advised by GAD that the
card vendor paid the State a rebate of $4.1 million for the contract year
ending in April 2012.
Program Controls
The Comptroller of Maryland – General Accounting Division (GAD) is the lead
agency for administering the Program. GAD has established Program policies
and procedures applicable to all State agencies to reduce the potential for
fraud, waste, and abuse.
GAD has established and maintains the Corporate Purchasing Card Program
Policy and Procedures Manual. This Manual was issued in April 2001 and
was last revised in October 2010. The Manual provides user agencies with
information and guidance regarding card issuance, card security, appropriate
card use, and documentation. The Manual also requires that each cardholder
sign an agreement certifying that he or she will comply with applicable
procurement policies and is responsible for unauthorized purchases.
In addition, GAD and the card vendor have taken certain centralized actions to
help ensure the propriety of transactions processed under the Program.
Specifically, GAD and the card vendor instituted certain control mechanisms,
including the following procedures:
 Establishing single transaction dollar limits as follows: State agencies
(including University System of Maryland) - $5,000; Emergency Response
Cards - $25,000.
7

--- Page 10 ---
 Blocking certain merchant category codes so that the system will not
approve transactions attempted with merchants in these categories.
Blocked codes include merchants coded as personal service providers
(such as beauty shops, restaurants, movie theaters, liquor stores,
gambling establishments, and automated teller machines). The
purchasing card vendor assigns merchant codes, and GAD makes the
determination of which codes to block.
 Limiting the State’s liability for lost and stolen cards. The card vendor
provides protection from liability for fraudulent use by cardholders up to
$100,000 per card provided prompt and timely actions are taken by the
State agency, such as terminating cardholders who make fraudulent
purchases.
 Reviewing for questionable purchases on a monthly basis. GAD uses data
provided by the card vendor to attempt to identify questionable purchases
(purchases from certain merchant codes that are deemed susceptible to
misuse). GAD requires user agencies to investigate such purchases and
provide assurance that these purchases were proper.
In addition, various controls are available to the individual State agencies to
further control card use and limit potential exposure to inappropriate
transactions. For example, a daily transaction limit and a monthly dollar limit
may be set for each individual card.
These controls have been designed to reduce the likelihood of flagrant types
of abuse such as those noted in recent United States Government
Accountability Office (GAO) audit reports on federal government purchasing
card programs. For example, the GAO has noted the use of cards to make
inappropriate purchases such as electronics for home use and cash
advances.
8

--- Page 11 ---
Purchasing Card Processing
The following is a simplified illustration showing the flow of the purchasing
card use, and the payment and reconciliation processes.
State Agency
CPC Processor
Purchasing cardholders in
agencies order/charge goods Merchants submit
and services within State purchasing
daily/monthly dollar limits on card information
card.
Cardholders are to record
purchase transaction details on
activity logs (vendor, date, dollar
amount, description).
CPC Bank
Cardholders are to reconcile
monthly purchasing card
statements received from the CPC Transaction Details
card vendor to the activity logs.
Approving agency officials are to GAD
review activity logs, card
statements and supporting Detail of Statewide
documentation (vendor invoices) activity received by GAD.
to ensure that purchases are
reasonable and necessary.
GAD pays card vendor
(within 25 days of the
Approving agency officials are to end of the billing cycle)
sign and date activity logs for and posts activity to
completeness and accuracy. State accounting
records.
All documentation is to be
submitted to Agency Fiscal
Officers, who are to reconcile State Accounting
agency purchasing card activity Records
to State accounting records.
9

--- Page 12 ---
10

--- Page 13 ---
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
Scope
We conducted a performance audit of the State’s Corporate Purchasing Card
(CPC) Program to identify processes and data analysis techniques that could
be used to enhance the integrity of the Program. We conducted this audit
under the authority of the State Government Article, Section 2-1221 of the
Annotated Code of Maryland and performed it in accordance with generally
accepted government auditing standards. Those standards require that we
plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient, appropriate evidence to
provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our
audit objectives. We believe that the evidence obtained provides a
reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit
objectives.
Objective
The objective of this audit was to identify transaction review processes and
data analysis techniques that could be used to enhance the integrity of the
State’s Corporate Purchasing Card Program.
Methodology
To accomplish our objectives, we reviewed applicable State laws and
regulations, as well as policies and procedures established by GAD and other
selected State agencies to maintain the integrity of the CPC Program. We
interviewed personnel at GAD and at the selected agencies that processed
transactions tested during the audit. We obtained information from
representatives of other government purchasing card programs and reviewed
relevant reports published by the United States Government Accountability
Office. We obtained electronic files detailing transactions processed by the
State’s purchasing card vendor for the period from December 25, 2009 to
January 25, 2012 which included approximately 1.5 million transactions
totaling $521 million and performed automated analyses of the data. We
reviewed the data received from the vendor and found it to be reliable for our
audit purposes. When our analysis raised suspicion of potential inappropriate
CPC activity, we extended our review to certain cardholder transactions before
and after the period above to determine the frequency and extent of the
potential violations.
11

--- Page 14 ---
Using the data from the vendor, we performed several types of automated
tests to identify and determine the propriety of items or services that were
purchased as well as the propriety or legitimacy of the vendors from whom
those items or services were purchased. We reviewed documents at various
State agencies to determine the reliability of the Level-3 detail transaction
data and the propriety of selected transactions (were purchases adequately
supported, approved, and reasonable).
Our audit did not include the review or evaluation of the CPC vendor’s
information system. We also did not review GAD or individual agencies’
processes for issuing purchasing cards and assigning individual card credit
limits, nor did we evaluate all internal controls of the agencies whose
transactions were selected for testing. Furthermore, we did not test all
transactions for violations of purchasing card policies, such as missing
receipts, lack of supervisor review, and lending of CPC card to others. In
general, we did not test CPC procedures and controls, which are typically
covered during our fiscal compliance audits of GAD and State agencies.
Fieldwork and Agency Response
We conducted our fieldwork from January 2012 to October 2012 and updated
agency personnel and legal actions as of December 2013. The Comptroller of
Maryland’s response to our findings and recommendations is included in an
appendix to this report. As prescribed in the State Government Article,
Section 2-1224 of the Annotated Code of Maryland, we will advise the
Comptroller regarding the results of our review of its response.
12

--- Page 15 ---
Findings and Recommendations
Conclusion
The Comptroller of Maryland – General Accounting Division (GAD) has
established certain policies and procedures to help ensure that corporate
purchase cards (CPC) are used for appropriate purposes. Our audit disclosed
additional actions could be taken by GAD to help improve the integrity of the
program. For example, our audit disclosed that CPC Level-3 (L-3) data are a
valuable source of information that can facilitate an efficient review of the
propriety of CPC transactions by an agency’s finance office personnel, central
staff, or internal auditors. Review of L-3 data could supplement other control
activities. In particular, L-3 data could be used by CPC cardholders’
supervisors to enhance their review of CPC transactions and could serve as a
means of identifying cardholder attempts to conceal inappropriate CPC
purchases.
Our examination of the L-3 data for CPC transactions from December 2009 to
January 2012 resulted in the identification and investigation of inappropriate
purchases by four cardholders. We subsequently determined that one of
these cases had been identified and investigated by the agency prior to our
examination. The remaining three cases were reported to the appropriate
agency management personnel for further agency investigation and
administrative actions, such as employee terminations. Investigations of
these four cases resulted in the identification of inappropriate purchases
totaling approximately $255,000. The cases were also referred to the Office
of the Attorney General – Criminal Division. Ultimately, for these four
referrals, prosecutions were undertaken and convictions were obtained.
In addition to examining the L-3 data, we evaluated various other data
analysis techniques. We concluded that these other analysis techniques
could be useful in attempting to identify misuse or fraud in CPC transactions
and believe the techniques could be used by agency management to further
evaluate the integrity of CPC transactions.
Background
The integrity of the CPC Program relies primarily on the cardholders using the
CPCs in accordance with the acceptable use policies and on the card user’s
immediate supervisor conducting a thorough review of individual purchase
transaction documents to ensure that each purchase is properly described
and documented and that each purchase relates to an appropriate business
13

--- Page 16 ---
purpose of the agency. However, the effectiveness of the supervisory review
of purchase transactions is dependent on the abilities of and diligence
exercised by these supervisors and others responsible for reviewing detailed
CPC activity. For example, supervisors must ensure that cardholders
accurately maintain logs identifying each purchase and that accurate and
valid itemized receipts are provided. With the advent of advanced
technologies, documentation can be altered or fraudulent documentation can
be easily created to misrepresent the purchases made.
Finding 1
State agencies were not required to use L-3 data to assist them in monitoring
their cardholders’ purchasing activity.
Analysis
State agencies were not required to use L-3 data to assist them in monitoring
their cardholders’ purchasing activity such as through requirements
established in GAD’s Corporate Purchasing Card Program Policy and
Procedures Manual. Our experience using L-3 data indicated that it was
readily available, easy to use, and provided significant information about
items purchased. Specifically, we used L-3 data to identify and investigate
apparent improper purchases by four cardholders. We were able to
determine that the cardholders intentionally concealed the nature of their
purchases by providing fictitious or altered receipts and/or misleading user
log entries.
During 2011, GAD began using L-3 data to monitor State agencies purchases.
Although beneficial, GAD’s monitoring has limitations in that GAD does not
have specific knowledge about State agencies’ purchasing needs to reliably
assess the appropriateness of certain purchases. Moreover, because
cardholder purchase activity logs are maintained at the agencies, GAD cannot
readily compare L-3 data to the logs. Improper purchases are obvious when
the items purchased described in the L-3 data do not agree to the
cardholders’ descriptions of the items purchased as recorded in the purchase
activity logs.
Our investigation of the four cardholders who made inappropriate purchases,
as well as the investigations conducted by the agencies involved, resulted in
the identification of inappropriate purchases totaling approximately
$255,000. See the Exhibit – Cases With Inappropriate Purchases, beginning
on page 19, for detailed descriptions of the four cases in which inappropriate
purchases were noted. The issues identified during this audit have been or
14

--- Page 17 ---
will be fully addressed, as appropriate, in our fiscal compliance audit reports
on the applicable agencies, which may contain more detailed
recommendations relevant to each specific agency.
L-3 data are available to GAD and State agencies through the purchasing card
bank’s online system. Similar to an invoice and a cash register receipt, L-3
data include detailed descriptive information for each purchase, as well as
detailed merchant and cardholder information. L-3 data are much more
informative than the basic data that typically appears on a CPC cardholder’s
monthly statement received from the CPC bank, which typically consists of the
transaction date, dollar amount, merchant name, and city and state.
L-3 data are captured and reported electronically to the purchasing card
processor along with other purchase information by some merchants (the
submission of L-3 data by merchants is voluntary). While many merchants do
provide L-3 data, the majority of merchants do not provide such data. Thus,
the use of L-3 data as a mechanism to improve CPC Program integrity should
be reviewed as a tool to supplement other control processes.
Recommendation 1
To enhance the integrity of the CPC program, we recommend that GAD amend
its Program Manual to require State user agencies to regularly obtain and use
L-3 data and provide guidance to the agencies as to how the L-3 data can be
used in their CPC verification procedures.
Finding 2
Certain aspects of CPC transactions can be evaluated on a global basis using
computer matching processes or the purchasing card bank’s online system to
identify circumstances or trends that may indicate the inappropriate use of
CPCs.
Analysis
Certain aspects of CPC transactions can be evaluated on a global basis using
computer matching processes or the purchasing card bank’s online system to
identify circumstances or trends that may indicate inappropriate use of CPCs.
Examples of such methods and techniques are described below. One
significant case is presented below to illustrate potential results of using
these techniques.
15

--- Page 18 ---
Declined Transaction Review
This method isolates all CPC attempted transactions that were rejected when
the card was used, and evaluates the frequency of the rejection
circumstances, such as the number of times rejections occurred for each
cardholder, the nature of the establishment where the purchases were
attempted, and the type of commodity that was attempted to be purchased.
Frequent attempts under similar circumstances by one cardholder (such as
repeated attempts to purchase alcoholic beverages, gasoline, or common
carrier travel) could indicate deliberate attempts to misuse the CPC card.
Multiple Vendors at One Address
This method evaluates whether the vendors paid by CPCs are legitimate and
independent vendors. Multiple vendors using a residential address or an
address known to use mail-stop boxes could indicate non-existent merchants
who provide no goods or services for the charges made, or who charge
inflated prices for merely taking orders for deliveries actually fulfilled by other
merchants. Typically, the cardholder is directing the purchasing activity to
such vendors in exchange for kickbacks or has an ownership interest in the
vendor.
Employee Address and Vendor Address are the Same
This method involves matching employee addresses (for example, from the
agency’s human resource records) with vendor addresses. The risks are
similar to those for Multiple Vendors at One Address, as discussed above.
High Dollar Volume of Purchases by One Cardholder from an Obscure Vendor
This method involves creating a cross-tabulation of the number, frequency
and volume of CPC purchases by cardholders and vendors. Subsequently, the
tables are examined to identify unusually high activity by one cardholder with
little-known vendors. Again, the risks are similar to those for Multiple Vendors
at One Address, as discussed above.
Purchases Structured to Avoid Transaction Limits
This method evaluates CPC activity for artificial splitting of single purchase
amounts that exceed the $5,000 single CPC transaction limit or the
applicable individual card limits. It involves examining for multiple purchases
on a single day or on nearby dates from a vendor that, in total, exceed the
applicable limits. Typically, but not always, this is done by splitting the single
purchase amount into a series of smaller charges of equal amounts that are
under the individual limit, or into a series of charges equal to the limit with the
last charge making up the balance of the single purchase amount. Structured
purchases are usually entered into for card user or agency convenience to
16

--- Page 19 ---
avoid complying with State procurement laws and regulations that may
require multiple quotes or bidding, and the employee may receive no self-
benefit from this scheme, However, this scheme could be used to direct the
purchases to a particular vendor in exchange for kickbacks.
Additional Scrutiny for Unusual Vendors or Payees
This method consists of examining the CPC data (both from the issuing bank
and/or in the cardholder monthly package of statements, logs, receipts, and
approvals) for unusual practices or seemingly mismatched descriptions. For
example, payments to a PayPal account from a CPC card should raise
questions as to the nature of what is being bought since PayPal is an account
used to accumulate and disburse funds rather than a provider of goods or
physical services. (The following paragraph describes a case in which PayPal
was used to facilitate inappropriate activity.) Another example would be
where the vendor name indicates a service-type provider (such as a barber
shop or beauty shop, which are prohibited merchants) but the descriptions of
items purchased indicate goods such as food were bought. These
mismatches or unusual practices when found should raise suspicion for the
reviewer and be resolved through further inquiries or investigation.
By reviewing CPC data for unusual vendors, we noted one instance in which
an on-line payment processing service was used to facilitate inappropriate
CPC activity. This situation was commented upon in our audit report on the
University System of Maryland – Coppin State University (CSU) dated
November 18, 2013. Specifically, CSU paid a retired employee who returned
to work for the campus $25,800 through an on-line payment processing
service using a CPC card. This was done during the period from July 6, 2010
to October 5, 2010 to circumvent the earnings limitation for retirees
established by State law (Section 23-407 of the State Personnel and Pensions
Article of the Annotated Code). State law requires a reduction of retirement
benefits for individuals that work for the State after retirement. In general,
the amount of retirement allowance must be reduced if the sum of the
individual’s earnings and the retirement allowance exceed the individual’s
average final compensation. This limitation applies for five full calendar years
after the date the individual retires.
In this case, the individual performed the same duties as prior to retirement,
and an employee-employer relationship continued to exist. Payments to this
individual should have been made using the State’s contractual employee
payroll process through the State’s Central Payroll Bureau (CPB). When the
employee initially retired and continued to work in the same capacity as prior
to retirement, the employee was paid properly as a contractual employee
17

--- Page 20 ---
through CPB. However, because the State Retirement Agency (SRA) matches
its records of retiree pay to CPB payments, the SRA identified and recovered
from the employee the excess payments made during fiscal years 2008 and
2009. Subsequently, the retired employee requested to be paid by CPC,
which effectively precluded SRA from identifying the wage payments and
recovering amounts in excess of the earnings limitation.
We were advised that the employee that authorized the use of the CPC to pay
this employee was terminated by the campus for this and other inappropriate
activities, and the employee’s supervisor received a written reprimand.
Recommendation 2
We recommend that GAD establish or sponsor orientation and training
programs for agencies’ management and CPC supervisors about other
available techniques for analyzing and assessing the propriety of CPC
transactions. Other transaction screening techniques for evaluating the
propriety of CPC transactions should be considered by agencies for their
particular circumstances.
18

--- Page 21 ---
Exhibit
Cases With Inappropriate Purchases
Case 1 – Local Health Department
Using L-3 data, we found that purchases totaling $45,640 made by one
cardholder at a Local Health Department between January 2008 and February
2012 appeared to have no legitimate business purpose. The descriptions
entered on the CPC activity logs by the cardholder did not agree to the L-3
descriptions recorded directly by the retailer for the items actually purchased.
Table 1 below describes these purchases.
Table 1
Questionable Purchases Noted at a Local Health Department
Items Purchased Quantity Purchased Amount Paid
Guitars 56 $ 30,183
Guitar Accessories 77 7,898
Watches 17 2,412
Pellet Guns 9 1,257
Binoculars 9 1,039
Knives 24 813
Toys 16 610
Books 14 426
Military Memorabilia 19 424
Clothes 11 295
Men's Vitamins 15 283
Totals 267 $ 45,640
Source: Bank L-3 data
All of these questionable purchases were made from an Internet retailer. As
such, all receipts were computer-generated and thus could be easily falsified.
The employee who made these purchases indicated on the CPC activity logs
that the questionable purchases were for legitimate items such as ink
cartridges and computer software and provided his supervisor with fictitious
computer-generated receipts that corresponded to the descriptions recorded
in the activity logs.
19

--- Page 22 ---
The employee’s supervisor does not appear to have been aware of L-3 data
since the data had not been reviewed as part of the supervisory review of the
cardholder’s CPC transactions. Had the supervisor’s review of CPC
transactions included the review of L-3 data, the questionable purchases,
which were made over a four-year period, would likely have been detected at
an earlier time since the purchase descriptions provided by the retailer
differed so dramatically from the descriptions entered by the cardholder on
the activity logs.
In addition, in our opinion, the supervisor probably should have questioned
why a fairly small agency needed to purchase such a large quantity of ink
cartridges, software, and other office supplies. This lack of a diligent
supervisory evaluation of the reasonableness of the purchases also allowed
the fraud to continue over a long period.
As a result of these fraudulent purchases, the employee was terminated from
State service by the Department of Health and Mental Hygiene effective May
21, 2012. Furthermore, this former employee was prosecuted by the Office of
the Attorney General - Criminal Division. The employee had pleaded guilty of
theft between $10,000 and $100,000 and was sentenced to serve a six-
month prison term. Also, we were advised that as a result of the supervisor’s
failure to detect these improper purchases over an extended period of time,
the supervisor retired from State service effective July 1, 2012.
20

--- Page 23 ---
Case 2 – Department of Juvenile Services
Using L-3 data, we found that one employee at a Department of Juvenile
Services (DJS) facility had purchased 41 gift cards totaling $4,185 in 13
separate CPC transactions between May 2010 to April 2011. The purchase of
gift cards using a CPC is strictly prohibited by GAD policies. Even though some
of these transactions had been subjected to a supervisory review, the monthly
cardholder activity logs did not properly describe the actual items purchased
(none of the descriptions in the activity logs indicated the purchase of gift
cards, but instead listed descriptions that appeared to be for legitimate
business purposes). Furthermore, the transactions were not always
supported by an itemized receipt or invoice. However, the supervisor had
apparently never questioned the missing receipts.
The employee’s supervisor does not appear to have been aware of the
existence of L-3 data because the data had not been reviewed as part of the
supervisory review of the cardholder’s CPC transactions. Had the supervisor
reviewed the L-3 data, the purchase of prohibited gift cards would have been
readily apparent. Since there was evidence that the employee purposely
attempted to conceal the prohibited purchases, we performed a more
thorough review of all of this cardholder’s CPC activity.
In addition to the prohibited gift card purchases, our analysis of this
cardholder’s CPC activity over a three-year period identified significant
increases in CPC activity, especially with one vendor. Specifically, CPC
purchases in calendar years 2009, 2010, and 2011 by this cardholder totaled
$50,894, $128,375, and $245,639, respectively, and purchases from one
vendor during the same periods totaled approximately $13,329, $31,635,
and $106,759, respectively. Also, there was no written contract that had
been solicited for bids or negotiated between the vendor and the State or DJS
during the periods in question. In our opinion, these circumstances should
have raised questions had DJS supervisors and management been
conducting a diligent review of CPC activity. However, we found no indication
that this cardholder’s CPC activity had been evaluated by DJS supervisors or
management.
After we brought these circumstances to DJS management’s attention, it
initiated an investigation of the employee's CPC transactions. As a result of
the investigation, DJS identified other questionable purchases totaling
$91,443 made by this employee from April 2011 through March 2012. Of
this amount, $56,844 related to unauthorized purchases from the one vendor
with the dramatic increase in CPC sales to the DJS employee. Improper
21

--- Page 24 ---
purchases identified by DJS included commercial kitchen equipment and
large quantities of food that were never delivered to a DJS facility.
In our opinion, lax attention by DJS supervisors and management regarding
required CPC procedures facilitated this employee’s frauds. Our review of the
cardholder's transaction activity disclosed that there were no monthly
cardholder document packages (supervisor reviewed cardholder activity logs,
monthly purchasing card statements, and transaction receipts) available for
the period from May 2011 through February 2012 at either the DJS regional
accounting office or at the satellite location where the employee worked.
Furthermore, there was no indication that anyone at the DJS regional office
questioned why monthly cardholder packages ceased being submitted
although the employee had increasing CPC activity. GAD’s Corporate
Purchasing Card Program Policy and Procedures Manual requires that State
agencies reconcile monthly cardholder activity and ensure the related
documents are filed in an easily retrievable and secure manner for future
review. DJS’ procedures required that the document packages be forwarded
from the satellite location to a regional accounting office for reconciliation and
filing.
We were advised by DJS that the employee who made these questionable
purchases was terminated from State service in May 2012. Furthermore, this
former employee was prosecuted by the Office of the Attorney General -
Criminal Division. The employee pleaded guilty to theft and was sentenced to
serve 15 years in prison with 14 years suspended and is required to pay
$94,868 in restitution.
Although this employee’s immediate supervisors did not detect the improper
purchases over an extended period of time, no disciplinary action was taken
against the supervisors. Furthermore, no disciplinary actions were taken
against employees of the regional accounting office who did not question the
lack of monthly cardholder packages or increased purchasing activity.
22

--- Page 25 ---
Case 3 – University System of Maryland – University of Maryland
Baltimore County
During our review of L-3 data, we found that an employee at the University
System of Maryland (USM) – University of Maryland Baltimore County (UMBC)
had purchased gift cards with a value totaling $4,356. UMBC policy prohibits
the purchase of gift cards with CPCs. After we brought this issue to the
attention of UMBC management, it initiated an investigation of the employee’s
CPC transactions. As a result of this investigation, additional questionable
purchases made by this employee were identified, and the matter was
referred to the Office of the Attorney General – Criminal Division for its
consideration. This situation was originally reported upon in our audit report
on the University System of Maryland – University of Maryland Baltimore
County dated May 8, 2012.
The employee’s supervisor did not use the L-3 data to determine the propriety
of CPC purchases as UMBC advised us that it was unaware of the existence of
L-3 data at the time of the questionable purchases. Had L-3 data been
reviewed, at least some of the improper purchases, such as the gift cards,
would have been readily identifiable. In addition, it appeared that CPC
purchases were not always thoroughly reviewed by the employee’s supervisor.
Specifically, even though the supervisor approved the cardholder’s monthly
CPC activity logs, the logs did not include all of the purchases on the monthly
statements, certain purchases were not supported by vendor invoices, and
receipts were altered to obscure identification of the items purchased.
The employee responsible for the improper purchases was terminated by
UMBC effective March 8, 2012. In January 2013, the former employee
pleaded guilty to felony theft and received a five-year suspended sentence,
supervised probation, community service and was ordered to pay restitution
of $6,693. The supervisor who approved the cardholder’s improper
purchases was issued a letter of reprimand.
23

--- Page 26 ---
Case 4 – Military Department
During our review of L-3 data for this audit, we noted that an employee of the
Military Department purchased gift cards totaling $39,600 between
December 24, 2009 and August 6, 2010. We contacted the Department’s
management about the employee’s purchase of these gift cards. We were
advised that the Department had begun an investigation into this employee’s
CPC purchases as a result of a special review of federal grant expenditures
that identified CPC purchases delivered to the cardholder’s home address.
The investigation identified 372 questionable CPC purchases totaling
$107,493 made by the employee from February 2008 to October 2010. In
addition to gift cards, the employee purchased personal items such as home
electronics and clothing. Fictitious invoices were prepared by the employee
using legitimate item descriptions, such as office supplies, to avoid detection.
This situation was also commented upon in our audit report on the Military
Department dated May 30, 2013.
Although the documentation supporting CPC expenditures was reviewed by
the designated supervisors on a monthly basis, the Department’s monitoring
procedures did not include the use of L-3 data to help determine the propriety
of CPC transactions. The L-3 data would have alerted the Department, as it
did us, of the purchases of the prohibited gift cards and possibly many of the
other inappropriate CPC purchases by this cardholder. Using the L-3 data may
have identified the inappropriate purchases significantly earlier than when the
purchases were actually discovered, and accordingly would have been useful
to stop the inappropriate purchasing before such a large number of
transactions had occurred. Also, in our opinion, the supervisor should have
questioned why computer-generated receipts were submitted by the employee
when original paper receipts should have been readily available, and why so
many office supplies were being purchased.
The Department terminated this individual’s employment in February 2011.
In March 2011, at the direction of the Office of the Attorney General –
Criminal Division, the Department referred the matter to federal law
enforcement for further action. The employee pleaded guilty of wire fraud in
federal court and was sentenced to six months in prison, followed by six
months of home detention with electronic monitoring. The former employee
was also ordered to pay restitution of $107,493. The supervisor who
approved these purchases was allowed to retire in lieu of termination.
24

--- Page 29 ---
General Accounting Division (GAD) Responses to Office of Legislative
Audit (OLA) Performance Audit
Finding 1
State agencies were not required to use L-3 data to assist them in monitoring their
cardholders’ purchasing activity.
Recommendation 1
To enhance the integrity of the CPC program, we recommend that GAD amend its Program
Manual to require State user agencies to regularly obtain and use L-3 data and provide
guidance to the agencies as to how the L-3 data can be used in their CPC verification
procedures.
GAD Response:
While we agree that L-3 data is an extremely useful tool in the review and verification of
corporate purchasing card transactions, it should be noted that this level of detail is only
available from less than 40% of the VISA merchants.
On several occasions (June 2011, October 2011, July 2012, and June 2013), GAD conducted
training sessions and/or provided instructions to the Purchasing Card Program Administrators
(PCPAs) on the use of L-3 data. GAD will continue to provide training to user agencies on how
the L-3 data can be used in their verification procedures. In addition, GAD will amend its
Program Manual by the end of this fiscal year to require that user agencies generate the L-3 data
report monthly and review and document the results.
Finding 2
Certain aspects of CPC transactions can be evaluated on a global basis using computer
matching processes or the purchasing card bank’s online system to identify circumstances or
trends that may indicate the inappropriate use of CPCs.
Recommendation 2
We recommend that GAD establish or sponsor orientation and training programs for
agencies’ management and CPC supervisors about other available techniques for analyzing
and assessing the propriety of CPC transactions. Other transaction screening techniques for
evaluating the propriety of CPC transactions should be considered by agencies for their
particular circumstances.

--- Page 30 ---
General Accounting Division (GAD) Responses to Office of Legislative
Audit (OLA) Performance Audit
GAD Response:
We agree that additional transaction screening techniques for evaluating the propriety of CPC
transactions should be considered by user agencies. When the Program Manual is amended by
the end of this fiscal year, it will list the additional screening techniques that should be
implemented by the agencies for their particular circumstances. Appropriate orientation and
training programs will be developed by fiscal year end and provided annually and when
requested by specific user agencies.