Title: University System of Maryland - University of Maryland, Baltimore County - Questionable Maintenance Procurement Practices
Date: 11/09/2016
Type: Fraud, Waste, and Abuse
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5a945d33cc9d72404c1509d8
Extracted: 2025-06-18T06:01:27.171085
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Special Review
University System of Maryland
University of Maryland, Baltimore County
The Facilities Management Department Used an On-Call Contract to Process the
Work of Other Vendors, Circumventing Required Procurement Policies
The Rationale and Documentation for Selecting One of the
On-Call Contract Vendors Were Questionable
Certain Vendor Invoices Lacked Details to Substantiate the Propriety of the
Charges for Work Performed
November 2016
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
For further information concerning this report contact:
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
301 West Preston Street, Room 1202
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Phone: 410-946-5900 · 301-970-5900
Toll Free in Maryland: 1-877-486-9964
Maryland Relay: 711
TTY: 410-946-5401 · 301-970-5401
E-mail: OLAWebmaster@ola.state.md.us
Website: www.ola.state.md.us
The Office of Legislative Audits operates a Fraud Hotline to report fraud, waste, or abuse
involving State of Maryland government resources. Reports of fraud, waste, or abuse
may be communicated anonymously by a toll-free call to 1-877-FRAUD-11, by mail to the
Fraud Hotline, c/o Office of Legislative Audits, or through the Office’s website.
The Department of Legislative Services does not discriminate on the basis of age, ancestry, color,
creed, marital status, national origin, race, religion, gender, gender identity, sexual orientation,
or disability in the admission or access to its programs, services, or activities. The Department’s
Information Officer has been designated to coordinate compliance with the nondiscrimination
requirements contained in Section 35.107 of the Department of Justice Regulations. Requests for
assistance should be directed to the Information Officer at 410-946-5400 or 410-970-5400.

--- Page 3 ---
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY
Wirren G. Deschenaux ThomasJ. BarnickelIII, CPA
Executive Director LegislativeAiditor
November 9, 2016
Senator Guy J. Guzzone, Co-Chair, Joint Audit Committee
Delegate C. William Frick, Co-Chair, Joint Audit Committee
Members ofJoint Audit Committee
Annapolis, Maryland
Ladies and Gentlemen:
We have conducted a review ofan allegation received through our fraud, waste,
and abuse hotline regarding certain questionable procurement practices at the
University System ofMaryland (USM) University ofMaryland, Baltimore
—
Countys (UMBC) Facilities Management Department. Our review included a
contract for on-call maintenance services t.or which UMBC made payments
totaling $2.1 million for the period from July 2012 through February 2016.
UMBC’s Facilities Management Department used the on-call maintenance
contract as a means to circumvent UMBC’s procurement policies, which
generally require procurements costing $5,000 or more to be competitively
procured. Rather than seeking competitive bids and entering into contracts with
other vendors, two Department employees processed other vendors’ work through
the on-call maintenance contract. This arrangement also allowed the on-call
contractors to charge a mark-up fee on the other vendors’ costs. It appeared that
the use ofthe on-call maintenance contract to pay unrelated vendors wa an
accepted Department practice to obtain the services ofvendors it preferred to
perform certain work without the need to use a competitive bid process.
The two aforementioned employees exercised excessive control over the on-call
maintenance contract and were generally responsible for establishing the scope of
the on-call maintenance projects. assigning and monitoring the work, and
approving the related invoices. This enabled these employees to process other
vendors’ work through the on-call maintenance contract and circumvent UMBC’s
SimplifiedProcure1ne17’ Procedures. Specifically, these employees either directed
the on-call contractors to include another vendor’s invoice in the on-call invoice,
or they directed the contractors to include other vendors’ cost proposals in the on-
call contract proposals as subcontractor work. In many instances, the on-call
301 West Preston Street Room 1202 Baltimore, Maryland21201
410-946-5900/301-970-5900 Fax 410-946-5999/301-970-5999
Toll Free in Maryland 877-486-9964 Fraud Hotline 877-FRAUD-il

--- Page 4 ---
contractors did not perform any ofthe work on these projects. While we were
unable to determine the full extent to which this occurred, based on emails and
other available evidence, it appeared that this occurred on at least 28 occasions for
11 vendors who were paid a total of$209,500.
Our review ofthe procurement ofthis on-call maintenance services contract
disclosed that UMBC did not document its rationale for reevaluating the technical
proposal submitted by one vendor that was initially rejected, but subsequently
determined to be qualified, and was selected as one ofthe two on-call
maintenance contractors. Furthermore, only three ofthe six members ofthe
original evaluation committee participated in the reevaluation and the related bid
evaluation was altered without explanation, including for the three members who
did not participate in the reevaluation. The aforementionedtwo employees who
administeredthe on-call contract were members ofthe evaluation committee and
participated in both evaluations ofthis proposal. This contractor was paid $1
million during the period from July 2012 through February 2016.
Finally, proposals and invoices submitted by two vendors who provided flooring
and seating maintenance work did not always provide sufficient detail for UMBC
to substantiate the propriety and reasonableness ofthe charges, and certain
invoices submitted by the seating vendor included questionable charges. These
vendors had performed work as subcontractors for the on-call contractor but the
deficiencies we noted related to work performed directly for UMBC. For
example, proposals and invoices from the flooring vendor lacked details
describing the square footage ofthe area included in the project and the associated
labor hours. Six invoices submitted by the seating vendor, totaling $7,500
contained questionable charges because the invoices included repairs on rows and
seats that did not exist in the specified rooms. During the period from July 2013
through February 2016, payments made directly by UMBC to the flooring and
seating vendors totaled $190,000.
The USM Office’s response, on behalfofUMBC, to our findings and
recommendations is included as an appendix to this report. We wish to
acknowledge the cooperation extended to us during the course ofthis review by
UMBC.
Respectfully submitted,
Thomas J. Barnickel III, CPA
Legislative Auditor
2

--- Page 5 ---
Table of Contents
Scope, Objectives, and Methodology 4
Background Information 5
Agency Responsibilities 5
Overview 5
Findings and Recommendations 7
On-Call Maintenance Services
Finding 1 – The University of Maryland, Baltimore County’s (UMBC) 7
Facilities Management Department used an on-call maintenance
contract as a means to process the work of other vendors, thereby
circumventing UMBC’s Simplified Procurement Procedures.
Finding 2 – UMBC did not document its rationale for reevaluating 9
a technical proposal submitted by a vendor that was initially
rejected, but subsequently selected as one of the on-call maintenance
contractors, nor did UMBC adequately document the subsequent
reevaluation of the bid proposal.
Other Maintenance Services
Finding 3 – Invoices submitted by two vendors did not always provide 10
sufficient detail to substantiate the propriety of the charges, and one
vendor submitted invoices with questionable charges. In addition,
some of the work performed by one of these vendors could likely
have been performed by UMBC employees or the on-call maintenance
contractors at a lower cost.
Agency Response Appendix
3

--- Page 6 ---
Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We conducted a review of an allegation that was received through our fraud
hotline regarding questionable procurement practices related to an on-call
maintenance contract in the Facilities Management Department of the University
System of Maryland (USM) – University of Maryland, Baltimore County
(UMBC).
The allegation related to possible violations of State and USM procurement laws,
regulations, and policies regarding the use of this contract. The purpose of our
review was to determine whether the allegation we received was valid and to
determine if the related activities violated State and/or USM laws, regulations,
and policies. This review was performed in accordance with State Government
Article, Section 2-1220 of the Annotated Code of Maryland.
At the time of our review, UMBC maintained two on-call maintenance contracts.
One contract was for projects estimated to cost less than $20,000 and the other
was for projects estimated to cost more than $20,000. The allegation we received
was related to the contract for projects estimated to cost less than $20,000;
therefore, we limited our review to that contract. For this one on-call
maintenance contract, two contractors were selected as on-call contractors for the
period from July 1, 2011 through June 30, 2013, with five one-year renewal
options. Payments to these contractors totaled $2.1 million for the period from
July 2012 through February 2016.
We obtained UMBC’s on-call maintenance contract files and related payment
records, including corporate purchasing card activity. Our review consisted of
tests, analyses, observations, and discussions with UMBC personnel and others,
as we deemed necessary, to achieve our objectives. The results of our review of
the allegation are identified in Finding 1. Our review also identified issues with
the procurement of this on-call maintenance contract as well as the use and
monitoring of certain other vendors and related billings, which are identified in
the two remaining findings. Our review did not constitute an audit conducted in
accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards. Our review
was conducted during the period from March through June 2016.
The response from the USM Office, on behalf of UMBC, to our findings and
recommendations is included as an appendix to this report. As prescribed in State
Government Article, Section 2-1224 of the Annotated Code of Maryland, we will
advise USM regarding the results of our review of its response.
4

--- Page 7 ---
Background Information
Agency Responsibilities
The University of Maryland, Baltimore County (UMBC) is a comprehensive
public research institution of the University System of Maryland (USM) and
operates under the jurisdiction of the System’s Board of Regents. UMBC offers a
broad range of baccalaureate, graduate, and doctoral programs in the liberal arts,
sciences, and engineering disciplines. Student enrollment for the Fall 2015
semester totaled 13,839, including 11,243 undergraduate students and 2,596
graduate students.
UMBC’s budget is funded by unrestricted revenues, such as tuition and fees and a
State general fund appropriation, as well as restricted revenues, such as federal
grants and contracts. According to the State’s accounting records, UMBC’s
Operation and Maintenance of Plant expenditures for fiscal year 2015 totaled
approximately $32 million. UMBC’s Facilities Management Department, which
has 98 employees, maintains 70 buildings on 512 acres of grounds, and services
approximately 3.7 million square feet of space.
Overview
UMBC entered into a two-year on-call maintenance contract for the period from
July 1, 2011 through June 30, 2013 (with five one-year renewal options) with two
contractors to complete individual maintenance and renovation projects, estimated
to cost less than $20,000, that were generally beyond the capabilities of UMBC’s
Facilities Management Department. On-call contracts are typically used by State
institutions of higher education to obtain services from contractors on an as-
needed basis and must be procured in accordance with the USM Board of
Regents’ Procurement Policies and Procedures.
Projects to be completed under the on-call contract were assigned to one of the
two contractors after consideration of factors such as the type of work involved
and proposed costs. The contract allowed the contractors to use the services of
subcontractors, for which UMBC was charged the subcontractor’s cost plus a
fixed mark-up percentage. Payments to the two contractors totaled approximately
$2.1 million for the period from July 2012 through February 2016.
The hotline allegation we received pertained to two Facilities Management
Department employees who were responsible for the administration of this on-call
contract. Our review of the hotline allegation also included a review of the
procurement of this contract, during which these two employees functioned as
5

--- Page 8 ---
members of the evaluation committee. We also reviewed the use and monitoring
of certain other maintenance vendors and related billings.
Based on our review, we identified certain questionable matters as described in
the findings which follow. Consequently, we referred these matters to the Office
of the Attorney General – Criminal Division. UMBC should consult with the
Office of the Attorney General before taking any actions related to the findings
contained in this report. A referral to the Criminal Division does not mean that a
criminal act has actually occurred or that criminal charges will be filed.
6

--- Page 9 ---
Findings and Recommendations
On-Call Maintenance Services
Finding 1
The University of Maryland, Baltimore County’s (UMBC) Facilities
Management Department used an on-call maintenance contract as a means
to process the work of other vendors, thereby circumventing UMBC’s
Simplified Procurement Procedures.
Analysis
UMBC’s Facilities Management Department used an on-call maintenance
contract as a means to circumvent UMBC’s procurement policies, which
generally require procurements costing $5,000 or more to be competitively
procured. Rather than seeking competitive bids and entering into contracts with
other vendors, two Department employees processed other vendors’ work through
the on-call maintenance contract, either by directing the on-call contractors to
include another vendor’s invoice in the on-call invoice, or by directing the
contractors to include other vendors’ cost proposals in the on-call contract
proposals as subcontractor work. This arrangement also allowed the on-call
contractors to charge a mark-up fee on the other vendors’ costs. It appeared that
the use of the on-call maintenance contract to pay unrelated vendors was an
accepted Department practice to obtain the services of vendors it preferred to
perform certain work without the need to use a competitive bid process.
These two Department employees exercised excessive control over the on-call
maintenance contract and were generally responsible for establishing the scope of
on-call maintenance projects, assigning and monitoring the work, and approving
the related invoices. This enabled these employees to process other vendors’
work through the on-call maintenance contract and circumvent UMBC’s
Simplified Procurement Procedures. Projects completed by vendors other than
the on-call maintenance contractors and their own subcontractors should have
been procured in accordance with these Procedures which require that
procurements estimated to cost between $5,000 and $100,000 be forwarded to
UMBC’s Procurement Department for processing, and that competition be sought
to the extent practical. The Procurement Department is responsible for
conducting the competitive bid process, including reviewing and evaluating the
bids, and for ensuring compliance with all applicable State and University System
of Maryland (USM) laws, regulations, and policies.
Generally, we noted two scenarios in which the Facilities Management
Department improperly used the on-call contract. In the first scenario, the two
7

--- Page 10 ---
employees responsible for administering the contract directed the two on-call
contractors to invoice UMBC for maintenance work that had been performed by
other vendors that were not under contract with UMBC to perform maintenance
work. Specifically, the on-call contractors were directed to submit invoices to
UMBC for the amount of another vendor’s invoice, as if the vendor’s work had
been performed by a subcontractor, and to add a 10 percent mark-up fee. The on-
call contractors received payment from UMBC, made payment to the other
vendor for the amount of its invoice, and retained the mark-up fee.
In the other scenario, the on-call contractors were directed to use certain vendors,
that were not under contract with UMBC, as subcontractors on projects.
Specifically, the two employees obtained quotes from other vendors and then
directed the on-call contractors to include the vendors’ quotes in their project
proposals as work to be performed by subcontractors. The project proposals were
to include the amount of the vendor’s quote plus an agreed-upon percentage
mark-up, and the amount of any work to be performed by the on-call contractor.
However, in many instances, the on-call contractor did not complete any of the
work on these projects.
We reviewed 485 projects totaling $2 million that were completed under this on-
call contract during the period between July 1, 2012 and February 29, 2016.
While we were unable to determine the total number of instances in which the on-
call contractor was directed to invoice UMBC for maintenance work performed
by other vendors or the on-call contractor was directed to use a specific vendor as
a subcontractor, based on emails and other available evidence, it appeared that
this occurred on at least 28 occasions for 11 vendors who were paid a total of
$209,500.
We were advised by Facilities Management Department management personnel
that these situations occurred primarily as a matter of convenience. Specifically,
the on-call contractors were asked to process other vendors’ invoices generally
when the amounts due the vendors exceeded $5,000, thereby providing a means to
avoid seeking competitive bids as required under the procurement procedures. In
other instances, the on-call contractors were instructed to use a specific vendor as
a subcontractor because the vendor had previously done very good work for
UMBC and because UMBC was spending a considerable sum with the vendor
over a period of time, but had not procured a contract with the vendor.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that UMBC
a. ensure procurements are performed in accordance with UMBC’s
Simplified Procurement Procedures;
8

--- Page 11 ---
b. discontinue its practice of processing vendor payments through its on-call
contractors and directing the on-call contractors to use subcontractors
selected by UMBC employees; and
c. properly separate the duties over the procurement, contract monitoring,
and invoice approval functions for maintenance services.
Finding 2
UMBC did not document its rationale for reevaluating a technical proposal
submitted by a vendor that was initially rejected, but subsequently selected
as one of the on-call maintenance contractors, nor did UMBC adequately
document the subsequent reevaluation of the bid proposal.
Analysis
UMBC did not document its rationale for reevaluating a bid proposal submitted
by a vendor that was initially rejected, but subsequently selected as one of the on-
call maintenance contractors, nor did UMBC adequately document the subsequent
reevaluation of this bid proposal. The two previously mentioned employees (in
finding 1) who administered the on-call contract were members of the evaluation
committee. As a result, there was a lack of assurance as to the propriety of the
entire bid process and whether the contractor selected was actually qualified to be
awarded the contract. Of the $2.1 million in payments made under the contract
during the period from July 2012 through February 2016, $1 million was paid to
the contractor whose bid was reevaluated.
UMBC solicited bids in March 2011 for the procurement of multiple contractors
to perform on-call services for maintenance and renovation projects individually
expected to cost less than $20,000, with total annual expenditures estimated at
$330,000 for each contractor selected. Thirteen contractors submitted technical
proposals that were evaluated by a six-member evaluation committee consisting
of one employee from UMBC’s Procurement Department, the two previously
mentioned employees who administered the on-call contract, and three employees
from other departments. An initial technical evaluation was prepared by each
committee member for each proposal received, and the individual member scores
were summarized on an overall bid tabulation document. For a contractor to
proceed to the next phase of the bidding process, which was the submission of a
price proposal, the request for proposals required that the contractor receive an
average score of 75 percent on the technical proposal. After the initial evaluations
were completed, losing bidders were notified and debriefing sessions were held if
requested.
9

--- Page 12 ---
One losing bidder filed a protest on the basis that the vendor was more qualified
than the other bidders because of experience with previous State contracts, and
was granted a reevaluation of the vendor’s original bid. After the reevaluation,
the bidder was deemed qualified to proceed to the price proposal phase with 10
other bidders and, ultimately, was selected as one of the two on-call contractors.
Our review disclosed, however, that UMBC did not document its rationale for
granting the reevaluation of the protesting vendor’s bid. Furthermore, the
reevaluation process was not adequately performed and documented.
Specifically, only three of the six members of the original evaluation committee
(the Procurement Department employee and the two employees responsible for
the administration of the contract) participated in the reevaluation. These three
employees changed their scores for certain rating categories without any support
or explanation and also changed the scores on the final overall bid tabulation
document for the three evaluation committee members who did not participate in
the reevaluation. Furthermore, the bid tabulation documents were not signed by
the evaluation committee members to substantiate their concurrence with the
contract award decision. UMBC could not explain its rationale for reevaluating
the proposal and for including only three of the six committee members in the
reevaluation process.
Recommendation 2
We recommend that UMBC
a. adequately document the reevaluation and rationale for reevaluating
vendor bid proposals, and
b. ensure that documentation is maintained to substantiate the concurrence
by evaluation committee members of bidder rankings.
Other Maintenance Services
Finding 3
Invoices submitted by two vendors did not always provide sufficient detail to
substantiate the propriety of the charges, and one vendor submitted invoices
with questionable charges. In addition, some of the work performed by one
of these vendors could likely have been performed by UMBC employees or
the on-call maintenance contractors at a lower cost.
Analysis
Proposals and invoices submitted by two vendors did not always provide
sufficient detail to substantiate the propriety of the charges, and certain invoices
submitted by one of the vendors included questionable charges. During our
10

--- Page 13 ---
review of the on-call contract, we extended our work to include payments made to
two vendors which performed flooring and seating maintenance work for UMBC.
These vendors had, on occasion, performed work at UMBC as subcontractors to
the on-call maintenance contractors; however, the conditions we note here relate
specifically to projects procured by UMBC directly with these two vendors.
Based on our review, we also concluded that some of the work conducted by the
seating vendor could likely have been performed by UMBC employees or the on-
call maintenance contractors at a lower cost.
The flooring vendor performed services, such as the installation of carpet and tile,
and the seating vendor performed preventive maintenance and other repairs as
needed on UMBC’s lecture hall seating and bleachers. During the period from
July 2013 through February 2016, payments made directly by UMBC to the
flooring and seating vendors totaled $93,000 and $97,000, respectively. Since
each project completed by these vendors cost less than $5,000, a competitive bid
process was not required by UMBC’s Simplified Procurement Procedures for the
procurement of these services.
• The proposals and invoices submitted by the flooring and seating vendors
lacked sufficient details to allow UMBC to determine the propriety of the
billings and to ensure costs were reasonable for the services performed. For
example, proposals and invoices from the flooring vendor lacked details
describing the square footage of the area included in the project and the labor
hours to complete the project. In addition, certain invoices submitted by the
seating vendor gave only vague descriptions of the work performed, such as
“Auditorium seating repairs Lecture Hall #1,” rather than details of the repairs
made.
• Six invoices submitted by the seating vendor totaling $7,500 contained
questionable charges because the vendor billed UMBC for repairs on rows
and seats that did not exist in the specified rooms. For example, one invoice
described work on a “row K” in a lecture hall that did not have a row K.
UMBC was unable to explain the apparent discrepancies we noted.
• Certain preventive maintenance and repairs on UMBC’s lecture hall seating
may have been performed by UMBC employees or the on-call maintenance
contractors at a lower cost. The seating vendor charged $95 per hour for
maintenance and repairs, such as tightening bolts and replacing desktops. The
maximum per hour charge of the on-call contractors was $57. Three other
USM institutions we contacted indicated that they use their respective
maintenance employees to provide these services except on rare occasions
when the nature of the work warranted an outside vendor.
11

--- Page 14 ---
Recommendation 3
We recommend that UMBC
a. ensure that proposals and invoices contain sufficient details to enable
verification of the amounts billed;
b. conduct a thorough review of the seating vendor’s invoices and
investigate and resolve any discrepancies, including recovering any
amounts that are determined to be improperly billed; and
c. use UMBC employees or the on-call maintenance contractors to perform
seating maintenance and repairs to the extent practical.
12

--- Page 15 ---
APPENDIX
UNIVERSITY SYSTEM
3300 METZEROTT ROAD II ADEIPHI. MD 207S3
of MARYLAND
WWW.USMD.EDU // 301.445.2740
OFFICE OF THE CHANCELLOR
October 3, 2016
Mr. ThomasJ. Bamckel I I, CPA
Legislative Auditor
Officeof Legislative Audits
StateOffice Building, Room 1202
301 WestPreston Street
Annapolis, MD21201
Re: University System of Maryland
—
University of Maryland, Baltimore County-The
Facilities Management Department
DateofAudit: October 2016
DearMr. Barnickel:
I have enclosed the University System of Maryland’s responses to yourdraft reportcovering the
examination ofthe accounts and records ofthe University System of Maryland Universityof
—
Maryland, Baltimore County The Facilities Management Department. Ourcomments referto the
—
individual items in the report.
Robert L Caret
Chancellor
Enclosures
cc:
Dr. Freeman A. Hrahowski Ill, Ph.D., President, UMBC
Ms. Lynne C. Schaefer, Vice President for Administration and Finance, UMBC
Mr. James T. Brady, Chair, University System of Maryland Board of Regents
Mr. Robert L. Page, Associate Vice Chancellor for Financial Affairs, USM Office
Mr. David Mosca, Director of Internal Audit, USM Office
Ms. Sharon Doherty-Ritter, Director, Management Advisory Services, UMBC
INSTiTUTIONS BOWIE STATEUNVERSITY COPPINSTATEUNIVERSITY FROSTSIJRGSTATEUNIVERSITY SALISBURYUNIVERSTY TOWSONUNIVERSITY
UNIVERSITYOPEALTIMOME UNIVERSITYOFMARYLAND,BALTIMORE UNIVERSITYOFMARYLAND.BALTIMORECOUNTYUNIVERSTYOFMARYLAND,COLLEGEPARK
UNIVERSITYOFMARYLANDEASTERNSHORE UNIVERSITYOFMARYLANDUNIVERSITYCOLLEGE UN1VERSTYOFMARYLANDCENTERFORENVIRONMENTALSCENCE
REGIONALCENTERS UNIVERSITIESATSHADYGROVE UNIVERSItYSYSTEMOFMARYLANDATHAGERSTOWN

--- Page 16 ---
RESPONSE TO LEGISLATIVE AUDIT REPORT-
SPECIAL REVIEW
UNIVERSITY SYSTEM OF MARYLAND
UNIVERSITY OF MARYLAND, BALTIMORE COUNTY’S
FACILITIES MANAGEMENT DEPARTMENT
OCTOBER 2016
On-Call Maintenance Services
Finding 1
The University of Maryland, Baltimore County’s (UMBC) Facilities
Management Department used an on-call maintenance contract as a means
to process the work of other vendors, thereby circumventing UMBC’s
Simplified Procurement Procedures.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that UMBC
a. ensure procurements are performed in accordance with UMBC’s
Simplified Procurement Procedures;
b. discontinue its practice of processing vendor payments through its on-call
contractors and directing the on-call contractors to use subcontractors
selected by UMBC employees; and
c. properly separate the duties over the procurement, contract monitoring,
and invoice approval functions for maintenance services.
University response
We agree with the recommendation.
a. We will ensure procurements conducted under the Simplified Procurement
method are performed in accordance with UMBC’s Simplified Procurement
Procedures; and
b. The UMBC employees responsible for managing the work performed under
the on-call contracts have discontinued directing the on-call contractors to use
subcontractors which they have selected and have also discontinued the
practice of processing such vendor/ subcontractor payments through these on-
call contractors.
c. We have properly separated the duties over the procurement, contract
monitoring, and invoice approval functions for maintenance services.
Specifically, our Procurement Department is ensuring that procurements are
properly completed and contracts are monitored; the Facilities Management
Business Manager will be reviewing and issuing the scopes of work to the on-
call contractors for pricing and subsequently reviewing the submitted
proposals. Our Project Managers will be issuing the notices to proceed and
approving the invoices upon completion of the work. This new procedure was
effective 10/17/16.

--- Page 17 ---
RESPONSE TO LEGISLATIVE AUDIT REPORT-
SPECIAL REVIEW
UNIVERSITY SYSTEM OF MARYLAND
UNIVERSITY OF MARYLAND, BALTIMORE COUNTY’S
FACILITIES MANAGEMENT DEPARTMENT
OCTOBER 2016
Finding 2
UMBC did not document its rationale for reevaluating a technical proposal
submitted by a vendor that was initially rejected, but subsequently selected
as one of the on-call maintenance contractors, nor did UMBC adequately
document the subsequent reevaluation of the bid proposal.
Recommendation 2
We recommend that UMBC
a. adequately document the reevaluation and rationale for reevaluating
vendor bid proposals, and
b. ensure that documentation is maintained to substantiate the
concurrence by evaluation committee members of bidder rankings.
University response
We agree with the recommendation.
a. In instances where a reevaluation of vendor bid proposals is deemed
necessary, we will adequately document the reevaluation and the rationale
for the reevaluation.
b. We will ensure that documentation is maintained substantiating the
concurrence by evaluation committee members of bidder rankings.
Other Maintenance Services
Finding 3
Invoices submitted by two vendors did not always provide sufficient detail to
substantiate the propriety of the charges, and one vendor submitted invoices
with questionable charges. In addition, some of the work performed by one
of these vendors could likely have been performed by UMBC employees or
the on-call maintenance contractors at a lower cost.
Recommendation 3
We recommend that UMBC
a. ensure that proposals and invoices contain sufficient details to enable
verification of the amounts billed;

--- Page 18 ---
RESPONSE TO LEGISLATIVE AUDIT REPORT-
SPECIAL REVIEW
UNIVERSITY SYSTEM OF MARYLAND
UNIVERSITY OF MARYLAND, BALTIMORE COUNTY’S
FACILITIES MANAGEMENT DEPARTMENT
OCTOBER 2016
b. conduct a thorough review of the seating vendor’s invoices and
investigate and resolve any discrepancies, including recovering any
amounts that are determined to be improperly billed; and
c. use UMBC employees or the on-call maintenance contractors to perform
seating maintenance and repairs to the extent practical.
University response
We agree with the recommendation.
a. We are ensuring that proposals and invoices contain sufficient detail to enable
verification of the amounts billed by specifying the required information when
proposals are requested and rejecting invoices if sufficient detail is not
provided.
b. We have conducted a thorough documented review of the seating vendor’s
invoices and investigated the discrepancies. Although some of these invoices
did have discrepancies (e.g. row identifiers), there was evidence that work was
done in each of the lecture halls invoiced; therefore, we are unable to
definitively determine if any amounts were improperly billed. Clearly defined
scopes of work and contractor invoices that distinctly show the work
performed are now being required thus allowing verification of completed
work.
c. We have evaluated the feasibility of using UMBC employees and/or the on-
call maintenance contractors to perform seating maintenance and repairs.
There is insufficient UMBC staff within structural trades to accomplish this
work in house. We will, therefore, utilize our on call contracts to perform
these repairs.