Title: Department of Assessments and Taxation - Homestead Property Tax Credits
Date: 02/28/2013
Type: Performance
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5a945d3acc9d72404c150a6c
Extracted: 2025-06-18T10:55:20.215739
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Performance Audit Report
Department of Assessments and Taxation
Homestead Property Tax Credits
A Comprehensive Compliance Program Should be Established
Data System Controls Should be Enhanced and Data Matches Should be
Performed to Monitor Continued Eligibility of Properties for the Credits
Actions Should be Taken to Maximize the Recovery of Taxes for Improperly
Granted Credits
February 2013
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
 This report and any related follow-up correspondence are available to the public through
the Office of Legislative Audits at 301 West Preston Street, Room 1202, Baltimore,
Maryland 21201. The Office may be contacted by telephone at 410-946-5900, 301-970-
5900, or 1-877-486-9964.
 Electronic copies of our audit reports can be viewed or downloaded from our website at
http://www.ola.state.md.us.
 Alternate formats may be requested through the Maryland Relay Service at 1-800-735-
2258.
 The Department of Legislative Services – Office of the Executive Director, 90 State Circle,
Annapolis, Maryland 21401 can also assist you in obtaining copies of our reports and
related correspondence. The Department may be contacted by telephone at 410-946-
5400 or 301-970-5400.

--- Page 5 ---
Table of Contents
Executive Summary 5
Background Information 7
Purpose of Homestead Credit 7
Value of Homestead Credits and Recent Trends 8
HTC Eligibility Criteria and Application Requirements 9
DAT Organization and Responsibilities 10
DAT Automated Systems and Processes 11
Statistical Analysis of Properties Designated as Eligible for the HTC 11
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology 13
Findings and Recommendations 17
Objective 1: Evaluation of Procedures and Controls Over the HTC 17
Conclusion
Finding 1 – DAT Had Not Developed a Comprehensive Compliance 18
Program to Help Ensure That HTCs Are Only Granted for Eligible
Properties
Finding 2 – Procedures Over the HTC Application Processing Need 20
Improvement
Finding 3 – DAT Did Not Establish Adequate Controls Over Its 22
Automated Records to Prevent or Detect Unauthorized Changes
to HTC Eligibility Determinations
Finding 4 – Certain Policies and Requirements Could be Established 23
to Improve DAT Oversight of the HTC Program
Finding 5 – DAT Does Not Plan to Investigate the Propriety of HTCs 25
Received in Prior Years on Properties Removed From Eligibility
After the Application Filing Period
Finding 6 – DAT’s Real Property Records Were Not Formatted in a 26
Manner to Facilitate Computer Matches
Objective 2: Procedures to Detect Properties Improperly Deemed 27
Eligible for HTCs
Conclusion
Finding 7 – Additional Automated Procedures Are Available to Help 27
Ensure Properties Remain Eligible for the HTC on an Ongoing Basis
County Homestead Credit Cap Percentages Exhibit A
Sample Calculation of the Homestead Property Tax Credit Exhibit B
Agency Response Appendix
3

--- Page 6 ---
4

--- Page 7 ---
Executive Summary
Legislative Audit Report on the Department of Assessments and Taxation
Homestead Property Tax Credits
February 2013
We conducted a performance audit to assess the State Department of
Assessments and Taxation’s (DAT) procedures for ensuring that Homestead
Property Tax Credits (HTC) are only granted for eligible properties. The audit
was conducted at the direction of the General Assembly’s Joint Audit
Committee. Our audit had two objectives:
1. To evaluate DAT’s procedures and controls for initially approving HTCs and
for periodically reviewing properties’ continuing eligibility for HTCs.
2. To identify automated methods and data sources DAT could use to
systematically evaluate properties for continued HTC eligibility.
The audit disclosed several areas where DAT can improve its processes to
ensure that only eligible properties receive an HTC and recoveries of HTCs
provided for ineligible properties are maximized. Our audit also disclosed
additional automated procedures are available to DAT to ensure that HTCs are
provided for only eligible properties on an ongoing basis.
DAT had not developed a comprehensive compliance program to ensure that
HTCs are only granted for eligible properties. Such a program should include
written procedures for the processing of HTC applications, establish the
responsibilities and the related processes to be performed at both DAT
headquarters and the local assessment offices, and establish procedures to
monitor the local assessment offices’ activities. Furthermore, local
assessment offices were not consistently using available sources of
information to help identify properties that may not be eligible to receive the
HTC.
Our review also disclosed that procedures over HTC application processing
need improvement. Applications received by DAT are initially screened, which
includes a comparison of the applicant’s property address to the
homeowner’s federal tax return address to help ensure that property owners
do not receive HTCs for more than one property. However, the screening
process could be enhanced by comparing applicant names with the property
owner names in the real property records. Also, procedures over the approval
of certain applications need to be strengthened. Users’ access and
5

--- Page 8 ---
capabilities for the systems that control HTC eligibility should be periodically
evaluated and limited as appropriate, and changes made to critical system
data fields should be independently reviewed.
DAT should also develop a policy regarding the recovery of all improperly
granted HTCs as allowable under law and consider proposing legislation
requiring homeowners to notify DAT regarding changes in property status that
would render the property no longer eligible for the HTC. Consideration should
also be given to standardizing the owner naming conventions used in DAT
databases to enhance automated matching capabilities.
DAT should develop a plan to investigate the propriety of HTCs received in
prior years on properties that will be removed from eligibility because an
application was not submitted by the deadline or was not approved.
DAT also does not perform other automated processes to help identify, on an
ongoing basis, properties that are no longer eligible for the HTC. Our audit
identified several matching processes that DAT could employ to help ensure
that HTCs are proper on an ongoing basis. When we performed these
matches, numerous instances of ineligible properties were noted.
As part of the audit, we conducted a statistical sample of the 1,343,271
properties classified as eligible for the HTC in DAT’s records as of June 1,
2012 to determine the extent to which properties were actually ineligible for
HTCs. Based on the results, we are 95 percent confident that between 8,422
properties and 109,409 properties classified as eligible for the HTC were
actually ineligible. Our sample was selected before the application filing
deadline of December 31, 2012 had passed; therefore, some of these
properties may ultimately become ineligible for the HTC due to the failure to
file an application or because the application is not approved.
6

--- Page 9 ---
Background Information
Purpose of Homestead Credit
The State Department of Assessments and Taxation (DAT) is responsible for
administering the State’s real and personal property tax laws, including the
Homestead Property Tax Credit (HTC). State Law (Section 9-105 of the Tax-
Property Article of the Annotated Code of Maryland) established the HTC to
help homeowners who have had large assessment increases on their principal
residence. The law limits the increase in county and State taxable
assessments on individual owner-occupied properties to a fixed percentage of
the preceding year’s taxable assessment. Every county and municipality is
required to establish the limit on taxable assessment increases at 10 percent
or less each year. (See Exhibit A for a list of Maryland’s 24 subdivision HTC
percentages.) The State limits the taxable assessment increase to 10 percent
for determining the State portion of the HTC.
As an example, assume a residential property’s prior taxable assessment was
$100,000 and the new assessment is $160,000 to be phased in over three
years (that is, increased $20,000 per year during the 3-year phase-in period).
The first year phase-in assessment would be $120,000. However, a 5
percent county assessment limit over the prior year’s taxable assessment
would limit the first year county taxable assessment to $105,000. The
difference between $120,000 and $105,000 is $15,000; the county’s
portion of the tax credit would apply to the taxes due on the $15,000. If the
county tax rate was $1.04 per $100 of assessed value, the HTC on the
county’s portion of the property tax would be $156.00 ($15,000 ÷ 100 x
$1.04). Similarly, the State’s portion of the HTC would be based on a taxable
assessment of $110,000 (that is, a 10 percent increase over the prior year)
and the State tax rate of $0.112 per $100 of assessed value. Accordingly,
the State tax credit for the first year would be $11.20 ($10,000 ÷ 100 x
$0.112). The State credit is much less than the county credit because the
State property tax rate per $100 of assessed value is much lower than county
rates, and the State credit is always based on a 10 percent annual taxable
assessment increase whereas counties frequently use lower limits. The HTC
is shown on the property tax bill as a credit reducing the total property tax
owed. Exhibit B provides a sample calculation of the HTC based on certain
application filing dates.
7

--- Page 10 ---
Value of Homestead Credits and Recent Trends
Based on DAT’s records, we estimated that, during fiscal year 2013, the total
reduction in property tax revenue from the credit for the State’s 23 counties
and Baltimore City will total approximately $323.1 million. The reduction in
State property tax revenue attributable to the credit during fiscal year 2013
will be approximately $2.3 million.
Not all properties that meet eligibility requirements for the HTC will actually
receive a credit in any given year, and the properties that do or do not receive
a credit can change from year-to-year based on application of the relevant
limits and rates. For example, no credit is received in tax years where the
assessment increase over the preceding tax year is less than the limits
established by the individual jurisdictions and the State.
As home values and assessments have declined in recent years, fewer
homeowners are receiving an HTC on their eligible property. According to
DAT’s records, for fiscal year 2013, there were 1,342,991 properties eligible
for the HTC but only 600,197 (44.7 percent) of the properties actually
received a credit. As shown by the following two tables, which are based on
DAT’s records, Statewide residential property assessed values have declined
considerably in recent years, and as a result the total value of all HTCs has
also declined. Many of the 742,794 properties eligible for an HTC but not
currently receiving one could begin receiving an HTC if their property
assessment values increase.
Statewide Average Change in Residential Real Property Assessments
From the Preceding Three-Year Assessment Cycle2
FY 2010 FY 2011 FY 2012 FY 2013
-3.4% -20% -22% -17%
2 Approximately one-third of residential properties are assessed each year with an estimated
value as of December 31. The fiscal year 2013 change in values, for example, represents the
change in property assessments from the fiscal year 2010 assessments on those same
properties.
8

--- Page 11 ---
Statewide Estimated Value of Homestead Property Tax Credits to Homeowners
(Reduction in Property Tax Revenue Collected)
Percent
FY 2010 FY 2011 FY 2012 FY 2013 Change
FY 10-13
County $1,313,455,340 $950,462,722 $585,177,392 $323,124,929 (75.4%)
State $86,821,366 $35,129,889 $8,073,850 $2,252,360 (97.4%)
HTC Eligibility Criteria and Application Requirements
According to State law, only owner-occupied residences are eligible for the
credit and a property owner can only receive the credit on one property. An
owner must reside at the property for at least six months of the year, including
July 1 of the year for which the credit is received. Married couples are
considered a single entity for HTC eligibility. Therefore, if a married couple
receives the HTC on one residence, neither spouse is allowed to receive the
HTC on another property in the State.
Legislation enacted by the Maryland General Assembly during the 2007
Legislative Session requires homeowners to submit an application for the HTC
(which includes their social security numbers) to DAT. For all properties in
which ownership was transferred after December 31, 2007, the new
homeowner can only receive an HTC when a properly completed application is
submitted to DAT and the information in the application indicates that the
property qualifies for the HTC.
In addition, all homeowners whose properties are eligible for an HTC but had
never submitted an application (generally those who purchased their
properties prior to January 1, 2008 when there was no application
requirement) were required to submit an application to DAT by December 31,
2012 to continue to remain eligible for the HTC. Under current law,
homeowners who failed to submit an HTC application by this deadline will lose
the HTC effective with the tax year starting July 1, 2013. As of January 17,
2013, according to DAT records, there were approximately 513,000
properties eligible for the HTC (including 183,000 that are receiving an HTC)
for which an application had not been received by DAT. Homeowners who
miss the December 31, 2012 filing deadline but file the application by June
30, 2014 can have their HTC eligibility and credit reinstated on the same
assessment basis as it was previously calculated but cannot retroactively
receive the credit for the tax year beginning July 1, 2013. Applications
received after June 30, 2014 will result in the properties being assessed at
9

--- Page 12 ---
their full value beginning July 1, 2014 with the HTC limits applied
prospectively based on the full value. This is demonstrated in Exhibit B which
is an example of the calculation of the HTC based on the date an application
is filed and approved.
DAT Organization and Responsibilities
DAT’s headquarters is located in Baltimore and it operates assessment offices
in each of the State’s 24 local subdivisions. DAT headquarters maintains an
HTC office currently staffed by 11 employees who are almost exclusively
devoted to processing and approving HTC applications. As required by State
law, DAT is reimbursed by the State’s 24 subdivisions for the cost to maintain
this office (according the State records, approximately $617,000 during fiscal
year 2012).
The local assessment offices have a total of approximately 390 employees.
The primary responsibility of the local assessment offices is to assess and
reassess the State’s approximately 2.2 million taxable real property parcels
every three years. Owner data are entered in the real property records by the
local assessments offices for the 23 counties upon notification of a new deed.
Owner data for properties in Baltimore City are uploaded to DAT’s real
property records from the City Government’s property system which records
new deeds. When a property is transferred to a new owner as evidenced by a
deed, the property should lose its HTC eligibility until a valid application for the
credit is filed by the new owner. The local assessment offices perform certain
procedures to help ensure ongoing compliance with HTC eligibility
requirements as part of the assessment process and investigate allegations
about property owners who are improperly receiving HTCs.
During the 2012 Legislative session, legislation was enacted which requires a
person who has been granted an HTC for which they did not qualify to be
assessed all state and local taxes that they would have otherwise paid. This
legislation also states if a person is found by DAT to have willfully
misrepresented facts regarding qualification for the HTC, the person shall be
assessed a penalty of 25 percent of the HTC received for which the person did
not qualify. Prior to the enactment of this legislation, there was no statutory
provision that specifically addressed recovery of prior HTCs improperly
received. However, Title 14 of the Tax-Property Article of the Annotated Code
of Maryland contains a statute of limitations provision that allows for the
recovery of taxes imposed under the Article owed for the most recent seven
years. When DAT detects HTCs granted for ineligible properties, it generally
forwards the related information to the local taxing authorities so that they
10

--- Page 13 ---
can bill property owners for the amounts attributable to the credits owners
improperly received during a given period.
DAT Automated Systems and Processes
DAT headquarters maintains a Homestead Credit Application System to
receive online HTC applications and to process mailed-in applications. The
Application System conducts certain initial screening tests for eligibility and
flags applications needing further review and information before DAT
headquarters authorizes HTC eligibility in the System. On a weekly basis, the
Application System updates the Assessment and Administration Valuation
System (AAVS) for any changes made at DAT headquarters for HTC eligibility.
AAVS is DAT’s primary property database system that includes a wide range of
information and history about individual properties, including assessment
values. The information from AAVS is provided annually to local jurisdiction
taxing authorities so they can calculate the property taxes and credits and
prepare their respective property tax bills.
Within AAVS, certain data fields are used to identify HTC eligible properties.
The Owner Occupancy Field, which is maintained and updated by the local
assessment offices, is used to identify whether a property is eligible for the
HTC based on information accumulated by the local assessor, usually during
the triennial field assessment of each property. The Homestead Qualification
Field is primarily maintained by DAT headquarters via updates of the HTC
Application System. Both the Owner Occupancy and Homestead Qualification
Fields must deem a property as HTC eligible before AAVS will calculate the
reduced taxable assessment for a property needed to carry out the HTC law.
Statistical Analysis of Properties Designated as Eligible for the HTC
To estimate the number of properties that may be improperly classified as
eligible for the HTC, we tested a statistical sample of properties classified as
eligible for the HTC as of June 1, 2012. (This was before the December 31,
2012 deadline for homeowners to submit HTC applications, so both the
population and sample included properties that had grandfathered HTC
eligibility and properties that had HTC eligibility determined through the
application process.) The population consisted of 1,343,271 properties
classified as eligible as of June 1, 2012 for the HTC in DAT’s AAVS from which
we selected a random sample of 114 properties. Based on the information
available to us, we determined that 5 of the 114 properties tested (4.39
percent) were improperly classified as eligible for the HTC. Three of these five
properties had actually received an HTC for fiscal year 2013. For four of these
five properties, we determined that the property owner was deceased and it
11

--- Page 14 ---
did not appear that the property was occupied by an assignee, survivor, or
personal representative of the property owner thus making the property
ineligible for the credit (since the property was not owner-occupied). For the
fifth property, we determined that the property was not owner occupied
(property owner was not deceased in this case). Based on identifying 5
properties ineligible for the HTC within the sample, we are 95 percent
confident that between 0.63 percent (8,422 properties) and 8.14 percent
(109,409 properties) of properties classified as eligible for the HTC in AAVS as
of the start of fiscal year 2013 were ineligible for the HTC (percentages are
rounded). The central (or best) estimate is that 58,970 (4.39 percent)
properties were incorrectly listed as eligible for the HTC. The five properties
that we determined to be ineligible for the HTC were referred to DAT for
further investigation.
12

--- Page 15 ---
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
Scope
We conducted a performance audit to assess the State Department of
Assessments and Taxation’s (DAT) procedures for ensuring that Homestead
Property Tax Credits (HTC) are only granted for eligible properties. The audit
was conducted at the direction of the General Assembly’s Joint Audit
Committee. We conducted this audit under the authority of the State
Government Article, Section 2-1221 of the Annotated Code of Maryland and
performed it in accordance with generally accepted government auditing
standards. Those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to
obtain sufficient, appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our
findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives. We believe that the
evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and
conclusions based on our audit objectives.
Objectives
Our audit had two objectives:
1. To evaluate DAT’s procedures and controls for initially approving HTCs and
for periodically reviewing properties’ continuing eligibility for HTCs.
2. To identify automated methods and data sources DAT could use to
systematically evaluate properties for continued HTC eligibility.
Methodology
To perform the audit, we studied the laws applicable to the HTC, and reviewed
available regulations, policies, manuals, and directives of DAT. We also
interviewed numerous DAT employees and obtained an understanding of
DAT’s procedures and the key information systems used to process and
record HTCs and related records. We also used statistical sampling to
estimate the error rate for properties designated in DAT’s records as eligible
for an HTC as of June 1, 2012. However, due to the variability of local
jurisdiction’s HTC rates, property values, and other factors we could not
reliably estimate from our sample the total dollar value of tax credits that had
been issued for all ineligible properties.
We obtained data files from DAT, other state agencies (such as the Motor
Vehicle Administration), and local subdivisions and used these data files to
perform various comparisons to DAT’s records. We evaluated and/or tested
13

--- Page 16 ---
the files from these data sources and determined the records were
appropriate and reliable for our purposes. We also determined that the data
files from DAT that we used were complete.
Objective 1
We reviewed procedures and controls over the approval of HTCs at DAT
headquarters and DAT policies issued to govern local assessment offices’
handling of HTC matters. We also evaluated the procedures used to detect
properties improperly designated as being eligible for HTCs subsequent to
initial approval, and reviewed employees’ access and capabilities on the
systems used to record application data and other property data which
designates properties as eligible for the HTC. We also reviewed procedures at
the Anne Arundel County, Baltimore City and Worcester County local
assessment offices, and made inquiries on specific issues at other local
assessment offices as needed. The Baltimore City local assessment office
was selected because it has a large dollar value of HTCs and has been the
subject of several newspaper articles on properties being improperly
designated as eligible for HTCs. Anne Arundel County was selected because it
also has a large dollar value of credits due to its low assessment cap (that is,
a maximum two percent increase over the prior year’s taxable assessment).
Worcester County was selected because it has a large number of non-owner
occupied properties that are ineligible for the HTC.
Objective 2
We performed computer matches to various data sources and employed data
mining techniques using DAT’s records as recorded in the application system
and real property records to identify properties potentially improperly
designated as eligible to receive an HTC. We conducted these matches to
determine whether these automated techniques could be worthwhile for
ongoing monitoring purposes. The principal data sources used for our
matching were:
 The Maryland Motor Vehicle Administration’s file of individuals who
surrendered their Maryland drivers’ licenses during fiscal years 2010
through 2012.
 Property owners’ addresses from their most recent income tax returns.
 DAT’s real property records (Assessment and Administration Valuation
System) to identify multiple properties with the same owner based on
owners’ addresses.
 Files of licensed rental properties maintained by five local governments.
 Lists of properties in foreclosure during fiscal year 2012 obtained from
two circuit courts.
14

--- Page 17 ---
We subsequently selected a sample of the match results and reviewed related
records and documents to determine if the properties were actually eligible for
the credit. To assess the propriety of HTC eligibility and credits approved for
individual properties, we reviewed homeowners’ federal income tax return
addresses maintained by DAT, their addresses on file with the Motor Vehicle
Administration, court records such as divorce filings and recorded property
deeds, rental and vacant property listings maintained by local governments,
the HTC applications maintained by DAT, and a commercial database of public
records. By reviewing the data sources, we were able to determine with
reasonable certainty whether properties were eligible under law for HTCs. We
did not contact property owners directly to obtain their representations about
their properties. We did provide our findings about individual properties to
DAT for its subsequent review and administrative actions. DAT had corrected
the eligible status of the properties and notified the local taxing authorities for
several of the properties improperly designated as eligible for an HTC while we
were still performing audit fieldwork.
For individual properties we deemed ineligible for an HTC, we determined
from DAT’s records of applicable assessments and rates the value of HTCs
granted for ineligible properties for each year the property did not qualify for
an HTC (for fiscal years 2006 through 2013 as appropriate).
Fieldwork and Agency Response
We conducted our fieldwork from June 2012 to December 2012. DAT’s
response to our findings and recommendations is included as an appendix to
our audit report. As prescribed in the State Government Article, Section 2-
1224 of the Annotated Code of Maryland, we will advise DAT regarding the
results of our review of their response.
15

--- Page 18 ---
16

--- Page 19 ---
Findings and Recommendations
Objective 1
Evaluation of Procedures and Controls over the Homestead Tax
Credit (HTC)
Conclusion
The State Department of Assessments and Taxation (DAT) needs to improve
oversight of the HTC program and its processes to ensure that only eligible
properties receive an HTC and recoveries of HTCs granted for ineligible
properties are maximized.
DAT had not developed a documented comprehensive compliance program to
help ensure that HTCs are only granted for eligible properties. Specifically,
DAT had not established written procedures for processing HTC applications.
Such a program also would formally establish the responsibilities and the
related processes to be performed at both DAT headquarters and the local
assessment offices and would establish procedures for the monitoring of the
local offices.
Additionally, our audit disclosed that procedures over HTC application
processing need improvement. In this regard, applicant names should be
compared to property owner names in the real property records and
procedures over the approval of certain applications need to be strengthened
by ensuring independent supervisory personnel verify the propriety of the
related HTC granted. Users’ access and capabilities for the systems that
maintain HTC eligibility information should be periodically evaluated and
limited to those necessary for the employees to carry out their job duties and
changes made to critical data fields should be independently reviewed.
DAT should also develop a policy regarding the recovery of all improperly
granted HTCs as allowable under law and consider proposing legislation
requiring homeowners to notify DAT regarding changes in property status that
would affect eligibility for the HTC. Furthermore, DAT should develop a plan to
investigate the propriety of HTCs received in prior years on properties
removed from eligibility for not completing an application. Specifically, DAT
estimated that, as of January 17, 2013, it had received approximately
175,000 applications that had not been processed, which is far less than the
513,000 properties deemed eligible for the HTC in DAT’s records for which an
application had not been filed (including 183,000 properties with HTCs
17

--- Page 20 ---
totaling $87 million for the tax year beginning July 1, 2013). Finally,
consideration should also be given to standardizing the owner naming
conventions used in DAT databases to enhance automated matching
capabilities.
Findings
Finding 1
DAT had not developed a documented comprehensive compliance program to
help ensure that HTCs are only granted for eligible properties.
Analysis
DAT had not developed a documented comprehensive compliance program
establishing the responsibilities and related processes to be performed by
headquarters and the 24 local assessment offices to help ensure that HTCs
are only granted for eligible properties. Specifically, DAT had not established
formal written procedures to be performed during the initial processing of an
HTC application, nor had DAT established formal procedures to be performed
to ensure the ongoing eligibility of properties for the HTC. Additionally, DAT
had not performed a resource analysis to determine whether additional
resources would be needed to implement an effective compliance program,
and how the resources would be funded.
DAT’s headquarters HTC office is responsible for initially processing and
approving HTC applications. However, DAT has not established written
procedures or guidance regarding the processing of the applications such as
the procedures to be used to validate information on the applications, how
issues noted during review of the applications are to be resolved, and the
roles and responsibilities of DAT employees, including employee
responsibilities for approving the applications and accessing and updating the
automated real property records.
Similarly, as part of the assessment process, local assessment offices may
detect HTC properties that subsequently become ineligible. However, DAT
had not prepared written guidance that specifies what procedures local
assessment offices should use to detect ineligible HTC properties. In this
regard, while the current HTC application process provides a cost-effective
means to help prevent individuals from receiving the HTC on more than one
property in the State, the process is not sufficient to ensure the continued
eligibility of properties. For example, a property owner receiving an HTC in
Maryland could move his or her principal residence out-of-state without selling
the property or notifying DAT of the change in status of the property receiving
18

--- Page 21 ---
the HTC. There is currently no requirement that property owners notify DAT of
changes in circumstances that would render the property ineligible for the
credit (as addressed in Finding 4). Also, DAT does not periodically perform
automated procedures to monitor continued HTC eligibility (as addressed in
Finding 7).
DAT headquarters does not perform any documented monitoring of the local
assessment offices’ procedures for detecting properties that are improperly
designated as HTC eligible. As a result, our review of procedures and controls
at three local assessment offices disclosed that the offices were not
consistently performing detection procedures. For example, at two of the
three offices reviewed, documented reviews of the United States Postal
Service National Change of Address list were not performed. DAT pays for this
service in part to enable local offices to detect home owners who move and
thus their properties may become ineligible for the HTC. We were advised by
one local office this list is considered a useful tool to detect homeowners who
are no longer entitled to an HTC, while two other offices did not consider the
list to be a useful tool.
We also noted that one of the local assessment offices reviewed did not
adequately assess ownership changes reported by the local government
finance office that are uploaded to the Assessment and Administration
Valuation System (AAVS). This report includes changes of ownership or
address and is the primary mechanism by which the local assessments office
can identify properties whose eligibility for the HTC may have changed.
Accordingly, the local assessment office needs to evaluate these changes to
determine whether the changes result in a property losing eligibility for HTC.
However, the local DAT office could not document any review for 8 out of 10
properties which we tested from the report. Of those 8 properties, 6
properties were improperly receiving the HTC. The 6 properties received
improper County and State HTCs totaling $8,903 and $142, respectively, for
fiscal years 2011 through 2013.
During the course of our audit, we were advised by DAT management that a
lack of resources would limit the extent of any compliance program. As
previously mentioned, DAT maintains an HTC office with 11 employees (8 full-
time budgeted positions and 3 temporary positions) that have been almost
exclusively devoted to processing and approving HTC applications. DAT
management advised us that when the volume of applications diminishes
after the December 31, 2012 deadline, the 11 employees in the HTC office
will begin performing certain compliance activities. However, the extent to
which these employees could be used to address ongoing compliance
monitoring has not been analyzed by DAT nor has DAT otherwise analyzed its
19

--- Page 22 ---
overall staffing resources for implementing a compliance program.
Consequently, the funding necessary to support a comprehensive compliance
program has not been researched. In accordance with law, DAT is reimbursed
by the State’s 24 subdivisions for the cost to maintain the HTC office for
processing and approving applications. Additional tax revenue mostly benefits
the counties and municipalities when HTCs granted for ineligible properties
are detected and removed. Therefore, it would be reasonable for the local
governments to bear a portion of the cost of maintaining a compliance
program to detect HTCs that were granted for ineligible properties.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that DAT
a. develop and document a comprehensive compliance program to help
ensure that HTCs are only granted for eligible properties, including
specifically defining the roles and responsibilities of headquarters and the
local assessment offices when processing HTC applications and ensuring
ongoing compliance;
b. provide for periodic monitoring by headquarters of the HTC compliance
activities performed at the local assessment offices, including ensuring
that local offices use available sources of information to identify ineligible
properties; and
c. perform an analysis of personnel and resource funding requirements for
developing a comprehensive compliance program and submit a proposal
for consideration by appropriate Executive Department agencies and the
General Assembly.
Finding 2
Procedures over the HTC application processing need improvement.
Certain enhancements are needed to improve procedures and controls over
the HTC application processing. Specifically, we noted the following
conditions:
 Since it began processing applications for the HTC in 2008, DAT has not
routinely compared the property owner names on HTC applications to the
property owners’ names in the real property records in AAVS. This
comparison could identify situations whereby someone other than a
property owner (such as a renter) could manually apply for the HTC and an
ineligible property could be deemed eligible to receive an HTC based on an
application submitted by a non-owner. In addition, other discrepancies
could be detected between information in the HTC application system and
AAVS which affect HTC eligibility.
20

--- Page 23 ---
We matched the names of property owners listed in DAT’s real property
records to the names on HTC applications as of June 2012. This
comparison disclosed 26,240 instances in which the name on the
application did not agree to the name in the real property records. (This
comparison was generally made using the property account number and
the property owners’ last names.) For fiscal year 2013, these properties
received HTCs that reduced county and state property tax revenue by
approximately $8.2 million and $146,000, respectively. We tested 20 of
these properties and determined that 15 of the properties should not have
been designated as eligible for the HTC at the time of the match.
We also noted that for 10 of the 15 properties the HTCs were based on
applications previously submitted by the former owners of the properties.
In these cases, it appeared that ownership of the properties had changed
and, although the new owners’ names were recorded in AAVS, the data
fields affecting HTC eligibility were not updated by the applicable local
assessment offices. Once a property changed owners, the HTC eligibility
should have been removed pending receipt of an application from the new
owner. These 15 properties were referred to DAT for further investigation.
 DAT did not establish adequate controls over the subsequent approval of
HTC applications initially suspended from processing. Specifically, to
ensure the propriety of approved HTC applications, including those
approved after being suspended, an output report of approved
applications was reviewed by two DAT supervisors. However, these two
supervisors also approved the HTC applications. Consequently, there was
a lack of assurance that applications approved by these employees were
proper as there was no independent review of the approvals.
When the addresses on HTC applications did not agree to owner’s income
tax filing address, the applications were placed in a pending status. The
pending applications were manually researched, such as by checking
Motor Vehicle Administration records or by contacting the applicant, and
subsequently approved or denied by a DAT employee.
 DAT had a backlog of unprocessed applications. Specifically, we were
advised by DAT management that it had an estimated 175,000
unprocessed applications on hand as of January 17, 2013. The backlog
resulted from the large number of applications that were received near the
December 31, 2012 deadline and the increased level of related activity
(phone inquiries) that greatly reduced the level of application processing.
In this regard, we noted that DAT only had approximately 1,500
unprocessed applications as of June 18, 2012.
21

--- Page 24 ---
Recommendation 2
We recommend that DAT
a. compare the names on HTC applications to the listed owners of the
properties and review and investigate approved HTC applications for which
the applicant’s name(s) does not match the listed property owner(s);
b. investigate the aforementioned properties that were improperly granted
an HTC, establish the cause of the inappropriate designation, and
establish appropriate guidance and controls;
c. ensure independent supervisory personnel verify the propriety of the tax
credits granted for applications that were initially suspended from
processing, at least on a test basis; and
d. ensure the backlog of HTC applications is processed as soon as possible.
Finding 3
DAT did not establish adequate controls over its automated records to prevent
or detect unauthorized changes to HTC eligibility determinations.
Analysis
DAT did not establish adequate controls over the real property records (the
AAVS) or the Homestead Application System to prevent or detect unauthorized
changes to eligibility determinations. Specifically, we noted that certain
system access was not adequately restricted and that edits to critical data
fields in both AAVS and the Application System were not subject to
independent supervisory review. Although the certain information in AAVS,
such as the Homestead Qualification Field, is generally updated weekly in
AAVS for new actions recorded in the Application System, the information can
also be manually edited in AAVS by certain DAT employees and these edits are
not reviewed by independent supervisory personnel. The potential impact of
this control weakness is exacerbated by the large number of employees who
were assigned critical system capabilities. As of August 2012, 400 employees
had access to the AAVS with 371 of these employees being assigned access
capabilities that allowed the users to change information such as the
Homestead Qualification Field in AAVS.
In addition, our test of 59 employees having access to the Homestead
Application System disclosed that 4 employees had unnecessary access to
delete an application and the ability to perform other functions on AAVS
without supervisory review and approval. DAT does not review these edits for
propriety.
22

--- Page 25 ---
We noted eligibility information for HTCs recorded in the Application System
and in the AAVS did not always agree. We performed a match between AAVS
system data effective July 2012 and the Homestead Application System data
effective June 2012, The match identified 1,134 properties in which the AAVS
system indicated the application was approved or the property had a
grandfathered HTC eligibility but was actually either rejected or pending in the
Homestead Application System. Applications rejected or placed in the
pending status should render the property ineligible on AAVS. We selected 20
properties from our match and identified 11 properties that, based on the
application and other external data sources, were not eligible for the HTC but
were classified as eligible for the HTC in AAVS.
Recommendation 3
We recommend that DAT
a. establish procedures to ensure edits to critical fields affecting HTC
eligibility are independently reviewed,
b. evaluate the propriety of employee access capabilities for critical data
fields in the HTC Application System and AAVS and remove access that
employees do not require for their job duties, and
c. identify all discrepancies between AAVS and the Homestead Application
System regarding eligibility for HTC and research the propriety of the
discrepancies and make the necessary changes.
Finding 4
Certain policies and requirements could be established to improve DAT
oversight of the HTC program.
Analysis
DAT should adopt a policy regarding the recovery of all improperly granted
HTCs as allowable under law and should consider proposing legislation
requiring homeowners to notify it of changes in property status which would
affect HTC eligibility.
 DAT did not develop a policy regarding the recovery of all improperly
granted HTCs as allowable under law. When DAT detected HTCs granted
for ineligible properties, it advised the local taxing authorities and
requested them to recover the taxes not paid as a result of HTCs being
granted for ineligible properties. State law specifies that the local taxing
authorities, not DAT, are responsible for the collection of property taxes.
However, our review of procedures at three local assessments offices
indicated that DAT did not research and/or inform the local taxing
authority of improperly granted HTC’s received beyond the prior three
23

--- Page 26 ---
years. We were advised by DAT that the records needed to conduct the
research for earlier years were not readily available in its systems.
Prior to July 1, 2012, there was no statutory provision that specifically
addressed the recovery of prior HTCs improperly received. However, Title
14 of the Tax-Property Article of the Annotated Code of Maryland
contained a statute of limitations provision that allows for the recovery of
taxes imposed under the Article owed for the most recent seven years.
Legislation enacted during the 2012 legislative session requires a
property owner who had been granted an HTC for which they did not
qualify to be assessed all state and local taxes (without a time limit) that
they would have otherwise paid.
The forgone tax revenue from prior years can be significant. For example,
we reviewed 30 properties from lists maintained by two local assessment
offices of properties determined to have improperly received HTCs.
Although 19 of these properties received HTCs for more than three years,
the local assessment offices did not research beyond the most recent
three years to determine how long the properties had improperly received
the HTC so that improperly received credits could be recovered to the
fullest extent possible. Consequently, we estimate that these properties
may have had their taxes improperly reduced by an additional $52,516
and $6,435 for the County and State, respectively, during fiscal years
2006 through 2012.
 There is no legal requirement that homeowners notify DAT of changes in
circumstances affecting a property’s eligibility for the HTC. Specifically,
although DAT is automatically made aware of certain changes in a
property’s status (such as via the recordation of a new deed), there is no
requirement for a homeowner to notify DAT of certain other changes that
would render a property ineligible for the credit (such as the homeowner
moving out of state). We were advised by DAT management that a legal
provision that would require that such circumstances be reported to DAT
would be helpful in their monitoring the ongoing eligibility of properties for
the credit.
Recommendation 4
We recommend that DAT
a. develop a policy regarding recovery of HTCs granted for ineligible
properties to the fullest extent allowable under law and develop the
related recordkeeping resources,
b. ensure that the policy on recovery of improperly granted HTCs for prior
years is consistently followed by the local assessment offices, and
24

--- Page 27 ---
c. consider proposing legislation to require homeowners to notify it regarding
changes in property status that would affect eligibility for the HTC.
Finding 5
DAT does not have a plan to investigate the propriety of HTCs received in prior
years on properties removed from eligibility after the application filing period.
DAT does not have a plan to evaluate the propriety of HTCs received in prior
years on properties removed from eligibility after the December 31, 2012
deadline because an application was not submitted or was not approved.
Many such property owners may never send in an application if they have
been receiving an HTC to which they were not entitled. As of January 17,
2013, there are 512,823 properties currently deemed eligible for the HTC
that may have not submitted an application and will lose HTC eligibility unless
an application was submitted before the deadline and it is approved. (As
mentioned in Finding 2, DAT had a large unprocessed application backlog.)
Additionally, 182,782 of these properties are designated for HTCs that would
reduce their fiscal year 2014 County and State property tax bills by
approximately $86.9 million and $409,000, respectively. Therefore, the
amount of improperly granted HTC’s received in prior years could be
significant.
DAT officials advised us that it does not have the resources to pursue such a
large number of cases. However, as previously mentioned (see Finding 1),
DAT has not performed an analysis of its staffing needs nor analyzed
additional funding necessary to support a comprehensive compliance
program regarding HTC.
Recommendation 5
We recommend that DAT
a. develop a plan to investigate property owners who have previously
received HTCs for which applications had not been submitted or approved,
and determine if HTCs were granted for ineligible properties in prior years;
and
b. request local taxing authorities to recover taxes for the value of HTCs
granted for ineligible properties in prior years to the extent allowed by law.
25

--- Page 28 ---
Finding 6
DAT’s real property records were not formatted in a manner to facilitate
computer matches.
Analysis
DAT’s real property records were not formatted in a manner to facilitate
computer matches. Specifically, owner names were not consistently recorded
in the same data fields and all owners were not always specifically listed in
the DAT real property records. There are two owner’s name fields in AAVS that
allow 34 characters each. In most (but not all) cases, the owner’s name is
entered with the last name first. A second owner may be entered on either
the first field with the first owner or the second field. In other cases, a second
or other additional owner may be implied but not specifically entered. For
instance, the records may state “and wife” or “et al”. There are approximately
two million residential real properties in the State; accordingly, adding all
owners to current AAVS records and formatting the existing AAVS records
consistently would require a significant commitment of resources.
Typically, owner data are entered in AAVS by the local assessments offices for
the 23 counties upon notification of a new deed. Owner data for properties in
Baltimore City is uploaded to AAVS from the City Government’s property
system which records new deeds.
While the consistent recordation of property owners’ names is not critical to
the administration of the assessment process, there is no assurance that
matches performed using the owners’ name, or portion thereof, will identify all
properties that meet the match criteria given such inconsistencies.
Furthermore, the lack of a consistent method to format names and the
records that lack the names of all property owners makes it impractical for the
HTC application system to automatically compare HTC applicant names to
property owner names.
Recommendation 6
We recommend that DAT determine the feasibility of
a. establishing a protocol for recording owner names in its automated real
property records and requiring the protocol to be used uniformly by all
assessment offices; and
b. adding all owners to the current real property records and formatting the
existing records consistently, at least on a prospective basis.
26

--- Page 29 ---
Objective 2
Procedures to Detect Properties Improperly Deemed Eligible for
HTCs
Conclusion
DAT should use additional automated procedures to ensure the continued
eligibility of properties receiving the HTC.
The only automated screening process currently used at DAT headquarters to
prevent improperly approving HTCs is the comparison of the property address
to the homeowner’s federal tax return address performed when an HTC
application is initially received. This procedure does provide some assurance
that property owners do not receive an HTC for more than one property.
However, this screening process is not repeated in subsequent years, and DAT
does not perform other automated processes to ensure the continued
eligibility of properties that previously were approved as eligible for the HTC.
Our audit identified several matching processes, as described below, that DAT
could employ to help ensure the ongoing eligibility of properties for the HTC.
Certain of the matches can be performed on a statewide basis by DAT
headquarters and others could be performed at the local assessment offices
based on records available from the local jurisdictions.
Finding 7
Additional automated procedures are available to help ensure properties
remain eligible for the HTC on an ongoing basis.
Analysis
Additional automated procedures are available to help ensure properties
remain eligible for the HTC on an ongoing basis. As previously mentioned,
DAT has not established a comprehensive compliance program to verify the
ongoing eligibility of properties for the HTC.
We identified various automated matching processes that, if used, would
enhance DAT’s ability to identify properties that are no longer eligible for an
HTC. Below we describe five matches we performed to identify properties no
longer eligible for the HTC and the results of those matches, (as would be
expected, match results overlapped in some cases; that is, identified the
same questionable properties). Our results demonstrate that these matches
can detect properties that are potentially improperly classified as eligible for
the HTC. While the results of any matches will need to be verified by DAT
27

--- Page 30 ---
contacting the owner before any action is taken to remove an HTC, the
matches provided an effective starting point to identify properties needing
further review.3 Also, since not all properties classified as eligible for the HTC
will actually receive a credit, DAT’s subsequent research of matched
properties should focus first on the properties actually receiving credits.
It should also be noted that we performed the matches before the application
filing deadline of December 31, 2012 had passed, and thus some properties
identified as matches may not be considered eligible for the HTC after
applications have been processed.
Motor Vehicle Administration Match
Using individuals’ last names and a portion of the properties’ addresses, we
compared a file from the Motor Vehicle Administration (MVA) of individuals
who surrendered their drivers’ licenses during fiscal years 2010 through 2012
to homeowners whose properties were classified as eligible for the HTC for
fiscal year 2013.4 The match disclosed 24,751 properties classified as
eligible for the HTC for which at least one owner had surrendered their drivers’
license. Furthermore, 10,367 of these properties had their fiscal year 2013
county property taxes reduced by approximately $7.2 million and 891 of these
properties had their state property taxes reduced by approximately $32,000.
Our test of 25 properties designated as eligible for the HTC in which an
owner(s) had surrendered their drivers’ license, according to the MVA file,
disclosed that 21 properties were not eligible for the credit, including 6
properties for which an application had been filed and approved. Of these 21
properties, 20 properties improperly had their county and state taxes reduced
by approximately $178,000 and $9,000, respectively during fiscal years 2010
through 2013.
Income Tax Records Match
With the assistance of the Comptroller of Maryland, the address individuals
used to file their most recent Maryland state income tax returns (generally the
2011 tax year) was compared to the property address used by the same
individuals when they applied for the HTC (the Comptroller used the
individuals’ social security numbers when performing the comparison). We
then compared the match results to properties classified as eligible for the
3 There are various reasons why the match results are not conclusive evidence of a property
improperly receiving the HTC. For example, in the Motor Vehicle Administration match
mentioned below, the match was performed using the last name and the property address.
As a result, an adult child that lived at the address and surrendered their driver license would
show up as a match result, although eligibility for the HTC would not be affected if the parents
continued to live at the same address.
4 Per our test, most drivers surrendered their Maryland licenses because they moved to
another state. However, certain licenses in the MVA file were surrendered for other reasons
such as court orders or medical conditions.
28

--- Page 31 ---
HTC for fiscal year 2013. Our match disclosed 11,231 properties classified
as eligible for the HTC for which the applicants filed Maryland tax returns
listing an out-of-state address. Of these properties, 4,156 had their fiscal year
2013 county property taxes reduced by approximately $2.8 million and 652
properties had their state taxes reduced by approximately $25,000. Our
match also disclosed 140,885 additional properties classified as eligible for
the HTC whose applicants’ state income tax returns listed a different Maryland
address than the property for which they received an HTC (that is, the HTC
property may no longer be their principal residence). Of these properties,
73,706 had their fiscal year 2013 county property taxes reduced by
approximately $48.2 million and 15,554 properties had their state property
taxes reduced by approximately $493,000. Our test of 30 properties
receiving an HTC for which the owner(s) listed an address other than the HTC
property address on their Maryland income tax returns disclosed that 11 were
not eligible for the credit although applications had been filed and approved
for all 11 properties. Based on our research, these 11 properties had their
county and State taxes improperly reduced by $248,133 and $22,111,
respectively, during fiscal years 2007 through 2013.
Multiple Properties Analysis
This match was performed using only DAT’s records from the AAVS. We sorted
the statewide listing of properties eligible for the HTC for fiscal year 2013 by
the addresses the owner provided for tax and assessment notice mailing
purposes to identify mailing addresses used for more than one property. This
sorting disclosed 9,506 mailing addresses that were used for two or more
properties classified as eligible for the HTC, pertaining to 26,058 properties.
Of these properties, 10,880 had their fiscal year 2013 county property taxes
reduced by approximately $5.4 million and 4,828 properties had their state
property taxes reduced by approximately $148,000. Our test of 12 pairs of
properties receiving the HTC (24 properties) that had the same tax mailing
address disclosed that 8 of the 24 properties were not eligible for the credit,
including 1 property for which an application had been filed and approved.
These 8 properties had their county and state taxes improperly reduced by
approximately $95,500 and $5,600 respectively, during fiscal years 2007
through 2013. Although the new Application System screening process
should generally prevent an owner from receiving an HTC on more than one
property due to use of social security numbers, this address sorting analysis
would have been useful to detect inappropriate credits during the period when
applications were being filed. Additionally, even after the submitted
applications have been processed, this analysis could still be useful to detect
prior inappropriate credits issued for properties where the owners did not file
an HTC application.
29

--- Page 32 ---
Rental Properties Match
Using property addresses, we matched files from five jurisdictions of licensed
rental properties to properties classified as eligible for the HTC for fiscal year
2013.5 Our match disclosed 9,258 properties classified as eligible for the HTC
that were identified as rental properties according to local government
records. Of these properties, 4,013 had their fiscal year 2013 county
property taxes reduced by approximately $3.3 million, and 1,427 properties
had their state property taxes reduced by approximately $53,000. Our test of
25 of the 4,013 properties designated as eligible for the HTC for a property
that was classified as a rental property by local governments disclosed that
11 properties were not eligible for the credit for certain years, including 5
properties for which an application had been filed and approved. Of these 11
properties, 10 properties had their county and state taxes improperly reduced
by approximately $54,000 and $2,600, respectively, during fiscal years 2007
through 2013.
Review of Foreclosed Properties
We compared two circuit courts’ records of foreclosure cases filed in fiscal
year 2012 to properties classified as eligible for the HTC for fiscal year 2013.6
We reviewed approximately 330 cases out of approximately 5,900 foreclosure
cases to identify 30 properties for which the foreclosure process was
completed as of June 30, 2012 and which were identified in DAT’s records as
eligible for the HTC. Our test of these 30 properties eligible for the HTC for a
residence that was foreclosed disclosed that 25 properties were not eligible
for the credit, including 10 properties for which an application had been filed
and approved. Furthermore, 10 of these properties were not owner occupied
prior to the foreclosure proceedings. Of these 25 properties, 16 properties
improperly had their county taxes reduced by approximately $15,300 during
fiscal years 2007 through 2013.
According to the Department of Housing and Community Development, there
were 15,293 foreclosures in the State during fiscal year 2012. Legislation
passed during the 2012 legislative session requires that financial institutions
that take possession of properties during foreclosure proceedings are
required to notify DAT of such actions. These properties would no longer be
eligible for the HTC.
5 The five jurisdictions used for our match were Baltimore City, Ocean City and Baltimore,
Montgomery, and Howard Counties. These counties and cities and certain other jurisdictions
in the state require rental properties to be registered or licensed.
6 The two courts covered Baltimore City and Prince George’s County where, based on
Department of Housing and Community Development records, there was known to be many
foreclosures.
30

--- Page 33 ---
We discussed these procedures to detect HTCs granted for ineligible
properties with DAT management. They agreed that more procedures, such
as the matches we performed, should be used to detect homeowners
receiving HTCs to which they are not entitled. While automated procedures to
detect properties improperly designated as eligible for the HTC can be
performed without a large commitment of resources, investigating potentially
ineligible properties can be a time-consuming process. For this reason, DAT
management maintained that performing such procedures for every
potentially ineligible property would generally not be possible with DAT’s
existing staff. However, the investigation of match results could be prioritized
such as by investigating properties actually receiving an HTC first.
Additionally, as previously mentioned (Finding 1), DAT has not analyzed its
staffing needs to determine the adequacy of its staff at both its headquarters
and local assessment offices.
Recommendation 7
We recommend that DAT develop automated procedures to detect properties
that are ineligible for the HTC on an ongoing basis, such as data matches
against other state and local agencies’ records.
31

--- Page 34 ---
Exhibit A
Maryland Counties and Baltimore City
Homestead Credit Cap
Over Preceding Year’s Taxable Assessment
Effective July 1, 2012
PERCENTAGE
SUBDIVISION
LIMIT
Allegany 107
Anne Arundel 102
Baltimore City 104
Baltimore 104
Calvert 110
Caroline 105
Carroll 105
Cecil 108
Charles 107
Dorchester 105
Frederick 105
Garrett 105
Harford 105
Howard 105
Kent 105
Montgomery 110
Prince George's 104
Queen Anne's 105
St. Mary's 105
Somerset 110
Talbot 100
Washington 105
Wicomico 105
Worcester 103
32

--- Page 35 ---
Exhibit B
Sample Calculation of the Homestead Property Tax Credit
These tables below show an example of the Homestead Property Tax Credits (HTC) that would be applied to a property
depending when the current homeowner first applied for a tax credit that is approved by DAT. (The example assumes no
change in property ownership.) The tables also show the interaction of the HTC and the three-year phase-in of the full
market value appraisal of the property. The calculations are based on the following conditions:
Property Value:
 $300,000 previous full market value appraisal with grandfathered HTC
 $450,000 full market value appraisal at January 1, 2012
 $400,000 full market value appraisal at January 1, 2015
 A three-year phase-in of the January 1, 2012 appraisal increase
County Property Tax:
 County tax rate of $1.00 per $100.00 of county taxable assessment
 County HTC cap on taxable assessment increases of 5 percent per year
State Property Tax:
 State tax rate of $0.112 per $100.00 of state taxable assessment
 State HTC cap on taxable assessment increases of 10 percent per year
Owner First Applies for HTC by December 31, 2012
Appraised Full Value Taxable Assessment Assessment Reduction Tax Reduction
Full‐Value Three‐Year Due to HTC Cap for Tax Calculation Due to HTC
Assessments Phase‐In County State County State County State
Prior Assessed Full Value $300,000
New Assessed Full Value at 1/1/12 450,000
For Tax Year Starting 7/1/12 $350,000 $315,000 $330,000 $35,000 $20,000 $350 $22
For Tax Year Starting 7/1/13 400,000 330,750 363,000 69,250 37,000 693 41
For Tax Year Starting 7/1/14 450,000 347,288 399,300 102,713 50,700 1,027 57
New Assessed Full Value at 1/1/15 400,000
For Tax Year Starting 7/1/15 400,000 364,652 400,000 35,348 ‐ 353 ‐
For Tax Year Starting 7/1/16 400,000 382,884 400,000 17,116 ‐ 171 ‐
For Tax Year Starting 7/1/17 400,000 400,000 400,000 ‐ ‐ ‐ ‐
Total six‐year tax reduction due to HTC: $2,594 $121
Owner First Applies for HTC by June 30, 2014
Appraised Full Value Taxable Assessment Assessment Reduction Tax Reduction
Full‐Value Three‐Year Due to HTC Cap for Tax Calculation Due to HTC
Assessments Phase‐In County State County State County State
Prior Assessed Full Value $300,000
New Assessed Full Value at 1/1/12 450,000
For Tax Year Starting 7/1/12 $350,000 $315,000 $330,000 $35,000 $20,000 $350 $22
For Tax Year Starting 7/1/13 400,000 400,000 400,000 ‐ ‐ ‐ ‐
For Tax Year Starting 7/1/14 450,000 347,288 399,300 102,713 50,700 1,027 57
New Assessed Full Value at 1/1/15 400,000
For Tax Year Starting 7/1/15 400,000 364,652 400,000 35,348 ‐ 353 ‐
For Tax Year Starting 7/1/16 400,000 382,884 400,000 17,116 ‐ 171 ‐
For Tax Year Starting 7/1/17 400,000 400,000 400,000 ‐ ‐ ‐ ‐
Total six‐year tax reduction due to HTC: $1,902 $79
Owner First Applies for HTC after June 30, 2014 or Never Applies
Appraised Full Value Taxable Assessment Assessment Reduction Tax Reduction
Full‐Value Three‐Year Due to HTC Cap for Tax Calculation Due to HTC
Assessments Phase‐In County State County State County State
Prior Assessed Full Value $300,000
New Assessed Full Value at 1/1/12 450,000
For Tax Year Starting 7/1/12 $350,000 315,000 330,000 35,000 20,000 350 22
For Tax Year Starting 7/1/13 400,000 400,000 400,000 ‐ ‐ ‐ ‐
For Tax Year Starting 7/1/14 450,000 450,000 450,000 ‐ ‐ ‐ ‐
New Assessed Full Value at 1/1/15 400,000
For Tax Year Starting 7/1/15 400,000 400,000 400,000 ‐ ‐ ‐ ‐
For Tax Year Starting 7/1/16 400,000 400,000 400,000 ‐ ‐ ‐ ‐
For Tax Year Starting 7/1/17 400,000 400,000 400,000 ‐ ‐ ‐ ‐
Total six‐year tax reduction due to HTC: 350 22
33

--- Page 37 ---
Comments and Response of the Department of Assessments and
Taxation (DAT) to the Findings and Recommendations of the
Legislative Auditors Regarding Homestead Tax Credits
Finding 1 – DAT had not developed a documented comprehensive compliance
program to help ensure that HTCs are only granted for eligible properties.
DAT Comments and Response: The Department concurs with the Auditors’
finding here and the three specific recommendations (a, b, and c) under this item.
a) Once the Department completes the significant data programming and
administrative processing of the 175,000 applications received in the last four
months before the December 31, 2012 application deadline, DAT will develop
(during the first half of fiscal 2014) a comprehensive written manual describing the
specific procedures to validate applications. That manual will combine existing
procedures historically utilized by the local Assessment Offices to validate
eligibility and the newer procedures developed by the central application
processing unit in 2007 as well as incorporating certain automated procedures
proposed in this Audit.
b) The manual will provide a specific list of audits to be performed by local
Assessment Offices and a mandatory monthly schedule for performing those
duties.
c) The Department will prepare for the submission of the Fiscal 2015
Budget Request a detailed proposal for additional positions and funding for
implementing the comprehensive compliance program proposed by this Audit to
be considered by the Executive Department of Budget and Management and the
General Assembly. For the record, this fiscal request will be substantial because of
the demonstrated need in the Audit for an increased number of employees. The
Legislative Auditors had a team of two managers and six field employees at the
Department for six months to find and validate limited numbers of improper
Homestead Tax Credits. In this regard, it must be emphasized that the
Department’s employees in the local Assessment Offices who perform Homestead
audits do so on a part-time basis because they have other regular assessment
related duties to perform each day. Finally, legislation will have to be introduced
accompanying the budget request that will amend the existing Homestead
application law to provide for local governments to reimburse the Department for
1

--- Page 38 ---
the cost of the additional employees and other administrative costs for
implementing these new ongoing audits. Given that legislation is likely to be
enacted in the 2013 session that will extend the Homestead application deadline
until December 31, 2013, there is sufficient time for the Executive Budget
Department and the General Assembly to approve the funding for additional
Homestead employees for the Department.
Finding 2 – Procedures over the HTC application processing need improvement.
DAT Comments and Response: The Department concurs with the Auditors’
finding here and the four specific recommendations (a, b, c, and d) under this item.
a) and b) Initially, the Department had compared the names of all HTC
applicants with the name in its legal ownership file in the AAVS Real Property
System. However, that practice was discontinued for electronically filed
applications after a careful review of exceptions showed that the program was
producing a large number of “false positive” exceptions based upon revision to a
maiden name by the former spouse or et al (“and others”) ownership of the
property. The Department has continued to check the applicant name and the
ownership name for all paper applications that are manually entered into the data
system as well as for the substantial number of applications “imaged” into the
system via the “KOFAX” system.
The Department will implement (by December 31, 2013) an additional
computer program that will retroactively compare applicant name with ownership
name for all electronically filed applications in each calendar year. That program
will produce a better “exceptions” report that can be individually investigated by
the Department. The report also will contain a section for dealing with ownership
discrepancies where the original applicant owner has died and the AAVS system’s
“stop” credit feature for transferred properties did not apply because the property
was transferred via inheritance and not transferred for a financial “consideration”
to a new, unrelated owner.
c) Given the limited number of “full-time” Homestead Tax Credit
employees (8 permanent employees) to process and audit the 1.1 million
applications, the Department is going to have to assign (by July 1, 2013) a
managerial level employee from a totally unrelated agency program to perform a
spot review on a test basis of the proprietary of tax credit eligibility for initially
suspended applications.
2

--- Page 39 ---
d) The Department has already developed an orderly plan to process by
March 31, 2013 (in just three months after the December 31, 2012 deadline), the
175,000 applications received in the past four months. The Department could not
process this group of applications as they were received because its limited number
of employees were occupied answering the 87,000 telephone calls and 13,000 e-
mails received in this same four month period.
Finding 3 – DAT did not establish adequate controls over its automated records
to prevent or detect unauthorized changes to HTC eligibility determinations.
DAT Comments and Response: DAT concurs with the finding and the three
recommendations (a, b, and c) under this item.
a) The Department will establish a procedure (by December 31, 2013) to
have an independent supervisory review on a test basis of changes to critical fields
such as deleting a Homestead application.
b) The Department has already begun restricting system access to AAVS as
it relates to the Homestead Qualification Field. The only reason that 371 of 400
employees had access that included the ability to change such information as the
Homestead Qualification Field was because AAVS is a new system itself where
Assessment Office employees were testing its applications and functionality. The
Department’s IT managers will continue to monitor and eliminate data permission
for employees who do not have an ongoing need for such access to perform their
specific job duties.
c) The Department’s IT Unit will develop (by December 31, 2013) a report
identifying any discrepancies between AAVS and the Homestead Application
System on Homestead eligibility. The Department submits that most of the
differences are due to timing issues based upon the updating of the systems by the
agency’s IT Unit.
Finding 4 – Certain policies and requirements could be established to improve
DAT oversight of the HTC Program.
DAT Comments and Response:
a) The Department can agree with the finding of the Auditors that there
needs to be a fixed policy on the number of years for recapturing Homestead Tax
Credits improperly received by the homeowner. However, the Department does
3

--- Page 40 ---
not agree with their determination that a “general” statute of limitations provision
for recovery of taxes for seven years (found in Section 14-1101 of the Tax-
Property Article) applies to the recovery of Homestead Tax Audits improperly
received.
The Department’s legal counsel has advised that the authority to collect any
past taxes has been unclear until the passage of Chapter 701, Laws of Maryland
2012 adding subsection (n) to §9-105. Before that enactment creating a 25%
penalty for willful misrepresentation beginning for the July 1, 2012 tax year, the
legal argument against the collection of taxes for prior years is that “once an
assessment becomes final then there was no specific statutory authority for
adjusting the assessment upwards after that ‘finality’ to recapture the taxes offset
by an erroneous Homestead Tax Credit”.
The Department notes that the three prior years recapture of tax credits
observed by the Auditors in the three different County Assessment Offices has
been the consistent determination of that policy by the agency. DAT decided on
the three prior year recapture policy for several reasons: (1) the time period is
consistent with the limited three year period by which a homeowner can claim a
refund of taxes erroneously paid found at Section 14-915, Tax-Property Article; (2)
the three prior year period is consistent with the number of years of federal tax
return information that the Department is able to retain for data storage purposes in
order to audit Homestead eligibility in the first place; and (3) the majority of the
local governments (whom the Auditors note have the legal responsibility to collect
taxes and who would receive the bulk of the tax dollars recaptured) have requested
that time period be used by the Department.
The Department has advised the Auditors that there is a separate property
tax appeal from a homeowner in Baltimore City that has just commenced which
challenges the legal right to collect even three prior years of improperly granted
Homestead Credits. Pending the outcome of that appeal, the Department will
continue to follow a policy statewide of advising local governments of the
recaptured tax credits for up to three prior years. When in the course of the
investigation of a Homestead account that the Department employee finds more
years of improper receipt of a credit beyond the three, then the employee will
advise the county government employee receiving the information of the additional
years. Because of the labor intensive nature of the effort required to investigate
more than a three year period and because of the limitation on the number of years
of automated records, the Department does not have sufficient staff to investigate
4

--- Page 41 ---
every Homestead recovery for a seven year period even if the longer period is
determined to be permissible under the law.
b) As the Auditors have suggested, DAT will introduce departmental
legislation at the 2014 session that will require homeowners to notify the
Department of changes in the property’s status that would affect eligibility for the
HTC. That legislation also will include a proposal creating a specific provision for
recapture of Homestead Tax Credits and the number of years to be recaptured.
Finding 5 – DAT does not have a plan to investigate the proprietary of HTCs
received in prior years on properties removed from eligibility after the
application filing period.
DAT Comments and Response: The Department agrees with the finding and can
comply with the two recommendations if the Executive Budget Department and
the General Assembly approves funding for a significant number of additional
employees in the Homestead Program.
There will be a six figure amount of homeowners who did not apply by the
December 31, 2012 deadline for a variety of reasons. Although a large number of
these homeowners did not apply because they know they no longer mathematically
qualify for an actual credit due to reduced assessments, there will still be a six
figure amount of homeowners receiving a credit who did not apply.
The Department will run a report of the nonfilers in descending order by the
amount of Homestead Credit granted on the property. Given the current likelihood
that legislation will be enacted in the 2013 session to extend the Homestead
application filing deadline for another year until December 31, 2013, there will be
another year and sufficient time for funds to be appropriated to provide additional
employees to perform this particular and other audits suggested in this Audit
Report. Those employees also will be needed to perform the tasks to recapture any
improperly granted credits for multiple prior years. There is no overstatement in
emphasizing how manually labor intensive and time consuming it becomes to
investigate individual property owners where the Department must meet a legally
sustainable standard of proving nonresidency for any year the tax credit is
removed.
Finding 6 – SDAT’s real property records were not formatted in a manner to
facilitate computer matches.
5

--- Page 42 ---
DAT Comments and Response: The Department agrees with the finding and will
comply with the recommendation requesting the agency to explore the feasibility
of changing its Real Property format for all property records to better facilitate
computer matches on property owner name for the Homestead Program.
The Department has made appropriate inquiries and it is not economically
feasible to obtain a vendor to add all owners to the current AAVS records and
reformat the existing AAVS records for 2.1 million properties. This process would
require the vendor to examine every deed for every property to make these
changes. However, the Department will review its existing instructions regarding
the entry of ownership changes and issue a revised instruction to ensure
consistency in the inclusion of additional names.
Finding 7 – Additional automated procedures are available to help ensure
properties remain eligible for the HTC on an ongoing basis.
DAT Comments and Response: The Department agrees with the Auditors’
finding and will adopt the one principal recommendation made here for the agency
to use additional automated procedures to ensure the continued eligibility of
properties receiving the HTC.
The Department believes that the automated procedure that will produce the
most fruitful results is the Motor Vehicle Administration (MVA) match. It needs
to be noted for the record that prior to the date when the Department began the
administration of the Homestead application law in 2007, the agency had requested
the MVA to agree to provide certain MVA records in an automated format.
Instead, the MVA agreed to provide the Department with the capability to look up
the driving records of persons on a manual, individual basis because of the
significant number of demands the MVA receives for its information. For this
Audit, the Auditors were able to request the MVA to provide them with a
specialized spreadsheet showing all drivers in Maryland who had surrendered their
driver’s license or identification card to another State. As a result, a member of the
General Assembly has introduced, after discussions with the Department,
legislation (SB645) that would require the MVA and the counties to provide
electronic records information to assist the Department in determining eligibility
for the Homestead Property Tax Credit. The MVA match report will be produced
by July 30, 2013 based on conversations already taking place between the two
agencies.
6

--- Page 43 ---
The second automated procedure is the Income Tax Records match.
Because the Comptroller’s Office ran and edited the report instead of providing the
underlying data, the results here will require significant individual testing and
investigation of the exceptions. That investigation also will require the
Department to obtain a particular commercial vendor’s information service that the
Legislative Auditors routinely have in their offices. There are many valid reasons
for having a different tax return address such as a return filed by a separated
spouse, an elderly parent filing a return at the address of an adult son or daughter,
an adult child moving from the home, or the Comptroller’s Office using a different
tax year’s address for the return. Since the Department matched the Homestead
property address income tax return in our federal income tax database, the
Department believes that this particular automated procedure will produce less
positive results. Depending on the number of applications the Department receives
based on the filing deadline extension legislation, the Department expects to
produce this report on July 1, 2014.
The third automated procedure recommended by the Auditors is the Multiple
Properties Analysis which the Department will begin performing on an automated
report basis on December 31, 2013. The Auditors note that this audit is useful for
properties not yet submitting a Homestead application. Otherwise, the Homestead
application screening process prevents an owner from receiving a HTC on more
than one property due to the comparison of Social Security numbers. In addition,
there is a longstanding manual letter issuance and credit removal process in the
local Assessment Offices where the employees send out an inquiry whenever a
property owner uses a different “mail to address” for receipt of Assessment
Notices or tax bills. This new automated procedure will be included in the
comprehensive compliance manual the Department is developing pursuant to
Recommendation 1 of this Report.
The fourth automated procedure is the Rental Properties Match which is an
audit that the local Assessment Offices (in counties where rental licensing exists)
have been performing for years. The Auditors have acknowledged to the
Department that several of the properties in their test of 25 properties had already
been earmarked for recapture by the local Assessment Office. The Auditors had
requested their own independent rental property lists from the local governments
without reference to earlier lists and the time periods for those lists. As was noted
in the larger Audit Report, it is essential for the Department to contact individual
property owners to receive an explanation of the property’s use. Recently, the
Department had found several instances where the City Government had
incorrectly indicated that a property was a currently licensed rental property when
7

--- Page 44 ---
in fact the property had been purchased two years earlier by the former tenant. The
local Assessment Office employees will continue reviewing these reports as they
are received from local governments.
The fifth and final automated procedure discussed by the Auditors is the
Review of Foreclosed Properties. The Department would assign the lowest
priority to this audit because the Department successfully had departmental
legislation enacted in the 2012 session that requires a mortgage lender to report the
foreclosure order on the property to the Department within 60 days of
“ratification” of the Order by the court. Equally important, the legislation contains
a self policing mechanism that places a lien on the property until the Homestead
Tax Credit amount for that tax year is paid. The local Assessment Offices that
administer the new mortgage foreclosure reporting law are already sending lists of
these properties to the Homestead Section to remove Homestead Credits for those
properties still receiving them. At our own initiative, the Department will seek (by
December 31, 2013) an electronic listing from the Department of Labor, Licensing,
and Regulation (DLLR) of its new (effective October 1, 2012) registry of
foreclosed properties to compare to a listing of properties receiving a Homestead
Tax Credit in the Department’s AAVS.
The Legislative Auditors conclude this section of the Audit Report noting
that “while automated procedures can be performed without a large commitment of
resources, investigating potentially ineligible properties can be a time-consuming
process”. All of these procedures will have to be prioritized if the Department
does not receive a significant commitment of new employees.
It is important to note again, as was mentioned previously in the comments
and response to finding 1, that the Department is still in the midst of the data
programming and administrative processing of those application the Homestead
office received in the four months before the December 31, 2012 application
deadline. Also, pending legislation introduced in the current session of the General
Assembly appears likely to extend the application deadline through December 31,
2013. If this occurs, a significant number of the 8 permanent employees the
Department intends to commit to performing some of the reviews on the results
from new automated procedures will be needed to continue the processing of
applications that are received throughout the extended application period.
Therefore, all of the suggested timelines in this response for beginning the reviews
of automated procedures are subject to revision based on the number of
applications received in the extended filing period, the number of telephone calls
received by the Homestead Section in the extended filing period, and the number
8

--- Page 45 ---
of new employees, if any, the Department receives in the fiscal 2015 budget
request.
9

--- Page 46 ---
A T
UDIT EAM
Stephen C. Pease, CPA
Audit Manager
Julia M. King
Senior Auditor
Jared J. Bardall
Daniel R. Brann, CPA
Michael D. Cheese
Jason M. Goldstein
Brian S. Han
Kevin J. Mercer
Staff Auditors