Title: Department of State Police - Workforce Civilianization
Date: 12/28/2016
Type: Special Reports and Letters
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5a945d3ccc9d72404c150acb
Extracted: 2025-06-18T11:04:33.422928
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Special Report
Department of State Police
Workforce Civilianization
Opportunities Exist to Increase Civilian Employment
December 2016
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
For further information concerning this report contact:
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
301 West Preston Street, Room 1202
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Phone: 410-946-5900 · 301-970-5900
Toll Free in Maryland: 1-877-486-9964
Maryland Relay: 711
TTY: 410-946-5401 · 301-970-5401
E-mail: OLAWebmaster@ola.state.md.us
Website: www.ola.state.md.us
The Office of Legislative Audits operates a Fraud Hotline to report fraud, waste, or abuse
involving State of Maryland government resources. Reports of fraud, waste, or abuse
may be communicated anonymously by a toll-free call to 1-877-FRAUD-11, by mail to the
Fraud Hotline, c/o Office of Legislative Audits, or through the Office’s website.
The Department of Legislative Services does not discriminate on the basis of age, ancestry, color,
creed, marital status, national origin, race, religion, gender, gender identity, sexual orientation,
or disability in the admission or access to its programs, services, or activities. The Department’s
Information Officer has been designated to coordinate compliance with the nondiscrimination
requirements contained in Section 35.107 of the Department of Justice Regulations. Requests for
assistance should be directed to the Information Officer at 410-946-5400 or 410-970-5400.

--- Page 3 ---
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERvIcEs
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY
Wiirren G. I)eschenaux ThomasJ.BarnickelIII. CPA
Executive Director Legislative Auditor
December 28, 2016
Senator Edward J. Kasemeyer, Chairman
Senate Budget and Taxation Committee
Miller Senate Office Building, 3 West Wing
11 Bladen Street
Annapolis, MD 21401
Delegate Maggie McIntosh, Chairman
House Appropriations Committee
House Office Building, Room 121
6 Bladen Street
Annapolis, MD 21401
Dear Senator Kasemeyer and Delegate McIntosh:
In the April 2016 Joint Chairmen‘s Report (page 152), the committees requested
the Office ofLegislative Audits (OLA) to study the personnel policies ofthe
Department ofState Police (DSP) and make recommendations on how to increase
civilianization at DSP. The Report also requested OLA to estimate the cost
savings to be realized by civilianizing certain positions held by sworn troopers.
Our study revealed that DSP does not have personnel policies that specifically
address the use ofsworn troopers in positions that can be fulfilled by civilian
employees. Consequently, those positions have not been formally identified nor
has DSP conducted periodic analyses or studies to determine whether positions
held by troopers should be performed by lower costing civilian employees.
OLA’s analysis ofthe 1,426 positions filled by sworn troopers as ofApril 22,
2016 identified 127 (8.9 percent) positions currently filled by sworn troopers that
could be civilianized. Using civilians for these positions could reduce the annual
cost for these positions by approximately $10.8 million because oflower salary
and certain fringe benefit costs. Approximately $7.2 million ofthe reduction is
due to lower employer pension contribution rates for civilians.
301 West Preston Street Room 1202 Baltimore, Maryland 21201
410-946-5900/301-970-5900 Fax 410-946-5999/301-970-5999
Toll Free in Maryland 877-486-996-L fraud Hotline $77-FRAUD-il

--- Page 4 ---
Although DSP agreed all ofthe 127 positions that OLA identified could be
candidates for civilianization based on our assessment criteria, DSP does not
believe 11 positions should be civilianized and for a further 32 positions would
prefer that sworn troopers be used. According to DSP, past budgetary restrictions
on civilian hiring, limited advancement opportunities for civilians, and the
flexibility in deploying troopers have resulted in the use oftroopers to perform
essential administrative and support roles.
The study results and our recommendations concerning future civilianization
analyses can be found on page 6. This section also includes several tables
identifying: the classifications for 127 trooper positions that could be civilianized
and their personnel costs; the comparable civilian positions and their personnel
costs; and the 43 positions for which DSP either does not believe should be
civilianized or prefers to use sworn troopers. Exhibit 1 contains our analyses of
each ofthose positions.
The Joint Chairmen’s Report language suggests that expanding civilian
employment opportunities could free up the troopers to perform law enforcement
related activities. However, ifall 127 troopers were redeployed to law
enforcement related activities, no cost savings would be realized; instead, DSP
would incur additional personnel costs ofapproximately $10.2 million to hire
civilians to fill those positions. Alternatively, DSP could pursue civilianization as
vacancies occur in law enforcement activities. That is, vacancies in law
enforcement activities could be filled by the troopers occupying the
aforementioned 127 positions and those positions could be filled with civilians.
DSP’s response to our recommendations is included as an appendix to this report.
We wish to acknowledge the cooperation extended to us by DSP.
Respectfully submitted,
7)
Thomas J. Barnickel III, CPA
Legislative Auditor
2

--- Page 5 ---
Background
The Department of State Police (DSP) was established under Title 2 of the Public
Safety Article of the Annotated Code of Maryland. DSP’s primary mission is to
protect the citizens of Maryland from foreign and domestic security threats, to
fight crime, and to promote roadway safety by upholding the laws of the State of
Maryland. This is accomplished through patrol, investigation, intelligence
gathering and interdiction efforts, and by providing leadership and assistance to
State and local agencies. DSP also has certain regulatory duties, which include
administering the laws that relate to handgun sales, and inspecting certain motor
vehicles.
DSP is comprised of the Office of the Superintendent and three bureaus (Support
Services, Criminal Investigations, and Field Operations), which oversee the
various units within the Department. The fiscal year 2016 budget authorized
2,367 positions. As of April 2016, DSP had 2,103 filled positions of which 1,426
were occupied by sworn troopers.
Scope, Objectives and Methodology
Scope
In the April 2016 Joint Chairmen’s Report (page 152), it was noted that certain
non-law enforcement positions within the Department of State Police (DSP) are
performed by sworn troopers and could be performed instead by lower cost
civilian personnel, freeing up trooper positions for law enforcement. The budget
committees requested the Office of Legislative Audits (OLA) to study the
personnel policies of the Department of State Police (DSP) and make
recommendations on how to increase civilianization at DSP.
The recommendations were to include classifying each job type as best being
performed by sworn personnel, civilian personnel or either; the number of sworn
trooper personnel functioning in positions that could be performed by civilian
personnel; and an estimate of cost savings to be realized.1 Finally, the Report
requested that the results of our review be submitted to the budget committees by
1 This JCR request is similar to one from the April 2003 Joint Chairmen’s Report, which resulted
in the issuance on January 7, 2004 of a OLA performance audit report entitled “Department of
State Police - Workforce Civilianization” that identified opportunities for civilianizing 79
positions. In that report, we also disclosed that for fiscal year 2003 the ratio of sworn troopers
to civilian DSP employment was approximately 2 to 1. During our current review, we found a
similar ratio as of April 2016.
3

--- Page 6 ---
November 1, 2016; however, in September 2016, the Joint Chairmen extended the
submission deadline to January 2, 2017.
Objectives
Our objectives were:
1. to assess any DSP personnel policies related to the use of sworn trooper
and civilian positions for performing functions within the various DSP
Bureaus and units;
2. to identify non-law enforcement positions, such as administrative and
support related, within DSP performed by sworn troopers that could be
performed by lower cost civilians; and
3. to determine if DSP periodically conducted a similar civilianization
analysis.
We did not assess the justification or need for those identified positions and
functions presently filled by sworn troopers within the context of DSP’s mission.
Methodology
To accomplish our objective, we interviewed personnel at DSP, reviewed its
organizational structure, and inquired as to its policies on filling administrative
and support positions with sworn personnel and whether periodic analyses or
studies to increase civilianization of positions had been conducted.
To identify possible positions for civilianization, we obtained a list of all sworn
personnel employed by DSP and their positions as of April 22, 2016, which we
tested and found reliable. For each position, DSP provided job descriptions,
which we reviewed to identify positions for which civilianization may be
possible. We conducted interviews with DSP management and the troopers
occupying those positions between the months of May and August 2016 to obtain
an understanding of the job requirements and DSP’s justifications for using a
sworn trooper. We also reviewed applicable State laws and regulations to
determine if there was a legal requirement that a specific position be filled by a
sworn trooper.
4

--- Page 7 ---
Our analyses of the positions for possible civilianization consisted of obtaining
answers to the following questions:2
1. Does the position require the exercise of law enforcement powers3?
2. Are the skills, training, or experience of a sworn trooper required to fulfill the
duties of the position4?
3. Does the position require a sworn trooper because of statute or regulation5?
4. Can the requirements of the position be fulfilled by a specially trained
civilian?
If the answer to the first three questions was “no” and the answer to the fourth
question was “yes”, the position was identified for possible civilianization.
To determine the potential difference in costs between sworn troopers and
civilians, we compared the duties associated with those positions for possible
civilianization to State personnel position descriptions identified by DSP Human
Resources staff as closely resembling the DSP positions (based on duties and
functions) to determine the existing average State salaries (according to the
Department of Budget and Management) for civilians who would fill any
positions currently held by sworn troopers. We also determined the difference in
fringe benefit costs associated with employer contributions for pension costs and
payroll (FICA) taxes. We did not identify or calculate certain fringe benefit costs
(such as health insurance) and non-payroll costs associated with position
reassignments.
Our analysis only determined whether the positions described within a unit could
be performed by civilians. We did not attempt to analyze the adequacy of staffing
within each unit or the necessity for the position. Thus, regardless of whether
positions were identified for possible civilianization, the number of staff
necessary to perform these functions is assumed to remain the same.
2 This methodology was based on a January 2013, City of Chicago Office of the Inspector
General’s report on opportunities for civilianization in the Chicago Police Department.
3 Law enforcement powers include, but are not limited to, the authorization to make arrests in the
course of performing the general duties of the Maryland State Police, as defined in Public Safety
Article of the Annotated Code of Maryland, Section 2-301.
4 Although these positions did not necessarily require the exercise of law enforcement powers, the
skills, training, or experience of a sworn trooper was necessary to adequately perform the
position’s duties. For example, the skills, training, and experience of a sworn trooper is required
to properly supervise sworn troopers in law enforcement positions.
5 Certain positions (such as regulatory positions) are required by statute to be filled by sworn
troopers.
5

--- Page 8 ---
The scope of our review was less than that of an audit conducted in accordance
with generally accepted government auditing standards.
Study Results and Recommendations
The Department of State Police (DSP) does not have personnel policies that
specifically address the use of sworn troopers in positions that can be fulfilled by
civilian employees. Furthermore, DSP does not perform periodic analyses or
formal studies to identify positions filled by sworn troopers that could be
performed by lower cost civilian employees.
We identified 127 positions within 20 DSP units currently filled by sworn
troopers that could be filled by civilian employees. Based on fiscal year 2017 cost
data,6 the annual cost to fill these positions with civilians is approximately $10.8
million less than filling these positions with troopers due to the lower civilian
salaries and lower fringe benefit costs for employer pension and payroll (FICA)
tax contributions. The cost reductions were calculated by comparing the $21.0
million in salaries and fringe benefit costs of the 127 sworn trooper positions, see
Table 1, to the estimated $10.2 million in salaries and fringe benefits of the
related civilian positions, see Table 2.
Table 1
Payroll Costs of Positions Filled by Sworn Troopers in Positions Identified
by OLA for Potential Civilianization
Total Annual Salaries
Number of
and Fringe Benefits
Sworn Trooper Classification Positions
(using current salaries
Identified
as of 8/8/16)
Trooper First Class 8 $933,800
Senior Trooper 9 1,229,908
Master Trooper 12 1,955,256
Corporal 19 2,820,325
Sergeant 49 8,274,952
First Sergeant 10 1,719,872
Detective Sergeant 3 556,005
Lieutenant 11 2,227,253
Captain 5 1,063,273
Major 1 270,937
Total Sworn Troopers 127 21,051,581
6 Using personnel and budget data from DSP and the Department of Budget and Management’s
Office of Personnel Services and Benefits.
6

--- Page 9 ---
Table 2
Potential Comparable Civilian Positions for the Related Administrative and
Support Services Functions Performed by Sworn Troopers
Total Estimated
Number of Annual Salaries and
Civilian Position Classification Positions Fringe Benefits (using
(per OLA) Identified statewide average
salaries as of 7/1/16)
Administrative Officer I 2 $121,701
Administrative Officer II 20 1,299,415
Administrative Program Manager III 3 340,713
Administrative Program Manager IV 1 112,956
Administrative Specialist III 2 114,551
Administrator I 10 733,656
Administrator III 11 947,913
Administrator IV 1 93,474
Administrator V 9 914,240
Administrator VI 1 110,941
Administrator VII 2 217,859
Agency Grants Specialist II 1 67,994
Agency Procurement Specialist II 2 136,786
Airport Paramedic 30 2,376,736
Armorer 1 51,652
Automotive Services Specialist 1 52,970
Computer User Support Specialist II 1 53,907
Database Specialist II 1 83,907
Database Specialist Supervisor 1 92,378
Equal Opportunity Officer II 1 63,898
HR Administrator II 2 176,663
HR Administrator III 1 99,670
HR Administrator IV 1 109,884
Internal Auditor Program Supervisor 2 186,598
IT Director III 1 135,797
IT Functional Analyst II 3 219,107
IT Technical Support Specialist II 2 174,379
IT Technical Support Specialist Manager 1 102,571
IT Technical Support Specialist Supervisor 1 85,610
MSP Pilot IV 1 114,796
Polygraph Examiner 7 551,235
Program Manager III 1 107,091
Public Affairs Officer II 1 69,297
Services Specialist 1 45,506
Warehouse Supervisor 1 51,652
Total Civilians 127 $10,217,503
7

--- Page 10 ---
The majority of the $10.8 million in cost reduction, approximately $7.8 million, is
due to employer pension plan contributions, which are significantly higher for
sworn troopers than for civilian employees. During fiscal year 2017, the
percentage of pension costs in relation to salary the State contributes is 84 percent
for sworn troopers, but only 17 percent for civilians. For example, one position
filled by a sworn trooper with a salary of $91,000 was identified that could be
filled by a civilian employee with a salary of $46,000. After considering payroll
(FICA) taxes and the State’s share of the pension contributions, we concluded that
the sworn trooper annually costs the State $174,000 whereas the civilian would
cost $57,000, approximately $117,000 less.
DPS agreed with our assessments on the feasibility of civilianizing the 127
positions based on our assessment criteria, but stated that for 43 positions, either it
does not believe the positions should be civilianized (11 positions) or prefers that
sworn troopers be used (32 positions), see Table 3.
8

--- Page 11 ---
Table 3
Summary of DSP’s Position on 127 Sworn Trooper Positions Identified by OLA for
Possible Civilianization, by Unit
Department of State Police Position
Unit Does Not
Prefers to Believe
Agrees Use Sworn Position
Troopers Should be
Civilianized
Office of Superintendent:
Strategic Planning and Command 7
Fair Practices Section 1
Internal Affairs 1
Media Communications Section 1
Office of the Department Prosecutor Section 1
Planning and Research Division – Grants Mgmt. 1
Special Projects Division 2
Support Services Bureau:
Human Resources Division 5 1
Information Technology Division 6
Electronic Systems Development 3
Facilities Management Division 3 1
Police Communications Support Division 2 1
Quartermaster Division 3
Motor Vehicle Division 2
Administrative Operations Division 2
Office of Promotional Testing 1
Criminal Investigations Bureau:
Licensing Division 22 6
Criminal Enforcement Division 18 1
Field Operations Bureau:
Aviation Command 2 31 1
Automotive Safety Enforcement Division 1 1
Total 84 32 11
Potential cost differential between troopers and
$7,104,044 $2,743,314 $ 986,720
civilians related to positions OLA identified for
civilianization
Exhibit 1 contains our detail analyses of sworn trooper positions by DSP unit,
classification and job duty, DSP’s response to our conclusions, and our further
comments for the 11 positions DSP believes should not be civilianized.
According to DSP, many of these 127 sworn troopers were placed in these
positions, in part, because of past budgetary restrictions on civilian hiring and the
need to ensure the critical roles of those positions were performed.
9

--- Page 12 ---
DSP cited several factors that could impact civilianization efforts or should be
considered. DSP believes the lower salary and limited advancement opportunities
a civilian would receive as a primary obstacle in attracting and retaining qualified
civilian personnel to fill certain positions. Also, for certain jobs, such as the
aforementioned 43 positions, DSP believes that sworn troopers are more
appropriately skilled than civilians to perform the jobs, such as handgun licensing.
Furthermore, DSP advised that civilians are limited in what they can do and
generally can only be used for tasks consistent with their official job descriptions,
as compared to sworn troopers who are required to be available for any
assignment of any type when needed. Consequently, any redeployment of sworn
troopers in positions subject to civilianization to meet law enforcement exigencies
would be lost if civilians had been in those positions.
The Joint Chairmen’s Report language suggests that expanding civilian
employment opportunities could free up the troopers to perform law enforcement
related activities. However, if all 127 troopers were redeployed to law
enforcement related activities, no overall cost savings would be realized. Instead,
additional positions would need to be authorized at an estimated annual cost of
approximately $10.2 million.
Alternatively, DSP could pursue civilianization as vacancies occur in law
enforcement activities. That is, vacancies in law enforcement activities could be
filled by the troopers occupying the aforementioned 127 positions and those
positions could be filled with civilians.
OLA Recommendations
DSP should develop formal policies that encourage civilianization when possible
and specify the related processes for converting positions. DSP should also
conduct periodic studies to identify future position that could be occupied by
civilian employees.
10

--- Page 13 ---
EXHIBIT 1
OLA Analysis of Sworn Positions Identified for Possible
Civilianization
A. Office of Superintendent
1. Strategic Planning Command Division
Number of Positions Number of Positions
Sworn Trooper
Filled by Sworn OLA Identified for
Rank
Troopers Possible Civilianization
Captain 1 1
Lieutenant 2 2
First Sergeant 2 2
Sergeant 3 2
Totals 8 7
Overview of Unit
The Strategic Planning Command Division is comprised of two subdivisions: 1)
Planning and Research and 2) Inspection and Compliance. Planning and
Research is responsible for maintaining accreditations and developing new
policies for DSP. Inspection and Compliance ensures the integrity,
accountability, and improvement of DSP personnel, programs, and operations.
Duties of Sworn Troopers OLA Identified for Possible Civilianization
The Strategic Planning Command Division includes eight sworn troopers of
which seven positions were identified for possible civilianization:
Five of these sworn troopers (one Captain, one Lieutenant, one First Sergeant, and
two Sergeants) are assigned to Planning and Research. The Captain and
Lieutenant ensure DSP’s compliance with the Commission on Accreditation for
Law Enforcement (CALEA) standards. One Sergeant assists with ensuring law
enforcement training programs meet accreditation standards. The other First
Sergeant and a Sergeant oversee the drafting and publishing of DSP policies (that
is, General and Special Orders).
The remaining two sworn troopers (one Lieutenant and one Sergeant) are
assigned to Inspection and Compliance. These troopers oversee the performance
of decentralized line inspections (internal audits of areas such as inventory,
timesheets and overtime, and leave records) to ensure Department wide
compliance with established policies and procedures.
11

--- Page 14 ---
DSP Response
DSP agreed with our conclusion.
2. Fair Practices Section
Number of Positions Number of Positions
Sworn Trooper
Filled by Sworn OLA Identified for
Rank
Troopers Possible Civilianization
First Sergeant 1 1
Totals 1 1
Overview of Unit
The Practices Section ensures DSP’s compliance with the Governor’s Code of
Fair Employment Practices and various federal and state laws and policies
prohibiting discrimination, harassment, and retaliation in all aspects of
employment.
Duties of Sworn Troopers OLA Identified for Possible Civilianization
The Fair Practices Section includes one sworn trooper whose position could be
civilianized. The First Sergeant is responsible for investigating and responding to
complaints that arise during the hiring and selection process, including speaking
with the individual who filed the complaint to determine the complaint’s validity.
DSP Response
DSP agreed with our conclusion.
3. Internal Affairs
Number of Positions Number of Positions
Sworn Trooper
Filled by Sworn OLA Identified for
Rank
Troopers Possible Civilianization
Captain 1 0
Lieutenant 2 0
Detective Sergeant 2 1
Sergeant 3 0
Corporal 2 0
Totals 10 1
12

--- Page 15 ---
Overview of Unit
The Internal Affairs Section is responsible for ensuring that thorough and
objective investigations of complaints and allegations of misconduct against DSP
troopers are performed. The Internal Affairs Section also ensures that appropriate
disciplinary action is processed when required.
Duties of Sworn Troopers OLA Identified for Possible Civilianization
The Internal Affairs Section includes 10 sworn troopers of which we identified
one of their positions for possible civilianization. Specifically, one Detective
Sergeant is primarily responsible for database management related to
investigations performed by the Internal Affairs Section. Database management
is an administrative function that does not require the exercise of law enforcement
powers or the skills and training of a sworn trooper, and there was no legal
requirement that the position be filled by a sworn trooper.
DSP Response
DSP agreed with our conclusion. Although this Detective Sergeant performs some
investigative duties, DSP advised us that these duties could be absorbed by the
other troopers in the Internal Affairs Section if their administrative duties
(primarily database entry) were in turn assumed by the database administrator
position.
4. Media Communications Section
Number of Positions Number of Positions
Sworn Trooper
Filled by Full-Duty OLA Identified for
Rank
Sworn Troopers Possible Civilianization
Corporal 1 1
Totals 1 1
Overview of Unit
The Media Communications Section is responsible for the daily dissemination of
information to the media and public, and the facilitation of internal
communication from the Office of the Superintendent.
Duties of Sworn Troopers OLA Identified for Possible Civilianization
The Media Communications Section includes one sworn trooper whose position
could be civilianized. The Corporal is the primary uniformed spokesperson for
DSP. This trooper provides information to local and national media outlets. They
also prepare statements and news releases, taking into account police operations,
directives, and sensitive law enforcement documents.
13

--- Page 16 ---
DSP Response
DSP agreed with our conclusion.
5. Office of the Department Prosecutor Section
Number of Positions Number of Positions
Sworn Trooper
Filled by Sworn OLA Identified for
Rank
Troopers Possible Civilianization
Lieutenant 1 1
Totals 1 1
Overview of Unit
The Office of the Department Prosecutor Section is responsible for prosecuting all
cases against sworn troopers in front of the disciplinary hearing board.
Duties of Sworn Troopers OLA Identified for Possible Civilianization
The Office of the Department Prosecutor includes one sworn trooper whose
position could be civilianized. The trooper presents disciplinary cases in front of
the hearing board and is responsible for recommending a punishment for the
officer. DSP is able to achieve greater consistency in the punishments it
recommends by having the same individual making these decisions.
DSP Response
DSP agreed with our conclusion.
6. Planning and Research Division - Grants Management Section
Number of Positions Number of Positions
Sworn Trooper
Filled by Sworn OLA Identified for
Rank
Troopers Possible Civilianization
First Sergeant 1 1
Totals 1 1
Overview of Unit
The Planning and Research Division - Grants Management Section applies for,
administers, and monitors grant awards.
Duties of Sworn Troopers OLA Identified for Possible Civilianization
The Planning and Research Division includes one sworn trooper whose position
could be civilianized. The First Sergeant is assigned to the Grants Management
Section of the Division and is responsible for managing multiple federal, state,
14

--- Page 17 ---
and local law enforcement grants, which could involve confidential and sensitive
materials. Specifically, the First Sergeant’s duties include writing and submitting
grant applications, meeting with grantees, and managing the usage of grant funds.
DSP Response
DSP agreed with our conclusion, provided that the civilian staff passes the
appropriate background checks (necessary to obtain access to the sensitive
materials involving DSP operations).
7. Special Projects Division
Number of Positions Number of Positions
Sworn Trooper
Filled by Sworn OLA Identified for
Rank
Troopers Possible Civilianization
Captain 1 1
Sergeant 1 1
Totals 2 2
Overview of Unit
The Special Projects Section handles all requests from the Superintendent that are
not assigned to a specific division.
Duties of Sworn Troopers OLA Identified for Possible Civilianization
The Special Projects Section includes two sworn troopers; both of their positions
could be civilianized. These positions are responsible for maintaining DSP’s
capital inventory, processing Public Information Act requests, short term project
management (for example, coordinating a conference), and completing various
reports (such as the Annual Report and DSP’s Capital Improvement Plan).
DSP Response
DSP agreed with our conclusion.
15

--- Page 18 ---
B. Support Services Bureau
1. Human Resources Division
Number of Positions Number of Positions
Sworn Trooper
Filled by Sworn OLA Identified for
Rank
Troopers Possible Civilianization
Lieutenant 2 2
First Sergeant 1 1
Sergeant 1 0
Corporal 2 1
Master Trooper 1 1
Senior Trooper 1 0
Trooper First Class 2 1
Totals 10 6
Overview of Unit
The Human Resources (HR) Division is responsible for all sworn and civilian
recruitment activities, salary administration, and classification and compensation
procedures. In addition, the HR Division oversees the administration of
retirement benefits and performance evaluation record keeping.
Duties of Sworn Troopers OLA Identified for Possible Civilianization
The HR Division includes 10 sworn troopers of which we identified 6 of their
positions for possible civilianization.
Employment Services Commander
One Lieutenant is responsible for overseeing the Recruitment Selection Unit and
the Background Investigations Unit. The Lieutenant oversees sworn cadet and
trooper candidate hiring, and ensures that DSP has an adequate recruiting strategy
to ensure that future sworn vacancies can be filled timely. The Lieutenant also
serves as the final review for polygraph testing and background investigations of
applicants to the Maryland State Police (MSP) Academy to ensure that all policies
were followed and all legal obligations were met.
Background Investigations Unit
Three sworn troopers (one Corporal, one Master Trooper, and one Trooper First
Class) are assigned to the Background Investigations Unit. This unit conducts
background investigations of applicants for Trooper Candidates positions within
the MSP Academy. The Corporal assigns background investigations of applicants
to the investigators in the unit (the Master Trooper and Trooper First Class, as
well as civilian investigators) and reviews and approves completed investigations.
16

--- Page 19 ---
Personnel Administration Section
Two sworn troopers (one Lieutenant and one First Sergeant) are assigned to the
Personnel Administration Section. The Lieutenant oversees medical services,
personnel services, civilian employment, and volunteers. The First Sergeant’s
primary responsibilities include overseeing volunteers and interns, the leave
records unit, retirement benefits, and personnel records.
DSP Response
DSP agrees that the six sworn trooper positions identified by OLA could be
civilianized, but it believes the Employment Services Commander position, which
is occupied a Lieutenant, should remain a position filled by a sworn trooper.
According to DSP, this position is ultimately responsible for recruiting new MSP
state troopers and ensuring that MSP continues to enroll the most highly qualified
candidates in the Academy.
OLA Comment
A civilian could be trained to supervise background investigations to ensure they
are completed properly (we also noted DSP currently has civilian employees
performing these duties), oversee cadet and trooper candidate hiring, and explain
to disqualified applicants why they were ineligible to participate in the MSP
Academy.
2. Information Technology Division
Number of Positions Number of Positions
Sworn Trooper
Filled by Sworn OLA Identified for
Rank
Troopers Possible Civilianization
Lieutenant 2 2
Sergeant 4 4
Totals 6 6
Overview of Unit
The Information Technology (IT) Division is responsible for developing,
implementing, and maintaining DSP’s various systems and applications used to
support troopers in the field, as well as allied law enforcement agencies, and state
and local government agencies.
Duties of Sworn Troopers OLA Identified for Possible Civilianization
The IT Division includes six sworn troopers; all six of their positions could be
civilianized. The duties of these sworn troopers were as follows:
17

--- Page 20 ---
IT Division Commander
One Lieutenant oversees the IT Division and is responsible for project
management and coordinating projects with allied agencies (such as the Maryland
Motor Vehicle Administration and local law enforcement agencies).
Research and Development Supervisor
One Sergeant is responsible for overseeing the development of all law
enforcement programs and software used in the Mobile Date Terminals (MDTs,
which are the laptop computers used in police vehicles) and at offices throughout
the State. In addition, the First Sergeant analyzes data from these programs to
ensure the program is operating properly and to identify trends that may require
additional action by DSP.
Logistics Supervisor
One Lieutenant is responsible for overseeing various IT projects, as well as
performing administrative tasks such as payroll, scheduling, and civilian
performance evaluations for the IT Division.
Support Personnel Supervisor
One Sergeant supervises the civilian support personnel within the IT Division and
assists with testing new programs and systems. The Sergeant also coordinates
training related to these systems for sworn troopers and other allied law
enforcement agency personnel.
User Support
One Sergeant provides user support for sworn troopers (as well as officers at
allied agencies) related to the programs and systems developed by the IT
Division. The Sergeant also assists in testing new programs and systems prior to
department wide implementation.
Technical Training Administrator
One Sergeant conducts technical training for all sworn troopers (as well as other
users at allied agencies) throughout the State.
DSP response
DSP agreed with our conclusion.
18

--- Page 21 ---
3. Electronic Systems Division
Number of Positions Number of Positions
Sworn Trooper
Filled by Sworn OLA Identified for
Rank
Troopers Possible Civilianization
First Sergeant 1 1
Corporal 1 1
Trooper First Class 1 1
Totals 3 3
Overview of Unit
The Electronic Systems Division is responsible for installing, maintaining, and
repairing electronic systems inside DSP vehicles.
Duties of Sworn Troopers OLA Identified for Possible Civilianization
The Electronic Systems Division includes three sworn troopers; all three of their
positions could be civilianized. The First Sergeant and Corporal each oversee
part of the Electronic Systems Division (and operate out of the Waterloo Barrack
and on Maryland’s Eastern Shore, respectively). These responsibilities include
managing and maintaining electronic systems used in police vehicles, and
researching and testing new electronic equipment. In addition, these sworn
troopers are responsible for DSP’s Mobile Command Center (a semi-truck type
vehicle that functions as a portable barrack) when it is deployed in the field. The
Trooper First Class performs installation and maintenance of IT equipment in
police vehicles.
DSP Response
DSP agreed with our conclusion.
4. Facilities Management Division
Number of Positions Number of Positions
Sworn Trooper
Filled by Sworn OLA Identified for
Rank
Troopers Possible Civilianization
Major7 1 1
Lieutenant 1 1
Sergeant 2 2
Totals 4 4
7 Under DSP’s rank structure, Majors are responsible for supervising commands (that is, the
Divisions) within each of the four Bureaus. This Major is the head of Logistics Command,
which is comprised of the Facilities Management, Motor Vehicle, and Quartermaster Divisions.
The Major is presented within the Facilities Management Division for reporting purposes.
19

--- Page 22 ---
Overview of Unit
The Facilities Management Division is responsible for maintaining, renovating,
and inspecting the various DSP locations throughout the State.
Duties of Sworn Troopers OLA Identified for Possible Civilianization
The Facilities Management Division includes four sworn troopers; all four of their
positions could be civilianized. The Major is the head of Logistics Command,
which is comprised of the Facilities Management Division, the Motor Vehicle
Division, and the Quartermaster Division. The Lieutenant is responsible for
managing the energy and recycling programs and maintaining DSP’s facilities
master plan. One Sergeant oversees the fuel management program. The other
Sergeant prepares various administrative reports for the Division.
DSP Response
Although DSP agrees that a civilian could perform in all four positions, but it
believes the position occupied by the Major should remain as a sworn trooper to
maintain the Department’s rank structure, which has a Major supervising each of
the commands. Given that this Major oversees the divisions responsible for
DSP’s police vehicles and equipment, DSP believes a sworn supervisor is
necessary to ensure that DSP is able to fulfill its mission.
OLA Comment
A sworn trooper is not necessary given that the Major supervises three Divisions
in which we identified all positions currently filled by sworn troopers for potential
civilianization.
5. Police Communications Support Division
Number of Positions Number of Positions
Sworn Trooper
Filled by Sworn OLA Identified for
Rank
Troopers Possible Civilianization
Captain 1 0
First Sergeant 2 1
Sergeant 4 1
Corporal 2 0
Master Trooper 2 1
Totals 11 3
Overview of Unit
The Police Communications Support Division (PCSD) manages the
communication systems used to support law enforcement personnel across the
State, provides statewide oversight over various databases, such as the National
20

--- Page 23 ---
Criminal Information Center (NCIC) database, and provides security at DSP’s
Headquarters.
Duties of Sworn Troopers OLA Identified for Possible Civilianization
The PCSD includes 11 sworn troopers and we identified 3 of their positions for
possible civilianization.
Administrative Officer
A First Sergeant is primarily responsible for administrative duties such as payroll,
performance evaluations, and scheduling training for the PCSD. The First
Sergeant also supervises the PCSD Duty Officers (who are sworn troopers).
NCIC Compliance Auditors
One Sergeant and one Master Trooper conduct audits of agencies with NCIC
access to ensure the integrity of data maintained within the system and to ensure
that access to the NCIC is properly restricted. Civilian employees at DSP
performed the same duties as the sworn NCIC compliance auditors.
DSP Response
DSP agrees that the three positions identified by OLA could be civilianized, but
prefers the Administrative Officer duties currently performed by a First Sergeant
to remain a sworn trooper position in order to adequately supervise the PCSD
Duty Officers.
6. Quartermaster Division
Number of Positions Number of Positions
Sworn Trooper
Filled by Sworn OLA Identified for
Rank
Troopers Possible Civilianization
Lieutenant 1 1
Sergeant 2 2
Totals 3 3
Overview of Unit
The Quartermaster Division procures materials, supplies, equipment, and services
needed to operate the DSP.
Duties of Sworn Troopers OLA Identified for Possible Civilianization
The Quartermaster Division includes three sworn troopers. All three of their
positions were identified for possible civilianization. The Lieutenant oversees
procurement of firearms and equipment, manages budgets, monitors contracts,
and evaluates the need for potential new equipment. One Sergeant serves as the
21

--- Page 24 ---
Agency Armorer and is responsible for managing DSP’s firearms inventory,
whose specific duties include performing routine maintenance on weapons,
repairing damaged weapons, and evaluating and testing potential new weapons.
The other Sergeant is responsible of managing the warehouse for DSP equipment.
DSP Response
DSP agreed with our conclusion.
7. Motor Vehicle Division
Number of Positions Number of Positions
Sworn Trooper
Filled by Sworn OLA Identified for
Rank
Troopers Possible Civilianization
Lieutenant 1 1
Sergeant 1 1
Totals 2 2
Overview of Unit
The Motor Vehicle Division procures, repairs, maintains, and disposes of DSP’s
motor vehicles.
Duties of Sworn Troopers OLA Identified for Possible Civilianization
The Motor Vehicle Division includes two sworn troopers; both of their positions
could be civilianized. Both troopers are responsible for ensuring that
procurement, maintenance, repairs, and dispositions of DSP vehicles are properly
performed.
DSP Response
DSP agrees with our conclusion.
8. Administrative Operations Division
Number of Positions Number of Positions
Sworn Trooper
Filled by Sworn OLA Identified for
Rank
Troopers Possible Civilianization
Captain 1 1
Sergeant 1 1
Totals 2 2
22

--- Page 25 ---
Overview of Unit
The Administrative Operations Division supports DSP’s Information Technology
(IT) Division by overseeing the procurement of new IT software and equipment
and managing DSP’s related IT inventory.
Duties of Sworn Troopers OLA Identified for Possible Civilianization
The Administrative Operations Division includes two sworn troopers; both of
their positions could be civilianized. Both troopers are involved with the
procurement and monitoring of DSP’s IT-related contracts.
DSP Response
DSP agrees with our conclusion.
9. Office of Promotional Testing
Number of Positions Number of Positions
Sworn Trooper
Filled by Sworn OLA Identified for
Rank
Troopers Possible Civilianization
Captain 1 1
Totals 1 1
Overview of Unit
The Office of Promotional Testing is responsible for all aspects of the
promotional testing process (the process used to promote sworn personnel to the
ranks of Corporal through Captain).
Duties of Sworn Troopers OLA Identified for Possible Civilianization
The Office of Promotional Testing includes one sworn trooper whose position
could be civilianized. This trooper’s responsibilities include creating written
exam questions, evaluating the applicability and relevancy of exam questions, and
compiling and tracking exam scores.
DSP Response
DSP agrees with our conclusion. DSP advised us that promotional exam
questions are created based on established criteria for the duties of each rank and
are evaluated by subject matter experts (that is, other sworn troopers of that
specific rank). Nevertheless, DSP believes the duties of this position could be
adequately fulfilled by a trained civilian.
23

--- Page 26 ---
C. Criminal Investigations Bureau
1. Licensing Division
Number of Positions Number of Positions
Sworn Trooper
Filled by Sworn OLA Identified for
Rank
Troopers Possible Civilianization
Captain 1 1
Lieutenant 1 0
First Sergeant 1 1
Sergeant 10 8
Corporal 5 5
Master Trooper 4 4
Senior Trooper 7 7
Trooper First Class 2 2
Totals 31 28
Overview of Unit
The Licensing Division administers laws and conducts investigations concerning
the sale, transfer, and registration of firearms and electronic listening devices.
The Licensing Division also issues licenses for professions such as private
detectives, security guards, security system companies, and others as provided for
in Code.
Duties of Sworn Troopers OLA Identified for Possible Civilianization
The licensing division includes 31 sworn troopers. We identified the positions for
28 of these troopers for possible civilianization. The duties of these 28 sworn
troopers were as follows:
Command Staff
One Captain has overall responsibility for the Licensing Division. A First
Sergeant oversees the Professional Licensing Section of the Licensing Division.
These sworn troopers are the final authority for interpreting case law and
approving or denying license applications under the Division’s purview.
Firearm Registration Unit
Seven sworn troopers (one Corporal, one Master Trooper, three Senior Troopers,
and two Trooper First Class) who provide oversight of regulated firearm
transactions (purchases, rentals, and transfers). These troopers review a series of
databases to determine whether or not an applicant is prohibited from possessing a
firearm.
24

--- Page 27 ---
Machine Gun Registration Unit
One Corporal ensures that Maryland machine gun owners properly complete the
required annual registrations.
Handgun Qualification License Unit
This unit is comprised of four sworn troopers (one Sergeant, two Corporals, and
one Senior Trooper) who issue licenses allowing applicants to purchase or rent a
handgun in Maryland. These licenses are issued once the applicant has passed the
required background investigations and completed any necessary training.
Handgun Permit Unit
This unit is comprised of three sworn troopers (one Sergeant, one Master Trooper,
and one Senior Trooper), who issue wear and carry permits for regulated firearms.
Administrative Investigations Unit
This unit is comprised of four sworn troopers (three Sergeants and one Senior
Trooper). This unit is responsible for conducting background checks, interviews,
and writing reports for certain individuals seeking employment with DSP, as well
as applicants for certain licenses issued by the Division. This unit also assists the
other units in reviewing and approving applications and investigating complaints
against licensees.
Special Police and Security System Unit
This unit is comprised of two sworn troopers (one Sergeant and one Master
Trooper). The unit issues licenses for security system agencies and security
system technicians, and investigates complaints against these licensees. In
addition, this unit is responsible for evaluating applications for special police
commissions.
Security Guard Section
This unit is comprised of four sworn troopers (one Sergeant, one Corporal, one
Master Trooper, and one Senior Trooper). The unit issues licenses for
professional security guards and investigates complaints against these licensees.
Firearms Billing Unit
One Sergeant ensures that payments for firearms registrations are properly
received, recorded, and deposited to the bank.
DSP Response
DSP agrees that these 28 positions could be performed by specially trained
civilian personnel. However, DSP believes 6 of these positions should continue
to be occupied by sworn troopers (one First Sergeant and five Sergeants) because
25

--- Page 28 ---
they oversee at least one of the Licensing Division’s units. DSP believes that in
instances where a citizen’s application is not approved, the decision needs to be
made by someone with the authority of a sworn trooper.
OLA Comment
The Business Occupations and Professions Article, Section 19-314 of the
Annotated Code of Maryland requires that the investigating officer for complaints
related to the various occupational licenses issued by the Licensing Division be of
the rank Lieutenant or above. However, by law, the Lieutenant (whom we did not
identify for civilianization) may delegate these investigations to other members of
DSP. We did not note any legal requirements that any of the licenses under the
Licensing Division’s purview be reviewed, approved, or issued by a sworn
trooper. Licensing is an administrative function that is performed by civilians at
other state agencies, such as the Department of Labor, Licensing and Regulation.
Since we identified all positions in the applicable units currently filled by the six
sworn troopers for potential civilianization, we do not believe that sworn troopers
are necessary in those oversight positions.
2. Criminal Enforcement Division
Number of Positions Number of Positions
Sworn Trooper
Filled by Sworn OLA Identified for
Rank
Troopers Possible Civilianization
Major 2 0
Captain 2 0
Lieutenant 9 0
Detective Sergeant 20 2
First Sergeant 1 1
Sergeant 67 9
Corporal 41 3
Master Trooper 10 0
Senior Trooper 13 0
Trooper First Class 51 4
Totals 216 19
Overview of Unit
The Criminal Enforcement Division (CED) provides investigative services, both
overt and covert, to support DSP’s mission of achieving public safety by
improving the quality of life for the citizens of Maryland. CED criminal
investigative activities involve an array of dedicated and special sections, units,
task forces and teams that investigate and solve all facets of crime throughout the
26

--- Page 29 ---
state of Maryland and provide direct support and resources to allied agencies
when their investigations are both linked to and impacted by crime in other
jurisdictions.
Duties of Sworn Troopers OLA Identified for Possible Civilianization
The CED includes 216 sworn troopers. We identified 19 of these positions for
possible civilianization. The duties of these 19 sworn troopers were as follows:
Digital Forensics Laboratory
This Digital Forensics Laboratory (DFL) is comprised of five sworn troopers (one
Detective Sergeant and four Sergeants). The DFL serves the digital forensic
needs of the CED and Internet Crimes Against Children Task Force (ICAC) and
all DSP installations, as well as federal, state, and local agencies upon request.
The DFL conducts analyses of digital evidence and provides technical assistance
to investigators and prosecutors concerning the seizure, storage, and analysis of
digital evidence.
Polygraph Unit
Seven sworn troopers in the Polygraph Unit (one Detective Sergeant, four
Sergeants, two Corporals), assist in conducting polygraph examinations of police
and civilian applicants, criminal investigative polygraph testing, administrative
internal polygraph testing of troopers, and post-conviction sex offenders.
Excluded from these seven is another position that must continue to be occupied
by a sworn trooper in order to conduct examinations of sworn troopers (OLA
identified the Master Trooper for that position). Specifically, the Law
Enforcement Officers Bill of Rights generally requires that an investigation or
interrogation of a law enforcement officer be conducted by another law
enforcement officer.
Maryland Gun Center
The Maryland Gun Center is comprised of six sworn troopers (one Sergeant, one
Corporal, and four Trooper First Class). The Maryland Gun Center serves as a
24/7 statewide firearms enforcement center that makes the screening and vetting
of every gun case (involving a firearm seized related to a criminal offense) in
Maryland available to law enforcement to ensure that offenders are systematically
held accountable for their crimes. These positions primarily require the review
and interpretation of case law.
Forensic Sciences Division
One First Sergeant oversees the Forensic Sciences Division (FSD). The First
Sergeant is responsible for FSD’s inventory (primarily contraband seized during
investigations, including weapons and illicit drugs). The First Sergeant is
27

--- Page 30 ---
responsible for performing quarterly physical inventories and overseeing the
periodic destruction of these materials. Although the position requires the
handling of sensitive materials, a trained civilian who had undergone a rigorous
background check could perform these duties.
DSP Response
DSP agrees with our analysis that all 19 sworn trooper positions identified by
OLA could be civilianized; however, it believes one of these trooper positions in
the Polygraph Unit should not be civilianized. Specifically, it believes a second
Polygraph Examiner should remain sworn to ensure that DSP is able to conduct a
polygraph examination of a sworn trooper in the event the other sworn Polygraph
Examiner is unavailable.
OLA Comment
We noted that internal polygraph examinations of sworn troopers were rare; for
example, we were advised that of the approximately 2,400 examinations
administered during calendar year 2015, only one was administered to a sworn
trooper. Consequently, we do not believe that a second sworn trooper is required
in this unit.
D. Field Operations Bureau
1. Aviation Command
Number of Positions Number of Positions
Sworn Trooper
Filled by Sworn OLA Identified for
Rank
Troopers Possible Civilianization
Major 1 0
Captain 1 0
Lieutenant 2 1
First Sergeant 3 0
Sergeant 25 17
Corporal 8 8
Master Trooper 8 6
Senior Trooper 5 2
Trooper First Class 16 0
Trooper 12 0
Totals 81 34
Overview of Unit
Aviation Command provides airborne emergency medical transportation, as well
as law enforcement, search and rescue, homeland security, and disaster
assessment services. According to the Governor’s fiscal year 2017 Managing for
28

--- Page 31 ---
Results submission, medically oriented missions accounted for 84 percent of
Aviation Command’s operational activities during fiscal year 2015.
Duties of Sworn Troopers OLA Identified for Possible Civilianization
Aviation Command includes 81 sworn troopers. We identified 34 of these
positions for possible civilianization. The duties of these 34 sworn troopers were
as follows:
Trooper Medics
Thirty trooper medics, which accounts for about one-half of the 61 trooper medic
positions occupied by sworn troopers within the Aviation Command, could be
civilianized. These positions assist in providing emergency medical care to
patients on board its medical evacuation (MEDEVAC) flights. Civilianizing
these positions would still allow for one sworn trooper medic, rather than two, on
each flight.
Pilots
One Sergeant serves as a co-pilot on helicopter missions. Since the remaining
DSP Aviation Command co-pilots are civilians, we believe this position could
also be civilianized.
Mission Support Commander
One Lieutenant is responsible for the procurement of equipment and services
needed to support DSP’s Aviation Command. The Lieutenant also ensures that
all of DSP’s aircraft undergo the required maintenance.
Support Operations Officer
One Senior Trooper performs aircraft maintenance and assists with procurement
and various other tasks as assigned by the Mission Support Commander.
Safety Management Section
One Corporal is responsible for ensuring that DSP is compliant with Federal
Aviation Administration regulations and that required safety reports are
submitted.
DSP Response
DSP agrees with our analysis that all 34 sworn trooper positions identified by
OLA could be civilianized based on our assessment criteria; however, DSP does
not believe 1 position should be civilianized and it prefers to continue to use
sworn troopers for 31 positions.
29

--- Page 32 ---
DSP believes the safety management position should remain a sworn trooper
because it is responsible for the safety of the Command’s facility, equipment, and
personnel.
For the 30 trooper medic positions identified for civilianization, DSP agrees they
could be civilianized, but prefers to continue to use a second trooper medic on-
board its MEDEVAC flights. DSP’s position is that in the event that half of the
sworn trooper medics were civilianized, the Aviation Command risks being
unable to fulfill a law enforcement mission in the event the sworn trooper medic
is unavailable for a flight. However, DSP Aviation Command staff
acknowledged that single medic missions, for either law enforcement or
MEDEVAC flights, are rare. DSP also cited scheduling difficulties it would
encounter if half the sworn trooper medics were civilianized because DSP has
greater scheduling flexibility with all sworn trooper medics than it does with
civilians.
MSP also prefers that the Mission Support Commander, who is responsible for
the procurement of equipment and services and ensuring all of DSP’s aircraft
undergo the required maintenance, remain sworn. However, since the duties
performed by the Mission Support Commander generally do not require the skills
of a sworn trooper, we maintain the position should be civilianized.
For the two remaining Aviation Command sworn trooper positions we identified
for civilianization, MSP agrees with our conclusion.
OLA Comments
In our opinion, a civilian could be trained to perform the duties performed by the
corporal in the safety management section. These duties do not require the skills,
training, or experience of a sworn trooper.
30

--- Page 33 ---
2. Automotive Safety Enforcement Division
Number of Positions Number of Positions
Sworn Trooper
Filled by Sworn OLA Identified for
Rank
Troopers Possible Civilianization
Captain 1 0
First Sergeant 2 1
Sergeant 7 1
Corporal 3 0
Master Trooper 4 0
Senior Trooper 4 0
Trooper First Class 1 0
Totals 22 2
Overview of Unit
The Automotive Safety Enforcement Division (ASED) is responsible for the
State’s Vehicle Safety Inspection Program, functions as the central repository and
clearinghouse for Safety Equipment Repair Orders (SERO) issued by all law
enforcement agencies throughout the State, and manages DSP’s Salvage Vehicle
Inspection Program. ASED also licenses and inspects the approximately 1,600
inspection stations throughout Maryland.
Duties of Sworn Troopers OLA Identified for Possible Civilianization
ASED contains 24 sworn troopers. We identified 2 of these positions for possible
civilianization. One First Sergeant oversees the Administrative Operations
section of ASED. The First Sergeant’s duties include overseeing the SERO and
Salvage Inspection Programs, preparing search warrants for ASED’s Field
Operations section, and various administrative responsibilities such as payroll
processing and leave tracking. One Sergeant works with ASED’s civilian
personnel to maintain and upgrade ASED’s IT systems.
DSP Response
DSP agrees both positions could be civilianized, but it believes the First Sergeant
position, which is responsible for preparing search warrants related to
investigations performed by ASED, should not be civilianized. DSP believes a
civilian could not adequately prepare the search warrant (contending that an
improperly prepared warrant may lead to inadmissible evidence which would
jeopardize the investigation). The First Sergeant also performs administrative
duties similar to the First Sergeants at each of the barracks.
31

--- Page 34 ---
OLA Comments
We were advised that ASED performs less than 10 criminal investigations per
year and thus another sworn trooper in ASED’s Field Operations section could be
given this duty, in lieu of the First Sergeant.
32

--- Page 35 ---
APPENDIX
STATEOFMARYLAND
MARYLAND STATE POLICE
1201 REISTERSTOWN ROAD
PIKESVILLE, MARYLAND21208-3899
410-486-3101
LARRYHOGAN TOLLFREE: 1-800-525-5555 COLONEL
GOVERNOR TD D; 410-486-0677 WILLIAMM.PALLOZZI
SUPERINTENDENT
BOYDK.RUTHERFORD
CTGOVERNOR
December 19, 2016
Thomas I. Barnickel III, CPA
Legislative Auditor
State ofMaryland
Office ofLegislative Audits
State Office Building, Room 1202
Baltimore, MD 21201
Dear Mr. Barnickel:
The Maryland Department ofState Police (MDSP) has received the report in response to
the 2016 Joint Chairmen’s Report requesting the Office ofLegislative Audits (OLA) study the
personnel policies ofthe MDSP and make recommendations on how to increase civilianization at
the Department. By this letter, I am responding to the recommendations contained in the report.
The MDSP appreciates the effort put forth by the OLA in examining opportunities for
additional civilianizationpositions within our Department. The personnel from the OLA were
professional and extremely thorough in the performance ofthe review. Creation ofadditional
civilianpositions would enable sworn personnel to be deployed from administrative positions
and functions that do not require the use ofpolice powers to more traditional operational duties.
With regards to the recommendations:
1) MDSP should develop formal policies that encourage civilianization when possible and
specify the related processes for converting positions.
Agency Response: MDSP does agree with the recommendation that civilianization should be
encouraged. It is the goal ofMDSP to civilianize where possible, consistent with the budget and
available civilian positions providing pin conversions are not required.
“Maryland’sFinest”

--- Page 36 ---
Thomas J. Barnickel III, CPA
December 19, 2016
Page Two
2) MDSP should also conductperiodic studies to idntify future positions that could be
occupied by civilian employees.
Agency Response: MDSP agrees periodic personnel reviews could be a worthwhile tool for
management. MD$P will periodically reviewthe OLA Report for its application to current
MDSP staffing.
Thank you for the assistance you are providing to the MDSP and the opportunity to
respond to the analysis performed by the members ofyour agency. I appreciate their time and
effort in developing this report. Should you have any additional questions or concerns, please do
not hesitate to contact me directly.
William M. Pallozzi
Superintendent
WMP:tw

--- Page 37 ---
A T
UDIT EAM
Stephen C. Pease, CPA
Audit Manager
Edward A. Rubenstein, CPA
Senior Auditor
Charles H. Hinds, IV, CPA
Daniel P. Nuccio, CPA, CFE
Staff Auditors
Peter J. Vorel
Staff Auditor Intern