Title: Board of Trustees of the Maryland Teachers and State Employees Supplemental Retirement Plans - Possible Lack of Disclosure of Losses Incurred in the Maryland Investment Contract Pool
Date: 10/09/2009
Type: Fraud, Waste, and Abuse
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5a945d33cc9d72404c1509e2
Extracted: 2025-06-18T06:02:16.492202
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Special Review
Board of Trustees of the Maryland Teachers and State Employees
Supplemental Retirement Plans
Investment Contract Pool
Unrealized Losses Were Not Adequately Disclosed to Participants
MSRP Oversight of the Investment Contract Pool Needs Improvement
October 2009
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
• This report and any related follow-up correspondence are available to the public through the
Office of Legislative Audits at 301 West Preston Street, Room 1202, Baltimore, Maryland
21201. The Office may be contacted by telephone at 410-946-5900, 301-970-5900, or 1-877-
486-9964.
• Electronic copies of our audit reports can be viewed or downloaded from our website at
http://www.ola.state.md.us.
• Alternate formats may be requested through the Maryland Relay Service at 1-800-735-2258.
• The Department of Legislative Services – Office of the Executive Director, 90 State Circle,
Annapolis, Maryland 21401 can also assist you in obtaining copies of our reports and related
correspondence. The Department may be contacted by telephone at 410-946-5400 or 301-
970-5400.

--- Page 3 ---
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY
Karl S. Aro Bruce A. Myers, CPA
October 9, 2009
Executive Director Legislative Auditor xxx
Delegate Steven J. DeBoy, Sr. Co-Chair, Joint Audit Committee
Senator Verna L. Jones, Co-Chair, Joint Audit Committee
Members of Joint Audit Committee
Annapolis, Maryland
Ladies and Gentlemen:
We conducted a review of an allegation received through our fraud, waste, and abuse
hotline regarding the possible lack of disclosure of losses incurred in the Maryland
Investment Contract Pool (ICP), which is one of several investment options of the
Maryland Supplemental Retirement Plan (MSRP). The reported book value of the ICP
portfolio was approximately $729 million as of December 31, 2008.
According to the MSRP, the ICP seeks to preserve principal and to provide a relatively
stable rate of return. The ICP’s portfolio includes stable value contracts and a variety of
fixed income instruments. The ICP’s rate of return is generally determined by the
performance of its investments.
Our review found that MSRP did not adequately disclose unrealized ICP investment
losses in financial publications made available to existing or prospective plan
participants, nor were the unrealized losses disclosed in MSRP’s 2007 audited financial
statements. As of December 31, 2008, these unrealized losses totaled approximately
$48 million. In addition, MSRP did not independently verify the reported market value
of ICP investments, and did not independently verify the accuracy of the interest rates
calculated by the investment manager that were used to credit earnings to participant
accounts.
Our review also disclosed that MSRP and the Board need to improve their
documentation of the monitoring and management of the ICP. From the onset of our
review, MSRP management personnel were consistently unable to satisfactorily address
fundamental questions, including a clear and accurate explanation of the wrapper
agreements, which are secured to provide protection of portfolio principal under certain
circumstances, and could not provide us with relevant documents relating to the ICP.
We were advised by MSRP management personnel that MSRP did not have such
information because such information and documents were the responsibility of the

--- Page 4 ---
investment manager. However, in our opinion, MSRP and the MSRP Board have a
fiduciary responsibility to actively oversee management of the ICP, including the
performance of contractors. For example, although certain sub-managers did not meet
established performance standards for close to a two-year period, there was a lack of
documentation to indicate that MSRP or the MSRP Board had taken any measures to
address this substandard performance.
Subsequent to the completion of our fieldwork on the special review and issuance of our
preliminary findings, the MSRP Board engaged a consultant to address a number of
questions and issues raised during the course of our review. The consultant issued its
report on July 7, 2009. MSRP provided us with a copy of the report and we discussed
the consultant’s findings and conclusions with MSRP representatives. As deemed
appropriate, we considered the consultant’s findings in this report.
Respectfully submitted,
Bruce A. Myers, CPA
Legislative Auditor
2

--- Page 5 ---
Table of Contents
Executive Summary 5
Scope, Objectives, and Methodology 7
Background Information 9
Agency Responsibilities 9
Maryland Investment Contract Pool Overview 10
Findings and Recommendations 13
Investment Contract Pool Performance and Evaluation
Finding 1 – Unrealized Losses of ICP Principal Were Not Adequately 13
Disclosed to Existing and Prospective Participants
Finding 2 – Unrealized Losses of Investment Principal Were Not 15
Disclosed in MSRP’s Audited Financial Statements
Finding 3 – Documentation of Independent Market Valuations of 16
ICP Investments Was Lacking
Finding 4 – The Accuracy of the Interest Rate Used to Credit Earnings 18
to Participant Accounts Was Not Independently Verified by MSRP
Finding 5 – Wrapper (Insurance) Agreements Executed to Cover Investment 19
Losses Appear Highly Complex and Ambiguous
MSRP Oversight of the Investment Contract Pool
Finding 6 – Monitoring of Sub-Managers Performance Was Not Adequately 22
Documented
Finding 7 – Oversight of the Investment Manager Was Not Adequately 25
Documented
Other Issues
Finding 8 – Certain Conditions Recommended by MSRP’s Legal Counsel 27
Were Not Compiled With
Finding 9 – Documentation Was Lacking That a Financial Relationship 28
Between the Investment Manager and a Sub-Manager Had Been
Disclosed to the MSRP Board
Finding 10 – An Alternative Conservative Investment Option Was Not 29
Offered to Certain Plan Participants
Exhibit 1 - ICP Fact Sheet 31
Agency Response Appendix
3

--- Page 6 ---
4

--- Page 7 ---
Executive Summary
• The Maryland Supplemental Retirement Plan (MSRP) did not adequately
disclose unrealized losses of the Maryland Investment Contract Pool (ICP)
investments in financial reports made available to existing and prospective plan
participants, nor were the unrealized losses disclosed in MSRP’s 2007 audited
financial statements. Additionally, MSRP did not confirm the existence of ICP
investments with the custodian bank. As of December 31, 2008, unrealized ICP
losses totaled approximately $48 million.
MSRP should clearly disclose the actual dollar amount of ICP unrealized gains or
losses to existing and prospective plan participants, and disclose the fair value of
ICP investments in its financial statements. MSRP should also ensure that the
existence of ICP investments is periodically confirmed with the custodian bank.
• Documentation was not available to substantiate that the market value of ICP
investments reported to the MSRP Board by the investment manager had been
independently verified. Additionally, MSRP did not independently verify the
accuracy of the interest rate calculated by the investment manager that was
used to credit earnings to participant accounts.
MSRP should obtain periodic independent verifications of the market values of ICP
investments. MSRP should also verify the accuracy of the interest rate calculated
by the investment manager.
• Wrapper (insurance) agreements executed with financial institutions to cover
ICP investment losses were highly complex and ambiguous, and MSRP
personnel and the investment manager were unable to clearly explain how the
agreements preserve the investment portfolio. Furthermore, certain
agreements were apparently not signed until after we requested them during
this review.
MSRP should, in conjunction with the Office of the Attorney General, obtain
clarification as to how the agreements protect the investment portfolio, including the
circumstances under which payments are made and the timing of such payments.
MSRP should also maintain current signed wrapper agreements.
5

--- Page 8 ---
• MSRP management and the MSRP Board did not adequately document their
monitoring of the investment manager and the sub-managers, and were unable
to answer fundamental questions or provide us with vital documents relating to
the ICP.
MSRP and the Board should establish procedures to adequately document their
monitoring of the performance of the investment manager and sub-managers.
6

--- Page 9 ---
Scope, Objective, and Methodology
We conducted a review of an allegation received through our fraud, waste, and abuse
hotline related to the Maryland Teachers and State Employees Supplemental Retirement
Plans (MSRP). The allegation related to the possible lack of disclosure of losses
incurred in the Maryland Investment Contract Pool, an investment option of the MSRP.
The purpose of our review was to determine whether the allegation we received was
valid. This review was performed in accordance with State Government Article,
Section 2-1220 of the Annotated Code of Maryland.
Our review consisted of tests, analyses, observations, and discussions with MSRP
personnel, contractors, and others, as we deemed necessary to achieve our objectives.
Our review did not constitute an audit conducted in accordance with generally accepted
government auditing standards. Had we conducted an audit in accordance with
generally accepted government auditing standards, other matters may have come to our
attention that would have been reported. Our review was conducted primarily from
November 2008 through February 2009.
7

--- Page 10 ---
8

--- Page 11 ---
Background Information
Agency Responsibilities
Title 35 of the State Personnel and Pensions Article of the Annotated Code of
Maryland provides that the Board of Trustees (Board) of the Maryland Teachers and
State Employees Supplemental Retirement Plans (MSRP) is responsible for
implementing, maintaining, and administering the State’s three voluntary tax sheltered
income deferral plans for State employees and certain employees of local boards of
education and municipalities. These plans are permitted under Sections 401(k), 403(b),
and 457 of the Internal Revenue Code. Additionally, Title 32 of the aforementioned
Article authorizes employer-matching contributions of up to $600 per participant each
year (subject to budget authority) for State Employees’ Pension System members who
elect to contribute to the supplemental retirement plans. These employer-matching
contributions are maintained in a defined contribution-matching plan permitted under
Section 401(a) of the Code. The Maryland Investment Contract Pool (ICP), also
referred to as the Stable Value Fund, is available as an investment option in the 401(a),
401(k), and 457 Plans. The assets of these plans are held in trust for the plan
participants and the related expenses incurred by MSRP (such as administration costs)
for these plans are paid from the contributions to, or from the income or assets of, the
plans.1
MSRP entered into a contractual agreement with an entity to provide investment
management services (investment manager) for ICP funds invested by plan participants.
These services include, in part, preparing a written investment policy (with Board
approval), selecting investment sub-managers to make investments on behalf of
participants, subsequently monitoring the investment performance of the sub-managers,
and providing the Board with a quarterly performance review report of the ICP. At
December 31, 2008, there were four sub-managers responsible for investing ICP funds.
Additionally, MSRP entered into a contractual agreement with a consulting company to
provide investment advisory services. These services include evaluating the
performance of the investment manager, providing MSRP with additional investment
options for plan participants, and generally assisting MSRP in achieving its objectives.
Finally, MSRP has contracted with an independent certified public accounting firm to
perform annual audits of the Plan’s financial statements, including ICP investments.
1 A third-party administrator maintains participant investment records and handles participant
transactions.
9

--- Page 12 ---
MSRP comprises 15 employees, including an executive director who reports to a nine-
member Board appointed by the Governor. The Board has approved investment
guidelines and policies governing the ICP. The Board has also established an
Investment Committee, comprised of several Board members, that makes
recommendations to the Board on investment matters (such as changes in investment
options offered to participants). The Board is responsible for approving all investment
options made available to participants in the supplemental retirement plans.
Maryland Investment Contract Pool Overview
According to the ICP Fact Sheet (a quarterly report published on the MSRP website),
“the ICP invests in a diversified portfolio of stable value contracts issued by banks,
insurance companies, and other financial institutions, and a variety of fixed income
instruments including U.S. Government and agency securities, mortgage-backed
securities, asset-backed securities, and corporate bonds. Investors [participants] earn
the average return received under all contracts in effect at any point in time. The ICP’s
return is affected by the general level of interest rates as well as by cash flows,
including those from employer and employee contributions, withdrawals, and transfers
into and out of the ICP.”
MSRP’s ICP Investment Policy and Guidelines provide that the objective of the
ICP is to preserve principal and provide a stable, competitive return for
participants. The Guidelines further indicate that the ICP emphasizes safety
through the preservation of principal, and invests primarily in guaranteed
investment contracts (GICs) that may be covered by a principal guarantee. The
investment manager is responsible for calculating the amount of interest
(referred to as the crediting rate) that is to be periodically credited to individual
ICP participant accounts. Prior to the initiation of our review, the investment
manager prepared this calculation quarterly. However, since January 2009, the
rate has been calculated monthly.
Furthermore, the investment manager’s response to the original request for proposal
made clear its understanding regarding the main objective of the ICP. Specifically, in
its technical proposal, dated February 22, 2006, the investment manager stated the
following:
“Stable Value (ICP) is the participant’s conservative investment option. For this
reason, the investment manager must employ an approach that emphasizes care,
diligence, and safety of principal. …[The investment manager] recognizes that
Stable Value is perceived by participants as the investment equivalent of a
10

--- Page 13 ---
retirement ‘security blanket’. Participants count on the stable value portfolio to
deliver safety of principal.…We have structured an investment process and risk
management approach that places paramount importance on endeavoring to
deliver safety of principal.”
While the aforementioned ICP related documents indicate that the objective of the ICP
is to preserve principal, MSRP’s ICP Fact Sheet contains certain disclaimers regarding
principal in a paragraph that discusses risk. In this regard, the Fact Sheet states that ICP
investments have risks, and there is a possibility that the ICP may not achieve its
investment objectives and may not maintain its principal value. The Fact Sheet further
states that, to minimize this risk, the ICP’s investment managers regularly monitor
credit ratings and the financial strength of the issuers of contracts (wrapper agreements)
and fixed income securities. These wrapper agreements, with various financial services
companies, are intended to preserve the ICP investment portfolio.
MSRP’s investment manager reported that the book value of ICP investments totaled
approximately $729 million for 27,163 employees in the ICP as of December 31, 2008,
making the ICP the single most popular investment option offered by MSRP based on
amounts invested. In total, approximately $1.9 billion was invested in the supplemental
retirement plans offered by the State as of December 31, 2008.
11

--- Page 14 ---
12

--- Page 15 ---
Findings and Recommendations
Investment Contract Pool Performance and Evaluation
Finding 1
MSRP did not adequately disclose unrealized losses of ICP principal to existing
and prospective plan participants even though this information was provided
monthly to MSRP and the Board. As of December 2008, the unrealized losses
totaled approximately $48 million.
Analysis
MSRP did not adequately disclose to existing and prospective plan participants
unrealized losses of ICP principal, which totaled approximately $48 million as of
December 2008. In our opinion, this inadequate disclosure limited the ability of ICP
participants to make informed investment decisions. Generally, an unrealized loss
occurs when the current market value of an investment is less than the price paid to
purchase the investment (book value). MSRP’s investment manager disclosed the book
value and market value of the ICP to the Board each month. However, MSRP did not
adequately disclose the unrealized losses in any financial reports made available to plan
participants. This is especially significant to participants since a main objective of the
ICP is to emphasize safety through preservation of principal, and the ICP is the most
conservative investment option offered to participants in three of the four MSRP plans.2
Table 1, which follows, depicts the unrealized gain and losses of the ICP for calendar
year 2008, as reported to the Board:
2 The 403(b) Plan includes a money market fund option, but participation in that plan is limited to
educational affiliated employees (such as, educational institution employees).
13

--- Page 16 ---
Table 1
Unrealized Gain and Losses of ICP Principal Value
Reported Cumulative
Month Book Value Market Value Unrealized
at Month End Gain/(Loss)
January $639,061,655 $641,589,527 $ 2,527,872
February 644,064,391 642,685,989 (1,378,402)
March 653,411,277 646,281,492 (7,129,785)
April 659,090,084 648,583,426 (10,506,658)
May 662,157,290 646,259,346 (15,897,944)
June 666,658,930 648,791,407 (17,867,523)
July 678,531,307 654,670,011 (23,861,296)
August 681,515,968 658,341,818 (23,174,150)
September 690,665,619 654,619,601 (36,046,018)
October 716,566,149 659,349,491 (57,216,658)
November 723,752,226 667,476,167 (56,276,059)
December 729,099,986 681,131,508 (47,968,478)
Source: Monthly and Quarterly Market-to-Book Reports to the Board
Note: The unrealized gain and losses are cumulative. At the time of our review, there was no
documentation on file to support that the market values reported to the Board were independently
verified (Finding 3).
Prior to September 2008, MSRP did not disclose unrealized losses in the ICP to plan
participants. However, MSRP believes that the unrealized losses are now adequately
disclosed via the quarterly ICP Fact Sheet, which is publicly available. Subsequent to
the initiation of our review, MSRP decided, in November 2008, that it would begin
issuing a disclosure related to unrealized ICP principal losses beginning with the
September 2008 Fact Sheet (which, at that time, had yet to be made available to the
public). Specifically, this and all subsequent Fact Sheets contain a line item in the
“Sector Allocation” section that is identified as “Wrapper Exposure” with a
corresponding percentage. A footnote to this line item states the following:
“Wrapper exposure represents the difference between the book value of the
wrapper contracts [agreements] and the market value of the underlying fixed
income securities as a percentage of the entire Fund. A positive wrapper
exposure denotes that the Fund’s book value exceeds the market value of the
underlying assets and the issuer of the wrapper contract has a potential liability
to the Fund. A negative wrapper exposure means that the market value of the
underlying assets exceeds the book value of the wrapper and the Fund may have
a potential liability to the contract issuer.”
14

--- Page 17 ---
In our opinion, the term “wrapper exposure” is not adequately descriptive of the
condition, and the related explanation is unwieldy and does not serve to readily inform
the average participant as to the specific unrealized loss amount and the implications on
plan participants. In order for an ICP participant to determine the unrealized loss in the
ICP, the participant would first have to read and comprehend the footnote, and then
calculate the loss by multiplying the “wrapper exposure” percentage by the total book
value of the ICP assets. The specific unrealized loss or gain dollar amount is not
reported by MSRP on the ICP Fact Sheet (see Exhibit 1 for the September 2008 ICP
Fact Sheet). We were advised by the MSRP Board that it believed that disclosure of the
specific dollar amount of unrealized ICP losses would be confusing to plan participants.
In our opinion, since the extent of unrealized losses was not adequately or clearly
disclosed, the ability of existing and prospective plan participants to make informed
investment decisions using basic and critical financial information was significantly
impaired.
Recommendation 1
To foster transparency, we recommend that MSRP specifically disclose the actual
dollar amount of ICP unrealized losses or gains to existing and prospective plan
participants on an ongoing basis, and provide a plain language description of the
wrapper exposure.
Finding 2
ICP unrealized losses were not disclosed in MSRP’s 2007 audited financial
statements.
Analysis
MSRP only reported the cost (book value) of the ICP investments in the December 31,
2007 audited financial statements, and did not disclose the ICP’s unrealized losses,
which totaled approximately $5 million at that date. The applicable accounting
principles require disclosure of both the investments’ cost and fair value (market-based
measurement). However, only the cost was reported in the 2007 financial statements.
Without a related disclosure of the fair value, users of the financial statements would be
unaware of the $5 million unrealized loss. As of May 20, 2009, the December 31, 2008
audited financial statements had not been completed and, as such, were not subject to
our review.
We were advised by senior MSRP management personnel that MSRP had reported its
ICP investments at cost in the body of the financial statements based on the
recommendations of MSRP’s independent accounting firm. However, our review of the
minutes of the July 24, 2007 MSRP Board meeting disclosed that, in fact, the
15

--- Page 18 ---
accounting firm advised MSRP that the investments should be reported at fair value, in
accordance with the related accounting principles. At that time, the firm acknowledged
that MSRP’s practice was to report these investments at cost, not fair value, and
acquiesced to MSRP’s reporting preference, as the firm concluded that the $5 million
difference between cost and fair value was not significant to the financial statements
taken as a whole.
Additionally, our review of the independent accounting firm’s working papers disclosed
that the firm did not confirm the existence of reported ICP investments with the
custodian bank. Rather, the firm confirmed the investments with the investment
manager. Furthermore, MSRP did not have an internal control procedure to verify the
existence of reported assets. Periodic confirmation of investments with the custodian
bank is critical to obtaining independent assurance as to the existence of all reported
ICP assets.
Recommendation 2
We recommend that MSRP
a. disclose the fair value of the ICP investments in its annual audited financial
statements, as required by applicable accounting principles; and
b. ensure that the existence of ICP investments is periodically confirmed with the
custodian bank.
Finding 3
MSRP lacked documentation to substantiate that the market value of ICP
investments, reported by the sub-managers to the investment manager (and
forwarded to the MSRP Board), had been independently verified.
Analysis
MSRP lacked documentation to substantiate the independent verification of the market
value of ICP investments reported by the sub-managers to the investment manager and
forwarded to the MSRP Board. As of September 2008, the market value of ICP
investments reported to the Board totaled approximately $654.6 million. It is important
to note that the market value information is used to calculate the crediting interest rate
and, in part, to evaluate the investment performance of the sub-managers.
Specifically, each sub-manager reported the market value of its ICP investments to the
investment manager, which then reported the market value of ICP investments to the
Board in its monthly performance review reports. Consequently, there was no
documentation to substantiate that the reported market values were independently
verified by any party. Furthermore, neither the MSRP nor the investment manager
knew if the related mortgages that underlie some of these investments were supported
16

--- Page 19 ---
by notes that were legally assigned and recorded. In this regard, there have been several
recently reported judicial rulings nationwide that prevented lending institutions from
foreclosing on mortgage-related investments of this nature because a legally assigned
and recorded note could not be provided.
Although we were advised by the investment manager that the market valuations
reported by the sub-managers were assigned according to the respective sub-manager’s
internal procedures, which may have included valuations performed by an independent
pricing service, the investment manager could not provide us the specifics of these
pricing procedures nor any documentation supporting this representation. Furthermore,
the investment manager and one sub-manager specifically disclaimed any liability
relating to the accuracy of the reported market values of ICP investments. In its
investment report to the Board, the investment manager also provided a disclaimer
related to the market value reports provided by sub-managers, stating that the
information received from each sub-manager
“…cannot be independently verified [by the investment manager]. [The
investment manager] has not made any specific inquiry as to the accuracy of the
information by the [sub-manager].”
In addition, we noted that market value reports submitted by one sub-manager included
its’ own disclaimer:
“The valuations provided herein are for informational purposes and represent
our estimate of the current market value of an instrument. The valuations are
not an audited financial statement, but are supplied in good faith based on
information we believe to be accurate.”
Because of the lack of an independent verification of the reported market values of ICP
investments, the values could be misstated. We advised the Board of our concerns
regarding the reported market valuations of ICP investments. In response to our
concerns, the Board discussed this issue with the investment manager during the
February 23, 2009 Board meeting, at which time the investment manager stated that
there could be a potential conflict of interest if it performed the market value
verifications. In its May 2006 technical proposal to MSRP, provided in conjunction
with its bid submission to be selected as the ICP investment manager, the current
investment manager had recommended the hiring of a third party to independently
calculate and track the market value of the ICP portfolio. However, there was no
documentation on file to substantiate that MSRP or the investment manager had
attempted to hire a custodian to provide independent investment valuations of the ICP
portfolio.
17

--- Page 20 ---
Recommendation 3
We recommend that MSRP obtain, on a periodic basis (at least quarterly),
independent verifications of the market values of investments held by the ICP.
Finding 4
MSRP did not independently verify the accuracy of the interest rates used to credit
earnings to participant accounts, even though the investment manager issued a
written disclaimer as to the accuracy of the interest rate calculations that it was
responsible for preparing.
Analysis
MSRP did not adequately monitor the interest rates used to credit earnings to
participant accounts. As previously noted, the investment manager calculates an
interest rate (referred to as the “crediting rate”) and the corresponding amount of
interest that is credited monthly to individual ICP participant accounts. In
effect, the crediting rate is to approximate the rate of return earned on the
investments that comprise the ICP portfolio as of a specific point in time. We
noted the following regarding the calculation of the crediting rate:
• MSRP did not independently verify the accuracy of the interest rates that were
calculated by the investment manager and used to credit participant accounts.
Furthermore, the investment manager issued a written disclaimer with regard to
each sub-manager as to the accuracy of its calculated crediting rates:
“The information…obtained by [the investment manager] from the [sub-
manager]…is needed to allow [the investment manager] to calculate the
crediting rates and administer the provisions of the stable value fund
wrapper contracts. [The investment manager] is dependent upon
the…information and the information cannot be independently verified by
[the investment manager]. [The investment manager] has not made any
specific inquiry as to the accuracy of the information by the [sub-manager].
[The investment manager] shall not be responsible for liabilities resulting
from errors in the calculation of the crediting rates or other provisions of the
wrapper contract that are caused by errors in the information provided by the
[sub-managers]. … [The investment manager] does not provide any
guarantee, warranty, or representation that the amount of interest credited to
participants in any calendar quarter…will equal the actual return earned by
the ICP fund during that quarter, or period of time…[The investment
manager] is not guaranteeing the … Crediting Rate of the ICP….”
18

--- Page 21 ---
Investment gains and losses in the ICP portfolio are a critical component of the
crediting rate calculation prepared by the investment manager. However, sub-
managers did not report to the investment manager the actual details of investment
gains and losses that were incurred. Without the aforementioned detail on
investment gains and losses from the sub-managers, the accuracy and
appropriateness of the interest rate calculated by the investment manager and used
to credit earnings to participants cannot be assured.
• MSRP policy, through November 2008, was to establish the crediting rate paid to
investors quarterly in advance. Consequently, there may not necessarily be a
correlation between the quarterly crediting rate and the underlying portfolio
performance. We questioned MSRP management as to how they could pay ICP
participants a relatively high rate of interest while the ICP portfolio was
experiencing unrealized losses. For example, for the quarter ending September
2008, the rate paid to participants was 4.39 percent yet, as of September 30, 2008,
the ICP had incurred a cumulative unrealized loss of $36 million. Furthermore, for
the quarter ending December 2008, the rate paid to participants was 4.40 percent
while the ICP had incurred a cumulative unrealized loss of approximately $48
million, as December 31, 2008. Effective January 1, 2009, the policy was changed
by the MSRP Board to reset the interest rate monthly; the interest rate was reduced
to 3.5 percent and has generally continued to decline.
Recommendation 4
We recommend that MSRP
a. work with the investment manager to eliminate the various disclaimers relating
to the accuracy and validity of the crediting rate calculation, to the extent
possible; and
b. establish a process to verify the accuracy of the crediting rate calculated by the
investment manager.
Finding 5
Wrapper (insurance) agreements executed with financial institutions to cover
investment losses appear highly complex and ambiguous, and MSRP was unable to
clearly explain how the agreements preserve the investment portfolio.
Furthermore, certain of these agreements were apparently not signed until after
we requested them.
Analysis
As previously noted, we initiated this review based on an allegation that MRSP was not
disclosing potential losses in the ICP to participants. During the early stages or our
fieldwork, MSRP officials advised us that insurance had been obtained in the event the
19

--- Page 22 ---
ICP suffered realized losses, so that unrealized ICP principal losses were not an overly
significant concern. However, our review of certain wrapper agreements found them to
be complex legal documents, with a number of ambiguous terms and conditions, and
MRSP was unable to clearly explain how the agreements preserved the investment
portfolio.
• Throughout the course of our review, we were unable to obtain clear responses from
MSRP management, the MSRP Board, Board legal counsel, and the investment
manager describing the circumstances under which MSRP could recover funds from
the wrapper providers (financial institutions). After our repeated attempts to verify
the existence of and the process for invoking such “insurance,” those parties
directed us to certain contract provisions in the wrapper agreements. Although
these provisions were purported to specify the circumstances and time frames for
obtaining payments under the agreements, the provisions did not serve to clarify the
matter. For example, one of the provisions indicated that a payment would be
required from the provider on the contract termination date for the amount by which
the book value of the covered ICP investments exceeded the market value.
However, the contract further provided that the termination date had to be agreed to
by both the investment manager and the provider. Consequently, it appears the
provider could potentially avert payments for investment losses by not agreeing to a
termination date. Furthermore, the investment manager advised us that the contracts
are “managed so as to make that event [payment by the provider of any investment
losses] unlikely to occur.” We were further advised by the investment manager that
this means the losses would be offset by the continuing reduction of the crediting
(interest) rate used to compute earnings for ICP participants, and could result in the
payment of no interest to ICP participants for an extended period. In this regard, the
provider and the investment manager would make every effort to continually extend
the termination date, until such time as the market value equaled the book value.
The aforementioned comments by the MSRP investment manager could conflict
with MSRP’s ICP Investment Policy and Guidelines, which provide that the desired
requirements for the wrapper (insurance) agreements is for such agreements to
provide for a book value settlement provision with “a limitation on duration
extension.” In this regard, the investment manager recognized the importance of
this MSRP Guideline and stated, in its technical bid proposal, that it “…has the
requisite expertise to evaluate issuers of contracts, to negotiate superior terms, and
to structure customized contracts that address the specific needs of our clients.”
20

--- Page 23 ---
Since the timing and extent of the actual payout would depend on several factors
including the composition of the investment portfolio and the various maturity dates
of such investments, there could be delays of several years in recovering investment
losses—a length of time that seems contrary to “a limitation on duration extension.”
We also noted that the financial status of certain of the providers raises concerns
regarding their ability to make payments that may be required under the wrapper
agreements. Specifically, two providers have had their credit ratings recently
downgraded. As of February 23, 2009, both providers were still above the credit
threshold established by MSRP for insurers of investments. However, we were
advised by the investment manager that it would be difficult to find a replacement
insurer in the current financial environment should any of the providers fall below
MSRP’s credit threshold. Also, representatives of MSRP management and the
investment manager advised us that, under the terms of the agreements, the existing
unrealized losses would not be covered if MSRP elected to unilaterally withdraw
from them.
• MSRP did not have on file copies of the wrapper agreements executed between the
investment manager and the providers (financial institutions). In order to provide us
these documents, MSRP had to request them from the investment manager.
Furthermore, it appeared that several of the agreements we ultimately received (such
as the contracts and confirmation notices) were signed well after the effective dates
of the agreements and after we made inquiries to obtain copies of the documents.
For example, two wrapper agreements with one provider had effective dates of
March 2007 and September 2007; however, the agreements were not signed until
December 2008, which was after our request for these documents. Furthermore, it
appears as if the same signature page was used for both agreements. We were
advised by the investment manager that signatures on the agreements are not
necessary for the contracts to be enforceable. Board legal counsel concurred with
this position.
According to the investment manager, the reported unrealized losses in the ICP totaled
approximately $48 million as of December 31, 2008. During fiscal year 2008,
payments made to the wrapper providers totaled approximately $600,000. We were
advised by the investment manager that these payments could increase significantly in
the near future due to current market conditions.
21

--- Page 24 ---
Recommendation 5
We recommend that MSRP
a. in conjunction with the Office of the Attorney General, obtain clarification
about how the agreements protect the ICP investment portfolio, including the
circumstances under which payments are made under the agreements, and the
timing of such payments;
b. maintain current signed wrapper agreements; and
c. monitor the financial status of wrapper providers, and take appropriate
measures in the event an insurer falls below MSRP’s established credit
threshold.
MSRP Oversight of the Investment Contract Pool
Finding 6
Monitoring of sub-managers performance was not adequately documented.
Analysis
MSRP management, the Board, and the investment manager did not adequately
document efforts to monitor the performance of the sub-managers. In this regard, we
noted the following conditions:
• Although the performance of certain sub-managers did not meet established
standards, and this information was reported to MSRP management, the MSRP
Board, and the investment manager, there was no substantive documentation of
efforts taken to address the performance of these sub-managers. We noted that the
Board did take action in 2008 to remove one poor performing sub-manager;
however, no action was taken with respect to two additional sub-managers
providing ICP investment services as of December 2008 that had failed to meet
investment performance standards over approximately a two-year period. One sub-
manager, with approximately $138 million in its ICP investment portfolio as of
December 31, 2008, had produced rates of return that were 15.5 percent and 8.7
percent below the performance standards set for it for the one-year and two-year
periods ending December 31, 2008, respectively. For example for the one-year
period ending December 31, 2008, this sub-manager achieved a negative rate of
return of 10.64 percent while the performance standard was 4.86 percent. The
MRSP Board advised us that they were aware of these issues but had not adequately
documented their discussions regarding these matters. As of December 31, 2008,
four sub-managers were actively providing ICP investments services.
22

--- Page 25 ---
• The aforementioned performance standards used by MSRP are based on established
indexes. Each index contains investment sector allocations (referred to as
benchmarks),3 and an index is assigned to each sub-manager to serve as an
investment guideline. MSRP permitted the sub-managers to deviate from the
assigned investment sector allocations as long as the investments complied with
MSRP’s ICP Investment Policy and Guidelines, and the sub-managers’ overall
performance met or exceeded the performance of the established index. However,
we noted that the two aforementioned sub-managers with substandard performance
had significantly deviated from the benchmarks of their respective indexes, as noted
in Table 2.
Table 2
Comparison of Benchmarks to Actual Sector Investments as of December 2008
Sub-Manager 1 Sub-Manager 2
Sector Allocation Benchmark Actual Difference Benchmark Actual Difference
Cash and Short Term
Investment Funds
(STIF) 0.0% 1.4% 1.4% 0.0% 2.7% 2.7%
Treasury 44.2% 29.6% -14.6% 20.6% 1.7% -18.9%
Government-Related 30.2% 11.0% -19.2% 13.4% 12.6% -0.8%
Corporate 25.6% 27.6% 2.0% 15.2% 24.5% 9.3%
Securitized:
Mortgage Backed
Securities (MBS) 0.0% 1.2% 1.2% 44.9% 55.7% 10.8%
Asset Backed
Securities (ABS) 0.0% 13.9% 13.9% 0.8% 2.7% 1.9%
Commercial Mortgage
Backed Securities
(CMBS) 0.0% 15.5% 15.5% 5.2% 0.0% -5.2%
Source: Investment records obtained from the investment manager; however, the totals may not equal 100%.
In this regard, MSRP management advised us that “…we expect the allocations of
each sub-manager to differ, sometimes significantly, relative to the
allocations.…‘Deviations’ made by sub-managers from the investment allocation of
their assigned benchmarks are not only permitted, they are expected.” For example,
we noted that, for one sub-manager (Sub-Manager 1 in the Table 2), the index
benchmark was zero for securitized investments, but its actual holdings of
securitized investments totaled approximately $47 million, which represented 30.6
percent of its ICP portfolio as of December 31, 2008. Another sub-manager’s (Sub-
manager 2 in Table 2) index benchmark was 20.6 percent for U.S. Treasuries (which
3 The term “benchmark” should not be construed as a contractual requirement, but rather, as a target goal.
23

--- Page 26 ---
equated to approximately $27 million); however, this sub-manager had only
invested 1.7 percent (approximately $2 million) of its investment portfolio in U.S.
Treasuries. Had the investments made by these sub-managers more closely adhered
to the sector allocations, the performance of the sub-managers could have been
significantly improved. The MSRP Board advised that it was aware of and had
discussed these issues but that it had not documented these discussions.
Furthermore, MSRP’s ICP Investment Policy and Guidelines permits up to 60
percent of ICP funds to be invested in securitized investments. We question the
reasonableness of this guideline given the current economic conditions and the fact
that the primary purpose of the ICP is preservation of principal. In that regard, we
noted that, as of September 30, 2008 and December 31, 2008, the percentage of total
ICP funds that were in securitized investments (such as mortgage-backed
instruments) was 45 percent and 35 percent, respectively.
• Certain sub-managers did not provide required monthly reports that would have
provided information on detail investment holdings to the investment manager. The
investment manager did not have this financial information as of November 2008
for four of the five sub-managers4 and had to request this financial information from
the sub-managers. MSRP management was unaware of what financial information
sub-managers had, or had not, submitted. Furthermore, the detailed schedule of
investment holdings subsequently provided by two sub-managers was incomplete
(for example, lacked investment purchase prices). The other two sub-managers had
not provided this financial information as of December 31, 2008. Agreements
executed between the investment manager and the sub-managers required the sub-
managers to provide this information to the investment manager on a monthly basis.
• Sub-managers did not provide required monthly reports that would have provided a
summary and detailed breakdown of unrealized gains and losses by category of
investment. Generally, an unrealized gain or loss is the difference between the book
value (cost) of an investment in a portfolio and the corresponding market value of
that investment. The cumulative reported unrealized ICP losses during the period
from September 2008 to December 2008 ranged from $36 million to $57 million.
The investment manager was unable to readily provide us a summary and detailed
breakdown of unrealized gains and losses by category of investment. We were
provided this information on unrealized losses for the period ending September 30,
2008 in March 2009, which showed that the majority of losses had occurred in asset
4 One sub-manager was terminated by the MSRP Board during November 2008.
24

--- Page 27 ---
and mortgage backed securities ($23.5 million) and corporate bonds ($17.7 million).
Agreements executed between the investment manager and the sub-managers
required the sub-managers to provide this information to the investment manager on
a monthly basis.
Recommendation 6
We recommend that MSRP
a. establish procedures, in conjunction with the investment manager, to
adequately document the monitoring of the performance of the sub-managers
and their compliance with MSRP’s ICP Investment Policy and Guidelines and
benchmarks, and that the MSRP Board adequately document discussions
concerning contractor performance;
b. review the MSRP’s ICP Investment Policy and Guidelines to ensure that the
guidelines are consistent with the objectives of preserving ICP principal; and
c. ensure that sub-managers submit all required monthly reports.
Finding 7
Adequate monitoring related to the performance of the investment manager was
not documented by MSRP management and the Board. For example, the
investment consultant reported that the MSRP ICP was outperformed by more
than half of other comparable ICPs during the periods measured, but there was no
documentation that any action was taken by MSRP to address this issue.
MSRP management and the Board were not adequately documenting their monitoring
of the performance of the investment manager. Although the Board advised that it did
monitor the investment manager’s performance, it did not document the monitoring or
related subsequent actions. Nevertheless, certain issues were noted during our review
that should have come to the attention of the Board for potential corrective action, as
follows:
• The performance reports prepared by its investment consultant5 indicated that the
MSRP ICP was outperformed (overall rate of return) by comparable investment
plans for the quarters ending September 30, 2008 and December 31, 2008, as well
as for the three-year and five-year periods ending December 31, 2008. The
investment consultant advised us that this result means that more than half of the
investment plans in this peer group (that is, stable value managers) outperformed the
MSRP ICP during the periods measured. However, the consultant did not use this
measurement to evaluate the performance of the investment manager. Rather, the
5 MSRP has a separate contract with an investment consultant to independently advise the Board and
MSRP.
25

--- Page 28 ---
consultant used another measurement source that was primarily comprised of U.S.
Treasury bills, even though, generally, only a small portion of the ICP is invested in
U.S. Treasury bills. While the performance reports indicated that the ICP
outperformed this measurement source, this performance should have been expected
given that this measurement source consisted primarily of a U.S. Government
security that paid a considerably lower interest rate. As such, we question the
appropriateness of the Board’s use of U.S. Treasury bills as a means to measure the
performance of the investment manager.
• We noted that the investment consultant used incorrect financial information to
evaluate the performance of the investment manager. Specifically, the investment
consultant erroneously evaluated the investment manager’s performance using the
book value of the ICP portfolio value instead of the portfolio’s market value. For
the quarter ending December 31, 2008, the book value of the ICP portfolio exceeded
the market value by $48 million. Furthermore, just as the investment manager had
issued a disclaimer on calculations that it prepared (see Finding 4), the investment
consultant also disclaimed any liability relating to the accuracy of its calculations
since the consultant’s evaluation of the investment manager’s performance was
based on financial information that it received from the investment manager.
• The investment consultant advised us that, although it had the ability to rate the
investment strategy of the ICP, it had not been asked to do so by MSRP, even
though this investment option was the most popular option offered by MSRP, with a
portfolio balance of $729 million as of December 31, 2008. The investment
consultant did rate the strategy of other MSRP investment options with smaller
portfolio balances.
• In February 2007, the investment manager prepared a special report on the effect of
the housing downturn on the ICP’s investments in asset backed securities. Although
this report was provided to the Board in February 2007, the earliest documentation
of the Board’s discussion of the report’s conclusions was August 2007 (five months
later). The report concluded that the ICP sub-managers anticipated the deterioration
of the housing market and maintained defensive measures in their assets, and that
the risk of significant losses to ICP participants over the next several months due to
the decline in the housing market was minimal. However, as of September 2008,
the unrealized losses in securitized investments totaled approximately $23.5 million
($10.9 million in asset backed securities, $7.8 million in mortgage backed securities
and $4.8 million in commercial mortgage backed securities) and represented 56
percent of the total unrealized losses in the ICP portfolio. Furthermore, there was
no documentation to substantiate that findings and conclusions of the investment
26

--- Page 29 ---
manager’s report were closely reviewed, or that the investment manager was
requested to reassess the potential impact on the ICP as the related conditions
worsened.
Recommendation 7
We recommend that MSRP
a. establish procedures to adequately document its monitoring of the investment
manager’s performance (including corrective actions taken);
b. assess the adequacy of the benchmarks used to evaluate the performance of the
investment manager;
c. consider requesting the investment consultant to rate the strategy of the ICP
managed by the investment manager; and
d. closely review special reports on a timely basis, take appropriate action to
protect the ICP portfolio, and document actions taken.
Other Issues
Finding 8
Certain conditions recommended by MSRP’s legal counsel were not complied
with.
Analysis
The original contract between MSRP and the investment manager, dated July 24, 2006,
contained a provision that held the investment manager responsible for prohibited
investments made by a sub-manager, such as the purchase of securities by a sub-
manager through an affiliate of the investment manager. Specifically, the
aforementioned provision was consistent with federal Employee Retirement Income
Security Act (ERISA) standards, and with the related request for proposals which
required fiduciaries to adhere to certain standards of diligence and conduct similar to
ERISA standards. Nevertheless, in response to a request by the investment manager,
MSRP’s legal counsel advised the Board that these standards were not required for this
contract. Subsequently, on May 11, 2007, the investment manager requested MSRP
Board approval to waive this provision, which, in essence, had the effect of holding
harmless the investment manager for those sub-manager purchases previously not
authorized under this provision of the agreement, including the purchase of securities by
a sub-manager through an affiliate of the investment manager.
27

--- Page 30 ---
MSRP’s legal counsel recommended to the Board that approval of the waiver be
contingent upon the following conditions:
1. The investment manager affirm that it would not direct funds of a sub-manager
into investments that are controlled by the investment manager,
2. This category of investments have a maximum size that is consistent with Board
investment policy, and
3. MSRP staff conduct an analysis of investment patterns during the first year of
operations and report to the Board on the actual position of investment manager
securities in the funds selected by the sub-managers and the effect of investment
manager transactions on these funds.
During the July 24, 2007 Board meeting at which this waiver was approved, the Board
directed MSRP staff to develop written guidelines to periodically review the
relationship between the investment manager, the collective funds, and the sub-
managers to detect any prohibited investments. The Board further directed the staff to
conduct such reviews and report to the Board’s Investment Committee, as appropriate.
We were advised by MSRP management personnel that, while written guidelines had
not been developed, MSRP did have an ad hoc review process in place. However,
MSRP could not document the performance of this ad hoc review process.
Furthermore, there was no documentation to substantiate that the Board had addressed
the other two conditions recommended by MSRP’s legal counsel. Specifically, there
was no documentation that the recommended affirmation had been obtained from the
investment manager, and that the Board’s investment policy had established a
maximum size for the related investments.
Recommendation 8
We recommend that MSRP take immediate action to ensure that all conditions
that were previously established by its legal counsel for approval of the waiver are
complied with.
Finding 9
MSRP lacked documentation to substantiate that a financial relationship between
the investment manager and a sub-manager it hired to invest ICP assets was
disclosed to, and approved by, the MSRP Board.
Analysis
Documentation was not maintained to substantiate that a financial relationship between
the investment manager and a sub-manager it hired to invest ICP assets was disclosed
to, and approved by, the MSRP Board. During the course of our review, it came to our
attention that the investment manager had an existing business relationship with a sub-
28

--- Page 31 ---
manager it had hired in March 2007 to provide services to the ICP. Specifically, the
investment manager provided investment management services to an affiliate of the
sub-manager. The investment manager advised us that this relationship was disclosed
to the Board during the June 4, 2007 Board meeting. Although MSRP senior
management personnel advised us that they were aware of this relationship, our review
of the meeting minutes for that Board meeting disclosed that there were no documented
discussions related to this potential conflict of interest. We discussed the general nature
of this issue with a representative of the Maryland State Ethics Commission who
advised us that, if requested, it would provide MSRP with applicable advice on
potential conflicts of interest.
As of December 21, 2008, this sub-manager was responsible for managing
approximately $152 million of ICP investments, which represented 20 percent of the
ICP portfolio.
Recommendation 9
We recommend that MSRP
a. present this matter to the Board and that the Board fully evaluate the
appropriateness of this relationship and formally document its position in the
related meeting minutes;
b. seek guidance from the State Ethics Commission regarding this matter (since,
at a minimum, the relationship represents the appearance of a conflict of
interest); and
c. take appropriate action based on the Board’s position and the State Ethics
Commission guidance.
Finding 10
The Board and MSRP did not offer other conservative investment options (such as
a money market fund) to participants in the 401(a), 401(k), and 457 Plans.
Analysis
The Board and MSRP did not offer an alternative conservative investment option (such
as a money market fund) to participants in the 401(a), 401(k), and 457 Plans, even
though such alternative investments are offered by certain other states. In this regard, a
study prepared in 2008 by MSRP’s investment consultant of other states’ 457 Plan
investment options disclosed that sixteen other states offered both a money market
investment option and an ICP option in their 457 Plans. In contrast, MSRP offers a
money market investment option only to 403(b) Plan participants,6 which is restricted to
educational affiliated employees (such as State educational institution employees).
Money market investments comprise U.S. government securities, certificates of deposit,
6 The ICP option is not available to 403(b) Plan participants.
29

--- Page 32 ---
and high quality commercial paper. In our opinion, these investments would offer a
more conservative investment option to the ICP and would be in accordance with
MSRP’s ICP Investment Policy and Guidelines.
While MSRP management personnel advised us the investment consultant does not
generally recommend that a Plan offer both an ICP and a money market option, as
noted, the consultant’s study indicated that a number of other states did offer both
options. We were further advised by MSRP that contracts with ICP insurers might
restrict MSRP from providing a money market option. However, MSRP could not
provide us with the specific contract provision that restricted MSRP from offering an
alternative conservative investment option to the ICP. Finally, MSRP and the
investment manager advised us that offering the money market option could result in
participant “confusion” when deciding which option to select. In our opinion, such an
option would not be confusing if adequate descriptive information was provided to
participants, including the fact that the risk of principal loss would be further
minimized.
Recommendation 10
We recommend that the Board and MSRP consider offering an alternative
conservative investment option (such as a money market fund) to 401(a), 401(k),
and 457 Plan participants.
30

--- Page 33 ---
Exhibit 1
Investment Contract Pool
Fact Sheet Page 1 of 2
Maryland Teachers & State Employees Supplemental Retirement Plans
William Donald Schaefer Tower ~ 6 Saint Paul Street ~ Suite 200 ~ Baltimore, Maryland 21202-1608
Phone 410-767-8740 or 1-800-543-5605 Fax 410-659-0349
Investment Contract Pool
Separate Account Report as of September 30, 2008
Objective ICP Characteristics
The MSRP Investment Contract Pool ( “ICP”) seeks to Assets $691 million USD
preserve principal value and provide a relatively stable rate of Average Credit Quality (See Credit Profile)1 AA+
return comparable to intermediate fixed-income yields over
Average Duration 3.20
two to five years.
Previous quarterly crediting rate (annualized) 4.39%
Upcoming quarterly crediting rate (annualized) 4.40%
Inception Date 1987
Investment Manager DB Advisors2
Investment Overview
Sector Allocation3 Credit Profile3,4
The ICP invests in a diversified portfolio of stable value
contracts issued by banks, insurance companies, and other Agency 6.6% A-1 5.9%
financial institutions, and a variety of fixed income instruments
Asset Backed 5.1% AAA 66.1%
including U.S. Government and agency securities, mortgage-
backed securities, asset-backed securities, and corporate CMBS5 6.7% AA+ 0.7%
bonds. Investors earn the average return received under all Corporate 19.7% AA 10.3%
contracts in effect at any point in time. The ICP’sreturn is
Mortgage Backed 33.4% AA- 0.6%
affected by the general level of interest rates as well as by
cash flows, including those from employer and employee STIF & Cash Equivalent 6.6% A+ 0.7%
contributions, withdrawals, and transfers into and out of the US Treasury 12.3% A 5.2%
ICP. The average duration of the ICP’sinvestments will be
General Account GICs 4.4% A- 1.8%
approximately two to four years. The average credit quality of
Wrapper Exposure6 5.3% BBB+ 2.9%
the ICP’sinvestments will generally be AA (or its equivalent),
although individual securities or contracts purchased for the BBB 4.9%
ICP may have a lower credit quality rating. BBB- 0.9%
BB+ & Below 0.1%
Risks
Performance6
Like all investments, the ICP has risks. There is a possibility
that the ICP may not achieve its investment objectives.If an
issuer of a contract or a fixed income security defaults on its 8% ICP iMoneyNet Inc. (Taxable All)
obligations, the ICP may not maintain its principal value. To 6%
4.64% 4.72% 4.52%
minimize this risk, the ICP’sinvestment managers regularly 3.94%
monitor credit ratings and financial strength of the issuers of 4% 2.82% 2.89%
contracts and fixed income securities. 2% 1.09%
0.47%
0%
3 Months 1 Year 3 Years 5 Years
1Represents the weighted average credit quality. potential liability to the Fund. A negative wrapper exposure means that the market
2Prior to July 2006 ING Stable Value Product Group, a division of ING Life value of the underlying assets exceeds the book value of the wrapper and the
Insurance and Annuity Company provided management services. Fund may have a potential liability to the contract issuer.
3Allocations shown are not necessarily indicative of future allocations. Figures 6Performance shown is net of Investment Management fees. Past performance
may not sum to 100% due to rounding. is not indicative of future results. Figures greater than one year are annualized.
4As rated by Standard & Poor’s or equivalent by any other ratingservices. The returns herein are not necessarily indicative of the returnsthat may be
5Commercial Mortgage Backed Securities achieved over the longer term. There is no assurance that comparable returns
6Wrapper exposure represents the difference between the book value of the will be achieved in the future or that the ICP'sinvestment objective will be
wrapper contracts and the market value of the underlying fixed income achieved. The results portrayed reflect the reinvestment of dividends and other
securities as a percentage of the book value of the entire Fund.A positive earnings. The iMoneyNetInc. Money Fund Report Averages is a service of
wrapper exposure denotes that the Fund’s book value exceeds the market iMoneyNetInc. (formerly the IBC Financial Data Inc.) and are averages for
value of the underlying assets and the issuer of the wrapper contract has a categories of similar money market funds. Investors cannot invest in an average.
DB Advisors is the brand name for the institutional asset management division of Deutsche Asset Management, the asset managementarm of Deutsche Bank AG.
In the US, Deutsche Asset Management relates to the asset management activities of Deutsche Bank Trust Company Americas, Deutsche Investment Management
Americas Inc. and DWS Trust Company. I-006149-1.1
31

--- Page 34 ---
Exhibit 1
Investment Contract Pool
Fact Sheet Page 2 of 2
Maryland Teachers & State Employees Supplemental Retirement Plans
William Donald Schaefer Tower ~ 6 Saint Paul Street ~ Suite 200 ~ Baltimore, Maryland 21202-1608
Phone 410-767-8740 or 1-800-543-5605 Fax 410-659-0349
Investment Contract Pool
Separate Account Report as of September 30, 2008
Strategy Overview ICP Investments7,8
Assets in the Investment Contract Pool are held in trust for Short Term Investment Funds (STIF)
the benefit of participants of the MSRP. Participant Bank of New York Government STIF A-1 4.6%
investments made in the ICP are credited with a daily
blended interest rate. Each quarter an anticipated, but not General Account GICs
guaranteed, rate is declared. This quoted rate is net of all
Jackson National Life Ins. Co. A1/AA/AA 2.9%
fees and expenses directly related to the ICP. This
average annual expense fee will vary, but typically is Prudential Insurance Co. Aa3/AA/AA 1.5%
approximately 0.35%, annualized. This fee does not
Synthetic GICs/ Wrapper Issuers
include the monthly asset fee assessed on all participants
by the Maryland Board of Trustees (“Board”) and Bank of America, N.A. Aaa/AA+/AA- 24.2%
Nationwide Retirement Solutions, which will total 0.19%, NatixisFinancial Products Inc. Aa3/AA-/A+ 28.7%
annualized.
Royal Bank of Canada Aaa/AA-/AA 24.2%
The ICP typically invests in the following investments: Monumental Life Insurance Co. Aa3/AA/AA+ 13.9%
(1) Short term cash investments that are primarily
Fixed income portfolios within Synthetic GICs8,9
available for participant daily liquidity needs; (2) Stable
value pooled funds, which are stable value commingled Aberdeen Asset Management 17.2%
bank trusts; (3) General Account Investment Contracts
The Hartford Investment Management Company 22.5%
(“GICs” or “BICs”), which are issued by insurance
Goode Investment Management, Co. 10.2%
companies or banks and maintain a constant principal
valuation while earning interest; and (4) Synthetic GICs, Pacific Investment Management Company 18.9%
which also allow for principal stability while earning
Western Asset Management Company 17.0%
interest. The key difference is that Synthetic GICsare the
result of fixed income portfolios owned by the ICP and managed by independent fixed income managers, which generate
investment income to pay interest, combined with wrapper contracts issued by insurance companies, banks, and other high-
quality financial institutions, which help maintain the principal stability of the ICP.
ICP Investment Policy
The ICP is managed according to a detailed investment policy established by the Board, which is available upon request.
Further Information
For information about the Maryland Supplemental Retirement Plans, investment option booklets, and other general information
or to arrange educational seminars, please go to the MSRP website at www.msrp.state.md.us. For additional information about
the Plans, financial planning calculators, performance information, mutual fund prospectuses, Plan forms, and to enroll or
access an account, please log on to the Nationwide Retirement Solutions MSRP participant website at www.MarylandDC.com.
You may also call the MSRP at 410-767-8740 / 1-800-543-5605 (office hours: Monday thru Friday, 8:30 a.m. to 5:00 p.m.) or e-
mail us at info@msrp.state.md.us. Or you may call the Nationwide Retirement Solutions Team MSRP Customer Service Center
at 1-800-545-4730.
7Ratings are Moody’s Investor Services, Standard and Poor’s Ratings Service, The MSRP Investment Contract Pool is not a mutual fund, therefore there is no
and Fitch, or its equivalent as determined by the manager, respectively. prospectus. It is a separately managed account, which may utilize collective
8Allocations shown are not necessarily indicative of future allocations. Figures investment trusts as part of its investment strategy. Unit price, yield, and return
may not sum to 100% due to rounding. may vary.
9Fixed income portfolios managed by these fixed income advisors are
combined with benefit responsive wrapper contracts to form Synthetic GICs. The comments, opinions and estimates contained herein are based on or derived
from publicly available information from sources that we believeto be reliable. We
NOT FDIC INSURED | MAY LOSE VALUE do not guarantee their accuracy. This material is for informational purposes only
NO BANK GUARANTEE | NOT A DEPOSIT and sets forth our views as of this date. The underlying assumptions and these
NOT INSURED BY ANY FEDERAL GOVERNMENT AGENCY views are subject to change without notice.
DB Advisors is the brand name for the institutional asset management division of Deutsche Asset Management, the asset managementarm of Deutsche Bank AG.
In the US, Deutsche Asset Management relates to the asset management activities of Deutsche Bank Trust Company Americas, Deutsche Investment Management
Americas Inc. and DWS Trust Company. I-006149-1.1
32

--- Page 37 ---
Responses to Legislative Audits Findings and Recommendations
Special Review: Board of Trustees of the Maryland Teachers and
State Employees Supplemental Retirement Plans Investment Contract Pool
October 2009
Finding 1
MSRP did not adequately disclose unrealized losses of ICP principal to existing and prospective
plan participants even though this information was provided monthly to MSRP and the Board.
As of December 2008, the unrealized losses totaled approximately $48 million.
Recommendation 1
To foster transparency, we recommend that MSRP specifically disclose the actual dollar amount of ICP
unrealized losses or gains to existing and prospective plan participants on an ongoing basis, and
provide a plain language description of the wrapper exposure.
RESPONSE 1
The MSRP agrees with the factual accuracy of the audit finding prior to the publishing of the
September 2008 quarterly fact sheet. MSRP, at this time, does not agree with the audit
recommendation to disclose the actual dollar amount of ICP unrealized losses or gains; however,
MSRP will consider providing a plain language description of the wrapper exposure.
The MSRP Board developed and published updated participant communication materials for the ICP.
The ICP fact sheet and the ICP Overview document have been periodically updated and improved to
reflect the best experience of staff, other retirement plans, advisers and investment managers. By the
end of 2007, market weakness and volatility led the Board and the investment manager to begin
additional reports and changes to regular reports. As of the September 2008 quarter, the ICP fact sheet
for participants was changed to report percentage Sector Allocations of the underlying investments and
to specifically identify wrap agreement exposure, e.g., the market to book ratio or “unrealized losses or
gains”. At that time, this percentage had just recently reached five percent of the total. It is important
to note that prior to the September 2008 quarterly ICP fact sheet, the market to book ratio or unrealized
losses were less than 3% of the ICP, well within the normal range for stable value funds.
In July 2009, the Board received an ICP assessment report from an independent consultant. This report
concluded that the wrapper disclosure in the ICP fact sheet was more than adequate and exceeded that
of other similar plans. In addition, the independent consultant repeated the cautions previously advised
to the Board by the investment manager regarding changes to ICP participant communication materials
(including disclosing a dollar value) that might be interpreted as an attempt to induce participant
behavior regarding investments and which therefore could be alleged to violate certain wrap contract
provisions unless provider consent was obtained. Failure to receive this consent could give a wrapper
provider an excuse to assert the right to deny some or all of their book value coverage. The
independent consultant's final recommendation was that the disclosure should remain unchanged with
no further modification of disclosures.
This recommendation is also consistent with a study conducted in March 2009 by the Board’s regular
investment consultant. This review examined stable value profile sheets from governmental units with
similar plans. It noted that Maryland’s fact sheet generally provided more information than other plans
surveyed. None of the other sheets included any information regarding market to book value. In fact,
very few fact sheets disclosed any information about wrap exposure—none stating other than a percent.
Page 1 of 16

--- Page 38 ---
Responses to Legislative Audits Findings and Recommendations
Special Review: Board of Trustees of the Maryland Teachers and
State Employees Supplemental Retirement Plans Investment Contract Pool
October 2009
The MSRP Board, based on this advice, consultation and consideration, believes that the ratio or
percentage method adopted in 2008 is appropriate and adequate disclosure. The Board’s concern is not
that disclosure of a specific dollar amount of unrealized ICP losses would be confusing to plan
participants; instead it is that the more appropriate and relevant number for the participant is the
percentage of the exposure, which can be applied to a participant’s individual account balance. MSRP
believes that unrealized losses, as well as basic and critical financial information, should be and are
adequately disclosed in the current materials and that these materials allow existing and prospective
plan participants to make informed investment decisions. However, the Board will consider providing
a plain language description of the wrapper exposure, as recommended by the auditors.1
As of the August 31, 2009 monthly report presented to the MSRP Board Investment Committee, the
current unrealized loss related to the ICP is approximately $16.9 million or 2.3% of the book value of
the fund.
Finding 2
ICP unrealized losses were not disclosed in MSRP's 2007 audited financial statements.
Recommendation 2
We recommend that MSRP
a) disclose the fair value of the ICP investments in its annual audited financial statements, as
required by applicable accounting principles; and
b) ensure that the existence of ICP investments is periodically confirmed with the custodian's bank.
RESPONSE 2
The MSRP agrees with the factual accuracy of the audit finding and has already implemented the
audit recommendations.
a) The 2007 Plan financial statements were reconciled and reported using the traditional practice of
reporting book value. The 2008 audited financial statements also reported book value, but with a
disclosure of market value in the accompanying footnotes. Both the book value and market value
of the ICP investments will be disclosed in future financial statements as required by applicable
accounting principles.
1 Auditor’s Comment: MSRP believes that its current disclosure of the percentage of ICP unrealized
losses is appropriate and adequate. Although we do not dispute that MSRP’s disclosure of ICP
unrealized losses is now consistent with industry practices, we believe that disclosing the actual dollar
amount of unrealized losses would improve participant understanding of investment risk. MSRP also
states that changes to participant communication materials could be considered an attempt to induce
participant investment behavior and, therefore, could be construed as a violation of the wrapper
contract provisions. However, including the actual dollar amount of unrealized losses is merely
providing participants with the same unrealized loss information that is already presented (as a
percentage), but in a simplified format. Accordingly, we continue to believe that disclosing such
amounts would enhance transparency.
Page 2 of 16

--- Page 39 ---
Responses to Legislative Audits Findings and Recommendations
Special Review: Board of Trustees of the Maryland Teachers and
State Employees Supplemental Retirement Plans Investment Contract Pool
October 2009
The reporting of book value only in the financial statements for these types of investments was
consistent with accounting standards in previous years. The Governmental Accounting Standards
Board (GASB), the Federal Accounting Standards Board (FASB) and the American Institute of
Certified Public Accountants (AICPA) all currently acknowledge that book value is the relevant and
appropriate measure for valuing fully benefit-responsive investment contracts held by state and
local governments because book value is the value that will ultimately be realized by plan
participants. An informal MSRP survey of other governmental entities, conducted by MSRP staff
in 2008, concluded that MSRP use of book value reporting was consistent with how other
governmental entities reported stable value funds in their financial statements.
Statement of Position (SOP) 94-4, issued by the AICPA, was amended by FASB Staff Position
(FSP) AAG INV-1 and SOP 94-4-1. These documents effectively changed the reporting
requirements that required both the book and market values to be noted in the financial statements.
This change became effective for financial statements for plan years ending after December 15,
2006. MSRP was not fully made aware of this change in the accounting standards until presented
with this finding.
As noted in the MSRP July 24, 2007 Board meeting minutes, the auditor indicated that their
preference was to report using market value but would continue the Board's practice of reporting
ICP assets at book, not market value. While agreeing to report ICP assets at book value, the auditor
did not suggest to MSRP to, in addition, disclose the market value in the accompanying footnote,
which is in compliance with applicable accounting standards.
b) The Board's independent accounting firm has been instructed to verify and confirm the existence of
the ICP investments with the custodian bank as part of the work conducted to prepare the audited
financial statements. These procedures were implemented with the preparation of the 2008 audited
financial statements. Furthermore, MSRP implemented an additional verification process as of the
quarter June 30, 2009.
Finding 3
MSRP lacked documentation to substantiate that the market value of ICP investments, reported
by the sub-managers to the investment manager (and forwarded to the MSRP Board), had been
independently verified.
Recommendation 3
We recommend that MSRP obtain, on a periodic basis (at least quarterly), independent verifications of
the market values of investments held by the ICP.
RESPONSE 3
While MSRP and the Board believe that the independent pricing policy used by the sub-manager
provided a reasonable level of assurance, the Board has implemented the audit recommendation
to provide further verification of the values of investments held by the ICP.
Page 3 of 16

--- Page 40 ---
Responses to Legislative Audits Findings and Recommendations
Special Review: Board of Trustees of the Maryland Teachers and
State Employees Supplemental Retirement Plans Investment Contract Pool
October 2009
In April 30 2009, MSRP procured an independent valuation service from its custodial bank. The
independent valuation from the custodial bank performed in April 2009 on all securities discloses no
variance of pricing more than 0.1% for the total portfolio. This conclusion was further confirmed by
the independent consultant, as part of the special review conducted.
Each sub-manager has a written portfolio pricing policy. In summary, three sub-managers use a process
that relies on an independent third party vendor pricing service. If a price for a security is unavailable
from the vendor pricing service, the sub-manager will typically use multiple broker prices to obtain the
value of the security. In all events portfolio management staff for the sub-manager may not influence
the pricing of securities that they manage. The fourth sub-manager uses an index strategy and, thus,
relies on the pricing of the index provider. Each sub-manager also follows GIPS (Global Investment
Performance Standards, formerly AIMR) compliance and undergoes independent verification. The
three sub-managers that use an independent third party vendor pricing service also perform a pricing
and holdings reconciliation monthly with the bank custodian. The sub-manager that uses an index
strategy receives prices and reconciles account holdings with the index provider.
While the sub-manager's pricing policy appears to provide for independent verifications of the market
values of the ICP investments, MSRP will continue to obtain the monthly independent valuation
service from its bank custodian, reporting on a quarterly basis to the Board. This valuation reporting
was implemented as of the quarter ending June 30, 2009. The custodial bank also continues to be
contracted to safeguard and report asset holdings as it has been since April 2006. This verification was
implemented as of the quarter ending June 30, 2009.
Finding 4
MSRP did not independently verify the accuracy of the interest rates used to credit earnings to
participant accounts, even though the investment manager issued a written disclaimer as the
accuracy of the interest rate calculations that is was responsible for preparing.
Recommendation 4
We recommend that MSRP
a) work with the investment manager to eliminate the various disclaimers relating to the accuracy
and validity of the crediting rate calculation, to the extent possible; and
b) establish a process to verify the accuracy of the crediting rate calculated by the investment
manager.
RESPONSE 4
MSRP and the Board believe the current methodology for calculating the interest rates used to
credit earnings to participant accounts is reasonable and consistent with professional standards
and that it was adequately monitored. However, the Board agrees to implement the audit
recommendations.
a) The disclaimer referenced in the auditor analysis was obtained from internal reports between the
sub-managers and the investment manager and was not on reports that the investment manager
issued to the Board. This type of disclaimer is typical or standard language in the industry.
Page 4 of 16

--- Page 41 ---
Responses to Legislative Audits Findings and Recommendations
Special Review: Board of Trustees of the Maryland Teachers and
State Employees Supplemental Retirement Plans Investment Contract Pool
October 2009
It is essential to note that the Assistant Attorney General reviewed and verified to the Board that
these disclaimers do not lessen the investment manager's fiduciary responsibility under its contract
obligations to manage the reporting process and report to the Board on any material difficulties or
errors that come to their attention, or that should come to their attention. Regardless, MSRP has
contacted the investment manager and will continue discussions regarding modification of the
wording of the disclaimers.
b) While MSRP believes the current methodology for determining credited interest rates is reasonable
and consistent with professional standards, MSRP agrees to establish a process to confirm the
crediting rate calculated by the investment manager. MSRP already has procedures in place that
will help implement this confirmation. MSRP receives custodial bank monthly reports of priced
holdings, performance and guidelines compliance. As indicated in a previous response, MSRP
implemented a quarterly custodial report of portfolio market values by sub-manager. MSRP staff
will use the custodial market values to confirm the Crediting Rate. The results of these procedures
will be documented and reported to the Investment committee each quarter.
Stable value funds, including the MSRP ICP, are managed with the objective of maintaining
principal stability, generating a positive and reasonably stable rate of return, and providing liquidity
at “contract value” for qualified participant-initiated transactions (also known as “benefit
responsiveness”). Published accounting standards provide that stable value funds (1) carry
synthetic investment contracts at contract value, also known as book value, which is deposited
principal plus accrued interest on the wrapper’s set rate of interest, known as the crediting rate; (2)
allow for the amortization of realized and unrealized gains and losses into future crediting rates of
the contract; and (3) allow assets to be available for participant withdrawal at contract value (again
“benefit responsiveness”). The amortization of gains and losses means that when market rates fall,
a stable value fund’s yield and crediting rate is expected to fall, although more slowly than the
current market interest rates. The reverse is also true. Thus, the situation noted by the auditors in
their analysis (where the crediting rate resulted in a high rate of interest during a period when the
ICP portfolio was experiencing unrealized losses) would have been expected. Again, the reverse
will also hold true (i.e., the crediting rate will appear to be a low rate of interest when the ICP
portfolio is experiencing unrealized gains). The formula and contract structure spreads gains and
losses over a period of time, and this will be particularly evident in times of great volatility, as in
2008.
Finding 5
Wrapper (insurance) agreements executed with financial institutions to cover investment losses
appear highly complex and ambiguous, and MSRP was unable to clearly explain how the
agreements preserve the investment portfolio. Furthermore, certain of these agreements were
apparently not signed until after we requested them.
Page 5 of 16

--- Page 42 ---
Responses to Legislative Audits Findings and Recommendations
Special Review: Board of Trustees of the Maryland Teachers and
State Employees Supplemental Retirement Plans Investment Contract Pool
October 2009
Recommendation 5
We recommend that MSRP
a) in conjunction with the Office of the Attorney General, obtain clarification about how the
agreements protect the ICP investment portfolio, including the circumstances under which
payments are made under the agreements, and the timing of such payments;
b) maintain current signed wrapper agreements; and
c) monitor the financial status of wrapper providers, and take appropriate measures in the event
an insurer falls below MSRP's established credit threshold.
RESPONSE 5
While we agree that the wrappers agreements are technical and complex documents, we disagree
they are ambiguous but, instead acknowledge they are written so as to provide appropriate
safeguard and protections. However, to document this and ensure best practices, the Board
agrees to implement the audit recommendations.
a) Wrapper providers for synthetic guaranteed investment contracts do not make payments to cover
particular losses as incurred on individual securities. As described in the special consultant’s report,
their obligation is to pay any difference between book and market value (i.e., referred to as
“unrealized loss”) at the end of a book value termination period elected by the Board or in certain
other limited circumstances, such as if the fund were to be depleted through extensive participant
withdrawals. The length of this termination period is controlled by the duration of the securities
that are “wrapped”. During this period securities are gradually liquidated through sale or maturity,
with continual adjustment of the credited interest rate so that, at the end of the period, book and
market value may be equalized. The contracts also provide that participants may continue to
withdraw funds at book value during this period, and that the interest rate may not fall below zero.
If book and market value of the fund are not equal at the end of the termination period, the wrapper
providers are obligated to make up the difference by paying money to the ICP. Contrary to
concerns expressed in the audit report, ICP agreements do not permit the wrapper providers to
perpetually extend this termination period, which is always limited by the underlying duration of
the securities.
As noted in the consultant’s report this type of termination (which gradually converts the fund into
a short term investment pool, similar to a money market fund) is rarely exercised. Instead, stable
value funds will typically opt to either negotiate a termination methodology or transfer assets to a
new contract provider.
MSRP has requested documented clarification and confirmation on these matters from the Office of
the Attorney General, including a legal description of how the agreements protect the ICP
investment portfolio, the circumstances under which payments are made to the ICP under the
agreements, and the timing of such payments. The Office of the Attorney General expects to deliver
this advice later in the month of October.
Page 6 of 16

--- Page 43 ---
Responses to Legislative Audits Findings and Recommendations
Special Review: Board of Trustees of the Maryland Teachers and
State Employees Supplemental Retirement Plans Investment Contract Pool
October 2009
b) MSRP currently has a complete copy of all signed wrapper contracts on file and will continue to
maintain a copy of these agreements, updating the files as necessary.
c) The investment manager is required to notify the Board when the credit rating for a wrapper
provider falls below the standard permitted by the ICP Investment Policy. In such event, the
investment manager would also be obligated by contract to find an appropriate substitute, or present
alternative resolution methodologies to the Board. This is part of their general obligation to
manage the ICP according to the conditions expressed in the policy.
In addition to the investment manager's responsibilities, MSRP has also implemented additional
procedures to monitor the financial status of wrapper providers. As recommended in the special
consultant report, MSRP staff receives a news/Web alert for each of the wrap providers and
receives regular weekly reports of events, analysis and commentary. The investment manager has
been notified to continue to make regular reports of significant developments regarding all parties
servicing the ICP as well as to make reports of events as they happen. Both the investment
manager and the investment consultant have been directed to provide alerts of significant events
such as ratings changes. All such significant information is and will be delivered to the Board of
Trustees members as received.
Furthermore, as part of their regular quarterly written report for Board meetings, the investment
manager includes a summary of any significant developments involving wrap providers, sub-
managers, or the bank custodian. The quarterly reports include the current credit rating for each
wrapper. This is compared to the ICP Investment Policy requirement that states “Issuers of Book
Value Contracts must be rated the equivalent of AA- or higher by at least one of the above rating
services at time of purchase.” If the credit rating is not in compliance with the ICP Investment
Policy, it would be noted in the quarterly report. A rating substantially below that standard would
require detailed analysis, evaluation and consultation by the MSRP Board in conjunction with the
investment manager. We believe this procedure will address the audit recommendation to monitor
the financial status of wrapper providers, and take appropriate measures in the event an insurer falls
below MSRP's established credit threshold. The review of these reports and related discussions will
be more fully documented in the Board meeting minutes.
Finding 6
Monitoring of sub-managers performance was not adequately documented.
Recommendation 6
We recommend that MSRP
a) establish procedures, in conjunction with the investment manager, to adequately document the
monitoring of the performance of the sub-managers and their compliance with MSRP's ICP
Investment Policy and Guidelines and benchmarks, and that the MSRP Board adequately
document discussions concerning contractor performances;
b) review the MSRP's ICP Investment Policy an Guidelines to ensure that the guidelines are
consistent with the objectives of preserving ICP principal; and
c) ensure that sub-mangers submit all required monthly reports.
Page 7 of 16

--- Page 44 ---
Responses to Legislative Audits Findings and Recommendations
Special Review: Board of Trustees of the Maryland Teachers and
State Employees Supplemental Retirement Plans Investment Contract Pool
October 2009
RESPONSE 6
While the Board disagrees with certain aspects of the audit analysis, the Board agrees to
implement the audit recommendations to ensure best practices.
a) Documenting Monitoring of the Performance of the Sub-Managers
The Board will assure adequate documentation of its monitoring of investment sub-managers’
performance and compliance, including the Board’s discussions on such matters. To address the
finding, it is important to note the monitoring process that is currently in place. The MSRP Board
has contracted with an investment manager to manage the ICP. The investment manager has
fiduciary responsibility and is provided with discretionary authority, on behalf of the MSRP, to
select stable value investment contracts and to exercise other delegated authority, which includes
monitoring the overall strategy and the different participating parties, such as the fixed income sub-
managers. The investment manager is not permitted to manage any underlying fixed income
investments within the ICP, per their contract, but is responsible for selecting sub-managers to
manage fixed income securities that are combined with wrapper agreements to form synthetic
GICs.
The investment manager employs multiple sub-managers in the ICP. Each sub-manager brings
different investment styles that may result in periods where one manager's strong cyclical
performance will offset another sub-manager's weaker performance. Each sub-manager's portfolio
assets are to be kept in compliance with provided investment guidelines, including duration, credit
quality and sector constraints. However, since each sub-manager is expected to actively manage
their assets, it is expected that the allocations of each sub-manager will differ, sometimes
significantly, relative to the allocations of the benchmark as well as to the other sub-managers.
Thus, deviations are expected.
The investment manager, as the overall stable value structure manager, monitors the sub-managers
to review implementation of and any changes to investment strategy, reviews daily cash flow of the
ICP, and oversees compliance by the sub-managers. The investment manager employs several
functional groups to effectively monitor, including an Investment Support team, a Stable Value
Group, a Credit and Research team, a Compliance team, and the Sub-Advisory Sub-Committee
(SASC).
Specifically, the SASC is responsible for oversight of the sub-managers, from compliance,
investment, legal, and business perspectives with representation from each area. The SASC
performs due diligence reviews, performance reviews and reviews to ensure guideline compliance.
The goal of the SASC is to combine sub-manager oversight under a single umbrella, provide
internal communication and coordination with respect to monitoring and key decision-making with
respect to the sub-advised relationship. As previously stated, this oversight is in accordance with
the concept that each sub-manager differs in their investment styles and is designed as such so that
those differences will help the overall ICP to remain stable.
Page 8 of 16

--- Page 45 ---
Responses to Legislative Audits Findings and Recommendations
Special Review: Board of Trustees of the Maryland Teachers and
State Employees Supplemental Retirement Plans Investment Contract Pool
October 2009
The investment manager and its SASC accomplish their monitoring of the sub-manager through
various activities:
• Monthly: The SASC meets on a monthly basis to discuss and assess each sub-manager over
the recent short term period and to review the longer-term performance. On a monthly basis,
the Stable Value Group reviews various sub-manager portfolio information and a standard
account holdings report and, if needed, makes inquiries to sub-manager regarding intra-
quarterly performance, exposures, or positioning of their account. The Stable Value Group also
produces the investment manager's Stable Value System monthly ICP fund report that is sent to
the MSRP staff. This report includes a check of contract balances and allocations, duration,
credit quality, sector and credit exposure and performance. The Stable Value Group provides
the SASC the “External Manager Reports” for each sub-manager, which are custom monthly
sub-manager reports that contain detailed information on the fixed income assets under
management for the ICP, including performance information and sector allocations of the sub-
managers, as well as their respective benchmark indexes. The Compliance team is also
provided these reports and reviews, in conjunction with the SASC, any compliance variations
during the month, steps taken to rectify, and whether there is any required sub-manager
reimbursement.
• Quarterly: The Compliance team receives a compliance report from each sub-manager, which
is reviewed and material changes are reported to and evaluated by the SASC and the Stable
Value Group. The Stable Value Group receives and reviews a quarterly reporting package from
each sub-manager that includes holdings information, transaction information, commentary
explaining the prior quarter's performance, strategy, and portfolio and market commentary. This
information is used to prepare the ICP quarterly report which is presented at the quarterly
MSRP Board meeting. An oral report is given when presenting the written ICP quarterly report
at the Board meetings.
• Annually: Each sub-manager provides a written annual compliance report and due diligence
report that includes information on executive management and key personnel changes, a review
of the compliance functions, committees, reporting and testing processes; the results of any
Securities and Exchange Commission or other regulatory inspections; a review of the internal
audit procedures, business continuity and recovery plans and internal operations, systems, and
trading procedures; change to risk management personnel or resources; the processes and rules
surrounding counter-party risk management; derivative use and oversight practices; credit
exposure monitoring process; size, depth, and experience of the portfolio management and
research analyst team; and historical performance. Each sub-manager also meets with the
Stable Value group and representatives of the SASC, which includes Compliance, Legal,
Operations, and Risk team members, for additional due diligence discussions and to further
review each account. All of this information is aggregated and reported to the SASC. At least
annually, the SASC will make a determination whether each sub-manager remains approved, is
put onto a watch list, or is to be terminated. This process has been in place and was used for the
sub-managers referenced in the report. Over the past couple years, one sub-manager has been
terminated while another sub-manager has been and is currently on the 'watch list'.
Page 9 of 16

--- Page 46 ---
Responses to Legislative Audits Findings and Recommendations
Special Review: Board of Trustees of the Maryland Teachers and
State Employees Supplemental Retirement Plans Investment Contract Pool
October 2009
As noted above, the MSRP Board receives both monthly and quarterly reports. In addition, the
quarterly ICP reports to the Board from the investment manager are distributed to the contracted
investment consultant in advance of each meeting in order for the consultant to be able to provide
commentary and evaluation of the quarterly status of the ICP at the upcoming Board meeting. The
MSRP Board reviews the ICP quarterly report that indicates sub-manager performance over time.
MSRP Board staff and the investment manager hold discussions regarding performance of the sub-
managers, both informally intra-quarter and formally during the quarterly MSRP Board meetings.
With the investment manager's advice, a sub-manager with consistent unsatisfactory performance
without justification is placed on 'watch' and, if performance does not improve, is terminated. Over
the past two years, one sub-manager has been terminated while another sub-manager has been and
is currently on the 'watch list'.
The auditor's statement that “had the investments made by these sub-managers more closely
adhered to the sector allocations, the performance of the sub-managers could have been
significantly improved” is speculative with the benefit of hindsight. A sub-manager's deviation
from investment allocations is not prohibited and does not require corrective action but is reviewed,
in conjunction with the overall ICP, to ensure that it is in the best interest and consistent with the
overall ICP strategy going forward. During the recent turbulent market, not one participant in the
ICP lost principal value. In addition, in 2008 the ICP returned a positive 4.7% for participants. The
ICP was one of only 2 investment options available to the MSRP 457, 401k and 401a plan
participants that had a positive return in 2008, per MSRP records.
In the future, the MSRP Board will ensure that it documents its monitoring of the performance of
the sub-managers and their compliance with MSRP's ICP Investment Policy and Guidelines and
benchmarks. We recognize that many discussions held in the past, including the discussions held at
the Board meetings, may not have been adequately documented to show evidence of this
monitoring activity. Thus, the MSRP Board will, in the future, adequately document their
discussions concerning contractor performances.
b) Review of the ICP Investment Policy and Guidelines
The MSRP Board regularly and at least annually reviews the MSRP's ICP Investment Policy and
Guidelines. This review includes ensuring that the guidelines are consistent with the objectives of
preserving ICP principal. Recently, the Board has requested that the investment consultant,
investment manager and the independent consultant hired to conduct the special review each review
the MSRP's ICP Investment Policy and Guidelines, specifically, to comment on whether the
guidelines were consistent with the objectives of preserving ICP principal. All three consultants
concluded that the current policy is consistent with the objective of “safety through preservation of
principal and accrued income”. MSRP will continue to review regularly the Policy in order to
determine if any revisions are appropriate. These reviews will be more fully documented in the
appropriate Board meeting minutes.
c) Sub-Manager Submitting Required Monthly Reports
Sub-managers submit the required monthly reports, noted in the auditor analysis, directly to the
investment manager. Per the investment manager, all required sub-manager monthly and quarterly
reports and information have been provided as agreed upon between the investment manager and
Page 10 of 16

--- Page 47 ---
Responses to Legislative Audits Findings and Recommendations
Special Review: Board of Trustees of the Maryland Teachers and
State Employees Supplemental Retirement Plans Investment Contract Pool
October 2009
the sub-managers. The investment manager has indicated that the auditors requested certain ad-hoc
information (e.g., detailed breakdown of unrealized gains and losses by category of investment) that
is not required to be provided within any reports required by any sub-manager Investment
Management Agreement. The auditors, thus, may feel that such information should be included in
future sub-manager reports. MSRP staff will work with the Legislative Auditors to explore what
information they feel should be provided monthly. Those suggestions will be reviewed with the
Board and the investment manager to determine if any revisions should be made to monthly reports
required by the Investment Management Agreements.
Finding 7
Adequate monitoring related to the performance of the investment manager was not documented
by MSRP management and the Board. For example, the investment consultant reported that the
MSRP ICP was outperformed by more than half of other comparable ICPs during the periods
measured, but there was no documentation that any action was taken by MSRP to address this
issue.
Recommendation 7
We recommend that MSRP
a) establish procedures to adequately document its monitoring of the investment manager's
performance (including corrective actions taken);
b) assess the adequacy of the benchmarks used to evaluate the performance of the investment
manager;
c) consider requesting the investment consultant to rate the strategy of the ICP managed by the
investment manager; and
d) closely review special reports on a timely basis, take appropriate action to protect the ICP
portfolio, and document actions taken.
RESPONSE 7
While MSRP and the Board believe its procedures to monitor the performance of the investment
manager are adequate, it does agree to implement the audit recommendations to ensure best
practices.
a) Procedures to Adequately Document Monitoring Investment Manager's Performance
MSRP has contracted for several years with an investment consultant to assist the Board in
monitoring and documenting the performance of all investment options in the Plans. Currently, the
investment consultant provides quarterly reports that include performance of the ICP. In addition
the Board regularly receives reporting from the investment manager that includes information on
the performance of the entire portfolio as well as the individual sub-managers. As described in the
response to finding 6, the investment manager has a detailed process for monitoring the sub-
managers and regularly reports to the Board.
Page 11 of 16

--- Page 48 ---
Responses to Legislative Audits Findings and Recommendations
Special Review: Board of Trustees of the Maryland Teachers and
State Employees Supplemental Retirement Plans Investment Contract Pool
October 2009
MSRP recently contracted with a special consultant to perform a review that included reviewing
MSRP staff and Board oversight practices. The special consultant concluded that the current Board
and staff oversight is more than adequate and even above average as compared to oversight
practices of other public defined contribution plans. The special consultant did, however, suggest
some additional monitoring steps to ensure best practices. The Board is implementing these
recommendations. In addition, to better document monitoring efforts, MSRP staff has developed a
Compliance and Monitoring Matrix that ensures various reports to monitor performance are
properly provided to the Board.
In the future, MSRP staff will verify that discussions of these documents, specifically the
investment manager's performance, are properly documented in greater detail in the Board Meeting
minutes.
b) Assess Adequacy of the Benchmarks to Evaluate the Investment Manager's Performance
As described in the response to Finding 6, the investment manager is a manager of the sub-
managers. There is no universally accepted benchmark to evaluate the performance of an
investment manager that is customized to stable value funds, because stable value funds are often
quite different in their structure and component strategies. However, MSRP has established an
overall goal or benchmark for the ICP, as noted in the MSRP ICP Investment Policy and
Guidelines. The Policy states that an objective of the ICP is to ensure that investments “exceed the
returns on money market investments by 100 - 200 basis points per year over a full market cycle”.
Consistent with the ICP Policy, performance is evaluated against 91-day Treasuries plus 100 basis
points. US Treasury Bills is the benchmark most often used to measure money market fund
performance. The investment manager's performance is evaluated based on their contract
requirements (e.g., delivering timely and accurate reports) and to the extent the ICP is complying
with the MSRP ICP Investment Policy and Guidelines.
Consistent with being a stable value fund, performance is reported based on book value of the ICP.
This is appropriate since participants in the ICP make withdrawals from the ICP based upon book
value of their account. The book value of the account is supported by the wrap contracts which
guarantee withdrawals, regardless of market activity. Reporting performance based on book value
is also consistent with industry standards for stable value portfolios.
As another measure of the investment manager's performance, the investment consultant compares
the returns of the ICP to a universe of other stable value managers. Per the investment consultant's
experience, this is in line with performance reporting for other defined contribution plans
monitoring similar investment options. As pointed out in the auditor analysis, the ICP
underperformed the median in its peer group for the three and five year periods ending December
31, 2008. It is important to note, however, it did so by only 0.10% in each period, reflecting a very
small margin of underperformance.
As noted in the auditor analysis, the investment consultant prepares performance reports for the
Board to use in evaluating the performance of the investment manager. The MSRP Board agrees to
review the Policy to determine if US Treasury Bills plus 100 basis points is the most appropriate
benchmark for the ICP.
Page 12 of 16

--- Page 49 ---
Responses to Legislative Audits Findings and Recommendations
Special Review: Board of Trustees of the Maryland Teachers and
State Employees Supplemental Retirement Plans Investment Contract Pool
October 2009
c) Requesting the Investment Consultant to Rate the Strategy of the ICP
As confirmed with the investment consultant, the customized nature of the ICP makes it
inappropriate to rate the investment manager using the consultant’s rating system used for other
asset classes. The ICP is a portfolio customized for the MSRP by the investment manager.
Customization for the portfolio includes the selection of sub-managers as well as the inflow and
outflows of assets specific to the MSRP ICP. The rating system used by the investment consultant
compares managers with similar investment strategies. The investment consultant currently does
not rate any stable value portfolios for clients due to the customized nature of these products. The
investment consultant will continue to monitor and report on ICP performance. MSRP will contact
the Legislative Auditors to discuss the investment consultant's position in order to determine what
further action the auditors feel should be taken with rating the strategy of the ICP.
d) Review Special Reports on a Timely Basis
The February 2007 special report of the investment manager, as noted in the auditor analysis, was
provided to Board members in February 2007. Discussions were held on the report prior to the
August 20, 2007 Board meeting, but the discussions were not sufficiently documented. It was
decided to formally put this report on the August 20, 2007 Board agenda for further discussion,
along with a report prepared by the investment consultant on sub-prime mortgages.
To address the audit concerns, the Board will address the action to be taken for special reports
received at the next meeting following when such reports are issued. If not on the agenda for the
next meeting, at minimum, the Board meeting minutes will reflect that the Board has received the
special report and, if applicable, the justification why the Board has decided to table discussion for
a future meeting.
The Board will continue to protect the ICP portfolio. All monitoring efforts will be documented
and available for future verifications.
Finding 8
Certain conditions recommended by MSRP's legal counsel were not complied with.
Recommendation 8
We recommend that MSRP take immediate action to ensure that all conditions that were previously
established by its legal counsel for approval of the waiver are complied with.
RESPONSE 8
The Board disagrees that certain conditions recommended by MSRP legal counsel were not
complied with; however, the Board does recognize that formal documentation that provided
specific evidence of this was insufficient. The Board will take immediate action to ensure that
such formal documentation is obtained.
Page 13 of 16

--- Page 50 ---
Responses to Legislative Audits Findings and Recommendations
Special Review: Board of Trustees of the Maryland Teachers and
State Employees Supplemental Retirement Plans Investment Contract Pool
October 2009
The conditions recommended by legal counsel were offered due to a concern that different types of
collective funds (such as mutual fund or collective fund effectively controlled by the investment
manager) might be used for this strategy, or that unapproved bond purchase programs might be
adopted. It is important to note that neither situation has occurred. The Investment Manager has not
directed sub-manager allocations into collective funds that it controls. Instead, the collective funds
used in the ICP are index funds managed by an independent index provider (i.e. that does not have any
relationship with the investment manager).
To address the specific legal counsel recommendations, approval of the waiver was to be contingent
upon the following conditions:
1) This condition is noted in the auditor analysis as “the investment manager affirm that it would not
direct funds of a sub-manager into investments that are controlled by the investment manager.” As
noted in the related Board minutes (July 24, 2007 meeting) that approved the waiver:
“The Committee therefore recommended a contract modification under the following terms and
conditions
(1) The general rules of fiduciary conduct will still apply and be affirmed in the waiver itself,
e.g., (investment manager) could not direct or attempt to direct transactions between the
collective investment vehicle and (investment manager) affiliates.”
With the approval by the Investment Manager of the contract amendment, the investment manager has
complied with this first condition. No additional document would be necessary.
2) MSRP staff has confirmed that the category of investments (related to the waiver) have
remained consistent with the plan expressed by Investment Manager at the inception of the
strategy. This plan is consistent with the Board investment policy.
3) MSRP staff has included monitoring of the enhanced index strategy in the aforementioned
Compliance and Monitoring Matrix and implemented review of monthly sub-manager reports.
Staff is scheduled to report quarterly to the Board Investment Committee regarding conformity
of ranges and types of investments as specified in the sub-manager’s investment management
agreement.
MSRP staff reviews, as well as documentation supporting conditions #1 and #2, will be presented to the
Board at an upcoming Board meeting in order to formally report and document compliance with these
conditions.
Finding 9
MSRP lacked documentation to substantiate that a financial relationship between the investment
manager and a sub-manager it hired to invest ICP assets was disclosed to, and approved by, the
MSRP Board.
Page 14 of 16

--- Page 51 ---
Responses to Legislative Audits Findings and Recommendations
Special Review: Board of Trustees of the Maryland Teachers and
State Employees Supplemental Retirement Plans Investment Contract Pool
October 2009
Recommendation 9
We recommend that MSRP
a) present this matter to the Board and that the Board fully evaluate the appropriateness of this
relationship and formally document its position in the related meeting minutes;
b) seek guidance from the State Ethics Commission regarding this matter (since, at a minimum, the
relationship represents the appearance of a conflict of interest); and
c) take appropriate action based on the Board's position and the state Ethics Commission
guidance.
RESPONSE 9
The Board agrees with the factual statement made by the auditors that documentation was
lacking. The Board has complied with the majority of the audit recommendations, with the
formal documentation of the Board’s position to be documented during the next quarterly Board
meeting in November 2009.
a) As noted by the auditors, the relationship in question was disclosed to the Board during the June 4,
2007 Board meeting. The Board has been aware of this relationship and had previously determined
that there was no conflict of interest concern. However, also as noted by the auditor analysis, this
disclosure and the Board's approval were not adequately documented in the Board meeting minutes.
In order to properly document the disclosure of this relationship, the investment manager presented
an extensive report on the sub-manager selection process at the Board meeting in June 2009. After
reviewing the report, the Board agreed with the report that there was no information indicating any
conflict of interest, and the selection this sub-manager complied with all ERISA rules.
At the June 2009 meeting, however, the Board did direct legal counsel to follow-up on the issue
with the State Ethics Commission, as suggested by the Legislative Auditors. The results of this
follow-up will be disclosed again to the Board at the next Board meeting so that the Board can
formally document its position on the financial relationship between the investment manager and a
sub-manager it hired to invest ICP assets.
b) In compliance with the OLA recommendation, a letter dated June 18, 2009 was sent from the Board
counsel to the Executive Director of the State Ethics Commission concerning this matter to seek
guidance. The reply from the Executive Director indicated that the Ethics Commission has no
jurisdiction in a matter of this type. Additional discussions with the Executive Director did not
offer any informal guidance.
c) Given the above actions taken, no further action is necessary.
Finding 10
The Board and MSRP did not offer other conservative investment options (such as a money
market fund) to participants in the 401(a), 401 (k), and 457 Plans.
Page 15 of 16

--- Page 52 ---
Responses to Legislative Audits Findings and Recommendations
Special Review: Board of Trustees of the Maryland Teachers and
State Employees Supplemental Retirement Plans Investment Contract Pool
October 2009
Recommendation 10
We recommend that the Board and MSRP consider offering an alternative conservative investment
option (such as a money market fund) to 401(a), 401 (k), and 457 Plan participants.
RESPONSE 10
The Board agrees with the factual statement of the finding. However, after careful consideration,
believes it is not in the best interest of the participants, at this time, to offer an alternative
conservative investment option.
The Board has performed biennial reviews of the investment options of the plans with assistance from
the investment consultant and has made consistent determinations against offering an alternative
conservative investment option (such as a money market fund) along side the ICP. Neither the
investment consultant nor the independent consultant that conducted a special review recommended
having both a stable value and a money market fund in the MSRP 457, 401 (k) and 401(a) plans.
Reasons given included that offering such an option would require the implementation of an equity
wash* that can be confusing to participants and difficult to monitor and implement by the plan. In
addition, both consultants noted that stable value has historically outperformed money market funds
with comparable risk and, in their experience, is preferred by participants.
In addition, in a memo dated August 13, 2009, legal counsel cited specific contract language that
restricts MSRP from offering an alternative conservative investment option to the ICP. Further noted
in the memo is that, in offering such an additional option, wrapper agreements could be affected and, as
noted above, an “equity wash” would be required.
The Board will continue to perform its biennial reviews to consider offering alternative investment
options; however, at this time and given the reasons noted above, MSRP will not offer an alternative
conservative investment option.
*The Stable Value Investment Association describes an equity wash as:
“A provision in a stable value product that any transfers made from the stable value fund must be directed to an
equity fund option of the plan for a stated period of time (usually 90 days) before said transferred funds may be
directed to any other plan-provided competing fixed income fund (such as a money market fund.) This provision
is intended to reduce interest rate arbitrage by plan participants, thus permitting stable value contract issuers to
underwrite the plan without excessive risk exposure.”
Page 16 of 16