Title: Review of the Actions Taken by the Department of Health and Mental Hygiene - Developmental Disabilities Administration to Resolve Repeat Audit Findings in Response to the April 2014 Joint Chairmen's Report
Date: 02/26/2015
Type: Special Reports and Letters
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5a945d3ccc9d72404c150af9
Extracted: 2025-06-18T11:10:07.252080
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 12 ---
Exhibit 2 to February 26, 2015 Letter to Joint Chairmen
Status of Repeat Findings in OLA’s October 2, 2013 Audit Report on the
Department of Health and Mental Hygiene
Developmental Disabilities Administration (DDA)
Status Based on
Prior Recommendations Pertaining to Repeat Findings
OLA Review
Consumers’ Services
1. We recommend that DDA
a. establish procedures to verify, at least on a test basis, that the
resource/service coordinators are ensuring that services are Corrected
provided as required in the individual service plans and that
adequate documentation is maintained.
b. monitor its resource/service coordinators to ensure that
annual reassessments of consumers are performed, as
Corrected
required by federal regulations.
c. determine if eligibility can be restored to the 28 consumers
noted in the finding and if reimbursement can be obtained for
Corrected
services provided to these consumers.
Federal Funds
3a. We recommend that DDA implement a process to ensure that all
Corrected
provider claims for prepaid services under the contractual
payment system have been submitted for federal reimbursement.
4. We recommend that DDA ensure that future requests for federal
Not Resolved
fund reimbursements are made in a timely manner.
5. We recommend that DDA, in conjunction with Medical Care
Programs Administration
a. take immediate action to ensure that rejected federal fund
Corrected
reimbursement claims are timely investigated, resolved, and
recovered.
b. maintain documentation supporting its actions taken to
Corrected
resolve rejected claims.
Provider Consumer Information System (PCIS2)
12. We recommend that DDA
b. grant modification access capabilities to critical data only to Corrected
individuals with a need for such access.
c. immediately eliminate unnecessary modification access. Corrected
The shaded recommendation is more fully described in Exhibit 3.

--- Page 13 ---
Status Based on
Prior Recommendations Pertaining to Repeat Findings
OLA Review
13. We recommend that DDA
Corrected
a. log all critical security related events for the PCIS2 database.
b. review all applicable database logs on a timely basis,
investigate questionable items, document these reviews and Corrected
investigations, and retain the documentation for verification
purposes.

--- Page 14 ---
Exhibit 3 to February 26, 2015 Letter to Joint Chairmen
OLA’s Assessment Regarding Repeat Findings That Had Not Been Resolved
Federal Funds
Prior Report Recommendation – Finding 4
We recommend that DDA ensure that future requests for federal fund reimbursements are
made in a timely manner (repeat).
Status: Not Resolved
In its status report, DDA stated that substantial progress had been made in complying with the
recommendation. For example, DDA noted that procedures and processes have been created to
help ensure that provider claims are submitted timely to facilitate the timely submission of the
related federal fund reimbursements. According to an analysis prepared by DDA, during fiscal
years 2013 and 2014, it processed federal fund reimbursements totaling approximately $720
million, of which $37 million, or 5 percent of the reimbursements, were untimely. This resulted
in lost interest income to the State’s General Fund of $117,000. Our October 2, 2013 audit
report noted that $89 million of the $789 million reimbursement requests tested or 11 percent of
the reimbursements tested were not submitted timely. We were advised by DDA management
that the current delay in federal fund reimbursement requests is partially attributable to the late
submission of valid claim documentation by providers on which federal fund reimbursement
requests are based.