Title: Review of the Actions Taken by the Department of Assessments and Taxation to Resolve Repeat Audit Findings in Response to the April 2014 Joint Chairmen's Report
Date: 12/17/2014
Type: Special Reports and Letters
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5a945d3ccc9d72404c150b06
Extracted: 2025-06-18T11:11:17.679094
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 10 ---
Exhibit 2 to December 17, 2014 Letter to Joint Chairmen
Status of Repeat Findings in OLA’s December 16, 2013 Audit Report on the
State Department of Assessments and Taxation (DAT)
Status Based on
Prior Recommendations Pertaining to Repeat Findings
OLA Review
Administration of Certain Tax and Credit Programs
5a. We recommend that DAT perform timely verifications of
Not Resolved
personal property tax returns, approved homeowners’ and
renters’ tax credit applications, and franchise tax returns.
Contract Monitoring
10. We recommend that DAT
b. verify that billed costs agree with contractual terms and
Corrected
conditions, and,
c. seek recovery of any overpayments identified including
those mentioned in the report.
Cash Receipts
11. We recommend that DAT
a. document the performance of independent verifications of
recorded collections to deposit; and
Corrected
b. generate output reports of “no fee” transactions recorded in
the automated system, and ensure that supervisory personnel
independent of the cash receipts functions review these
transactions for propriety.
Shaded recommendations are more fully described in Exhibit 3.

--- Page 11 ---
Exhibit 3 to December 17, 2014 Letter to Joint Chairmen
OLA’s Findings Regarding Repeat Findings That Had Not Been Resolved
Administration of Certain Tax and Credit Programs
Prior Report Recommendation – Finding 5a
We recommend that DAT perform timely verifications of personal property tax returns,
approved homeowners’ and renters’ tax credit applications, and franchise tax returns
(repeat).
Status: Not Resolved
During our review, we found that the verifications for personal property and franchise tax returns
were performed in a timely manner. Although some progress has been made, verifications of
homeowners’ and renters’ tax credit applications were still not timely. The tax credit verification
process consists of audits of certain applications selected based on risk and significance. At the
time of our review, such audits had been completed for the applications received from
homeowners and renters who were granted tax credits in years 2009 and 2010. Audits of
applications for tax credits granted in years 2011 and 2012 had recently begun and were in
progress and DAT’s estimated start date for the 2013 audits was July 2015. In its status report,
DAT stated that it received three new positions for the tax credit programs in the approved fiscal
year 2015 budget, and these positions will be used to accelerate the timeliness of the audits.
DAT advised us that delays in filling these positions, as well as unexpected turnover in a key
auditor position have also hindered its ability to complete the audits sooner.