Title: Baltimore City Public School System
Date: 09/28/2012
Type: Local School Systems
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5a945d34cc9d72404c1509f2
Extracted: 2025-06-18T06:03:35.253198
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Financial Management Practices Audit Report
Baltimore City Public School System
October 2018
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
For further information concerning this report contact:
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
301 West Preston Street, Room 1202
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Phone: 410-946-5900 · 301-970-5900
Toll Free in Maryland: 1-877-486-9964
Maryland Relay: 711
TTY: 410-946-5401 · 301-970-5401
E-mail: OLAWebmaster@ola.state.md.us
Website: www.ola.state.md.us
The Office of Legislative Audits operates a Fraud Hotline to report fraud, waste, or abuse
involving State of Maryland government resources. Reports of fraud, waste, or abuse may
be communicated anonymously by a toll-free call to 1-877-FRAUD-11, by mail to the Fraud
Hotline, c/o Office of Legislative Audits, or through the Office’s website.
The Department of Legislative Services does not discriminate on the basis of age, ancestry,
color, creed, marital status, national origin, race, religion, gender, gender identity, sexual
orientation, or disability in the admission or access to its programs, services, or activities. The
Department’s Information Officer has been designated to coordinate compliance with the
nondiscrimination requirements contained in Section 35.107 of the Department of Justice
Regulations. Requests for assistance should be directed to the Information Officer at 410-
946-5400 or 410-970-5400.

--- Page 7 ---
Table of Contents
Background Information 8
Statistical Overview 8
Oversight 9
Efforts to Address Baltimore City Public School System (BCPSS) 9
Budget Gap
External Audits 11
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report 11
Findings and Recommendations 12
Revenue and Billing Cycle
 Finding 1 – BCPSS did not properly monitor or bill amounts owed by 13
outside organizations for the services of its employees.
Federal Funds
Finding 2 – BCPSS did not obtain social security numbers for 5,600 15
students with individual education plans to help identify qualified
students for whom Medicaid reimbursements could be obtained
for eligible services.
Finding 3 – BCPSS did not have a formal process to review denied 16
Medicaid claims in order to determine if the claims could be
corrected for resubmission.
Procurement and Disbursement Cycle
 Finding 4 – BCPSS did not adequately restrict user access capabilities 17
in its automated procurement and accounts payable system.
Finding 5 – BCPSS did not document the appropriateness of using 18
intergovernmental cooperative purchasing agreements as required
by State law.
Finding 6 – BCPSS did not document the basis for assigning work to 19
pre-qualified vendors for certain services and, in certain cases,
higher priced vendors received work prior to lower cost vendors.
* Denotes item repeated in full or part from preceding audit report
5

--- Page 8 ---
Finding 7 – Purchase orders were not always prepared and approved 21
as required prior to obtaining the related goods or services.
 Finding 8 – BCPSS did not always adequately monitor contracts to 22
ensure goods and services were properly received or that invoices
were proper prior to payment.
Finding 9 – BCPSS did not always adequately document the rationale 23
for sole source contract determinations and sole source contract
awards were not always published on eMaryland Marketplace as
required.
Human Resources and Payroll
 Finding 10 – Critical human resources and payroll transactions were 25
not independently reviewed for propriety.
 Finding 11 – Certain overtime payments could not be substantiated 26
or were improperly calculated.
Inventory Control and Accountability 28
Information Technology
Finding 12 – Sensitive personally identifiable information maintained 29
by BCPSS was stored without adequate safeguards.
 Finding 13 – Proper account and password controls were not 30
established over the Enterprise Resource Planning application system,
used for finance and human resource functions.
Finding 14 – The BCPSS network’s intrusion prevention system had 31
substantial gaps and malware protection controls over computers
were not sufficient.
Finding 15 – BCPSS lacked assurance that adequate information 33
technology security and operational controls existed over its
student information system that was hosted, operated, and
maintained by a service provider.
* Denotes item repeated in full or part from preceding audit report
6

--- Page 9 ---
Facilities Construction, Renovation, and Maintenance 35
Transportation Services
Finding 16 – Contract and payment processing issues specific to 39
the prior arrangement with private bus contractors contributed
to transportation costs being higher than necessary.
Finding 17 – BCPSS did not maintain critical documentation, including 42
executed contracts, to support certain financial relationships with
bus contractors.
Finding 18 – BCPSS’ process for reviewing taxi company invoices did 43
not adequately ensure the billings were proper and payments were
consistent with contractual terms resulting in overpayments
totaling $1.2 million.
Food Services 45
School Board Operations 45
Management of Other Risks
Finding 19 – BCPSS did not require charter school management 47
personnel and board members to periodically renew conflict of
interest disclosures and did not ensure the disclosures were
completed as required.
Finding 20 – BCPSS did not properly track and monitor required 48
critical documents to be submitted by each charter school nor
did BCPSS perform follow-up actions to obtain required documents
from the schools.
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology 50
Agency Response Appendix
7

--- Page 10 ---
Background Information
Statistical Overview
According to student enrollment records compiled by the Maryland State
Department of Education (MSDE), the Baltimore City Public School System
(BCPSS) ranks 4th in student enrollment among the 24 public school systems
in Maryland. Fiscal year 2016 full-time student enrollment was 83,666
students. BCPSS has 160 schools (including 36 charter schools and 5
contract/transformational schools) consisting of 115 elementary, 6 middle
schools, 12 intermediate, 21 high schools, and 6 other types of schools
(including vocational and special).
According to BCPSS’ audited financial statements, fiscal year 2016 revenues
were $1.4 billion and expenditures were $1.4 billion. The largest expenditure
category was salaries and wages, including benefits, which accounted for 73
percent of total expenditures during fiscal year 2016. See the chart below for
BCPSS’ expenses by category in fiscal year 2016 according to its audited
financial statements. According to MSDE records, during the 2015-2016
school year, BCPSS had 9,913 full-time equivalent positions, which consisted
of 7,076 instructional and 2,837 non-instructional employees.
BCPSS Expenditures by Category and Selected Statistical Data
Fiscal Year 2016
(amounts in millions)
Source: BCPSS’ Fiscal Year 2016 Audited Financial Statements and MSDE Data
_________________________________________________________________
8

--- Page 11 ---
Oversight
BCPSS is governed by a local school board, consisting of nine members jointly
appointed by the Mayor of Baltimore and the Maryland Governor, and one
student member with partial voting rights. The State and Baltimore City
government provide the vast majority of BCPSS funding. In addition, MSDE
exercises oversight through the establishment and monitoring of various
financial and academic policies and regulations, in accordance with certain
provisions of the Annotated Code of Maryland. MSDE also works with BCPSS
to comply with the requirements and mandates of federal law. The Baltimore
City government exercises authority over BCPSS primarily through the review
and approval of BCPSS’ annual operating and capital budgets.
Efforts to Address BCPSS’ Budget Gap
During the development of its fiscal year 2018 budget, BCPSS determined
that there was a structural budget gap totaling $130 million between
expected revenues and expenses. Additionally, BCPSS’ budget projections
reflected that the annual budget gap would continue to increase to $190
million until fiscal year 2020. BCPSS attributed the fiscal year 2018
structural gap to increased expenses that had not been offset by inflation-
adjusted revenue sources. Specifically, BCPSS cited the current State funding
formula that does not distinguish between real growth in the Baltimore City’s
tax base and paper wealth resulting from the financial impact of public-private
partnerships which impacts actual tax revenue collected. Additionally,
declining student enrollment has resulted in less State funding.
In the spring of 2017, to address potential budget gaps, the State of Maryland
and the City of Baltimore announced that additional resources would be
provided to BCPSS. Those resources would take two forms:
1) State legislation (Chapter 6, 2017 Laws of Maryland) providing
revenue totaling $22 million would be added to BCPSS’ general fund
projections in fiscal year 2018 and $20 million in both fiscal years
2019 and 2020 above the local appropriation provided in fiscal year
2017, and
2) Certain services would be provided to BCPSS by the State or City
without cost.
The combined effect of these additional resources had an estimated annual
value totaling $59.4 million for fiscal years 2018 through 2020. Additionally,
in finalizing its 2018 annual budget, BCPSS reduced expenses and made
position cuts that yielded a net decrease of 278.2 full time equivalent
9

--- Page 12 ---
positions for fiscal year 2018. BCPSS estimated these reductions would
result in annual savings totaling $25 million.
The aforementioned 2017 law also required BCPSS to contract with an
independent certified public accountant (CPA) on or before December 31,
2017 to conduct a comprehensive audit of BCPSS. As of July 2018, BCPSS
was in the process of finalizing a contract with the CPA firm that
independently audits its annual financial statements to conduct this
comprehensive audit. In accordance with the law, the findings and
recommendations from the audit are required to be reported on or before
December 31, 2019 to the Department of Budget and Management (DBM),
MSDE, the General Assembly budget committees, the Mayor of Baltimore City,
and the Baltimore City Board of School Commissioners.
The law also required the Board to develop a Financial Recovery Plan to
address all repeat findings from our Office’s Financial Management Practices
audit of BCPSS and include steps to address the following conditions:
1) eliminate BCPSS’ structural deficits by 2020;
2) balance the BCPSS budget and future deficits;
3) alter permanent and temporary staffing levels and review existing
employment contracts and attrition levels to achieve greater efficiency,
including size and scope of the BCPSS central office;
4) alter the administrative organization of BCPSS to achieve greater
efficiency;
5) conduct special audits or further studies to analyze the effectiveness
of the financial recovery plan; and
6) establish a capital budget that maximizes the use of available
resources to address infrastructure deficiencies.
As required by the law, the Board submitted the Financial Recovery Plan on
August 1, 2017 to the Mayor, DBM, and the General Assembly budget
committees. The publicly available Plan addressed BCPSS’ efforts and
strategies to reduce staffing, renegotiation of union contracts, reduction of
surplus facilities, and capital improvements of school buildings. Finally, the
law requires the Board to report quarterly on its progress in implementing the
actions identified in the Plan to the Mayor, DBM, and the General Assembly
budget committees. We noted that the first quarterly status report was
submitted on November 1, 2017, and subsequent reports were also
submitted with the latest being dated August 1, 2018.
10

--- Page 13 ---
External Audits
BCPSS engages a certified public accounting firm to independently audit its
annual financial statements. Additionally, the auditor conducts what is
referred to as a Single Audit of BCPSS federal grant programs (as required by
federal regulations). We reviewed the resulting financial statement audit and
Single Audit reports for fiscal years 2015 and 2016, and examined the related
work papers for fiscal year 2016, which were the latest available at the time
we performed our audit fieldwork.
There were similarities between the work of the independent certified public
accounting firm that audited BCPSS’ financial statements and conducted the
Single Audit, and the risks and scope of our audit in certain areas. As a result,
we reduced the scope of our audit work related to State and local government
revenues received via wire transfer, accounts receivable, and federal grant
activity.
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report
Based on our current audit assessment of significance and risk to our audit
objectives, our audit included a review to determine the status of 25 of the 26
findings contained in our preceding audit report dated September 28, 2012.
We determined that BCPSS satisfactorily addressed 19 of these findings. The
remaining 6 findings are repeated in this report.
11

--- Page 14 ---
Findings and Recommendations
Revenue and Billing Cycle
Background
Baltimore City Public School System (BCPSS) revenues consist primarily of
funds received from the State, Baltimore City, and the federal government.
According to the BCPSS audited financial statements, revenues from all
sources totaled $1.4 billion during fiscal year 2016. In addition, schools
collect funds for other purposes such as student activities, clubs, and school
publications. Because they are not considered school revenue, these school
activity funds are accounted for separately by each school and reported in
summary in the audited financial statements. Although this revenue is raised
through student related activities, BCPSS has a fiduciary duty to safeguard
these funds. For fiscal year 2016, student activity fund collections totaled $5
million and the June 30, 2016 balance was $1.6 million.
External Audits
There were similarities between the work of the independent certified public
accounting firm that audited the BCPSS financial statements and the
objectives of our audit of certain revenue activities. As a result, we reduced
the scope of our audit work related to State and local government revenues
received via wire transfer and accounts receivable, for which the auditor’s
procedural review and testing disclosed no material weaknesses or significant
deficiencies.
Reviews of School Activity Funds
The BCPSS internal auditor conducts audits of school activity funds to
determine whether proper controls have been established over collections
and disbursements, and funds have been properly accounted for. The audits
of the school activity funds at BCPSS schools identified some control
weaknesses at certain schools that were addressed by school management.
The reports we reviewed disclosed that internal control weaknesses identified
were not prevalent. The internal auditor audits all schools’ activity funds on a
rotating basis and reports any findings to the respective school principal and
the central administrative staff.
The independent certified public accounting firm contracted by BCPSS to
perform its annual financial statement audit also conducts a limited review of
the school activity funds. These reviews consist primarily of tests of bank
reconciliations, and receipt and disbursement transactions at selected
schools. Our review of the firm’s findings for fiscal year 2016 disclosed that
12

--- Page 15 ---
internal control weaknesses identified were not prevalent. In addition, the
firm’s testing did not identify any improprieties.
Finding 1
BCPSS did not properly monitor or bill amounts owed by outside organizations
for the services of its employees.
Analysis
BCPSS did not properly monitor or bill amounts owed by outside organizations
for services provided by its employees, which are required to be reimbursed
under certain circumstances.
Amounts due to BCPSS for employees granted paid leave of absences to work
for outside organizations had not been recorded properly in the centralized
accounts receivable records and were not adequately billed and pursued for
collection. Specifically, according to its policy, BCPSS is required to be
reimbursed for the costs paid for salaries and fringe benefits for employees
granted a paid leave of absence to work for outside organizations, such as
employee unions. Although the BCPSS Office of Human Capital was tasked
with collecting these receivables, there was no oversight to ensure all
amounts were billed and collected. According to BCPSS records, as of
February 2017, there were eight employees granted a leave of absence to
work for outside organizations for fiscal year 2017.
Our test of four employees working for outside organizations during fiscal
years 2016 and 2017, disclosed that BCPSS had not properly billed
$352,500 for two employees. For example, BCPSS did not bill any of the
actual payroll costs totaling $271,562 for one employee. Additionally, the
BCPSS Office of Human Capital did not maintain complete documentation
supporting the approval of the leaves of absence to work for outside
organizations. For example, there was no documentation that the Board was
notified as required that these four employees were on leaves of absence with
outside organizations.
A similar condition regarding the recordation of amounts in the accounts
receivable records and the billing to and collection of amounts owed from
outside organizations was commented upon in our preceding audit report.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that BCPSS
a. include all amounts owed to BCPSS in its centralized accounts receivable
records (repeat),
13

--- Page 16 ---
b. ensure appropriate and timely collection efforts are made for amounts
owed by outside organizations (repeat), and
c. maintain documentation supporting the approval of an employee’s leave
of absences to work for outside organizations.
Federal Funds
Background
BCPSS receives funds pertaining to federal government programs that are
generally restricted for use for a specific program (such as the School Lunch
Program or Special Education). According to the audited Schedule of
Expenditures of Federal Awards, fiscal year 2016 expenditures totaled $138
million, not including federally funded fee-for-service programs such as
Medicaid reimbursement for special education services.
Single Audit Report Disclosed No Reportable Conditions Regarding Federal
Grant Management
Due to work performed by the independent certified public accounting firm
that conducted the Single Audit of BCPSS’ federal grants and the objectives of
our audit in this area, we reduced the scope of our audit work related to
federal grants. Besides expressing an opinion on BCPSS’ compliance with the
terms of several grant programs, the auditor also considered the existing
internal control structure's impact on compliance and audited the required
Schedule of Federal Awards (which includes claimed and reported grant
expenditures) for fiscal years 2015 and 2016. The related reports stated that
BCPSS complied, in all material respects, with the requirements applicable to
its major federal programs. With respect to internal controls over compliance
with, and the operation of, major federal programs, the auditors did not
identify any material weaknesses or significant deficiencies.
Medicaid Funds for Eligible Services
Although BCPSS had established a procedure to identify children eligible for
Medicaid-subsidized services, we noted certain opportunities to enhance the
reimbursement process. Medicaid is an entitlement program for which
certain service costs can be reimbursed to BCPSS. Medicaid activity is not
covered by the Single Audit of federal grants. According to BCPSS records,
fiscal year 2017 state and federal reimbursements for Medicaid-subsidized
services totaling approximately $19.6 million were obtained through
approximately 229,000 reimbursement claims.
14

--- Page 17 ---
Finding 2
BCPSS did not obtain social security numbers for 5,600 students with
individual education plans to help identify qualified students for whom
Medicaid reimbursement could be obtained for eligible services.
Analysis
BCPSS did not obtain social security numbers (SSNs) for all students with
individual education plans (IEPs). SSNs represent a critical piece of
information used by BCPSS to determine which students are eligible for
Medicaid reimbursement through an automated data-matching program with
the State Medicaid records. The matching program, which is based on the
SSN, provides BCPSS with the required medical assistance number needed to
allow for the billing of Medicaid-eligible services for these students. BCPSS
advised us that it did not collect a student’s SSN when preparing an IEP, and
it did not perform alternate procedures (such as, using the student’s full name
and date of birth) to obtain the required medical assistance number.
Nevertheless, BCPSS did advise us that parents or guardians sometimes
volunteered to provide the SSN or medical assistance number during IEP
meetings.
According to BCPSS’ records, as of September 2017, BCPSS did not have
social security numbers for approximately 5,600 of the 12,600 students
having an IEP, to help identify all qualified students for whom Medicaid
reimbursement could be obtained for eligible services provided to those
students. The extent to which these 5,600 students qualified, because they
have a medical assistance number, was not available; but our review of five
such students suggests additional Medicaid reimbursement is possible.
For three of the five students, their IEP indicated they were Medicaid eligible
and for two of these students the data-matching indicated the existence of a
medical assistance number that potentially could have been used to obtain
reimbursement for services provided to them. Regarding the other two
students, one was not eligible and the other student had a medical assistance
number and billings had been made for the eligible services provided to this
student.
Recommendation 2
We recommend that BCPSS obtain social security numbers for students with
individual education plans and bill to obtain Medicaid reimbursements for
eligible services provided to qualified students.
15

--- Page 18 ---
Finding 3
BCPSS did not have a formal process to review denied Medicaid claims in
order to determine if the claims could be corrected for resubmission.
Analysis
BCPSS did not have a formal process to review denied Medicaid
reimbursement claims to determine if the claims submitted for children
provided services under an IEP could be corrected and resubmitted. BCPSS
submits Medicaid reimbursement claims for daily services provided to each
student previously deemed eligible; however, claims are denied for various
reasons.1 BCPSS advised us that denied claims are not reviewed due to the
large volume of denied claims and staffing limitations. However, reviewing
denied Medicaid reimbursement claims is important since BCPSS only has a
year from the date of the service to obtain reimbursement. According to
BCPSS’ records, during fiscal year 2017, approximately 113,000 claims were
denied that totaled $14.6 million.
Although many of the denied claims could be for reasons that would not justify
resubmission, such as, ineligible student, claims exceeding certain limitations,
and third-party insurance, our analysis identified denied claims that could in
fact be valid and resubmitted after being researched and corrected. We
identified approximately 14,000 claims (based on the code associated with
the reason for denial) totaling $522,000 in fiscal year 2017, where the denial
was most commonly due to the mismatched diagnosis codes or the student’s
name not matching the unique medical assistance number filed with the
claim, conditions which appear to be easily correctable.
Specifically, our test of five of these denied claims, totaling $886, disclosed
four claims, totaling $856, were not researched and resubmitted. We
reviewed the documentation related to the four claims and found that
corrections to the diagnosis code, medical assistance number, or the
student’s name could have been made in order to obtain reimbursement. The
documentation was reviewed with a responsible BCPSS official who agreed
with our conclusion on the four claims and that, if the denied claims were
corrected as we proposed, BCPSS would have been able to resubmit the
claims for reimbursement.
1 Reasons for denial could include, ineligible student, other insurance coverage exists, claim
exceeds certain limitations, mismatched diagnosis codes, or the student’s name did not
match the unique medical assistance number filed with the claim.
16

--- Page 19 ---
Recommendation 3
We recommend that BCPSS develop a formal process to review denied claims
for Medicaid reimbursements to determine if the claims could be corrected
and resubmitted.
Procurement and Disbursement Cycle
Background
According to the audited financial statements and BCPSS records, non-payroll
disbursements totaled $353 million during fiscal year 2016. BCPSS uses an
automated system for purchasing and disbursements. Requisitions entered
via the system by departments are subject to on-line departmental and
purchasing office approval. Approved requisitions are then converted to
purchase orders by the purchasing office, which also generally handles the
solicitation, bid evaluation, and establishment of contracts. The receipt of
goods and services is entered into the automated system by the receiving
school or department and payments are then processed by the finance office.
Payments are processed by the finance office through the automated system
that prints vendor checks and posts the payment to the financial records.
BCPSS written procurement policies require that procurements over $25,000
be competitively bid in accordance with Section 5-112 of the Education Article
of the Annotated Code of Maryland. The policies also require that these
procurements be approved by the Board with the exception of: textbook
purchases and other materials of instruction, emergency items, sole-source
procurements, and the use of intergovernmental agreements and purchasing
cooperatives. Although exempt from board approval, the aforementioned
procurements are presented to the Board for information purposes.
Furthermore, the policies generally require the solicitation of written or oral
quotes for any purchase of $5,000 or greater and formal competitive bidding
for contracts of $25,000 or greater.
Finding 4
BCPSS did not adequately restrict user access capabilities in its automated
procurement and accounts payable system.
Analysis
BCPSS did not adequately restrict user access capabilities in its automated
procurement and accounts payable system. Our review of system access as
of September 2017 disclosed that 20 employees had been assigned system
capabilities that allowed them to perform incompatible critical functions. For
17

--- Page 20 ---
example, 6 employees had the ability to enter invoices, approve payments,
and override the system matching requirements that help ensure invoices
agree with the terms of previously authorized purchase orders. Additionally, 2
of these 6 employees also had the capability to add and update vendors. As a
result, unauthorized disbursements could be processed without detection,
although our testing found no evidence of inappropriate transactions.
A similar condition related to restricting user capabilities has been
commented on in our two preceding audit reports.
Recommendation 4
We recommend that BCPSS restrict assigned capabilities to eliminate the
ability of users to perform incompatible duties (repeat).
Finding 5
BCPSS did not document the appropriateness of using intergovernmental
cooperative purchasing agreements (ICPAs) as required by State law.
Additionally, BCPSS did not obtain the original agreements from the initial
procuring entity so that payment rates could be verified nor did it obtain
itemized invoices for certain purchases it made under ICPA contracts.
Analysis
BCPSS did not document the cost savings and other benefits associated with
using ICPAs, as required by State law. BCPSS advised us that it is not its
practice to document the appropriateness of using the ICPAs. Additionally,
BCPSS did not obtain the original agreements from the initial procuring entity
so that payment rates could be verified nor did it obtain itemized invoices for
certain purchases it made under ICPA contracts. Based upon a review of
BCPSS records, during fiscal year 2016, we identified 176 active ICPA
contracts, including 146 contracts valued at $73.2 million and 30 additional
contracts without a defined estimated contract value.
State law requires a written determination of the benefits of using an ICPA.
The law, which legal counsel to the Maryland General Assembly advised us is
applicable to local education agencies, allows the use of cooperative
purchasing agreements only after the using entity has determined in writing
that the use of such arrangements will provide costs benefits, promote
18

--- Page 21 ---
administrative efficiencies, or promote intergovernmental cooperation.2 Our
test of three ICPA contracts active in 2016 and totaling $4.6 million disclosed
that BCPSS had not documented the benefits of using the three ICPAs nor had
it obtained the original agreements and verified the propriety of the rates
charged on the related invoices. At our request, BCPSS obtained three of
these agreements. Our review of one billing from each of the three ICPAs,
totaling $1.1 million, confirmed that the rates paid for two of the three billings
appeared to be in accordance with the agreements. However, for one of the
three invoices totaling $127,000, we were still unable to verify the amount
paid because the invoice was not itemized making it impossible to compare
the rates to the original agreement. Finally, BCPSS did not ensure that the
three ICPA contracts were properly procured (that is, through a competitive
procurement process) by the initial procuring entity, as required by State law.
Recommendation 5
We recommend that BCPSS
a. comply with State law and ensure that a written determination of the
benefits for the use of an ICPA is prepared,
b. obtain the original ICPA contracts and verify invoices to the terms
contained in the ICPA, and
c. obtain evidence to satisfy the requirements of State law that the ICPA
contract was properly procured by the initial procuring entity.
Finding 6
BCPSS did not document the basis for assigning work to pre-qualified vendors
for certain services and, in certain cases, higher priced vendors received work
prior to lower cost vendors.
Analysis
BCPSS did not establish a methodology for assigning work to pre-qualified
vendors, with differing prices, on multiple-award contracts. Using a
2 Section 13-110 of the State Finance and Procurement Article, of the Annotated Code of
Maryland in part, defines an intergovernmental cooperative purchasing agreement as a
contract that is entered into by at least one governmental entity in a manner consistent with
the purposes set forth in Section 11-201 of the Article, that is available for use by the
governmental entity entering the contract and at least one additional governmental entity,
and that is intended to promote efficiency and savings that can result from
intergovernmental cooperative purchasing. The aforementioned law applies to all ICPAs
regardless of the services, goods, or commodities purchased. In addition, Section 5-
112(a)(3) of the Education Article, of the Annotated Code of Maryland provides that local
education agencies do not need to conduct competitive procurements for goods and
commodities if they use a contract awarded by public agencies or intergovernmental
purchasing organizations and the lead procuring agency followed public bidding
procedures.
19

--- Page 22 ---
competitive solicitation, BCPSS established contracts with a group of vendors
that met specific technical qualifications to provide various services (such as,
temporary district office staff, substitute teachers, skilled nursing, and special
education aides). These contracts included BCPSS-approved rates which
were based on the vendors’ initial bids. This resulted in a pool of pre-qualified
vendors, with differing cost structures, from which BCPSS could select for the
specific personnel services on an as-needed basis.
BCPSS did not have a formal documented process for subsequently selecting
vendors from the pre-qualified list to perform specific services as needed
during the term of each contract. We were advised by BCPSS management
that, although not documented, previous BCPSS experience with a vendor was
the primary factor for selection even though each pre-qualified vendor had the
technical expertise to provide the services. Since the differing cost rates
between vendors were not considered in selecting a vendor, higher costs may
have been incurred than if the lowest cost pre-qualified vendor had been
selected.
Based on the budgets for five multiple-award contracts totaling $65.2 million
(approved by the Board from June 2013 through July 2015), there may have
been opportunities to allocate a greater portion of the services under each of
these contracts to lower cost vendors. For example, of the 14 qualified
vendors for a multiple-award contract to provide special education aides, one
vendor was budgeted to receive 46 percent of the $28.5 million contract
value even though six other qualified vendors had lower rates. These six
vendors were budgeted to receive a combined 30 percent of the contract
value. Additionally, one of the five qualified vendors for a multiple-award
contract to provide temporary district office staff received 67 percent of the
$9 million contract value even though two other qualified vendors had lower
rates overall. The extent to which the actual usage was consistent with the
contract budgets was not ascertained.
Recommendation 6
We recommend that BCPSS establish a formal methodology for selecting from
pre-qualified vendors on multiple-award contracts, which documents the basis
for selection and appropriately considers vendor costs for the services to be
provided.
20

--- Page 23 ---
Finding 7
Purchase orders were not always prepared and approved as required prior to
obtaining the related goods or services.
Analysis
Although BCPSS policy requires that purchase orders be prepared and
independently approved prior to making purchases of goods or services, we
noted that this policy was not routinely being followed by BCPSS units.
According to its records, BCPSS had identified that during fiscal year 2016
there were 2,001 purchase orders totaling $10.4 million that were
retroactively processed (prepared and approved) after receiving an invoice
from a vendor for goods or services, including approximately $3.6 million of
these purchase orders related to BCPSS’ Information Technology Division or
the Chief Operating Office.
BCPSS’ Purchasing Office monitors for this type of activity and sends bi-weekly
notifications advising each department and school of the problematic nature
of this activity. According to the notification memos, this activity distorts the
financial activity of BCPSS since the expenses are not known before hand, it
results in additional processing time for invoices and other inefficiencies, and
contributes to higher costs due to a lack of competitive bids. The extent to
which competitive procurements should have been undertaken for the
aforementioned 2,001 purchase orders was not determined by BCPSS.
BCPSS’ automated system for purchases and disbursements requires that
each vendor invoice be electronically matched to an established purchase
order. When a vendor invoice does not have an established purchase order,
the automated system controls prevent the invoice from being paid.
Consequently, the Finance Office has to confirm manually the accuracy of the
invoice with the department or school that obtained the goods and services
and retroactively process a purchase order in order to process the invoice for
payment.
Recommendation 7
We recommend that BCPSS ensure that procurement policies and automated
system controls are not bypassed by ensuring purchase orders are prepared
and approved prior to obtaining the related goods or services.
21

--- Page 24 ---
Finding 8
BCPSS did not always adequately monitor contracts to ensure goods and
services were properly received or that invoices were proper prior to payment.
Analysis
BCPSS did not always adequately monitor contracts to ensure goods and
services were properly received or that invoices were proper prior to payment.
Our test of 20 invoices totaling $5.4 million paid from July 2015 to July 2016
disclosed that for 4 invoices totaling $1.9 million, BCPSS had recorded the
receipt of the services in its automated procurement and accounts payable
system before the services had been provided and the invoices were received.
The tested invoices were judgmentally selected from 20 contracts totaling
$93 million; the 4 contracts for which BCPSS had recorded in its system that
services had been received prior to vendors having actually provided the
services totaled $6.5 million. These contracts were for temporary staffing,
extended learning, and summer school. By recording the receipt of all
services in the system, the subsequent invoices for these vendors were
automatically approved for payment upon recordation in the system,
bypassing the intended control provided by the use of receiving reports.
For example, on June 24, 2016, BCPSS recorded the receipt of all services for
a $1.7 million summer school contract, which had a service delivery period
from June 1, 2016 to August 5, 2016. In this case, the vendor was paid the
entire contract amount, via an invoice dated July 25, 2016, which included
services delivered after June 24, 2016 and for which there was no additional
receipt of services recorded by BCPSS in its system. We also noted that
services were not provided for one day due to extreme summer weather, but
the vendor was paid based on BCPSS’ premature recordation of services
delivery, resulting in an overpayment of $4,050.
BCPSS’ policies require that good and services be recorded in the automated
procurement and accounts payable system when they are actually received. A
similar condition was noted in our prior report regarding the approval of
invoices for payment prior to obtaining documentation that the related
services were provided.
Recommendation 8
We recommend that BCPSS monitor contracts and related billings to ensure
goods and services are provided in accordance with the contractual terms
and conditions prior to payment and that invoices accurately reflect the
services rendered (repeat).
22

--- Page 25 ---
Finding 9
BCPSS did not always adequately document the rationale for sole source
contract determinations and sole source contract awards were not always
published on eMaryland Marketplace as required.
Analysis
BCPSS did not always appropriately document the rationale for its sole source
contract determinations. Additionally, sole source contract awards were not
always published on eMaryland Marketplace (eMM) as required. BCPSS’
Procurement Policy allows for sole source contracts when it is determined that
only one vendor can provide the goods or services, it is in BCPSS’ best interest
to award a contract without a competitive solicitation, the contract is for an
emergency, or the contract is in connection with actual or potential litigation.
Our test of five sole source contracts totaling $14.5 million, approved by the
Board between January 2013 and March 2016 disclosed the following
conditions:
 The sole source determinations for four sole source contracts totaling
$10.7 million lacked specificity to justify that the selected vendor was the
only suitable or acceptable option to provide the services as required by
BCPSS policy. Specifically, the justifications simply stated that the
organizations were successful in providing services to BCPSS previously.
Two contracts totaling $8.1 million were for special education services and
two contracts totaling $2.6 million were for the operation of elementary
summer school programs.
 None of the five sole source contracts awards were published on eMM as
required by State procurement regulations. eMM is an Internet-based,
interactive procurement system managed by the State of Maryland’s
Department of General Services and State procurement regulations
require local school systems to publish sole source contract awards valued
at $15,000 or more on eMM. Publishing awards on eMM provides
transparency over procurements including information about the winning
bidder and the amount of the related award.
Furthermore, although BCPSS advised us that its procurement system had the
ability to identify and track the type of procurement method it used for
awarding contracts, BCPSS had not developed a report to obtain this
information. Consequently, we could not readily determine the number and
value of BCPSS’ sole source contracts. In May 2018, BCPSS advised us that it
would develop this report.
23

--- Page 26 ---
Recommendation 9
We recommend that BCPSS
a. ensure that sole source contract determinations include appropriate
information to document the rationale for not performing a competitive
procurement,
b. publish sole source contract awards on eMaryland Marketplace, and
c. develop a system report that tracks the procurement method used for
each contract to aid in verifying compliance with existing policies.
Human Resources and Payroll
Background
Payroll expense represents the largest single cost component in the BCPSS
budget. According to BCPSS records, fiscal year 2016 salary, wage, and
benefit costs totaled $935 million, or 73 percent of the total operating
expenditures. According to Maryland State Department of Education (MSDE)
reports, during the 2015–2016 school year BCPSS had 9,913 full-time
positions, which consisted of 7,076 instructional positions and 2,837 non-
instructional positions.
The vast majority of BCPSS employees (including teachers and police officers)
are represented by various unions that negotiate contracts with BCPSS that
specify the terms of employment, including salaries. All union contracts
expired on or before June 30, 2017 and were extended on a month-to-month
basis. A new teachers’ contract was negotiated and ratified by the Baltimore
Teachers Union in March 2018. According to the new union agreement,
teachers are to receive a 2.5 percent pay increase over the next two years,
which includes a 1 percent raise to be applied retroactively to July 1, 2017
and the remaining raise in January 2019. The other union contracts were
under negotiation as of March 2018. Non-affiliated employees, including
school system administrators, do not belong to a union.
BCPSS uses an automated system to maintain human resources information,
record employee time, track leave usage, and process and record payroll
transactions. Employees prepare paper timesheets or timecards that are
approved by supervisors and forwarded to timekeepers throughout the school
system. Timekeepers record adjustments to the standard work schedules,
such as overtime, on an exception basis in the automated timekeeping
system based on these paper time records. The timekeeping system
interfaces with the payroll system to process the payroll. Additional
adjustments (such as for accumulated leave payments) are processed by
24

--- Page 27 ---
BCPSS central payroll personnel. The system generates payroll checks and
direct deposit advices.
Finding 10
Critical human resources and payroll transactions were not independently
reviewed for propriety.
Analysis
Critical human resources and payroll transactions on the automated system
were not independently reviewed for propriety. Without an independent
review of changes processed, BCPSS lacked assurance that all transactions
were properly authorized and were correctly entered into the automated
system.
 There was no independent review to ensure employee personnel and
payroll transactions recorded in the automated system were correct and
accurate. Six employees had the ability to enter human resources data
into the system, such as new employees and employee pay rates, without
an independent review for propriety. Furthermore, available transaction
reports of new employees added to the system or changes to employee
data, including salary changes, were not generated for verification to
authorized source documentation for independent supervisory review and
approval. According to BCPSS records (which we did not verify) its human
resources employees entered 11,174 changes to employee salaries and
pay rates during fiscal year 2017, resulting in net annual pay increases
totaling up to $81.5 million, including 973 entries for the hiring of new
employees with salaries totaling $45.9 million. One of the six
aforementioned employees processed approximately 8,500 of these
adjustments totaling $14.7 million. Similar conditions were noted in our
two preceding audit reports.
 Nine employees could process manual adjustments to provide additional
compensation and adjust leave balances without a timely review to ensure
the adjustments are appropriate and properly approved. These
adjustments were necessary when an employee’s hours needed to be
corrected after the standard payroll process, for payments of accumulated
leave, and for employee grievance settlements and should be supported
by an approval form signed by the Payroll Director. Although BCPSS began
generating a quarterly report in June 2015 to monitor and review these
adjustments on a test basis, the reports were not generated timely each
quarter. For example, as of October 24, 2017, the most recently
completed review was for the quarter ended December 2016 and that
review did not begin until May 2017, when the report was generated. The
25

--- Page 28 ---
quarterly reviews were intended to ensure that these manual adjustments
were accurately entered in the payroll system and properly supported by
the required approval forms.
Our test of 22 additional compensation payments totaling $1.5 million
that were processed as manual adjustments during calendar year 2016
disclosed that eight payments totaling $818,450 were not supported by
the required form to authorize the adjustment. Additionally, for one other
payment of $36,794, the approval form was on file, but not signed by the
Payroll Director, as required. During calendar year 2016, BCPSS
processed manual adjustment for additional compensation totaling $11.2
million. A similar condition was noted in our prior audit report.
Recommendation 10
We recommend that BCPSS establish adequate internal controls over the
various aspects of payroll and human resources system processing to ensure
the propriety of payments to employees. Specifically, we recommend that
BCPSS
a. generate output reports of critical changes and adjustments made to the
automated human resources and payroll data (repeat); and
b. at least on a test basis, independently verify system output reports of
these critical changes and adjustments to appropriate supporting
documentation, including the properly completed authorization and
approval forms, in a timely manner (repeat).
Finding 11
Certain overtime payments could not be substantiated or were improperly
calculated.
Analysis
Certain overtime payments could not be substantiated or were improperly
calculated.
Overtime Not Substantiated
BCPSS personnel in various departments who were responsible for comparing
overtime to supporting documents (such as sign-in sheets and overtime
approval forms) and approving overtime for payment did not properly perform
these responsibilities. Specifically, we found certain overtime payments
tested could not be substantiated by approved sign-in sheets indicating hours
worked and/or the required overtime approval forms. The overtime approval
forms are required to be approved in advance by supervisors, and the sign-in
sheets serve as the basis for recording overtime in the timekeeping system.
26

--- Page 29 ---
As a result, there is a lack of assurance that the related hours were actually
worked for all paid overtime.
Our test of overtime totaling $63,664 paid to 23 employees during certain pay
periods in calendar year 2016 disclosed that the overtime hours were not
approved in advance and often were not supported by sign-in sheets. During
calendar year 2016, these 23 employees individually were paid overtime
ranging from $2,821 to $51,849, with total collective overtime payments of
$392,813. The following table summarizes the results of the overtime
payments tested.
Table 1
Summary of Documentation Discrepancies
From OLA Overtime Test for 23 Employees
Overtime Not Overtime Not
Overtime
Documented on Documented on Overtime
Totals for
Either Sign-in Sign-in Sheets Documented,
23
Sheets or but Approved but Approved
Employees
Overtime After the Fact After the Fact
Tested
Approval Forms
Hours 830 49% 595 36% 251 15% 1,676
Costs $26,624 42% $28,063 44% $8,977 14% $63,664
Overtime Payments Improperly Calculated
BCPSS paid overtime to employees of one union (that represented
approximately 1,000 employees) at an earnings rate that was 9.1 percent
higher than provided for under the related collective bargaining agreement in
force at the time. This same condition existed during our preceding audit, at
which time we were advised that this incorrect overtime rate for employees of
this union dated back to when BCPSS payroll was processed by Baltimore City
government and was never corrected when BCPSS transitioned to processing
its own payroll in 2004. In response to our preceding audit report, BCPSS
stated it would correct this overtime calculation. Overtime paid to members of
this union totaled approximately $2.5 million during calendar years 2015 and
2016. We calculated that approximately $208,000 was overpaid during
these two years because the incorrect overtime rate was used.
According to BCPSS records, overtime costs during calendar year 2016
totaled approximately $3.4 million, including $913,000 for the
aforementioned union employees.
27

--- Page 30 ---
Recommendation 11
We recommend that BCPSS
a. investigate the aforementioned discrepancies and determine the extent of
other unsubstantiated payments and take appropriate actions, such as
recovery of improper payments (repeat);
b. ensure supervisors verify work hours, including overtime, recorded in the
timekeeping system to supporting documentation including sign-in sheets
and overtime approval forms, at least on a test basis, prior to approving
the timekeeping records (repeat); and
c. correct the aforementioned overtime payment calculation in its automated
system to reflect the overtime rate provided for in the related union
agreement (repeat) and seek legal advice regarding the permissibility of
recovering past amounts overpaid.
Inventory Control and Accountability
Background
According to BCPSS’ financial statements, the undepreciated value of its
capital equipment was $53 million, as of June 2016. BCPSS uses a
centralized fixed asset inventory system to track capital equipment (that is,
items with a cost of $5,000 and greater). In addition, BCPSS’ Information
Technology Office maintains automated records for its sensitive information
technology equipment (such as all computers and laptops) regardless of cost.
Our review found that BCPSS had established written policies for the
acquisition, capitalization, physical inventory, and disposal of its capital and
sensitive equipment. Furthermore, our testing found that generally, periodic
physical inventories for certain capital equipment were conducted and
reconciled to the detail records.
Information Technology
Background
BCPSS’ Information Technology Office (ITO) manages and administers the
BCPSS computer network, computer operations and information systems
applications. BCPSS and a contractor operate a wide area network, with
Internet connectivity, which connects the individual schools’ local networks to
the computer resources located at the BCPSS’ headquarters. ITO maintains
two data center locations containing computer servers that support BCPSS’
information systems applications, which include an Enterprise Resource
Planning (ERP) application for finance and human resources functions.
28

--- Page 31 ---
BCPSS’ student information system is hosted, maintained, and operated by an
outside service provider.
Finding 12
Sensitive personally identifiable information (PII) maintained by BCPSS was
stored without adequate safeguards.
Analysis
Sensitive PII maintained by BCPSS was stored without adequate safeguards.
Specifically, we reviewed one application and determined that as of August
2017 one table within BCPSS’ ERP database contained 64,564 unique social
security numbers stored in clear text along with associated names and
addresses. In addition, we were advised that this sensitive PII was not
protected by other substantial mitigating controls of a comprehensive nature.
Furthermore, BCPSS had not performed an inventory of its systems to identify
all sensitive PII, determined if it was necessary to retain the PII, and deleted
PII identified as unnecessary.
PII is commonly associated with identity theft and typically includes
demographic information for individuals such as name and social security
number, address, and date of birth. Accordingly, appropriate information
system security controls need to exist to ensure that such confidential
information is safeguarded and not improperly disclosed. Best practices
identified in the State of Maryland Information Security Policy state that
confidential data should be protected using encryption and/or other
substantial mitigating controls.
Recommendation 12
We recommend that BCPSS
a. perform an inventory of its systems, identify all sensitive PII, and delete all
unnecessary PII; and
b. use approved encryption methods or other substantial mitigating controls
to properly protect all sensitive PII.
29

--- Page 32 ---
Finding 13
Proper account and password controls were not established over the ERP
system, ERP database logging did not exist for certain critical privileges and
security-related changes, and BCPSS could not substantiate that security
monitoring was performed for the its firewalls and the ERP system.
Analysis
BCPSS had not established proper account and password controls over its
ERP system, and ERP database logging did not exist for the use of certain
critical privileges and security-related changes. Additionally, BCPSS could not
substantiate that security monitoring was performed for the ERP system and
BCPSS’ firewalls.
 The account and password controls over the ERP application, database,
and the server that hosts the ERP database were not always in
accordance with best practices identified in the State’s Information
Security Policy with respect to account lockout and password age and
length. For example, we identified 662 ERP application accounts that did
not have any related password age expiration setting. A similar condition
was commented upon in our preceding audit report.
 ERP database logging did not include operations performed by accounts
using several critical database privileges, such as altering security roles or
updating any table. In addition, the ERP database auditing options were
not configured to log security-related changes recorded for five critical
database tables, such as personnel addresses or pay amounts. A similar
condition was commented upon in our preceding audit report.
 BCPSS had not established procedures for overseeing the setup and
execution of the managed security services performed over its ERP system
and firewalls by its security contractor. Logs of security-related
information from these sources were forwarded to a BCPSS network
appliance that the contractor configured, maintained, and operated for
security monitoring on behalf of BCPSS. We determined that BCPSS
personnel did not understand how the network appliance was initially
configured, nor could they view the control settings supporting the security
monitoring service. Furthermore, BCPSS was unable to provide any
documentation evidencing that the security contractor had generated and
reviewed comprehensive security monitoring reports.
Best practices identified in the State’s Information Security Policy require that
information systems generate audit records for all security-relevant events,
30

--- Page 33 ---
including all security and system administrator accesses. The Policy also
requires that procedures must be developed to routinely (for example, daily or
weekly) review audit records for indications of unusual activities, suspicious
activities or suspected violations, and report findings to appropriate officials
for prompt resolution.
Recommendation 13
We recommend that BCPSS implement appropriate account, and password
controls for the ERP system and ensure that the ERP system and BCPSS’
firewalls are subject to regular security monitoring. Specifically, we
recommend that BCPSS
a. establish appropriate account and password controls over the ERP
application, database, and the server hosting this database; (repeat)
b. enable logging for actions involving use of critical ERP database privileges
and for security-related changes to critical database table; (repeat) and
c. establish procedures for overseeing the process used by its security
contractor for monitoring its critical logged ERP system and firewalls
security and audit events, which include the capabilities to view related
control settings and confirm that comprehensive security reporting is
generated, reviewed and documented.
Finding 14
Intrusion detection prevention system coverage for the BCPSS network had
substantial gaps, and malware protection controls were not sufficient to
provide BCPSS with adequate assurance that its computers were properly
protected.
Analysis
Intrusion detection prevention system (IDPS) coverage for the BCPSS network
had substantial gaps, and malware protection controls were not sufficient to
provide BCPSS with adequate assurance that its computers were properly
protected.
 IDPS coverage did not exist for substantial amounts of untrusted traffic
(both encrypted and unencrypted) entering the BCPSS network. For
example, neither server host-based intrusion prevention system (HIPS)
coverage, nor network device decryption and inspection coverage occurred
for encrypted traffic. We identified 27 firewall rules that allowed traffic
from any source to 84 unique BCPSS network destinations via encrypted
methods without IDPS coverage. The absence of IDPS coverage for
untrusted traffic entering the network creates network security risk as
such traffic could contain undetected malicious data. Best practices in
31

--- Page 34 ---
the State’s Information Security Policy require protection against malicious
code and attacks by using IDPS to monitor system events, detect attacks,
and identify unauthorized use of information systems and/or confidential
information.
 BCPSS did not periodically verify that malware protection software was
installed and operational on all of its 39,568 active computers. Our
testing as of October 10, 2017 noted that the console that BCPSS used to
manage its malware protection software on the aforementioned
computers only included 22,976 computers with operational malware
protection software. Therefore, BCPSS lacked assurance that 16,592 of
its computers had malware protection software that was operational and
current.
 Certain BCPSS workstations had not been updated with the latest releases
for software products that are known to have significant security-related
vulnerabilities. Although the vendors for these software products
frequently provide software patches to address these vulnerabilities,
BCPSS had not updated these workstations by applying these patches.
For example, as of September 2017, we identified that 8 of 12 tested
workstations were running outdated versions of a commonly vulnerable
application where the older software versions installed on the
workstations had release dates that ranged from June 2008 to October
2015.
 Local administrative rights were not properly restricted. Our test of 10
regular employee users identified that 3 users were inappropriately
assigned local administrative rights to their workstations. If these 3
workstations were infected with malware, the malware would run with
administrative rights and expose these workstations, and possibly the
BCPSS network to a greater risk of compromise than if the workstations’
user accounts operated with user rights. In addition, the administrative
rights would permit these 3 users to disable the malware protection
software on their workstations.
Best practices stated in the State’s Information Security Policy require
protection against malicious code and attacks by using IDPS to monitor
system events, detect attacks, and identify unauthorized use of information
systems and/or confidential information. The Policy also states that agencies,
at a minimum, must protect against malicious code (viruses, worms, Trojan
horses) by implementing anti-malware solutions that, to the extent possible,
include a capability for automatic updates. Also, industry best practice
recommends that workstation accounts for regular employees (non-
32

--- Page 35 ---
administrators) run with standard user rights to lessen the risk of compromise
from malware.
Recommendation 14
We recommend that BCPSS
a. perform a documented review and assessment of network security risks
and identify how IDPS coverage (which may include HIPS) should be best
applied to the network and, based on this review and assessment,
implement the necessary coverage;
b. ensure that all computers are running current versions of the malware
protection software used by BCPSS;
c. promptly install all critical security-related software updates for commonly
vulnerable applications on all computers; and
d. ensure that administrative rights on workstations are restricted to system
and network administrators.
Finding 15
BCPSS lacked assurance that adequate information technology security and
operational controls existed over its student information system that was
hosted, operated, and maintained by a service provider.
Analysis
BCPSS lacked assurance that adequate information technology security and
operational controls existed over its student information system that was
hosted, operated, and maintained by a service provider, under a contract
effective September 15, 2015 through September 14, 2020. Our review
concerning independent security assurances needed for this system disclosed
that as of September 2017 BCPSS had not obtained a System and
Organization Controls (SOC) report or any other similar independent security
assurances report.
Upon our inquires, it was found that the service provider had a recent SOC 2
Type 2 review performed, with a related report issued on April 5, 2017,
covering the period of February 1, 2016 to January 31, 2017. At our request,
BCPSS obtained the SOC report and our review disclosed that the report
identified no exceptions on the service organization’s system description and
the suitability of the design and operating effectiveness of controls, but did list
two issues related to data access and physical facilities.
In addition, we noted that the scope of the SOC review was not as
comprehensive as necessary. Specifically, while the SOC review addressed
system security (that is, determining the system is protected against
33

--- Page 36 ---
unauthorized access and disclosure of information, and damage to the
system), this coverage did not address critical controls related to encryption of
sensitive data at rest. Also, the scope did not include audit logging and
monitoring of activities related to privileged or unauthorized access, system
exceptions, and information security events. Furthermore, the SOC review did
not address the data availability (that is, information and systems are
available for operation and use to meet the entity’s objectives) trust criteria.
As such, the SOC report did not address several key availability controls
necessary for the student information system related to data backup and
offsite storage nor stipulate that disaster recovery and business continuity
policies, processes, and procedures existed, or had been regularly tested.
The American Institute of Certified Public Accountants has issued guidance
concerning examinations of service providers. Based on this guidance,
service providers may contract for an independent review of controls and
resultant independent auditor’s report referred to as a SOC report. There are
several types of SOC reports, with varying scopes and levels of review and
auditor testing. One type of report, referred to as a SOC 2 Type 2 report,
contains the service organization’s description of its system and the results of
the auditor’s examination of the suitability of the system design, operating
effectiveness for the period under review, and can include an evaluation of
system security, data availability, processing integrity, confidentiality, and
privacy trust criteria. Due to the nature and sensitivity of the information
contained in BCPSS’ student information system, we believe a SOC 2 Type 2
report covering both the system security and data availability trust criteria is
necessary.
Recommendation 15
We recommend that BCPSS
a. ensure that its existing service provider agreement requires annual SOC 2
Type 2 reviews, which cover appropriate trust criteria including, at a
minimum, system security and data availability and all related controls;
and
b. annually obtain and review copies of these SOC 2 Type 2 reports to ensure
that the related independent reviews adequately address all necessary
critical security and operational concerns and that the service provider
implements all critical report recommendations.
34

--- Page 37 ---
Facilities Construction, Renovation, and Maintenance
Background
BCPSS employs a staff of approximately 600 custodial and maintenance
personnel to maintain its 160 school facilities. BCPSS’ expenditures for
necessary construction, major renovations, and systemic improvements to
existing facilities totaled $38.3 million during fiscal year 2016. According to
BCPSS’ fiscal year 2018 Capital Improvement Plan, which we did not audit,
expected funding requests over the next 6 years totaled $370 million for
construction, major renovations, and system improvements to BCPSS
facilities. This amount excludes additional significant deferred maintenance
needs. According to BCPSS’ fiscal year 2017 Comprehensive Maintenance
Plan, deferred maintenance was estimated at approximately $1.1 billion.
Policies and Procedures are in Place for Construction Contracts
We reviewed BCPSS’ policies and procedures for construction contract
bidding, inspections, and change orders. Our test of five construction
contracts totaling $39.2 million and related invoices totaling $2.4 million
disclosed that the contracts were properly procured and monitored.
Processes are in Place to Minimize Energy Costs
BCPSS has processes in place to minimize energy costs. For example, BCPSS
uses an automated system to analyze energy bills to ensure accuracy,
converted to the use of smart meters, and participates in a regional energy
company's cost savings program.
In addition, BCPSS offers an incentive program for school principals to use
less energy, whereby individual schools would receive a percentage of the
energy cost savings. Furthermore, BCPSS participates in a consortium with
other entities to purchase energy at the best possible terms for the members
of the consortium. According to documents provided by BCPSS (which we did
not audit), BCPSS claims to have avoided an estimated $2.7 million in energy
costs from fiscal year 2014 through fiscal year 2016.
21st Century School Buildings Program
In 2013, the Maryland General Assembly passed the Baltimore City Public
Schools Construction and Revitalization Act. This Act created the 21st
Century School Buildings Program that authorized the Maryland Stadium
Authority (MSA) to issue up to $1.1 billion in bonds, which are being used to
support up to 28 school renovation or replacement projects. A memorandum
of understanding (MOU) was created between BCPSS, the City of Baltimore,
and MSA that clarified roles and responsibilities related to the Program. The
MOU and a subsequent amendment made MSA responsible for all
35

--- Page 38 ---
procurement and payment-related activities. BCPSS can request
reimbursement from MSA for any expenses (such as payroll costs for
employees) it incurs related to the Program. According to the Program’s 2016
Annual Report, the overall progress of the Program has continued in a
successful manner with both MSA and BCPSS working effectively together to
address the mission of the Program and the requirements of the MOU.
BCPSS is still in the process of implementing certain requirements (as
described below).
During the period from fiscal year 2015 through fiscal year 2017, Program
expenditures totaled $205 million (paid from the bond proceeds). As of
November 2017, 2 school renovation/replacement projects have been
completed, 8 schools were either in construction or construction documents
were being complied, 5 schools were in the design development phase, and
13 schools were in the feasibility study phase.
The MOU required BCPSS to increase the average utilization rates of school
buildings and, in 2014, to develop a Comprehensive Maintenance Plan (CMP)
for preventive and ongoing maintenance of all school buildings. BCPSS
pledged to increase the average utilization rates of the school buildings to 80
percent for the 2015-2016 school year and 86 percent for the 2019-2020
school year.
BCPSS has completed an annual CMP as required since 2014, and the 2017
CMP provided updates on its initiatives to improve Facilities Maintenance and
Operations that were originally detailed in the 2014 CMP. According to the
2017 CMP, BCPSS anticipated the average utilization rate of 86 percent for
the 2019-2020 school year might not be reached due to a drop in enrollment
projections. Additionally, BCPSS provided an update on its implementation of
a computerized maintenance management system (CMMS) that was required
by the MOU. The CMMS consists of four applications:
1) maintenance: maintain and monitor work orders through BCPSS;
2) inventory: real time information on the inventory maintained in the
storeroom;
3) preventive maintenance: manage and track preventive maintenance,
including an asset assessment of all BCPSS buildings to enter into the
CMMS; and
4) utility management: monitor and track utility usage at each building.
Except for the preventive maintenance application, BCPSS anticipated that
the other applications will be implemented by the end of the 2017-2018
school year. Before the preventive maintenance application can be fully
36

--- Page 39 ---
implement, BCPSS advised that it first needs to perform an asset assessment
for all of its buildings. An asset assessment includes focusing on the heating
system, ventilation system, air conditioning system, roofing system, electrical
system, plumbing, vertical transportation, building envelope (exterior),
structural components, site paving, and major kitchen equipment and will
allow BCPSS to develop a comprehensive and integrated process for tracking
and monitoring necessary preventive maintenance for critical systems (such
as, boilers and air conditioners). BCPSS is currently contracting with a vendor
to perform the asset assessment and it is expected to be completed by June
2020.
Transportation Services
Background
BCPSS provides transportation to approximately 32,500 students. Students
were transported 2.8 million route miles during the 2015-2016 school year
using 339 contractor-owned buses and 33 school system-owned buses and
certain students were transported using public transportation and taxicabs.
See the table below for BCPSS’ 2016 transportation expenditures by type and
number of students transported. BCPSS has automated routing software for
bus operations.
According to BCPSS’ audited financial statements, fiscal year 2016
transportation costs totaled approximately $52.5 million. These costs
included $30.3 million for school buses operated by private contractors
generally for transporting special needs children to their appropriate school,
$6.9 million paid to the Maryland Transit Administration (MTA) for public
transportation services for students unable to safely walk to their school, $8.0
million for taxicabs primarily for special need and homeless students and
$2.9 million for System-owned school buses (operated by BCPSS employees)
used primarily to transport certain disabled students. The remaining $4.4
million was for Transportation Department administrative costs. As noted in
the Table below, a majority (58 percent) of BCPSS’ transportation
expenditures were for private bus contractors that transported 12 percent of
the students.
37

--- Page 40 ---
Table 2
Type of Transportation Expenditures and Number of Students
Transported
During 2015-2016 School Year
(Expenditures in Millions)
Approximate
Type of Transportation Students
Expenditures Annual Cost
Expenditure Transported
per Student
Private Bus Contractors $30.3 58% 3,927 12% $7,700
BCPSS Owned Buses 2.9 6% 305 1% 9,500
Transportation on MTA
6.9 13% 27,375 84% 250
Buses
Taxi Companies 8.0 15% 856 3% 9,300
Administrative Costs 4.4 8% - - -
TOTAL $52.5 100% 32,463 100% $1,600
Source: BCPSS and MSDE records
Contracts for Bus Transportation
BCPSS entered into five-year contracts beginning July 1, 2013 with eight bus
contractors. For each bus route operated by these contractors, BCPSS paid a
daily fixed route rate, which varied depending on the type of route and
whether the route driven involved regular or disabled students requiring
wheel-chair assistance. During the 2015-2016 school year, the daily fixed
route rate ranged from $344 to $479, with routes requiring up to 4.5 hours of
bus driver time and 60 miles of roundtrip distance. BCPSS also reimbursed
contractors for fuel and paid contractors $1.6 million for additional time and
mileage to operate bus routes beyond the 4.5 hour and 60 mile thresholds,
based on time and mileage records provided by the contractors. The
contracts generally provided for an annual rate adjustment of 2.5 percent, to
the extent funding was available. The bus contractors were also paid an
annual program fee to cover a variety of certification and training costs.
In 2018, BCPSS issued two invitations for bids (IFBs) to procure bus services
beginning with the 2018-2019 school year. Under the IFBs, price proposals
were submitted based on the bus type (size of bus) and type of route (such as,
curb to curb or corner to corner service). The price proposals also considered
varying ranges of billable roundtrip mileage levels (such as, 30 miles or less,
31 to 50 miles, 51 to 60 miles) and whether the routes were for transporting
38

--- Page 41 ---
students to schools in Baltimore City or outside of the City (as with other local
school systems, some students, based on their needs, are transported to
educational facilities outside of the system). Under the new contracts, the
bus contractors are to be paid a daily flat rate based on these factors and,
therefore, there will no longer be payments for fuel, or additional time and
mileage over established thresholds as is the case with the current contract.
BCPSS was in the process of negotiating the final details of these new
contracts as of late August 2018.
Independent Reviews of BCPSS’ Transportation Services
In March 2017, an assessment of BCPSS’ Transportation Routing and
Scheduling process was performed by a consultant. The report contained
various recommended actions to improve the efficiency and effectiveness of
the Transportation Department. The recommendations primarily addressed
improvements to resolve issues with employee training, productivity, and
communication and not the contractor payment structure.
Additionally, an independent performance audit of BCPSS’ Transportation
Department was conducted based on the recommendation of the National
Transportation Safety Board following a fatal traffic accident that occurred on
November 1, 2016 involving a school bus operated by a BCPSS contractor.
The audit, dated January 31, 2018, contained various recommendations to
improve the safety and effectiveness of BCPSS’ transportation operations
(such as, ensuring compliance with certain Federal and State requirements).
As of February 2018, BCPSS’ management advised us that it was in the
process of implementing the recommended actions contained in these two
reports.
Finding 16
Contract and payment processing issues specific to the prior arrangement
with private bus contractors contributed to transportation costs being higher
than necessary.
Analysis
Contract and payment processing issues specific to the prior arrangement
with private bus contractors contributed to transportation costs being higher
than necessary. Specifically, certain circumstances were noted in which bus
contractors were overpaid or BCPSS incurred excessive costs totaling at least
$1,031,720 over a three-year period ending June 30, 2016.
39

--- Page 42 ---
Contract Issues
 Although the contracts permitted contractors to be reimbursed for fuel
costs, there was no provision for BCPSS to exclude federal and state
excise taxes when paying bus contractors for fuel, as permitted by federal
and State law. As a result, we calculated that BCPSS’ total fuel payments
to bus contractors were $358,000 higher than necessary for fiscal years
2014 through 2016 based on the permitted federal exemption and we
projected that fiscal year 2017 fuel payments to bus contractors could
potentially be $148,000 higher than necessary related to the recently
enacted Maryland fuel tax exemption. According to federal law, BCPSS
contractors were exempt from the $0.244 per gallon federal excise tax on
diesel fuel and, under Maryland law effective July 1, 2016, BCPSS
contractors were exempt from the $0.3425 per gallon State excise tax on
diesel fuel.
 BCPSS had not documented the basis for the time and mileage thresholds
used to establish the daily fixed route rates paid to the bus contractors.
BCPSS used thresholds of 4.5 hours of bus driver time and 60 miles of
roundtrip distance as the basis for daily fixed route rates. These
thresholds were critical since bus contractors received additional
payments for each hour and mile in excess of the established time and
mileage thresholds.
Based on our review of BCPSS’ bus routes recorded in its routing system
as of April 2016, 86 percent of the 341 established daily routes were 50
miles or less and 57 percent of the routes were 3.5 hours or less, so the
thresholds could be overstated for a majority of the routes. Conversely,
during fiscal years 2016 and 2017, BCPSS paid bus contractors a total of
$4.8 million for time or mileage in excess of the established time and
mileage thresholds used for the daily fixed route rates.
Payment Processing Issues
 BCPSS’ template provided to bus contractors to calculate billing
adjustments for fuel price fluctuations during the period from September
2014 to June 2015 contained an undetected formula error. We
determined that this error resulted in contractors being overpaid
$498,000 during that period. The template for the following school year
was properly designed so that this error did not recur.
 BCPSS did not have a process in place to verify contractor-reported billing
data for fuel costs, resulting in overpayments to three bus contractors
totaling $142,600 during the period from September 2015 to June 2016.
For example, BCPSS overpaid one bus contractor $38,000 based on the
40

--- Page 43 ---
contractor using the incorrect baseline fuel price and overpaid another bus
contractor $22,400 based on the contractor using an incorrect vehicle
miles per gallon.
 The BCPSS Transportation Department’s review of school bus contractor
invoices did not adequately ensure the propriety of the billings for time
and mileage. BCPSS had not implemented a global positioning system to
monitor the time and mileage incurred by bus contractors in order to verify
invoiced charges for time and mileage above the threshold amounts.
Consequently, BCPSS did not have the means to review these charges for
propriety and reasonableness. Our tests disclosed certain obvious errors.
One contractor incorrectly reported the excess bus operating time charges
for 2 buses in 2 different months due to billing afternoon routes as
starting at 2:00 AM and 2:15 AM instead of 2:00 PM and 2:15 PM. The
12-hour difference for these routes resulted in the contractor incorrectly
billing $33,120 for excess time during May and June 2016.
We were advised that certain of the above issues should be eliminated by
virtue of the changes made to the structure of the bus services contracts
mentioned in the Background Section above. For example, under the new
contractual arrangements, bus contractors will be paid a fixed daily rate
based on the billable mileage level and other factors, without provisions for
time and mileage incurred beyond predetermined thresholds and fuel price
adjustments. Also, the rates bid by contractors under the new contract
structure are supposed to reflect the fuel costs after considering exempt
taxes.
While potentially simplifying the contract terms and payment process, BCPSS
will still need to make sure the contract structure is cost beneficial. For
example, BCPSS needs to ensure the billable mileage levels established
under the contracts are appropriate thresholds given the actual length of
routes and verify contractors are billing the proper rates.
Recommendation 16
We recommend that BCPSS
a. establish a process to periodically assess the operational costs and
efficiency of its bus contractor services under the new contract structure;
b. verify the propriety of contractor billings, including the rates charged; and
c. recover the aforementioned overpayments related to contractor billing
errors.
41

--- Page 44 ---
Finding 17
BCPSS did not maintain documentation, including executed contracts, to
support certain financial relationships with bus contractors.
Analysis
BCPSS did not maintain documentation related to bus contractors, such as
executed contracts and justification to support certain changes to contractual
terms with bus contractors, exceeding $1.2 million in value.
 During the period from September 2015 to April 2017, BCPSS used three
additional bus contractors (separate from the eight contractors BCPSS
contracted with in July 2013) to provide student transportation on an
emergency basis without executing written contracts. Although BCPSS
documented the emergency condition, and obtained approval from the
BCPSS Chief Executive Officer and the Board of School Commissioners to
enter into emergency contracts, formal written contracts were not
executed. BCPSS paid these three bus contractors a total of $781,000
during the aforementioned period, based on negotiated daily rates ranging
from $450 to $475.
In addition to setting forth all financial terms and conditions, written
contractual agreements are essential in order to define the duties and
responsibilities of the parties and to protect each party in the event of
default. Critical factors to be considered in a contract for student
transportation services would include BCPSS’ ability to review bus
personnel driving records, criminal records, drug and alcohol testing
records, and criminal background checks. In addition, a written
agreement should also establish the contractor’s insurance requirements,
defaults and remedies, and BCPSS’ ability to assess liquidated damages.
Such factors and conditions were included in the contracts with the
previously procured eight contractors.
 Justification was not maintained to support certain changes to the
contractual terms for two bus contractors with existing contracts.
Specifically, BCPSS did not have documentation supporting its approval to
increase one bus contractor’s daily fixed flat rates by 17 percent (from
$370 to $433 and $378 to $441). BCPSS advised us that the increased
rate was negotiated with the bus contractor based on claims that the
original agreed-upon rates provided for in the contract did not compensate
the bus contractor enough for deadhead mileage. However, BCPSS did
not obtain documentation justifying the contractor’s assertion, which
served as the basis for the increase. The bus contractor began billing
BCPSS the increased rate in February 2016. During the period from
42

--- Page 45 ---
February 2016 to June 2017, the bus contractor was paid approximately
$490,000 in additional compensation related to the increased rate. For
another contractor, BCPSS could not explain the justification for, and did
not have documentation supporting, a $259,000 reduction of assessed
liquidated damages totaling $1.14 million for multiple occurrences of
using uncertified drivers and aides.
Recommendation 17
We recommend that BCPSS
a. ensure that written contracts are executed that clearly define all terms
and conditions and the duties and responsibilities of the parties; and
b. maintain formal written documentation justifying changes to critical
contract terms, including contract billing rates, and reductions in
liquidated damage assessments.
Taxi Companies
Finding 18
BCPSS’ process for reviewing taxi company invoices did not adequately
ensure the billings were proper and that payments were consistent with
contractual terms, resulting in overpayments totaling $1.2 million.
Analysis
BCPSS’ process for reviewing taxi company invoices did not adequately
ensure the billings were proper and payments were consistent with
contractual terms. We identified overpayments of $1.2 million due to the use
of incorrect reimbursement rates. In addition, certain payments were not
supported by student ride tickets to evidence the transport.
 The BCPSS reimbursement rates paid to taxi companies included
duplicate administrative fees and mileage rates greater than permitted by
the respective contracts and Public Service Commission (PSC) regulations.
Consequently, we determined that from September 2015 to June 2017,
BCPSS paid the various taxi service providers $1.2 million more than
required for student transportation. Specifically, during the period from
September 2015 to May 2017, we estimated that BCPSS paid taxi
companies $1.1 million in duplicate administrative fees. As permitted by
the contracts, and consistent with PSC regulations, taxi companies may
charge an 11.5 percent administrative fee in addition to the approved
mileage rate. However, BCPSS paid taxi companies the administrative
fees twice by including the administrative fee in its mileage
43

--- Page 46 ---
reimbursement rate and by allowing the taxi companies to bill the
administrative fee separately.
During the period from September 2015 to June 2017, we also noted that
BCPSS overpaid taxi companies by up to an estimated $126,700 due to
the use of an unapproved mileage rate. Under the contracts, the taxi
companies were to charge the PSC-approved rate of $3.80 per mile
($1.80 for the first 1/11 of a mile and $0.20 for each 1/11 of a mile or
fraction thereafter). However, BCPSS reimbursed taxi companies at $4.00
for each mile and could not explain the basis for that higher payment
amount.
BCPSS was unaware of these issues until we brought them to its attention.
BCPSS agreed with our findings and, in August 2017, BCPSS advised the
taxi companies that future payments would be consistent with the rates
and fees specified in the contracts. However, as of November 2017,
BCPSS had not taken action to recover the identified overpayments from
the taxi companies.
 Our test of payments to taxi companies totaling $47,200 for transporting
20 students disclosed that payments totaling $12,200 for 7 students
were not always supported with ride tickets. Under the contracts, ride
tickets are to be prepared and signed by the student and the cab driver to
document each trip, and submitted with the companies’ billings.
Specifically, available ride tickets only supported charges of $8,300 of the
$12,200 paid, indicating a potential overpayment of $3,900.
During fiscal year 2016, BCPSS paid taxi companies $8.0 million.
Recommendation 18
We recommend that BCPSS
a. ensure that payments made to taxi companies are in accordance with the
terms of the contracts;
b. investigate and recover the aforementioned overpayments of
administrative fees and mileage rates from the taxi companies;
c. ensure that taxi company billings are supported by the required signed
ride tickets; and
d. review past taxi company billings for properly completed ride tickets and
recover any improper payments, including the aforementioned amounts.
44

--- Page 47 ---
Food Services
Background
BCPSS provides meals free (breakfast, lunch, snack, and dinner) to all of its
students. According to MSDE’s records, 88 percent of BCPSS’ approximately
83,600 student qualified for free and reduced meals as of October 31, 2015.
BCPSS has the third largest food services operation in the State’s school
systems in terms of the number of meals served. Specifically, BCPSS served
16.4 million meals during fiscal year 2016. According to its audited financial
statements, BCPSS food services revenues ($50.9 million) exceeded
expenditures ($48.1 million) by $2.8 million during fiscal year 2016.
BCPSS participates in the federal Community Eligibility Program (CEP), which
allows schools that are in high poverty districts to serve meals to all students
at no cost without collecting applications for free and reduced meals.
Through CEP, BCPSS is reimbursed for meals using a formula based on the
percentage of students eligible for free meals based on their participation in
other specific means-tested programs (such as the Supplemental Nutrition
Assistance Program and Temporary Assistance for Needy Families). BCPSS is
currently reimbursed for 100 percent of its cost through CEP. The
reimbursement factor remains effective until the end of the 2019 school year,
at which time a new factor will be calculated.
Since BCPSS participates in CEP and its current reimbursement factor is 100
percent and none of its students are required to pay for meals, we did not
perform any audit work in the area of food service operations.
School Board Operations
Background
The Baltimore City Board of School Commissioners (the Board) is composed of
nine members jointly appointed by the Mayor of Baltimore and the Governor,
and one student member with partial voting rights. In its oversight
responsibilities, the Board contracted with a certified public accounting firm
for independent audits of the BCPSS financial statements and federal
programs. The Board has an operations committee that meets monthly to
discuss fiscal matters, including relevant internal and external audit activities,
as well as other areas of BCPSS operations and governance. The Board also
has an audit committee that meets on a quarterly basis. The Board meets
monthly for regular board meetings during the school year and schedules
additional meetings as needed. The Board has its approved policies available
on the BCPSS website.
45

--- Page 48 ---
Management of Other Risks
Health Insurance
BCPSS is self-insured and uses a third-party administrator (TPA) to oversee
and administer its employee and retiree healthcare plans. Specifically, for
medical coverage, BCPSS contracts with a TPA to provide administrative
services, such as claims processing for participants’ medical costs and for
stop-loss coverage. Stop-loss coverage indemnifies BCPSS against health
insurance claim amounts that exceed a certain threshold for a member.
BCPSS has a separate prescription drug contract with a different TPA.
Medical providers submit claims to the TPA who pays them on behalf of
BCPSS. BCPSS reimburses the TPA for the claims it reports as paid on behalf
of BCPSS and pays an administrative fee for these services. In addition, on a
monthly basis BCPSS verified the eligibility of program participants and their
listed dependents and hired a contractor to periodically audit the propriety of
claims paid by the TPA. BCPSS paid approximately $109 million in claims
during fiscal year 2016.
Our review found that BCPSS generally had processes in place to adequately
review monthly invoices, ensure that eligibility and claims audits were
performed, and that follow-up was undertaken based on the results of audits.
Charter Schools
Each charter school receives funding from BCPSS based on the number of
students attending the school and the per pupil cost to educate a student in
BCPSS schools (excluding certain costs such as for special education services
and debt payments). Charter school expenditures for fiscal year 2016 totaled
approximately $141.3 million according to BCPSS records, which primarily
consisted of salary and benefit costs paid directly by BCPSS to BCPSS
employees who worked at the charter schools. BCPSS disburses the
remaining available funds (after deducting payroll and other costs incurred by
BCPSS) to the charter schools to cover other costs, such as supplies. For
fiscal year 2016, BCPSS had 41 operator run schools (includes 34 traditional
charter schools and 7 contract or transformational schools) operated by
outside organizations that enrolled 15,824 students and had 1,065 full-time
equivalent employee positions, according to BCPSS records.
46

--- Page 49 ---
Finding 19
BCPSS did not require charter school management personnel and board
members to periodically renew conflict of interest disclosures and did not
ensure the disclosures were completed as required.
Analysis
BCPSS did not require charter school management personnel and board
members to periodically renew conflict of interest disclosures and did not
ensure the disclosures were completed as required. Specifically, charter
school management personnel are required to complete a conflict of interest
disclosure form during the application process to establish a charter school,
but BCPSS did not require the schools to renew the disclosures periodically
(such as annually), as is required for BCPSS personnel. The disclosures are
required for all board members and management personnel (including
principals and vice principals) of charter school operating entities.
BCPSS advised us that the conflict of interest disclosure requirement began
during the 2009-2010 school year and it only applied to new charter school
operators. Therefore, charter school operators that existed prior to the 2009-
2010 school year were never required to complete conflict of interest
disclosures. According to BCPSS’ records, 19 of the current charter schools
existed prior to the 2009-2010 school year.
Our test of seven charter schools disclosed that one school was required to
submit conflict of interest disclosures and confirmed that for the other six
schools, which began operating before the 2009-2010 school year, no
disclosures were on file at BCPSS. However, for that one school, which began
operation in the 2009-2010 school year, BCPSS had obtained disclosures for
just three of the eleven individuals who at that time were required to complete
a disclosure.
Charter school conflict of interest disclosures inform BCPSS of any related
parties and secondary interests, which may affect the decision-making of an
individual in a position of governance responsibility. For example, individuals
have to disclose if they, or their spouse, have contractual agreements with the
school, have ownership interests in entities doing business with the school,
real estate transactions or loan guarantees with the school. The required
disclosures for charter school officials are similar to BCPSS’ own annual
financial disclosure statements for similar key employees and Board
members. Since charter school officials act in similar capacities as those
BCPSS individuals but with more autonomy, annual submission of the
disclosures would be a reasonable requirement and would be consistent with
State of Maryland and BCPSS’ financial disclosure reporting requirements.
47

--- Page 50 ---
Recommendation 19
We recommend that BCPSS
a. require all charter school management personnel and board members to
periodically (such as annually) file conflict of interest disclosures;
b. ensure the disclosures are completed by all required individuals; and
c. review all disclosures for, and resolve any, apparent conflicts.
Finding 20
BCPSS did not properly track and monitor required documents to be
submitted by each charter school nor did BCPSS perform follow-up actions to
obtain required documents from the schools.
Analysis
BCPSS did not properly track and monitor the annual submission and receipt
of required documents from charter schools, including quarterly financial
reports, annual audited financial statements, budgets, and various
compliance-related documents such as certificates of insurance and
occupancy. Our tests identified a number of instances of missing documents.
In addition, BCPSS did not perform follow-up actions to obtain the required
documentation from the schools. The failure to obtain required documents
hindered BCPSS’s ability to monitor certain aspects of the charter schools’
operations.
In accordance with the terms of the agreements between the charter schools
and BCPSS, these documents are subject to review by BCPSS. If charter
schools do not submit these documents, BCPSS is supposed to notify the
school in writing to request submission. According to BCPSS policy, these
documents and a charter school’s history of timely response to and
compliance with such written notices are supposed to be taken into
consideration by BCPSS when evaluating the charter school’s periodic
renewal to continue operating.
Our review of the BCPSS log used to track and monitor the receipt of these
documents during the three-year period from 2015 to 2017 for seven charter
schools disclosed several instances of incomplete or inaccurate information
to evidence the receipt of all required documents. For example, the log did
not always record whether or not the documents were received. There were
30 instances in which BCPSS advised us that the required documents were
received, but the applicable tracking records did not reflect the receipt of the
documents nor could copies be readily located in the BCPSS files. These 30
missing documents included audited and quarterly financial statements,
48

--- Page 51 ---
insurance certificates, and other required documents. Eventually, BCPSS was
able to locate 15 of these documents.
Additionally, in cases where required documents were noted as missing on
the log, there were 17 instances in which there was no evidence of BCPSS
submitting a written request to the applicable charter school to obtain the
missing documents. Charter school expenditures totaled $23.4 million for
these seven schools in fiscal year 2016.
Recommendation 20
We recommend that BCPSS
a. properly track and monitor the submission of required documents by
charter schools, and
b. perform follow-up actions (such as written notifications) to obtain required
documents from the schools when it is not submitted.
49

--- Page 52 ---
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We conducted a performance audit to evaluate the effectiveness and
efficiency of the financial management practices of the Baltimore City Public
Schools (BCPSS). We conducted this audit under the authority of the State
Government Article, Section 2-1220(e) of the Annotated Code of Maryland,
and performed it in accordance with generally accepted government auditing
standards. Those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to
obtain sufficient, appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our
findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives. We believe that the
evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and
conclusions based on our audit objectives.
We had two broad audit objectives:
1. Evaluate whether the BCPSS procedures and controls were effective in
accounting for and safeguarding its assets.
2. Evaluate whether the BCPSS policies provided for the efficient use of
financial resources.
In planning and conducting our audit of BCPSS, we focused on 11 major
financial-related areas of operations as approved on December 6, 2016 by
the Joint Audit Committee of the Maryland General Assembly in accordance
with the enabling legislation. The scope of the work performed in each of
these areas was based on our assessments of significance and risk.
Therefore, our follow-up on the status of findings included in our preceding
audit report on BCPSS dated September 28, 2012, included those findings
that were applicable to the current audit scope for each of the 11 areas.
The audit objectives excluded reviewing and assessing student achievement,
curriculum, teacher performance, and other academic-related areas and
functions. Also, we did not evaluate the BCPSS Comprehensive Education
Master Plan or related updates, and we did not review the activities, financial
or other, of any parent teacher association, group, or funds not under the local
board of education’s direct control or management.
To accomplish our objectives, we reviewed applicable State laws and
regulations pertaining to public elementary and secondary education, as well
as policies and procedures issued and established by BCPSS. We also
interviewed personnel at BCPSS and the Maryland State Department of
Education (MSDE), and staff at other local school systems in Maryland (as
appropriate). Our audit procedures included inspections of documents and
50

--- Page 53 ---
records, and observations of BCPSS operations. We also tested transactions
and performed other auditing procedures that we considered necessary to
achieve our objectives, generally for the period from July 1, 2014 through
December 31, 2016. Generally, transactions were selected for testing based
on auditor judgment, which primarily considers risk. Unless otherwise
specifically indicated, neither statistical nor non-statistical audit sampling was
used to select the transactions tested. Therefore, the results of the tests
cannot be used to project those results to the entire population from which
the test items were selected. For certain areas within the scope of the audit,
we relied on the work performed by the independent accounting firm that
annually audits BCPSS’ financial statements and conducts the federal Single
Audit.
We used certain statistical data—including financial and operational—
compiled by MSDE from various informational reports submitted by the
Maryland local school systems. This information was used in this audit report
for background or informational purposes, and was deemed reasonable.
We also extracted data from the BCPSS automated financial management
system for the purpose of testing expenditure and payroll transactions. We
performed various audit procedures on the relevant data and determined the
data were sufficiently reliable for the purposes the data were used during the
audit.
BCPSS’ management is responsible for establishing and maintaining effective
internal control. Internal control is a process designed to provide reasonable
assurance that objectives pertaining to the reliability of financial records;
effectiveness and efficiency of operations including safeguarding of assets;
and compliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations are achieved.
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate. In
addition to the conditions included in this report, other findings were
communicated to BCPSS that were not deemed significant and, consequently,
did not warrant inclusion in this report.
We conducted our fieldwork from January 2017 to December 2017. The
BCPSS response to our findings and recommendations is included as an
Appendix to this report. As prescribed in the State Government Article,
Section 2-1224 of the Annotated Code of Maryland, we will advise BCPSS
regarding the results of our review of its response.
51

--- Page 55 ---
Finding 1
BCPSS did not properly monitor or bill amounts owed by outside organizations for the services
of its employees.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that BCPSS
a. include all amounts owed to BCPSS in its centralized accounts receivable records (repeat),
b. ensure appropriate and timely collection efforts are made for amounts owed by outside
organizations (repeat), and
c. maintain documentation supporting the approval of an employee’s leave of absences to
work for outside organizations.
Response:
a. City Schools partially agrees with this recommendation. City Schools records accounts
receivable for employees on external assignments in accordance with the City Schools
understanding/interpretation of the contractual obligations of the external agencies and
their historical application. City Schools will review the applicable requirements of the
current contracts to ensure compliance with the external agency contracts, and will
confirm that appropriate billing is recorded for all employees on external contracts.
Regarding billing for tuition reimbursements per the terms of the contracts, City Schools
will revise its regular timeline for initiating collection actions. The Human Capital Office
will refer to the Finance Office all former employees who owe repayment of tuition
reimbursement and resigned after the prior year referral by October 31, 2018. Thereafter,
collection actions for employees whose resignations are received and effective during
each subsequent fiscal year quarter will be initiated within 60 days of the quarter ending
date with the submission of the referral to the Finance Office.
b. City Schools partially agrees with this recommendation. Appropriate collection efforts will
be made for outstanding balances of all receivable amounts including external
assignments and tuition reimbursements, in accordance with the City Schools Accounts
Receivable processes.
c. City Schools partially agrees with this recommendation. City Schools will implement
revised procedures to maintain complete documentation supporting the approval of
leaves of absence to work for outside organizations (i.e. employee unions). Before the first
day (July 1) of each fiscal year, the Director of Labor Relations & Negotiations will ensure
that complete documentation of the request for a paid leave of absence has been received
and approved in accordance with the terms of the applicable collective bargaining
agreement. Subsequently, by July 1 of each fiscal year, the Human Capital Office will
provide to the Finance Office a copy of all approvals of paid leaves of absence for which
reimbursement must be collected from outside organizations for that fiscal year. If any
such leave of absence is requested after the start of a fiscal year, the Director of Labor
Relations & Negotiations will ensure review within 30 days of receipt and will provide to
the Finance Office Accounts Receivable staff a copy of any approval within 30 days of the
approval.

--- Page 56 ---
Finding 2
BCPSS did not obtain social security numbers for 5,600 students with individual education
plans to help identify qualified students for whom Medicaid reimbursement could be obtained
for eligible services.
Recommendation 2
We recommend that BCPSS obtain social security numbers for students with individual
education plans and bill to obtain Medicaid reimbursements for eligible services provided to
qualified students.
Response:
City Schools agrees with the recommendation. Medicaid reimbursements can be further
maximized if social security numbers were provided for all students with an Individualized
Education Plan (IEP). Commencing September 3, 2018, City Schools has been requesting
this information from parents/guardians via the Parental Consent Letter which is distributed
the first week of school. This letter and the request for information is also distributed
throughout the school year as students enroll and transfer within City
Schools. Parents/guardians are not required to provide this information but City Schools may
request it. This information was previously provided to City Schools as part of a multiple State
Agency quarterly data sharing process which was discontinued in July 2017 due to technical
difficulties. Discussions with various State Agencies have been held regarding the resumption
of the existing data sharing process until a new process can be developed.
Finding 3
BCPSS did not have a formal process to review denied Medicaid claims in order to determine
if the claims could be corrected for resubmission.
Recommendation 3
We recommend that BCPSS develop a formal process to review denied claims for Medicaid
reimbursements to determine if the claims could be corrected and resubmitted.
Response:
City Schools agrees with this recommendation. On December 13, 2017, Third Party Billing
implemented a formal process to research claims denied for incorrect Medical Assistance
names and numbers. Denied claims must be reviewed on a case-by-case basis. Recipient
information relating to submitted claims may be verified utilizing a Claim Lookup function on
the Maryland Medical Programs Web Services site, to allow rebilling. In cases where the
diagnosis code is incorrect, the provider of service must make the correction. Monthly reports
will be generated and provided to the Related Services Department, which will list services
reported and denied with an incorrect primary diagnosis code. The Office of the Chief
Financial Officer is supporting Third Party Billing with additional staff to maintain the Medical
Assistance database used for billing, as well as to correct denied but rebillable claims.

--- Page 57 ---
Finding 4
BCPSS did not adequately restrict user access capabilities in its automated procurement and
accounts payable system.
Recommendation 4
We recommend that BCPSS restrict assigned capabilities to eliminate the ability of users to
perform incompatible duties (repeat).
Response:
City Schools partially agrees with this recommendation. Two staff members had the
overlapping functions of invoice entry and supplier entry. Supplier entry access has been
removed from these staff members and this supplier entry function has been reassigned to
staff in other departments. Regarding the system matching override question, the six staff
members with Accounts Payable functions do not have the capability to override system
matching requirements. Payment for transactions not requiring purchase orders, such as
employee expense reimbursements, NonPublic tuition, payments to Maryland State
Department of Education, etc. are processed utilizing a non-purchase order process.
Commencing March 2017 these non-purchase order transactions have also been reviewed
and approved by Finance staff prior to entry, and the transactions in Accounts Payable system
are reviewed and confirmed after system entry. Procurement process approval clarity will be
investigated and considered for possible enhancement.
Finding 5
BCPSS did not document the appropriateness of using intergovernmental cooperative
purchasing agreements (ICPAs) as required by State law. Additionally, BCPSS did not obtain
the original agreements from the initial procuring entity so that payment rates could be
verified nor did it obtain itemized invoices for certain purchases it made under ICPA contracts.
Recommendation 5
We recommend that BCPSS
a. comply with State law and ensure that a written determination of the benefits for the use
of an ICPA is prepared,
b. obtain the original ICPA contracts and verify invoices to the terms contained in the ICPA,
and
c. obtain evidence to satisfy the requirements of State law that the ICPA contract was
properly procured by the initial procuring entity.
Response:
a. City Schools agrees with this recommendation. On May 11, 2017, City Schools
implemented a Piggyback Checklist that requires the completion of a price comparison

--- Page 58 ---
prior to the Board approval of an ICPA. The Director of Procurement will continue to
reinforce this requirement.
b. City Schools agrees with this recommendation. City Schools will itemize the individual
pricing reflected in the ICPA commencing January 1, 2019.
c. City Schools agrees with this recommendation. On May 11, 2017, City Schools
implemented a Piggyback Checklist that requires the retrieval of all ICPA documentation
to comply with State law.
Finding 6
BCPSS did not document the basis for assigning work to pre-qualified vendors for certain
services and, in certain cases, higher priced vendors received work prior to lower cost vendors.
Recommendation 6
We recommend that BCPSS establish a formal methodology for selecting from pre-qualified
vendors on multiple-award contracts, which documents the basis for selection and
appropriately considers vendor costs for the services to be provided.
Response:
City Schools agrees with this recommendation. The City Schools formal vendor selection
process plan is in development and will be implemented November 2018, to include the
following corrective actions:
 Contracts with multiple vendors will require a spreadsheet from the Contract Monitor,
showing the allocation of contract amounts by vendor. The Contract Monitor will also
provide a justification supporting the amount allocated to each vendor.
 Buyers will also maintain a spreadsheet that documents any changes to CPA amounts
requested by the contract monitor.
 Contract Administrator will attach documentation to the Financial/Procurement
Systems corresponding record.
Finding 7
Purchase orders were not always prepared and approved as required prior to obtaining the
related goods or services.

--- Page 59 ---
Recommendation 7
We recommend that BCPSS ensure that procurement policies and automated system controls
are not bypassed by ensuring purchase orders are prepared and approved prior to obtaining
the related goods or services.
Response:
City Schools agrees with this recommendation. Certain circumstances require that Emergency
Procurement purchase orders are issued after services have been provided, such as
performing emergency repairs or to meet immediate transportation needs for students.
Confirming purchase orders would also be indicated where invoice dates predate the
purchase order requisition date, for activities such as professional development registration,
online training courses, meeting space rental, or other similar expenses. Unless included in
categories of this type, the requesting schools/departments should comply with the City
Schools Procurement processes such that purchase orders are fully approved prior to the
ordering of the related goods or services. This information is also available on the City Schools
website so that City Schools vendors should be aware of this requirement as well.
City Schools Management will disseminate this compliance information to the various Officers
who will emphasize the compliance requirements with their various schools/departments.
Commencing January 2019, Procurement will provide recurring Confirming Purchase Order
Compliance Reports which provides purchase order details by Officer, to allow systemic review
of the confirming purchase order activities and appropriate follow-up action.
Finding 8
BCPSS did not always adequately monitor contracts to ensure goods and services were
properly received or that invoices were proper prior to payment.
Recommendation 8
We recommend that BCPSS monitor contracts and related billings to ensure goods and
services are provided in accordance with the contractual terms and conditions prior to
payment and that invoices accurately reflect the services rendered (repeat).
Response:
City Schools agrees with this recommendation. Unless purchase orders fall within the
categories where the circumstances dictate that services are provided in advance of purchase
orders, such as Emergency Procurements for emergency repairs, immediate transportation
needs, conference registration, or similar expenses, the City Schools schools/departments
are required to comply with the established procurement processes. Requisitioners are
required to post receipts in K12Buy to confirm that services have been rendered or materials
received. Receipts should not be posted prior to the completion of this confirmation process
as receipt posting is an integral part of the internal control associated with the three-way
match of the purchase order system.

--- Page 60 ---
City Schools Management will disseminate this compliance information to the various Officers
who will emphasize the compliance requirements with their various schools/departments, by
January 2019. The Procurement Office will work with Information Technology Department to
develop a recurring report which will indicate certain exceptions for additional review, such as
posting of the full purchase order amount shortly after purchase order creation or other
anomalies. These specific receipt postings may be subsequently reviewed to determine if
they were posted appropriately as the goods or services had been fully provided.
Finding 9
BCPSS did not always adequately document the rationale for sole source contract
determinations and sole source contract awards were not always published on eMaryland
Marketplace as required.
Recommendation 9
We recommend that BCPSS
a. ensure that sole source contract determinations include appropriate information to
document the rationale for not performing a competitive procurement,
b. publish sole source contract awards on eMaryland Marketplace, and
c. develop a system report that tracks the procurement method used for each contract to
aid in verifying compliance with existing policies.
Response:
a. City Schools agrees with this recommendation. The City Schools Board Letter process
requires that a sole source justification is listed within the selection methodology section
of the Board Letter. As of September 1, 2018, the Procurement Director requires all sole
source procurement Board Letters to include justification language that documents the
rationale for not performing a competitive solicitation.
b. City Schools agrees with this recommendation. On October 6, 2017 Procurement
published and implemented guidance (eMM Requirements for the Publishing of
Solicitations and Posting of Contract Awards) pertaining to posting non-competitive
contract awards to eMaryland Marketplace.
c. City Schools agrees with this recommendation. The report indicating procurement method
has been developed and has been available as of September 1, 2018.
Finding 10
Critical human resources and payroll transactions were not independently reviewed for
propriety.

--- Page 61 ---
Recommendation 10
We recommend that BCPSS establish adequate internal controls over the various aspects of
payroll and human resources system processing to ensure the propriety of payments to
employees. Specifically, we recommend that BCPSS
a. generate output reports of critical changes and adjustments made to the automated
human resources and payroll data (repeat); and
b. at least on a test basis, independently verify system output reports of these critical
changes and adjustments to appropriate supporting documentation, including the
properly completed authorization and approval forms, in a timely manner (repeat).
Response:
a. City Schools agrees with this recommendation. The Office of Human Capital and the
Payroll Department had partnered with the Information Technology Department to develop
a series of reports for Compensation and Payroll functions. These reports provide
information related to salary and wage changes, as well as leave accruals and changes
and leave accrual-related payments. The Manager, Human Capital Strategy developed the
format and elements of the report of changes to salaries and wage rates, along with a
sampling methodology, in June 2018. The Payroll Director had previously identified two
quarterly reports which would provide the total earnings register information and change
reports, to allow for sample testing.
b. City Schools agrees with this recommendation. The Manager, Human Capital Strategy will
conduct a review of a sample of the newly developed Office of Human Capital report on a
monthly basis between October 2018 and December 2018, with the sample review to be
conducted quarterly thereafter. Based upon the sample testing, reviews will verify that
system output reports of these critical changes and adjustments are linked to appropriate
supporting documentation, including independent approval forms. Finance will resume
the quarterly monitoring team review for the FY19 quarterly reports, which includes review
and confirmation of a sample of the transactions of the earnings register and the change
reports to the supporting documentation and various required approvals.
Finding 11
Certain overtime payments could not be substantiated or were improperly calculated.
Recommendation 11
We recommend that BCPSS
a. investigate the aforementioned discrepancies and determine the extent of other
unsubstantiated payments and take appropriate actions, such as recovery of improper
payments (repeat);

--- Page 62 ---
b. ensure supervisors verify work hours, including overtime, recorded in the timekeeping
system to supporting documentation including sign-in sheets and overtime approval
forms, at least on a test basis, prior to approving the timekeeping records (repeat); and
c. correct the aforementioned overtime payment calculation in its automated system to
reflect the overtime rate provided for in the related union agreement (repeat) and seek
legal advice regarding the permissibility of recovering past amounts overpaid.
Response:
a. City Schools partially agrees with this recommendation. Nearly all recommendations
relate to the School Police time entry as the prior system provided information on overtime
only. Due to the issues related to the nature of police work assignments, the school police
did not have an effective time tracking system for recording work or absences during their
scheduled shifts. The audit review indicated that without the shift schedule verification,
the identification of the overtime start time could not be determined. The City Schools
Information Technology Department and an external contractor developed an electronic
time sheet form to enter, track, and approve school police shift time hours.
b. City Schools agrees with this recommendation. The weekly time sheet electronic form to
enter, track, and approve school police shift time hours was in the testing phase in April
2018 and has been implemented since September 2018. Both the school police
scheduled hours and overtime hours are recorded in their respective electronic form and
are approved by their appropriate supervisors.
c. City Schools partially agrees with this recommendation. The overtime rate that had been
paid to a specific collective bargaining unit resulted from historical practice, and did not
align to that collective bargaining unit agreement. The City Schools Director of Labor
Relations & Negotiations notified the collective bargaining unit in July 2018 that the
calculation of overtime would be adjusted to align with the written language of the
negotiated agreement. This change became effective September 2018.
Finding 12
Sensitive personally identifiable information (PII) maintained by BCPSS was stored without
adequate safeguards.
Recommendation 12
We recommend that BCPSS
a. perform an inventory of its systems, identify all sensitive PII, and delete all unnecessary
PII; and
b. use approved encryption methods or other substantial mitigating controls to properly
protect all sensitive PII.

--- Page 63 ---
Response:
a. City Schools agrees with this recommendation. City Schools has identified all systems that
have PII information and a matrix is created and maintained and a periodic review (Semi-
Annual) to ensure the catalog is updated with new information and is kept current. City
Schools will expand the PII matrix to designate and categorize systems as low-impact,
moderate-impact, or high-impact for the security objectives of confidentiality, integrity, and
availability per Federal Information Processing Standard (FIPS) 199. The expected
resolution date is July 1, 2019.
b. City Schools agrees with this recommendation. City Schools will also perform a review
across all systems holding PII information and will strategize and identify ways to minimize
the amount of PII usage, along with a regular review of information being held to determine
whether the PII is still relevant and required for the business function along with procuring
and implement an encryption software/tool to encrypt sensitive personally identifiable
information. The expected resolution date is July 1, 2019.
Finding 13
Proper account and password controls were not established over the ERP system, ERP
database logging did not exist for certain critical privileges and security-related changes, and
BCPSS could not substantiate that security monitoring was performed for the its firewalls and
the ERP system.
Recommendation 13
We recommend that BCPSS implement appropriate account, and password controls for the
ERP system and ensure that the ERP system and BCPSS’ firewalls are subject to regular
security monitoring. Specifically, we recommend that BCPSS
a. establish appropriate account and password controls over the ERP application, database,
and the server hosting this database; (repeat)
b. enable logging for actions involving use of critical ERP database privileges and for security-
related changes to critical database table; (repeat) and
c. establish procedures for overseeing the process used by its security contractor for
monitoring its critical logged ERP system and firewalls security and audit events, which
include the capabilities to view related control settings and confirm that comprehensive
security reporting is generated, reviewed and documented.
Response:
a. City Schools agrees with this recommendation. City Schools, based on the
recommendation and finding has now enabled appropriate account and password
controls over the Enterprise Resource Planning (ERP) application, database, and the
server hosting this database. City Schools has enabled auditing on all the critical system

--- Page 64 ---
privileges along with automating the process to have a 90-day password expiration. The
expected completion date is December 31, 2019.
b. City Schools agrees with this recommendation. Based on written contracts, City Schools
will also determine the party responsible (City Schools or our security vendor) for
generating and reviewing reports of logged ERP database security related information.
The expected completion date is December 31, 2019.
c. City Schools agrees with this recommendation. City Schools will ensure that the
responsible party (City Schools or our security vendor) generates and reviews reports of
critical logged security and audit events on a periodic basis (e.g. weekly) with these reviews
and any subsequent investigations documented and retained for future reference. A
review of the current contract will be performed and based on the contract provision City
Schools will identify a review frequency for the alert logs along with the responsible party
(our security vendor or City Schools) and all investigation related documentation will be
stored and archived for future reference. The expected completion date is December 31,
2019.
Finding 14
Intrusion detection prevention system coverage for the BCPSS network had substantial gaps,
and malware protection controls were not sufficient to provide BCPSS with adequate
assurance that its computers were properly protected.
Recommendation 14
We recommend that BCPSS
a. perform a documented review and assessment of network security risks and identify how
IDPS coverage (which may include HIPS) should be best applied to the network and, based
on this review and assessment, implement the necessary coverage;
b. ensure that all computers are running current versions of the malware protection software
used by BCPSS;
c. promptly install all critical security-related software updates for commonly vulnerable
applications on all computers; and
d. ensure that administrative rights on workstations are restricted to system and network
administrators.
Response:
a. City Schools agrees with this recommendation. City Schools has updated the firewall rules
based on the finding to resolve trusted and untrusted traffic as noted above. City Schools
will continue to review, assess and document our network security risks and identify how
IDPS coverage should be best applied in our network environment. IDPS protection will
be applied for untrusted traffic. The expected completion date is July 1, 2019.

--- Page 65 ---
b. City Schools agrees with this recommendation. City Schools will ensure that all computers
are running current versions of the malware protection software. The expected completion
date is July 1, 2019.
c. City Schools agrees with this recommendation. City Schools will distribute critical security-
related software updates for commonly vulnerable applications on all computers. The
expected completion date is July 1, 2019.
d. City Schools agrees with this recommendation. City Schools also plans on implementing
the recommendation to only allow administrative access on workstations which are
restricted to system and network administrators and document any exceptions. The
expected completion date is July 1, 2019.
Finding 15
BCPSS lacked assurance that adequate information technology security and operational
controls existed over its student information system that was hosted, operated, and
maintained by a service provider.
Recommendation 15
We recommend that BCPSS
a. ensure that its existing service provider agreement requires annual SOC 2 Type 2 reviews,
which cover appropriate trust criteria including, at a minimum, system security and data
availability and all related controls; and
b. annually obtain and review copies of these SOC 2 Type 2 reports to ensure that the related
independent reviews adequately address all necessary critical security and operational
concerns and that the service provider implements all critical report recommendations.
Response:
a. City Schools agrees with this recommendation. City Schools implemented a new cloud-
based Student Information System (SIS) for the school year SY16-17. As part of
continuous process improvement and in an effort to stabilize and secure our newly
implemented Student Information System, City schools will work with our Student
Information System vendor per the contract provisions to obtain SOC 2 Type 2 report in
mutually agreed timeline. The expected resolution date is July 1, 2019.
b. City Schools agrees with this recommendation. As part of the annual review, City Schools
will advise the vendor to include the above recommendations along with City Schools
review and document the findings of the SOC2 Type 2 report for future reference. The
expected resolution date is July 1, 2019.

--- Page 66 ---
Finding 16
Contract and payment processing issues specific to the prior arrangement with private bus
contractors contributed to transportation costs being higher than necessary.
Recommendation 16
We recommend that BCPSS
a. establish a process to periodically assess the operational costs and efficiency of its bus
contractor services under the new contract structure;
b. verify the propriety of contractor billings, including the rates charged; and
c. recover the aforementioned overpayments related to contractor billing errors.
Response:
a. City Schools agrees with this recommendation. The Office of the Chief Operating Officer
(COO) and the Office of Pupil Transportation (OPT) will assess the operational costs and
the efficiency of contractor services under the new contract. Procedures will be put in
place to monitor the accuracy of operational costs compared to the contract requirements
and agreements.
A strategy was initiated where City Schools establishes mileage limits as a criteria to
evaluate contractor billings. The COO and OPT have put in place three initiatives: 1) two
new positions - a Manager of Processes, Projects and Systems, and a Data Analyst, 2)
installation of GPS on City Schools’ and contractor buses and 3) restructuring of the yellow
bus contract to align costs to route plan and GPS data.
The work of the new staff will be to develop workflows and implement procedures to
manage billing processes in OPT. Their first project is to develop monthly mileage limits to
issue to contractors by which invoices for bus services will be evaluated. Route plan and
GPS data will be used to develop and calibrate mileage limits. The new yellow bus
Invitation For Bid and the subsequent contract were structured so that both mileage
thresholds and the monthly mileage limits can be used to evaluate invoices and control
waste. This initiative is currently in process with a targeted completion date of January
15, 2019.
b. City Schools agrees with this recommendation. OPT has completed the following corrective
actions: hired accounting staff to validate and process contractor billings, put in place
procedures to ensure the propriety of contractor billings, implemented a GPS system on
City School and contractor buses, configured the routing application to include distance
data, and restructured the yellow bus contract. These corrective actions are currently in
process with a targeted completion date of January 15, 2019.
c. City Schools agrees with this recommendation. OPT has identified overpayments to yellow
bus contractors. City Schools Operations, Procurement and Legal staff have developed
an agreement and a related promissory note to be used for repayments. OPT will meet

--- Page 67 ---
with contractors to begin discussions on repayments. Recovery dates of payments are not
yet determined.
Finding 17
BCPSS did not maintain documentation, including executed contracts, to support certain
financial relationships with bus contractors.
Recommendation 17
We recommend that BCPSS
a. ensure that written contracts are executed that clearly define all terms and conditions and
the duties and responsibilities of the parties; and
b. maintain formal written documentation justifying changes to critical contract terms,
including contract billing rates, and reductions in liquidated damage assessments.
Response:
a. City Schools agrees with the recommendation. OPT will work with Procurement to assure
all contracts are executed and clearly define the duties and responsibilities of the parties.
OPT will also work to visit contractors to clarify roles as stated in the contract and to receive
related job descriptions from the contractors. The revised process was implemented July
1, 2018.
b. City Schools agrees with this recommendation. OPT will document justifications in
changes to contract terms, billing rates and reductions in liquidated damages. This
process was implemented October 8, 2018.
Finding 18
BCPSS’ process for reviewing taxi company invoices did not adequately ensure the billings
were proper and that payments were consistent with contractual terms, resulting in
overpayments totaling $1.2 million.
Recommendation 18
We recommend that BCPSS
a. ensure that payments made to taxi companies are in accordance with the terms of the
contracts;
b. investigate and recover the aforementioned overpayments of administrative fees and
mileage rates from the taxi companies;
c. ensure that taxi company billings are supported by the required signed ride tickets; and
d. review past taxi company billings for properly completed ride tickets and recover any
improper payments, including the aforementioned amounts.

--- Page 68 ---
Response:
a. City Schools agrees with this recommendation. The wait time and mileage rate calculations
have been corrected in the application used to process taxi cab rates. This correction was
completed as of July 1, 2018.
b. City Schools agrees with this recommendation. City Schools Operations, Procurement and
Legal staff negotiated with Yellow Taxi Cab for repayment of $1.1 million. The Agreement
and a Promissory Note has been signed for the repayment; and repayments have been
processed in accordance with the agreement. Similar negotiation discussions will be
pursued with the other taxi cab companies. The targeted implementation dates have not
been determined.
c. City Schools agrees with this recommendation. City Schools will ensure that taxi company
billings are supported by the required signed ride tickets. Procedures include an
appointed staff member to count tickets and validate signatures of the driver and the
student. The targeted implementation date is November 1, 2018.
d. City Schools agrees with the recommendation. Additional staff were hired who reviewed
past Taxi Company billings to determine possible recovery amounts. The review was
completed as of July 1, 2018. The targeted implementation date of possible remedies
has not been determined.
Finding 19
BCPSS did not require charter school management personnel and board members to
periodically renew conflict of interest disclosures and did not ensure the disclosures were
completed as required.
Recommendation 19
We recommend that BCPSS
a. require all charter school management personnel and board members to periodically
(such as annually) file conflict of interest disclosures;
b. ensure the disclosures are completed by all required individuals; and
c. review all disclosures for, and resolve any, apparent conflicts.
Response:
a. City Schools partially agrees with this recommendation. Charter operators are required by
contract to follow City Schools’ procurement policy and to certify on an annual basis that
they are compliant with this policy, including ensuring there are no conflicts of interest.
Operators who have received Board approval to waive City Schools’ procurement policy
are required to have their own policies that ensure no conflicts of interests which, again,
are certified annually. In addition, operators are required by contract to submit annual
audit reports by independent auditors that verify their financial controls. However, specific

--- Page 69 ---
conflict of interest disclosure statements had not been required until the implementation
of the recent mandatory annual requirement.
b. City Schools agrees with this recommendation. To ensure that all operators are complying
with conflict of interest requirements, as of August 2018 submission of conflict of interest
forms from operator management personnel and board members has become a
mandatory annual requirement.
c. City Schools agrees with this recommendation. Office of New Initiatives (ONI) will review
all annual disclosures and will resolve non-compliance in accordance with the City Schools
Ethics Policy or the Operator Policy which would be applied in accordance with their
agreement.
Finding 20
BCPSS did not properly track and monitor required documents to be submitted by each
charter school nor did BCPSS perform follow-up actions to obtain required documents from
the schools.
Recommendation 20
We recommend that BCPSS
a. properly track and monitor the submission of required documents by charter schools, and
b. perform follow-up actions (such as written notifications) to obtain required documents
from the schools when it is not submitted.
Response:
a. City Schools partially agrees with the recommendation. City Schools has historically
tracked and monitored the annual submission of critical documents from operators. Over
time, City Schools has continued to refine the process for collecting and monitoring
documents to ensure greater compliance and better document tracking. In order to
improve practices, City Schools has recently revised the submission log to include specific
dates when documents were submitted and also created a log to document specific
outreach actions. These changes have been implemented during the fall of the 2018-19
school year. As operators may operate multiple schools, City Schools will also ensure that
document submission information is noted for each school requirement.
b. City Schools partially agrees with the recommendation. While City Schools had monitored
compliance with required documentation from the operators, the records of such outreach
action have been incomplete at times. A log of specific outreach actions has been
implemented in the fall of the 2018-19 school year. City Schools will document when
emails, other written correspondence, or phone calls regarding late or missing documents
has occurred. If required documents are not subsequently submitted, City Schools will
issue appropriate Accountability Notices for areas of non-compliance.

--- Page 70 ---
A T
UDIT EAM
Stephen C. Pease, CPA
Matthew L. Streett, CPA, CFE
Audit Managers
Richard L. Carter, CISA
Stephen P. Jersey, CPA, CISA
Information Systems Audit Managers
Robert W. Lembach, CPA
Lisa M. Beers, CFE
Senior Auditors
Edward O. Kendall
Matthew D. Walbert
Information Systems Senior Auditors
Anthony V. Calcagno
Walter L. Horan IV
James J. Podhorniak, CPA, CFE
Staff Auditors