Title: Somerset County Public Schools
Date: 03/25/2010
Type: Local School Systems
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5a945d38cc9d72404c150a34
Extracted: 2025-06-18T10:47:58.650416
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Financial Management Practices Performance Audit Report
Somerset County Public Schools
March 2010
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
• This report and any related follow-up correspondence are available to the public through
the Office of Legislative Audits at 301 West Preston Street, Room 1202, Baltimore,
Maryland 21201. The Office may be contacted by telephone at 410-946-5900, 301-970-
5900, or 1-877-486-9964.
• Electronic copies of our audit reports can be viewed or downloaded from our website at
http://www.ola.state.md.us.
• Alternate formats may be requested through the Maryland Relay Service at 1-800-735-
2258.
• The Department of Legislative Services – Office of the Executive Director, 90 State Circle,
Annapolis, Maryland 21401 can also assist you in obtaining copies of our reports and
related correspondence. The Department may be contacted by telephone at 410-946-
5400 or 301-970-5400.

--- Page 3 ---
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY
Karl S. Aro Bruce A. Myers, CPA
Executive Director Legislative Auditor xxx
March 25, 2010
Senator Verna L. Jones, Co-Chair, Joint Audit Committee
Delegate Steven J. DeBoy, Sr., Co-Chair, Joint Audit Committee
Members of Joint Audit Committee
Annapolis, Maryland
Ladies and Gentlemen:
We conducted an audit of the financial management practices of the Somerset
County Public Schools (SCPS) in accordance with the requirements of the State
Government Article, Section 2-1220(e) of the Annotated Code of Maryland. SCPS is
the second smallest public school system in Maryland based on the number of
students enrolled. The educational services are delivered in 10 schools, with fiscal
year 2008 expenditures of $48 million. The objectives of this audit were to evaluate
whether SCPS procedures and controls were effective in accounting for and
safeguarding its assets and whether its policies provided for the efficient use of
financial resources.
Our audit disclosed that, in many cases, SCPS had procedures and controls in place
to ensure the safeguarding of assets and the efficient use of financial resources.
Nevertheless, our report contains 23 recommendations to SCPS to enhance controls
and to implement best practices used to improve operations in such areas as
transportation, food services, procurement, facilities, and equipment inventory. For
example, SCPS did not have a written policy establishing the criteria for calculating
the bus contractors’ table of payment rates, which included payments for the cost of
the vehicle, bus driver wage rates, and maintenance cost reimbursements.
Furthermore, certain components of the formula used to establish bus contractor
payment rates should be reevaluated, as the rates appear to result in unnecessarily
high payments, and could cost SCPS approximately $1.4 million over the life of the
new buses put into service since 1995. Also, SCPS should establish better controls
over critical information technology systems and verify its health care costs. In
addition, SCPS should establish a comprehensive performance measurement system
to evaluate key operations.

--- Page 4 ---
An Executive Summary of our findings can be found on page i, immediately following
this cover letter, and our audit scope, objectives, and methodology are explained on
page 63. SCPS’ response to this audit is included as an appendix to this report. We
wish to acknowledge the cooperation extended to us during our audit by SCPS.
Respectfully submitted,
Bruce A. Myers, CPA
Legislative Auditor

--- Page 5 ---
Executive Summary
The Office of Legislative Audits has conducted an audit to evaluate
the effectiveness and efficiency of the financial management
practices of the Somerset County Public Schools (SCPS) in
accordance with the State Government Article, Section 2-1220(e) of
the Annotated Code of Maryland. State law requires the Office to
conduct such an audit of each of the 24 public school systems in
Maryland and provides that the related audit process be approved
by the Joint Audit Committee. Since the Committee approved the
audit process in September 2004, we have issued audit reports
related to 18 school systems; SCPS represents the nineteenth to
date. The approved process included 11 functional areas to be
audited at each system. The following are summaries of the
findings in these areas at SCPS.
Revenue and Billing Cycle (see pages 9 through 12)
According to SCPS’ audited June 30, 2008 financial statements,
$44.5 million in revenue was received from all sources during fiscal
year 2008, the majority of which was received via electronic fund
transfers from other governmental entities. Procedures and
controls for significant revenue sources and for accounts receivable
were generally found to be adequate. However, based on our audit,
cash receipts received at the central business office were not
adequately controlled. For example, checks were not restrictively
endorsed upon receipt, collections were not properly safeguarded
prior to deposit, and collections were not independently verified to
deposit documentation.
Federal Funds (see pages 13 through 15)
Annually, SCPS is subject to an audit of its federally-funded
programs (often referred to as the Single Audit, a requirement of
Circular A-133, which is issued by the U.S. Office of Management
and Budget). Due to parallels between that work and the scope of
our audit, we placed significant reliance on the results of the
independent audit of the fiscal year 2008 grant activity, for which
reported expenditures totaled $6 million. The related report stated
i
Office of
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 6 ---
that SCPS complied, in all material respects, with the requirements
applicable to its major federal programs. In addition, with respect to
internal controls over compliance with, and the operation of, major
federal programs, the auditors reported no matters considered to be
material weaknesses and no significant deficiencies.
Although SCPS has processes for the identification of children
eligible for Medicaid-subsidized services and for recovering the
related costs, it should document the efforts to identify such
children. SCPS fully participated in the E-Rate program, which
provides financial assistance to schools for telecommunications
expenses.
Procurement and Disbursement Cycle (see pages 17
through 21)
According to SCPS records, non-payroll disbursements totaled
approximately $18 million during fiscal year 2008. SCPS used
existing governmental contracts as a way to obtain discounts and
reduce procurement costs and had appropriate processes in place
to control travel expenditures. However, SCPS needs to improve its
procurement policies. For example, SCPS did not have any policies
governing the procurement of services and the use of single (sole)
source procurements and the policies did not require Board
approval of any contracts, with the exception of construction-related
contracts. In addition, SCPS should improve controls over its
automated financial management system used for invoice payment.
Human Resources and Payroll (see pages 23 through 25)
SCPS employed 475 full-time equivalent employees as of October
2008, and associated payroll costs during fiscal year 2008 totaled
$30 million. SCPS uses a centralized hiring and approval process to
help control payroll costs. SCPS should improve controls over its
automated human resources and payroll systems. Although SCPS
had implemented workforce planning for teachers and other
instructional personnel, such planning was not comprehensive since
it did not address the needs and processes for non-instructional
personnel.
ii
Office of
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 7 ---
Inventory Control and Accountability (see pages 27
through 29)
SCPS should improve its policies and procedures to ensure that
accountability and control is effectively maintained for its
equipment inventory. In addition, procedures for controlling and
maintaining an inventory of textbooks need to be improved and
formalized. According to SCPS’ audited financial statements, as of
June 30, 2008, the capital equipment inventory had a
undepreciated cost of $5.9 million.
Information Technology (see pages 31 through 33)
SCPS maintains and administers a computer network, computer
operations, and a number of significant administrative and
academic-related information system applications. A master
technology plan, which is periodically updated to address current
and future school needs, has been developed. SCPS, however,
needs to improve computer system access, security, and data back-
up procedures, and develop a comprehensive disaster recovery plan
to adequately safeguard applications and data systems.
Facilities Construction, Renovation, and
Maintenance (see pages 35 through 40)
SCPS maintains 10 schools and several other facilities (such as
administration and support offices) with a staff of 37 custodial and
maintenance personnel. SCPS uses a comprehensive and public
process to plan for construction and renovation of school facilities.
Plans are long-term, updated annually, and reflect input from the
Board. However, SCPS should establish a performance
measurement system and enhance the use of its work order system
to better manage its maintenance operations. SCPS should also
develop a formal process to identify and address its deferred
maintenance needs and document all preventive maintenance
performed. Furthermore, SCPS should comply with its procurement
policies by obtaining bids for facility related purchases.
iii
Office of
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 8 ---
Transportation Services (see pages 41 through 48)
SCPS is responsible for the safe transportation of approximately
2,900 eligible students, of which three percent are disabled.
SCPS uses several best practices to increase the efficiency of
transporting students, such as staggering school start and stop
times so buses can provide multiple trips on the same day.
However, SCPS should use its automated routing software to help
efficiently plan bus routes and develop a written policy establishing
the criteria for determining bus contractor rates. SCPS should also
reevaluate the formula used to determine payments to bus
contractors. This payment formula may result in SCPS paying $1.4
million more than necessary over the life of new buses put into
service since 1995. Also, SCPS should perform an analysis to
determine if it is cost beneficial to continue outsourcing its
transportation services. In addition, SCPS should ensure the
accuracy of amounts paid to contractors, and adhere to a related
Board approved policy for fuel reimbursements. Finally, SCPS
should expand its use of performance measures to evaluate its
transportation operations and ensure its criteria for selecting bus
contractors complies with applicable laws.
Food Services Operations (see pages 49 through 53)
SCPS currently uses a number of best practices in its food services
operations. For example, it uses available USDA commodities and
has procedures in place designed to maximize participation in the
National School Meal Program. However, SCPS should improve
controls over the procurement of food supplies and develop
performance data. Also, the food service operation, which is
intended to be self-sufficient, should account for all costs of
operations when determining self sufficiency.
School Board Operations and Oversight (see pages 55
through 58)
The five-member Board has adopted policies governing certain
operations of the Board and SCPS and exercised oversight of
financial activities through independent audits. To enhance
oversight, the Board should consider establishing an internal audit
function and a confidential reporting process to receive reports of
possible fraud, waste, or mismanagement. The Board should also
iv
Office of
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 9 ---
adopt comprehensive performance measures in key operational
areas, such as transportation, food service, and facilities
management. Finally, SCPS should ensure that financial disclosure
statements are filed by all required individuals.
Other Financial Controls (see pages 59 through 60)
SCPS has appropriate practices in place to govern its cash and risk
management. However, SCPS should establish sufficient controls to
verify the propriety of its health care costs.
v
Office of
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 10 ---
vi
Office of
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 11 ---
Table of Contents
Executive Summary i
Background Information 7
Oversight 7
Statistical Overview 7
External Audit of Fiscal Year 2008 Activity 8
Chapter 1: Revenue and Billing Cycle 9
Background 10
Controls Over Revenue and Billing Cycle Activity Were Generally Adequate for 11
Significant Revenue Types
Controls Over Cash Receipts Received at the Central Business Office 11
Need to Be Improved
Recommendation 12
Chapter 2: Federal Funds 13
Background 14
SCPS Established Adequate Internal Controls Over Federal 14
Grants and Complied with Federal Grant Requirements
SCPS Should Document Its Efforts to Identify All Students Eligible for 14
Medicaid-Subsidized Services
SCPS Participated in the Federal E-Rate Program 15
Recommendation 15
1
Office of
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 12 ---
Table of Contents
Chapter 3: Procurement and Disbursement Cycle 17
Background 17
SCPS Used Several Best Practices to Address Its Procurement 18
Needs and Control Travel Costs
SCPS Should Improve Its Procurement Policies and Procedures 19
SCPS Had Not Established Adequate Invoice Processing and Payment 19
Controls
SCPS Should Comply with Its Procurement Policies and Better Document 20
Procurement Decisions
Recommendations 21
Chapter 4: Human Resources and Payroll 23
Background 23
Human Resources and Payroll Internal Controls Need 24
to Be Strengthened
Workforce Planning Should Be Expanded to Include Non-Instructional 25
Positions
Recommendations 25
Chapter 5: Inventory Control and Accountability 27
Background 27
Existing Controls and Procedures Over Equipment Should Be Improved 28
Textbook Procedures Should Be Enhanced 28
Recommendations 29
2
Office of
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 13 ---
Table of Contents
Chapter 6: Information Technology Services 31
Background 31
Technology Plans Were Developed to Address Current and 32
Future Needs of SCPS
Steps Should Be Taken to Ensure Adequate Security Over IT 32
Applications
SCPS Should Develop a Comprehensive Disaster Recovery Plan 33
Recommendations 33
Chapter 7: Facilities Construction, Renovation, and 35
Maintenance
Background 36
A Number of Best Practices Were in Place to Enhance the 37
Efficiency and Effectiveness of the SCPS Facilities and
Maintenance Department
Certain Processes Should Be Implemented to Increase the 37
Effectiveness of Maintenance and Custodial Operations
SCPS Should Develop a Formal Process to Identify and Address Its 39
Deferred Maintenance Needs
Bids Should Be Obtained for Facility-Related Purchases 39
Recommendations 39
3
Office of
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 14 ---
Table of Contents
Chapter 8: Transportation Services 41
Background 41
Several Best Practices Were in Place to Enhance Student 42
Transportation Services
Routing Procedures Should Be Enhanced and Routing Software 43
Should Be Used
Bus Contractor Rates Paid Were Not Based on Documented Criteria 44
More Can Be Done to Ensure Cost-Effective Operations 44
Control Over Payments to Bus Contractors Should Be Enhanced 47
Performance Should Be Measured and Reported Regularly to the Board 47
Recommendations 47
Chapter 9: Food Services Operations 49
Background 49
Certain Best Practices Were in Place 51
Internal Controls Over Purchasing of Food Supplies Need to Be Improved 51
Food Services Operations Should Recognize All Applicable Costs and 52
Performance Measures Should Be Developed to Assess Efficiency
Recommendations 53
Chapter 10: School Board Operations and Oversight 55
Background 55
Certain Oversight Has Been Put in Place Regarding SCPS Operations 57
The Board Should Take Additional Steps to Assist in Governance 57
Of SCPS
Recommendation 58
4
Office of
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 15 ---
Table of Contents
Chapter 11: Other Financial Controls 59
Risk and Cash Management Best Practices Were in Place 59
SCPS Should Take Steps to Verify the Propriety of Health Care Costs 60
Recommendation 60
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology 61
Response of Somerset County Public Schools Appendix
5
Office of
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 16 ---
6
Office of
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 17 ---
Background Information
Oversight
Somerset County Public Schools (SCPS) is governed by a local
school board, consisting of five elected members and two non-
voting student members. The vast majority of SCPS funding is
provided by the State and the Somerset County government. In
addition, the Maryland State Department of Education (MSDE)
exercises considerable oversight through the establishment and
monitoring of various financial and academic policies and
regulations, in accordance with certain provisions of the Annotated
Code of Maryland. MSDE also works with SCPS to comply with the
requirements and mandates of the federal No Child Left Behind Act
of 2001. Oversight by the Somerset County government is limited,
although the SCPS annual operational and capital budgets require
County approval.
Statistical Overview
According to MSDE student enrollment records, SCPS is the second
smallest school system based on student enrollment among the 24
public school systems in Maryland. From fiscal year 2000 through
2009, the total full-time regular and special education pupil
population has decreased 4.9 percent from 3,063 to 2,912 with
projected increases to 3,000 by 2017. For the 2008-2009 school
year, SCPS had 10 schools, consisting of 5 elementary, 1
intermediate, 2 high schools, and 2 other schools. According to the
fiscal year 2008 audited financial statements, total expenditures
were $48 million. The largest expenditure category is salaries and
wages, including benefits, which accounted for approximately 63
percent of total expenditures during fiscal year 2008. SCPS
budgeted full-time positions in fiscal year 2009 totaled 475, which
consisted of 341 instructional and 134 non-instructional
employees.
Certain statistical information contained in this report was taken
from unaudited reports distributed by MSDE and represents the
most current comparable information available at the time of our
7
Office of
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 18 ---
audit. These reports are based on self-reported data from the 24
Maryland public school systems, and MSDE does not warrant the
comparability or completeness of the data.
External Audit of Fiscal Year 2008 Activity
Annually, SCPS engages a certified public accounting firm to
independently audit its fiscal year-end financial statements.
Additionally, the auditor conducts what is referred to as a Single
Audit of SCPS federal grant programs (as required by federal
regulations). The two resulting audit reports for the 2008 fiscal year
were issued in September 2008. Neither report disclosed any
material weaknesses or significant deficiencies on SCPS record
keeping, processes, and controls.
8
Office of
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 19 ---
Chapter 1
Revenue and Billing Cycle
According to SCPS’ audited financial statements for the fiscal year
ended June 30, 2008, $44.5 million of revenue was received by
SCPS during fiscal year 2008. Due to similarities between the work
of the independent certified public accounting firm that audited
SCPS financial statements and the scope of our audit in this area,
we placed significant reliance on the results of the audit of the fiscal
year 2008 financial statements for revenue transactions, including
State, local, and federal sources and other sources of revenue (such
as student activity fund1 cash receipts of $708,000) and for
accounts receivable (for example, amounts due from other
governments). The firm’s procedural review and testing disclosed
no material weaknesses2 and no significant deficiencies3. Such
testing included the most significant revenue types—the majority of
which related to electronic fund transfers from other government
1 The Board has a fiduciary responsibility to ensure that the school activity fund is used
only for intended purposes by those to whom the assets belong. Receipts for the school
activity fund are not included in the $44.5 million revenue total because the Board
cannot use these assets to finance its operations.
2 A material weakness is a significant deficiency, or combination of significant deficiencies,
that results in more than a remote likelihood that a material misstatement of the financial
statements (or, with respect to Single Audit, material noncompliance with a type of
compliance requirement of a federal program) will not be prevented or detected by any
entity’s internal control.
3 A significant deficiency is a control deficiency, or combination of control deficiencies,
that adversely affects the entity’s ability to initiate, authorize, record, process, or report
financial data reliably in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles (or,
with respect to Single Audit, to administer a federal program such that there is more
than a remote likelihood that noncompliance with a type of compliance requirement of
a federal program) that is more than inconsequential will not be prevented or detected
by the entity’s internal control.
9
Office of
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 20 ---
entities, as well as school activity funds and food service cash
receipts.
Our audit of cash receipts received at the central business office,
which totaled $17.8 million during fiscal year 2008, disclosed that
controls over these collections need to be improved.
Background
SCPS revenues consist primarily of funds received from the State,
Somerset County, and the federal government. Other sources
include receipts from the sale of food, facility rentals, and interest
income. Chart 1 (see below) shows the breakdown of SCPS fiscal
year 2008 revenues of $44.5 million by major source.
Chart 1
Sources of Fiscal Year 2008 Revenues
($44.5 Million)
Somerset
County
$8,792,192
20%
Federal
$5,982,931
13% State of
Maryland
$28,922,988
Other
65%
$782,598
2%
Source: SCPS fiscal year 2008 audited financial
statements and supporting SCPS records
10
Office of
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 21 ---
In addition to the revenues in Chart 1, schools also collected funds
for various purposes, such as student activity groups including
yearbook and student activity funds. These school activity funds are
accounted for separately by each school and are reported in
summary in the audited financial statements. According to the
audited financial statements, fiscal year 2008 school activity fund
receipts totaled $708,304, and the June 30, 2008 balance was
$264,822.
Controls Over Revenue and Billing Cycle Activity Were
Generally Adequate for Significant Revenue Types
Due to similarities between the work of the independent certified
public accounting firm that audited the SCPS financial statements
and the scope of our audit in this area, we placed significant
reliance on the results of the independent audit of the fiscal year
2008 financial statements. The auditor’s procedural review and
testing disclosed no material weaknesses or significant deficiencies
regarding the collection of any accounts receivable or revenues
from local, State, federal and other sources (such as food service
operations), including electronic fund transfer transactions. Student
activity funds and cafeteria cash operations were also audited by
the firm, including a review of internal controls and bank account
reconciliations. The independent auditors identified findings
involving student activity funds (for example, bank reconciliations
were prepared by the same individuals who prepared the checks for
the related bank accounts) at certain schools, which were
addressed by school management.
Controls Over Cash Receipts Received at the Central
Business Office Need to Be Improved
Receipts received by the central business office were not properly
controlled; such collections totaled $17.8 million during fiscal year
2008. Specifically, collections were not recorded and checks were
not restrictively endorsed until up to a day after initial receipt. In
addition, prior to deposit, cash receipts were stored in an
unattended room readily accessible to headquarters employees.
Furthermore, we noted that certain monthly checks were not always
11
Office of
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 22 ---
recorded on the initial log. Finally, verifications that recorded
collections were subsequently deposited were not performed.
Recommendation
1. SCPS should ensure that all receipts are immediately recorded
and safeguarded until deposit, and that checks are restrictively
endorsed upon receipt. In addition, an employee independent of
the cash receipts process should verify that all recorded receipts
were deposited.
12
Office of
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 23 ---
Chapter 2
Federal Funds
Annually, SCPS is subject to an audit of its federally-funded grant
programs (often referred to as the Single Audit, and required by
Circular A-133, which is issued by the U.S. Office of Management
and Budget). The report on the audit of fiscal year 2008 federal
grant activity was issued by an independent certified public
accounting firm on September 10, 2008.
In that report, the auditor stated that SCPS complied, in all material
respects, with the requirements applicable to its major federal grant
programs. In addition, with respect to internal controls over
compliance with, and the operation of, major federal programs, the
auditors noted no matters considered to be material weaknesses
and no significant deficiencies.
SCPS had established a procedure to identify children eligible for
Medicaid-subsidized4 services but the related efforts should be
documented. In addition, SCPS did have a procedure to ensure that
the related Medicaid reimbursements were actually received. SCPS
also fully participated in the federal E-Rate program, which provides
funding for telecommunications expenses.
4 The Federal Medical Assistance Program, or Medicaid, is not a grant program
under Circular A-133 and is not included in the Single Audit.
13
Office of
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 24 ---
Background
SCPS receives funds primarily from the State, Somerset County, and
the federal government. Most funds received from Somerset
County and from the State are unrestricted; however, federal funds
are generally restricted for use for a specified program (such as the
School Lunch Program or Special Education). According to the
audited Schedule of Federal Awards, fiscal year 2008 expenditures
of federal award funds totaled $6 million.
SCPS Established Adequate Internal Controls Over
Federal Grants and Complied with Federal Grant
Requirements
Because of the accounting firm’s work on SCPS federal fund
expenditures, we relied on the auditor’s results. Besides expressing
an opinion on SCPS compliance with the terms of several grant
programs, the auditor also considered the existing internal control
structure’s impact on compliance and audited the fiscal year 2008
required Schedule of Federal Awards (which includes claimed and
reported grant-related expenditures). In its report, the firm stated
that SCPS complied, in all material respects, with the requirements
applicable to its major federal grant programs. In addition, with
respect to internal controls over compliance with, and the operation
of, major federal programs, the auditors noted no material
weaknesses and no significant deficiencies.
SCPS Should Document Its Efforts to Identify All
Students Eligible for Medicaid-Subsidized Services
SCPS should document its efforts to identify all students eligible for
Medicaid-subsidized services. According to SCPS records, during
fiscal year 2009, there were 342 students deemed eligible for
Medicaid-subsidized services. These records also indicate that
fiscal year 2008 revenue for Medicaid-subsidized services totaled
$333,182.
14
Office of
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 25 ---
SCPS advised us that it had a process in place for identifying
students eligible for Medicaid-subsidized services. Specifically,
SCPS advised that it compared all students receiving special
education services to the Medicaid electronic eligibility verification
system to identify Medicaid eligible students. Although this process
would help identify all such children, these comparisons were not
documented. Once eligible children were identified, SCPS did have
a process in place to ensure that all identified Medicaid-eligible
costs were recovered.
SCPS Participated in the Federal E-Rate Program
SCPS had a process in place to request and receive reimbursement
for technology expenditures from the federal School and Libraries
Universal Service Program (E-Rate). SCPS received $98,564 in
federal E-Rate funding for fiscal year 2008. The E-Rate program
provides funding to schools for telecommunications expenses (such
as, Internet access). The funding is based on the level of poverty
and the rural status of the school district.
Recommendation
2. SCPS should document its efforts to identify all students eligible
for Medicaid-subsidized services.
15
Office of
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 26 ---
16
Office of
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 27 ---
Chapter 3
Procurement and Disbursement Cycle
SCPS often used existing contracts procured by other governmental
entities (referred to as “piggybacking”) as a way to obtain discounts
and reduce procurement costs and had established policies and
procedures to control travel costs. However, SCPS needs to
improve its policies and procedures over procurements, as well as
ensure it complies with existing policies. For example, SCPS did not
have any policies governing the procurement of services and the
use of single (sole) source procurements, and the policies did not
require Board approval of any contracts, with the exception of
construction-related contracts. In addition, SCPS needs to improve
controls over its automated financial management system used for
invoice processing and payment. Numerous employees had
incompatible system capabilities, including the ability to post
payment transactions, add vendors, and print checks.
Background
SCPS uses a manual system for purchasing goods and services and
an automated system for paying the related invoices. Requisitions
are manually prepared by departments and are subject to
supervisory approval within the requesting departments. Purchase
orders, contracts, solicitations, and bids are usually handled by the
ordering department with the exception of construction and other
facility related acquisitions, which are administered by the Facilities
and Maintenance Department, and information technology
purchases, which are handled by the Department of Technology.
Purchases of goods over $25,000 are required to be formally bid,
and are required to be approved by the area supervisor and the
17
Office of
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 28 ---
Director of Finance. Contracts exceeding $25,000 must be
approved by the Superintendent or a designee.
The ordering department documents the receipt of goods and
services by signing a copy of the related purchase order, which is
forwarded to the accounting department where an accounting
associate ensures that the purchase order, packing slip, and invoice
are in agreement. Payments are then processed on the automated
system by the finance office’s accounts payable unit. According to
SCPS records, non-payroll disbursements totaled $18 million during
fiscal year 2008.
SCPS Used Several Best Practices to Address Its
Procurement Needs and Control Travel Costs
SCPS had instituted certain best practices that should enhance the
cost effectiveness of its procurements. These include
“piggybacking” onto contracts already procured by the State and
other local governments, and participating in cooperative
purchasing organizations. These practices saved SCPS certain
costs associated with the procurement of the contracts and may
provide larger discounts as a result of the combined purchasing
power of multiple entities. In addition, SCPS had written policies
and procedures for the procurement of goods including the use of
procurement cards.
Furthermore, SCPS had established adequate policies and
procedures to control employee travel costs, including requirements
that all travel reimbursements be approved by departmental
supervisors, that expenses be documented with itemized receipts,
and that expenses, such as meals and mileage, be subject to
certain limits. Out-of-state travel is required to be reported to the
Superintendent and the Board. Travel expenditures for fiscal year
2008 totaled approximately $123,000 according to SCPS records.
18
Office of
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 29 ---
SCPS Should Improve Its Procurement Policies and
Procedures
SCPS’ policies did not adequately address all procurements that it
made.
• Unlike other school systems, SCPS’ policy did not require Board
approval of any contract, except those related to construction.
For fiscal year 2008, there were 111 vendors who received
payments of more than $25,000. Payments to these vendors
totaled approximately $14.9 million.
• Policies do not address the procurement of services from
vendors, such as the need to competitively bid those purchases.
The policies also did not address the use or applicability of sole
source procurements and related documentation requirements
justifying such purchases. Although we were advised that such
procurements were infrequent, the policies should recognize all
procurement methods and associated requirements. For
example, for sole source procurements, the rationale for using
this procurement method should be documented and, if over a
specified dollar amount, the contract should be reviewed and
approved by the Board. According to SCPS’ records, contracted
services totaled approximately $1.7 million for fiscal year 2008.
SCPS Had Not Established Adequate Invoice
Processing and Payment Controls
SCPS had not established adequate controls over its automated
invoice processing application. Specifically, we noted that 13
employees had been granted access that allowed them to perform
critical incompatible functions (such as entering and posting
payment transactions, adding vendors, and printing vendor checks).
One of these employees routinely performed these incompatible
duties. In addition, access to the check printer and signature plate
were not properly restricted.
19
Office of
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 30 ---
SCPS Should Comply with Its Procurement Policies
and Better Document Procurement Decisions
SCPS did not always comply with its policies by obtaining goods
through a competitive procurement process nor adequately
document certain procurement decisions. Specifically, SCPS policy
requires that procurements for goods over $25,000 are to be
formally bid and procurements between $10,000 and $25,000
require three written price quotes from vendors. Three oral price
quotes are required for procurements between $5,000 and $9,999.
That policy also requires the preparation of contracts with the
lowest responsible bidders. Our test of 15 fiscal year 2008 and
2009 disbursements totaling $654,000 disclosed that 3 of these
disbursements totaling $208,600 were not competitively bid.
These purchases were for heating oil ($25,400), playground
equipment ($19,600), and computer equipment ($163,600). No
contract existed with the vendor that provided the heating oil and,
therefore, SCPS could not ensure that rates charged were proper.
Furthermore, SCPS did not verify that the quantity of fuel paid for
was actually received; this vendor was paid a total of $311,000
during fiscal year 2008.
During fiscal year 2008, SCPS purchased certain computer items
totaling approximately $40,749 under a University System of
Maryland (USM) contract. However, SCPS did not document that it
received the specified discounts from the list price. USM’s contract
allows for Maryland school systems to purchase computer
equipment and associated peripherals from selected vendors for an
agreed upon percentage discount from the manufacturer’s
suggested retail price.
Although we were advised that SCPS performed an analysis to
determine whether extending contracts was more beneficial than re-
bidding the contract, the analyses were not documented. One
contract (for waste management) has been renewed annually for at
least five years; the amount paid to this vendor in fiscal year 2008
totaled $82,228. Another contract (for hosting services) was
recently renewed for an additional three years for a total of
$62,492. In general, when contracts expire, the original terms
should be reevaluated to ascertain whether the contract represents
the best value.
20
Office of
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 31 ---
Recommendations
3. SCPS should amend its existing policies to require Board
approval for all procurements over a specified amount and to
address all categories of purchases, including services and sole
source procurements.
4. SCPS should improve controls over its invoice processing system
by segregating incompatible functions and restricting access to
critical system functions to only those employees who need the
capabilities to perform their job duties. Furthermore, SCPS
should restrict access to the signature plate to employees who
are independent of the invoice processing functions.
5. SCPS should obtain goods through a competitive procurement
process in accordance with its policies and fully document
procurement decisions. Furthermore, SCPS should ensure that
it receives available discounts and that it documents analyses
regarding extending contracts without rebidding.
21
Office of
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 32 ---
22
Office of
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 33 ---
Chapter 4
Human Resources and Payroll
SCPS uses automated systems to maintain human resources
information; to record employee time and track leave; and to
process and record payroll transactions. In addition, SCPS uses a
centralized hiring and approval process to help control payroll costs.
However, SCPS should address certain procedural deficiencies with
respect to payroll processing. These deficiencies included
unnecessary and incompatible access capabilities given to certain
personnel on the SCPS payroll system and a lack of supervisory
review of certain payroll transactions. Additionally, although SCPS
had implemented workforce planning, it did not address the needs
and processes for employees other than teachers and related
instructional positions.
Background
Payroll costs represent the largest single cost component in the
SCPS budget. According to SCPS records for fiscal year 2008,
salary, wage, and benefit costs totaled $30 million. According to
MSDE reports, as of October 2008, SCPS had 475 full-time
equivalent employees, of which 134 (28 percent) were non-
instructional. The 6.1 to 1 ratio of SCPS students to full-time
equivalent employees (both instructional and non-instructional) is
lower than other similarly sized school systems (see Table 1 on the
next page).
23
Office of
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 34 ---
Table 1
Comparison of Student to Employee Ratios – Fall 2008 (Unaudited)
Number of Full-
Number of Student to
Time Equivalent
School System Students Employee
Employees
(as of September 30, Ratio
2008) (as of October 1,
2008)
Somerset Co. 2,912 475 6.1 to 1
Talbot Co. 4,419 607 7.3 to 1
Garrett Co. 4,425 643 6.9 to 1
Dorchester Co. 4,560 696 6.6 to 1
Kent Co. 2,219 355 6.3 to 1
Source: MSDE Student /Staff Publications
Note: School systems selected for comparison are those with student enrollments
closest in number to SCPS.
Human Resources and Payroll Internal Controls Need
to Be Strengthened
SCPS did not establish adequate internal control over its automated
payroll systems and related processes.
• One employee had been granted unrestricted access to all
critical payroll functions in the automated payroll system. These
critical functions include adding and deleting employees,
changing employee addresses, changing employee pay rates
and direct deposit account information, entering time and
attendance information, and preparing checks. In addition, this
employee also had access to the check printer and signature
plate.
• SCPS generated reports of payroll transactions and adjustments
recorded and processed each pay period for independent review
and approval. However, the employee responsible for approving
these reports did not use supporting documentation to verify the
propriety of the adjustments.
• Information (leave, employee data, and salary) recorded in the
payroll system was not reviewed or approved after initial
recordation. This could allow for inaccurate adjustments to
employee records without detection.
24
Office of
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 35 ---
Workforce Planning Should Be Expanded to Include
Non-Instructional Positions
Although SCPS had implemented workforce planning for
instructional positions, SCPS should expand its workforce planning
efforts to include non-instructional positions which, as of October
2008, represent 28 percent of its workforce (134 non-instructional
professional and support staff, out of 475 full-time equivalent
positions). The SCPS Master Plan sets the strategic direction and
provides coordination and focus for initiatives to address challenges
faced by SCPS. The Plan includes a number of objectives and
strategies to address human resource needs—which is evidence of
workforce planning. However, it addresses only the recruitment and
retention of highly-qualified instructional staff (that is, teachers and
certain instructional aides).
Non-instructional positions play a key role in the ultimate success of
SCPS in providing quality education and, therefore, should be
included in workforce planning.
Recommendations
6. SCPS should ensure that payroll functions are adequately
separated and that critical system access capabilities are
granted in accordance with those functions. In addition, SCPS
should ensure that all payroll-related transactions and
information recorded in the system are reviewed and approved,
at least on a test basis, by an employee independent of the
payroll processing function using supporting documentation.
7. SCPS should expand its workforce planning to include key non-
instructional positions in critical operational units.
25
Office of
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 36 ---
26
Office of
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 37 ---
Chapter 5
Inventory Control and Accountability
Our audit disclosed that SCPS has developed written procedures
and policies for the acquisition and disposal of assets. However,
SCPS could improve its controls and procedures which govern
accountability over its equipment inventory. Additionally, SCPS had
not established formal procedures for controlling textbooks, and
processes established to maintain a comprehensive inventory of
textbooks need improvement.
Background
According to SCPS audited financial statements, as of June 30,
2008, the undepreciated cost of capital equipment was $5.9
million. Equipment items include computers, audio and video
items, and various other items. All furniture and equipment items
with a cost of $1,000 or greater are to be included in the
centralized inventory system. Generally, SCPS orders materials and
supplies on an as-needed basis and does not maintain a central
inventory location.
27
Office of
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 38 ---
Existing Controls and Procedures Over Equipment
Should Be Improved
While SCPS had written policies regarding the acquisition and
disposal of assets, we noted several areas where controls and
procedures over equipment were in need of improvement.
• SCPS policies and procedures did not address periodic physical
inventories, reconciliation of the physical count to the inventory
records, segregation of duties, and reporting of lost and stolen
items. Furthermore, those policies did not address
accountability and control over sensitive items (such as
computers and other electronic equipment) costing less than
$1,000, as well as the requirements for independent review and
approval of adjustments made to the equipment detail records.
• SCPS stated that a physical inventory of equipment may be
performed every three to five years for non-IT equipment and
annually for IT equipment. However, SCPS could not provide any
documentation indicating when the last inventories were
performed.
• SCPS detail records frequently lacked information to specifically
identify individual items. For example, 227 of 912 items in one
equipment category lacked a property tag number and, if
applicable, a serial number to identify the items. In addition, IT
inventory records did not include the purchase date and item
cost. Furthermore, the official records did not include certain IT
equipment items (such as digital and video cameras); these
items were only recorded on individual schools’ inventory
records.
Textbook Procedures Should Be Enhanced
Procedures for accounting for textbooks need to be enhanced and
formalized. Each school performed an annual physical inventory of
its textbooks, and SCPS used the results of the inventory to make
purchasing decisions and to redistribute excess books to other
schools instead of making new purchases. However, even though
each school maintained perpetual inventory records of textbooks,
there were no documented comparisons of the number of books on
28
Office of
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 39 ---
the inventory records to the number of books counted during the
physical inventories. During fiscal year 2008, textbook
expenditures totaled approximately $689,000, according to SCPS
records.
Recommendations
8. SCPS should develop comprehensive written policies and
procedures to govern the recording, accounting, and
safeguarding of equipment, including sensitive items costing
less than $1,000.
9. SCPS should develop formal policies and procedures for
accounting and controlling its textbooks, which include a
requirement that the physical count of textbooks be compared
to the inventory records.
29
Office of
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 40 ---
30
Office of
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 41 ---
Chapter 6
Information Technology Services
SCPS maintains and administers a computer network, with Internet
connectivity, which connects the individual schools’ local networks
to the computer resources located at the SCPS central offices.
SCPS has established a written technology plan, which includes a
comprehensive assessment of the technical needs of the schools.
The plan provides a vision and mission for technology in SCPS and
includes measurable goals and objectives.
However, we identified several areas in need of improvement. SCPS
needs to strengthen its policies and procedures over passwords and
accounts, and data back-up. SCPS should monitor security events
involving critical servers, adopt physical security and environmental
controls for the server room, and develop a comprehensive disaster
recovery plan.
Background
SCPS operates a wide area network connecting the various schools
within Somerset County. The SCPS Department of Technology
maintains and administers the SCPS network, academic and human
resources information applications, and other general computer
operations.
31
Office of
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 42 ---
Technology Plans Were Developed to Address Current
and Future Needs of SCPS
SCPS has developed a written technology plan, which includes a
comprehensive assessment of the technology needs of the schools.
The plan identifies each school’s information technology (IT) needs
and the actions to be taken to address those needs. The plan also
includes measurable goals and objectives, and addresses
professional development and IT related budgets. The plan is
periodically updated and monitored for implementation status of
identified actions.
Steps Should Be Taken to Ensure Adequate Security
Over IT Applications
Enhancements should be made to existing procedures to
ensure that all access is appropriate – Our review disclosed
several deficiencies in computer application security which
increased the vulnerability of certain SCPS automated systems,
programs, and data. SCPS’ policies for controlling passwords did
not require automatic password expirations nor establish a
minimum password length (to make the passwords more difficult to
hack). In addition, logging and reporting of security events for
critical servers was not enabled. Furthermore, unnecessary user
accounts existed on the server where the Financial and Payroll
applications resided. Finally, software updates had not been
installed on its production database, which made the database
vulnerable to security threats and to unauthorized modifications of
critical production data.
Physical controls over data processing functions should be
improved – The computer server room was controlled by a master
key; however, we determined that 44 individuals, who did not need
access to this room, were provided a key to the room. In addition,
the server room was not equipped with fire prevention devices.
Furthermore, although critical back-up files were created, those files
were stored in the same room as the original data. Accordingly,
critical data might be lost if the facility was destroyed in a disaster.
32
Office of
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 43 ---
SCPS Should Develop a Comprehensive Disaster
Recovery Plan
SCPS did not have a comprehensive disaster recovery plan (DRP) for
its computer systems. Specifically, SCPS had made no provision for
the following critical elements of a DRP:
• Alternate site processing arrangements
• Current and complete list of required hardware and software
components
• Current and complete network restoration procedures
• Current and complete list of applications prioritized for recovery
• Procedures for testing the DRP
Recommendations
10. SCPS should implement appropriate security measures to
safeguard its applications and data systems by improving
password protection, enabling logging and reporting of all
critical security events, eliminating unnecessary accounts, and
installing software updates. SCPS should also establish
adequate physical controls and safeguards for its computer
rooms and store backup copies of data from critical servers at
an appropriate offsite location.
11. SCPS should develop and implement a comprehensive
disaster recovery plan.
33
Office of
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 44 ---
34
Office of
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 45 ---
Chapter 7
Facilities Construction, Renovation, and
Maintenance
SCPS uses a comprehensive and public process to plan for
construction and renovation of school facilities. Six-year plans are
prepared and updated annually, and reflect input from the Board.
SCPS has followed a number of best practices that should enhance
project results and cost effectiveness in its Facilities and
Maintenance Department.
Nevertheless, for its maintenance and custodial operations, SCPS
had not established formal performance measures and related
benchmarks, and did not fully use its work order system to assess
program efficiency for both custodial and maintenance operations.
Also, there was a lack of documentation that preventive
maintenance had been performed, and SCPS should consider
implementing a formal customer feedback program. Furthermore,
SCPS did not formally determine the extent of its deferred
maintenance needs. Finally, SCPS did not solicit bids for several
facility-related purchases.
35
Office of
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 46 ---
Background
SCPS maintains 10 schools and other administrative and support
offices with a staff of 30 custodial and 7 maintenance personnel.
SCPS uses a six-year Capital Improvement Plan (CIP) to identify
ongoing and projected needs for new buildings and major
renovations. In the fiscal year 2010 CIP, necessary major
renovations, repairs, and systemic improvements to existing schools
over the next six years were estimated to cost $24.3 million.
Table 2 below compares SCPS fiscal year 2007 plant costs (that is,
maintenance and operational costs) with other similarly-sized school
systems in Maryland. The table presents two measures used to
assess plant costs: cost per student and cost per square foot.
These statistics show that SCPS facilities operations and
maintenance costs are generally higher than its peer group.
Table 2
Plant Cost Comparison Per Student and Per Square Foot
Fiscal Year 2007 (Unaudited)
Plant Costs Square Total
Per Per Footage Gross
School System
Total Student Square Per Square
(cid:110) Foot Student Footage
Somerset Co. $3,235,377 $1,112.96 $6.47 172.06 500,178
Talbot Co. 4,799,956 1,095.13 6.95 157.61 690,787
Garrett Co. 4,505,304 982.19 5.64 174.23 799,176
Dorchester Co. 4,412,890 955.17 5.31 179.74 830,410
Kent Co. 2,803,692 1,203.82 5.23 230.19 536,108
Average of
Comparable $4,130,461 $1,059.08 $5.78 185.44 714,120
Schools
Sources: MSDE Financial Data, MSDE Fact Book, Maryland Public School Construction Square Footage
Data (most recent data available)
(cid:110) - Based on Average Daily Enrollment 2006-2007
36
Office of
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 47 ---
A Number of Best Practices Were in Place to Enhance
the Efficiency and Effectiveness of the SCPS Facilities
and Maintenance Department
SCPS has instituted several best practices to enhance project
results and cost effectiveness in its Facilities and Maintenance
Department.
• A six-year Capital Improvement Plan has been developed that
reflects a comprehensive process involving the Board, public,
and county officials.
• Various processes have been implemented in order to reduce
the need for additional construction, including the use of
portable classrooms and the periodic evaluation of school
district boundaries.
• SCPS has recently implemented an in-house energy
conservation program directed toward reducing energy costs.
• SCPS participates in a consortium with other Eastern Shore
entities to purchase energy at the best possible terms for the
members of the consortium.
Certain Processes Should Be Implemented to Increase
the Effectiveness of Maintenance and Custodial
Operations
SCPS should develop a performance measurement system
that establishes standards and expectations for
maintenance and custodial operations – SCPS had not
implemented a performance measurement system to measure and
assess the efficiency of its maintenance and custodial operations,
both for internal self-evaluation purposes and for comparisons with
other systems. Furthermore, we were informed that SCPS had not
compared the costs of maintenance and custodial operations to
similarly-sized districts in Maryland or other states. Comparability
with other systems in Maryland could not necessarily be done
unilaterally since there would need to be a consensus on the
measures and methodology; however, other states (for example,
37
Office of
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 48 ---
Michigan, Florida, and Minnesota) have established measures and
benchmarks (such as maintenance expenditures per square foot) to
assist their school systems in the evaluation of costs and practices.
Use of the manual work order system could be enhanced to
improve management of maintenance operations – SCPS
uses a manual work order system to assign maintenance work and
track completion of assigned tasks. However, SCPS was not fully
using the system. Specifically, SCPS did not record estimated time
and cost information, the use of which could help SCPS to control
costs and assess performance of the departments and related
personnel. Although all work orders were reviewed along with
information related to the actual resources used to perform the
tasks, no information was recorded indicating the resources
expected to be used to perform the tasks, based on either past
history or industry guidebooks. The establishment of time and cost
estimates before work commences would enhance the
department’s efforts to evaluate efficiency and performance.
SCPS did not maintain documentation to substantiate that
required preventive maintenance work had been
performed – SCPS had implemented a preventive maintenance
program that included, among other details, preventive
maintenance (such as checking the operation of air conditioning
units and inspecting boilers) and custodial task schedules and
requirements. SCPS personnel indicated that periodic inspections
and evaluations of preventive maintenance and custodial work were
conducted; however, they did not document that all scheduled
preventive maintenance tasks were performed.
SCPS should consider implementing a formal customer
feedback program for facilities operations and
maintenance – SCPS does not use a formal customer feedback
program to address matters pertaining to the care and upkeep of its
facilities. A formal feedback program can be an effective tool to
gauge how well the department is serving the customers and to
make needed adjustments to improve service.
38
Office of
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 49 ---
SCPS Should Develop a Formal Process to Identify and
Address Its Deferred Maintenance Needs
SCPS’ capital improvement planning process did not formally
determine the extent and impact of its deferred maintenance.
Deferred maintenance is a practice of allowing infrastructure to
deteriorate by postponing prudent but non-essential repairs to save
cost, labor, and material. Generally, a policy of continuing deferred
maintenance will ultimately result in higher costs than if normal
maintenance had occurred. Although SCPS scheduled major
maintenance repairs as part of its capital improvement plan, SCPS
had not performed an analysis to identify, quantify, or prioritize
maintenance projects that have been deferred.
Bids Should Be Obtained for Facility-Related
Purchases
The Facilities and Maintenance Department did not always obtain
quotes or bids for facility-related purchases. As previously noted,
SCPS’ policy states that procurements over $25,000 are to be
formally bid, procurements between $10,000 and $25,000 require
three written price quotes from vendors, and procurements between
$5,000 and $9,999 require three oral price quotes from vendors.
Our test of 13 invoices totaling approximately $1.2 million disclosed
that no bids or quotes were received for 4 of these purchases
totaling $52,168. One of these purchases was for bleachers
totaling $26,998, and the remaining three purchases (three
separate projects, each in excess of $5,000) were for masonry work
totaling $25,170. The masonry work was performed by an SCPS
employee, which appears to violate SCPS’ ethics policy.
Recommendations
12. SCPS should develop a performance measurement system
that establishes standards and expectations for maintenance
and custodial operations, and report the measurement results
to the Board. SCPS should also fully use the existing work
order system for maintenance operations by recording
estimated labor and material costs and using the system as a
performance measurement and budgeting tool. Additionally,
SCPS should retain documentation of all preventive
39
Office of
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 50 ---
maintenance performed. Finally, SCPS should consider
implementing a formal customer feedback program to assist in
evaluating performance and improving maintenance and
custodial operations.
13. SCPS should develop a formal process to identify, prioritize,
plan, and report all deferred maintenance.
14. SCPS should comply with its procurement policy by obtaining
bids for facility-related purchases and ensure that contract
awards do not violate its ethics policy.
40
Office of
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 51 ---
Chapter 8
Transportation Services
SCPS used a number of recognized best practices to increase
student transportation efficiency, such as staggering school arrival
and dismissal times to enable certain buses to perform multiple
runs, combining middle school and high school bus runs to take
advantage of their close proximity and using central collection
points for transportation to the technical school.
Nevertheless, we noted areas where improvements could be made.
For example, SCPS did not use its automated routing software to
help efficiently plan bus routes and had not conducted any recent
documented cost benefit analysis of its decision to outsource
student transportation services. Also, SCPS did not have a written
policy establishing the criteria for determining bus contractor
payment rates. Furthermore, the methodology used to reimburse
the bus contractors for the purchase cost of buses may result in
paying $1.4 million more than necessary for buses purchased over
a 15-year period. In addition, SCPS had not developed formal
performance measures to monitor and evaluate the efficiency and
effectiveness of transportation services.
Background
SCPS is the second smallest school system in Maryland based on
student enrollment. Approximately 2,900 students are eligible for
student transportation. SCPS students were transported on a fleet
of 34 buses owned by 33 contractors hired by the school system.
Fiscal year 2008 transportation costs totaled $2.3 million. Of the
778,284 reported route miles for the 2007-2008 school year, 14
percent were for transporting disabled students.
41
Office of
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 52 ---
Table 3 below shows that SCPS’ cost per rider is among the lowest
of the four school systems that are of comparable size. SCPS cost
per mile is lower than three of the four comparable school systems.
Table 3
Comparison of Transportation Costs per Rider and per Mile
Fiscal Year 2008 (Unaudited)
Number of Eligible Miles Average Annual
Riders (in thousands) Expenditures Cost per
School System
Non- Non- (in
Disabled Disabled Rider Mile
Disabled Disabled thousands)
Somerset Co. 2,832 77 669 110 $2,270 $780 $2.91
Talbot Co. 2,838 13 595 27 2,541 891 4.08
Garrett Co. 4,413 45 1,069 70 3,893 873 3.42
Dorchester Co. 4,370 81 829 123 2,950 663 3.10
Kent Co. 1,951 47 482 121 1,727 864 2.86
Average of
Comparable 3,393 47 744 85 $2,778 $823 $3.37
Schools
Sources: MSDE 2007-2008 Fact Book
Several Best Practices Were In Place to Enhance
Student Transportation Services
The SCPS transportation department used several practices to
enhance bus operations:
• Staggering school arrival and dismissal times so buses can
make multiple runs on the same day
• Using central collection points for transportation to the technical
school to reduce the need for additional buses to transport the
affected students
• Combining middle school and high school students on the same
bus to take advantage of the close proximity of the schools and
to avoid sending multiple buses
• Assigning bus routes to drivers based on their proximity to the
routes to reduce the number of miles driven with no students on
the bus (deadhead miles)
• Providing transportation services only to students residing
outside the limits specified for walking to school or when the
conditions for walking are not considered safe
42
Office of
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 53 ---
Routing Procedures Should Be Enhanced and Routing
Software Should Be Used
Bus routing procedures should be more comprehensive –
SCPS needs to better document processes used to plan, review, and
revise bus routes and ensure that such processes include all
appropriate factors. Specifically, SCPS does not have adequate
documented procedures that instruct routers on how to plan,
review, and revise bus routes. The existing procedures provide only
a general guideline for routing and do not establish documented
policies for related areas such as bus loads (capacity) and
maximum student ride times.
SCPS should use its automated routing software – SCPS does
not use its electronic routing software to assist in developing
efficient bus routes. Recognizing the potential benefits of an
electronic routing system, SCPS had previously purchased routing
software in fiscal year 2006 for approximately $5,000; however,
usage of the software was discontinued because SCPS determined
that it was easier to formulate and update routes by hand.
Using routing software is a recognized best practice that can be
used to reduce the time it takes to design efficient routes, reduce
student ride time, and help ensure that routes minimize the number
of buses needed to transport students. In addition, the use of
routing software can automate current manual processes, such as
electronically mapping student addresses and developing routes.
It is current SCPS practice to use existing bus routes and then make
changes on an as-needed basis versus periodically reviewing routes
for efficiency. SCPS’ transportation department relies on school
administrators and bus drivers to notify it of problems with existing
bus routes (for example, the number of students exceeds the bus
capacity). Consequently, this policy forces personnel from the
transportation department to correct problems reactively without
necessarily ensuring the most efficient solution is found. This
practice could also have a potentially negative impact on route
efficiency. Our analysis of SCPS’ 2007-2008 and 2008-2009 bus
stop forms prepared by bus drivers, which listed the number of
students at each stop on given days, disclosed that on 77 routes
the buses were operated on average at 74 percent of SCPS
43
Office of
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 54 ---
capacity.5 This rate is reduced to 59 percent when considering only
elementary school bus routes. Implementation of the electronic
routing system could help in the development of more efficient bus
routes and assist in the periodic evaluation of routes.
Bus Contractor Rates Paid Were Not Based on
Documented Criteria
SCPS does not have a written policy establishing the criteria for
calculating the bus contractor table of payment rates, which
included an annual per vehicle allotment (PVA), bus driver wage
rates, maintenance and fuel costs per mile, and auxiliary fixed costs
per bus. In addition, SCPS personnel informed us that the bus rates
are adjusted each year to be competitive with similarly-sized local
education agencies (LEAs) by comparing its rates to other schools’
rates and then selecting rates that are close to the other LEAs
(primarily Wicomico County). For example, SCPS’ PVA is largely
based on that used by Wicomico County Public Schools. SCPS had
no policy to specify the method for establishing the various rates
and no documentation to substantiate the rates actually used.
More Can Be Done to Ensure Cost-Effective
Operations
Contractor pay should be periodically revised based on
current market conditions – SCPS pays contractors an annual
per vehicle allotment (PVA) for each bus. The PVA formula includes
reimbursement for the cost of the bus and a flat rate of return on
the investment (ROI). SCPS contractors receive the annual PVA
payment for the life of the bus or 15 years. In this regard, Maryland
law allows SCPS to use a 15-year life of the bus, rather than the 12-
year life used by most other LEAs. We were advised that SCPS has,
for at least the past 15 years, been paying bus contractors an
annual PVA based on amounts paid in other school systems
(primarily Wicomico County). Specifically, SCPS was using a flat 9.5
5 Like other LEAs, SCPS uses a lower capacity rate than the manufacturer’s
stated bus capacities. For example, SCPS determined the capacity for high,
middle, and elementary schools routes at 48, 50, and 72 respectively based on
72 passenger buses (manufacturer stated capacity).
44
Office of
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 55 ---
percent return on investment (ROI), which was not adjusted to
reflect market conditions. In addition, the cost reimbursement
component of the PVA was calculated as if the bus will only be in
operation for 10 years. Thus, since SCPS uses a 15-year bus life,
bus contractors are paid 150 percent of the bus’ cost over the life of
each bus (10 percent of the cost each year for 15 years).
The PVA is one of several elements used to determine payment
amounts to bus contractors. Bus contracts usually run for one-year
terms but are renewable from term-to-term without either party
being required to give notice of renewal and generally are renewed
for the same length of time as the approved useful life of the bus
(15 years).
To estimate the financial impact to SCPS of paying 150 percent of
the bus cost and using a 9.5% ROI over the life of a bus, we
calculated the PVA for each of the past 15 years (1995 to 2009)
using a 15-year cost reimbursement rate and the prime interest
rate6 as the ROI. Compared to our PVA results, SCPS’ annual PVA
payments per bus were from $1,682 to $6,111 higher than the
payments would have been had the prime rate that existed at the
time of purchase and a 15-year cost reimbursement been used in
the calculation. The effect is that, over the 15-year life of the 29
new buses put into service by contractors since 1995, we estimate
that SCPS will pay out approximately $1.4 million more than if the
prime rate and a 15-year cost reimbursement rate had been used.
Of the $1.4 million, $629,000 has already been paid out through
fiscal year 2009 and, unless changes are implemented, the
remaining $808,000 will be paid out during fiscal years 2010 to
2023. This analysis does not include the effects for any new bus
purchases that may be made after fiscal year 2009 and the lost
interest income that could have been earned by SCPS on the excess
amounts paid.
Bus contractor selection criteria should be revised – SCPS,
like many other Maryland school systems, uses an application
process and selects bus contractors based on certain criteria.
However, one of the requirements to be a SCPS bus contractor is
residency in Somerset County. SCPS believes this requirement
6 We used the prime rate since this rate was recommended in a November 1999
study commissioned by another Maryland school system. Also, in 1975 an
MSDE study recommended the prime rate as a reasonable prevailing interest
rate.
45
Office of
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 56 ---
helps promote business within the County. However, this policy
precludes bus contractors outside of the County from providing
student transportation services. According to an Assistant Attorney
General we contacted, this policy may be in violation of State and
federal laws dealing with equal protection and privileges and
immunities.
Periodic cost benefit analysis should be performed – SCPS
had not formally reevaluated its decision to have a bus fleet owned
by contractors. SCPS believes that a contractor-owned fleet is
beneficial due to the up-front capital outlay needed to buy buses,
the cost to operate maintenance shops, and the personnel-related
costs (such as healthcare) associated with an in-house fleet.
However, experiences in other states and Maryland school systems
have found that an in-house fleet, or even a mixture of an in-house
and outsourced fleet, may be more cost beneficial.
Fuel Payment Rates Were Not Reduced as Required by
Board Policy – SCPS did not reduce fuel rate payments made to
bus contractors to reflect a decline in fuel prices. Specifically, in
December 2007, the SCPS Board approved a sliding fuel scale that
allows for a monthly increase or reduction of $.01 per mile in the
fuel payment rate for every $.07 increase or reduction in the cost of
fuel. However, while the bus contractors received the proper fuel
adjustment increases, in December 2007, the transportation
director decided not to reduce fuel payments to fully reflect
declining fuel prices (that is, the maximum monthly reduction was
limited to $.03 per mile). This decision was not approved by the
Board.
We reviewed fuel payment adjustments for November 2008 through
February 2009 and noted that SCPS was paying bus contractors
$.05 to $.15 per mile more than the amount calculated per the
sliding scale. This resulted in overpayments of $4,400 to $11,900
per month, for a total overpayment of $34,429 for the
aforementioned period. After we brought this situation to SCPS’
attention, we were advised that the Board decided not to recover
these overpayments, although SCPS stated that it would adhere to
the fuel policy in the future.
46
Office of
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 57 ---
Control Over Payments to Bus Contractors Should Be
Enhanced
SCPS did not ensure the accuracy of certain payments to the bus
contractors. At the beginning of each school year, the contractors’
drivers completed a manifest, which included the total time and
miles driven on each route. SCPS uses the data recorded on these
manifests to calculate the bus driver wages and maintenance and
fuel cost components of the monthly payments to the contractors.
While SCPS performs observations each year for half the routes,
which included documenting the total time and mileage of the route,
it does not compare for accuracy the data from its observation to
the data reported by the contractors. Our limited test identified
some differences that resulted in small overpayments, thereby
demonstrating that a comparison of SCPS’ observations to
contractor supplied data could help ensure the propriety of
payments to the contractors
Performance Should Be Measured and Reported
Regularly to the Board
SCPS did not have a formal performance measurement system for
its transportation services. Performance measures that could be
developed and reported regularly to the Board include ridership
compared to bus capacity, transportation cost per student, bus
operating costs per mile, and number of accidents. This data
should also be used to provide ongoing monitoring of performance
and ensure overall accountability. The Government Finance Officers
Association recommends that program and service performance
measures be developed and used as an important component of
long-term strategic planning and decision making.
Recommendations
15. SCPS should better document all procedures used to
determine bus routes, including all appropriate factors that
comprise the route planning process and should fully use its
routing software to help ensure efficient services.
47
Office of
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 58 ---
16. SCPS should establish a written policy on how components of
the bus contractor table of rates are to be determined each
year. SCPS should maintain documentation that shows each
year how the rates were determined and that the policy was
adhered to.
17. SCPS should analyze bus contractors pay (including the PVA)
to determine whether the rates are reasonable and necessary.
In addition, SCPS should ensure that its bus contractor
selection requirements comply with all applicable laws and
regulations. Furthermore, SCPS should periodically prepare a
documented analysis to determine whether continued use of
outside contractors to provide student bus services is, in fact,
cost beneficial for the school system. Finally, SCPS should
adhere to the Board approved policy for fuel reimbursements
to bus contractors.
18. SCPS should use its observations of bus route times and
distances to ensure that the applicable payments to
contractors accurately reflect the actual bus services provided.
19. SCPS should develop a performance measurement system for
transportation services and periodically report the results to
the Board.
48
Office of
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 59 ---
Chapter 9
Food Services Operations
SCPS has implemented a number of best practices to help reduce
food service costs, such as participation in the United States
Department of Agriculture (USDA) commodity program and
membership in a multi-county food-purchasing cooperative. SCPS
also has adequate procedures in place to identify students eligible
for free and reduced-price meals under the federal National School
Meals Programs. However, SCPS should improve internal controls
over the procurement of food supplies and properly reflect all costs
in determining its food service department operating costs. In
addition, SCPS should establish a performance measurement
system for food services.
Background
Except for two schools (the technical school and an alternative
learning school), SCPS has a cooking cafeteria in which food is
prepared and served at each of the other eight schools. SCPS has
25 full-time and 7 part-time cafeteria employees (as of June 2008).
Fiscal year 2008 food service sales totaled $1.3 million. SCPS
reports for food service operations indicated that food service
expenditures exceeded revenues by $47,059 for fiscal year 2008.
See Table 4 on the next page for information regarding food
services.
49
Office of
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 60 ---
Table 4
Food Service Activity for Fiscal Year 2008
Average cost per meal $ 2.58
Number of meals served
Breakfast
Paid 47,697
Free 91,043
Reduced Price 10,799
149,539
Lunch
Paid 76,531
Free 187,725
Reduced Price 26,976
291,232
Meal Equivalents
A La Carte Meal 72,254
Snacks 3,720
Summer Meals 6,292
82,266
Total Meals Served 523,037
Schools 8
Full Kitchens 8
Full-time Employees 25
Part-time Employees 7
Revenues
Federal
Cash Payments $ 809,996
USDA Commodities 63,844
$ 873,840
Sales and other sources 348,994
State aid 81,654
Total Revenue (all sources) $ 1,304,488
Total Expenditures 1,351,547
Excess Expenditures over Revenues $ (47,059)
Source: SCPS Fiscal Year 2008 Audited Financial Statements, MSDE 2008 data,
and SCPS data
50
Office of
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 61 ---
Certain Best Practices Were in Place
SCPS has implemented several practices to improve food
service operations – These measures helped to both increase
operational efficiency and reduce food supply and material costs.
• SCPS participated in the United States Department of
Agriculture (USDA) commodities program, which is a free food
program. According to SCPS records, $64,000 in USDA
commodities was received in fiscal year 2008.
• SCPS participated in a food purchasing cooperative in order to
maximize its buying power and reduce food costs.
• SCPS maximized the use of convenience foods (heat and serve
items) to reduce the labor needed to prepare foods.
• SCPS monitored food consumption, adjusted food production,
and reheated certain items to reduce waste.
SCPS used several best practices to encourage
participation in the free and reduced-price meal programs
– The best practices included the use of a family application
process (instead of individual student applications) to
simultaneously qualify more students for the free or reduced-priced
meal programs. SCPS also used an automated point-of-sale system
in cafeterias which helps to prevent easy identification of
participating students thereby reducing any stigma associated with
participating in the program. For fiscal year 2008, 85 percent of
SCPS students eligible to receive free lunches and 83 percent of the
students eligible to receive reduced-price lunches actually
participated in the programs, which was higher than the averages of
similarly-sized school systems.
Internal Controls Over Purchasing of Food Supplies
Need to Be Improved
Our test of 36 fiscal year 2008 invoices totaling $25,716,
applicable to seven vendors, disclosed the following deficiencies:
• Supervisory personnel did not grant advance approval for
purchases on 32 invoices totaling $23,157. In addition, the
employee responsible for making these purchases also signed
51
Office of
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 62 ---
documentation of the receipt of the items and performed the
monthly inventories of food supplies.
• No bids were obtained, and formal contracts did not exist, for
purchases made from 3 of the 7 vendors included in our test.
SCPS policies require three bids for purchases of supplies in
excess of $5,000 and preparation of contracts with the lowest
responsible bidders. Consequently, there was no assurance that
the goods were purchased at the lowest cost and payments
were made based on the agreed-upon prices. Purchases from
these three vendors totaled $229,178 during fiscal year 2008.
Food Service Operations Should Recognize All
Applicable Costs and Performance Measures Should
Be Developed to Assess Efficiency
All applicable expenditures for food service operations were
not recognized – Although SCPS management stated that its
food service operations was designed to be self-sufficient, we noted
that SCPS general funds have been used to cover the costs for
certain food service related expenses. For example, the SCPS food
service department did not pay for the cafeterias’ share of utility
and custodial costs at SCPS schools; rather, these costs were
funded by general funds. SCPS did not include these and other
indirect costs in the annual budget prepared for food service
operations. According to documentation prepared by MSDE for
SCPS, estimated indirect costs totaled $207,000 for the food
service department for fiscal year 2007 (the most recent year for
which such costs were determined). If these indirect costs had
been included as a cost of food service operations, the operation
would have incurred a $235,000 deficit for fiscal year 2007 rather
than the reported deficit of approximately $28,000. Assuming those
indirect costs are relatively consistent from year to year, a much
larger deficit than the $47,059 shown in Table 4 would have been
incurred for fiscal year 2008 as well.
SCPS had not established a performance measurement
system to assess the efficiency of its food service
operations – Best practice models recommend the use of
benchmarks and goals to help school districts identify ways to
52
Office of
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 63 ---
increase efficiency and reduce food service costs. Such a system
should include realistic, justifiable benchmarks (or standards) and
goals, with a process for periodic measurement and analysis of
results. Examples of standards could include costs per meal, meal
participation rates, and expected ratios for meals prepared to meals
served.
Although SCPS calculated meals per labor hour, activity associated
with a la carte sales was not reflected in its calculation, which is
done by other local school systems. Furthermore, there was no
indication that the results, when available, were used to improve
food service operations. In addition, SCPS did not have other
comprehensive performance and cost-efficiency measures (such as
cost per meal and free or reduced price meal participation) in place
to provide management with information to evaluate the entire food
service program.
Recommendations
20. SCPS should improve controls over its purchase of food
supplies by requiring advance approval by independent
supervisory personnel for purchases and competitive bids in
accordance with SCPS policies, and by entering into formal
contracts with food suppliers, when applicable. In addition,
duties should be properly segregated over the procurement
and custody of food service items.
21. SCPS should identify all food service department costs,
including utility and custodial costs, to properly reflect the
department’s full operating costs. In addition, SCPS should
establish a performance measurement system to assist in
monitoring the efficiency of food service operations.
53
Office of
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 64 ---
54
Office of
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 65 ---
Chapter 10
School Board Operations and Oversight
Generally, the Board has adequate polices to govern the operations
of the school system. The Board meets periodically with the certified
public accounting firm to review the results of the audits of the
annual financial statements, the school activity fund, and federal
funds. In addition, the Board is actively involved in the development
of the SCPS annual budget.
Several opportunities exist for the Board to improve operations and
oversight. The Board should consider establishing an internal audit
function and a confidential hotline to enable employees and others
to report operational concerns and suspected fraud, waste, and
mismanagement. In addition, formal performance measures should
be implemented to assist the Board in its oversight function.
Finally, SCPS should ensure that all persons subject to the financial
disclosure requirements of its ethics policy file the disclosure
statements.
Background
SCPS is governed by a five-member board (excluding two student
representatives) elected by the voters of Somerset County. The
Board does not have an established committee structure due to its
size and generally acts in whole to carry out its oversight duties. To
assist in its oversight function, the Board has contracted with an
independent auditor to conduct audits of the SCPS financial
statements, federal programs, and student activity funds.
The Board is ultimately accountable for the success of the SCPS in
providing the children of Somerset County with a quality education,
55
Office of
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 66 ---
while wisely spending local, State, and federal funds. Following is
the SCPS Board’s stated beliefs and goals:
Beliefs
· We believe instruction must be rigorous and challenging with high
expectations for success.
· We believe students must be taught effective problem-solving and decision-
making skills.
· We believe in providing maximum technological learning and instructional
opportunities for all students.
· We believe an ethnically diverse curriculum promotes multi-culturalism.
· We believe SCPS employees are responsible to model good work ethics,
citizenship, moral and ethical values and social skills for all students.
· We believe SCPS is responsible for providing safe, clean, well disciplined
nurturing learning environments for all students.
· We believe continuous parental involvement is an essential component in
school programs.
· We believe parents are a child’s first educators and are therefore responsible
for providing a home environment that promotes education and learning as a
lifelong process.
· We believe in family-friendly and community-friendly welcoming schools.
· We believe administrators, faculty, support staff, parents and community
members must work collaboratively to accomplish the mission of our schools.
· We believe the school system benefits in working with community colleges,
four-year institutions and our business and service community to integrate
Pre-K-12 improvement initiatives and opportunities for SCPS students.
Mission
The Mission of Somerset County Public Schools is to unite the best efforts of our
entire community in order to assure that all students achieve high standards,
graduate from high school, and are equipped with the skills and behaviors
needed to attain success in a rapidly changing world.
Goals
Goal I: Student Achievement:
Achievement will improve for each student so that on or before 2013-14, all
students will reach or exceed high standards of proficiency in reading,
language arts, mathematics, and science.
Goal II: High Qualified Educators
By 2005-2006, all students will be taught by highly qualified teachers who
meet the County, State, and Federal criteria.
Goal III: Safe, Quality Environment
All Somerset County Public School students will be educated in learning
environments that are safe, drug free, and conducive to learning.
Source: SCPS Strategic Plan for Student Services at
http://www.somerset.k12.md.us/
56
Office of
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 67 ---
Certain Oversight Has Been Put in PlaceRegarding
SCPS Operations
The SCPS Board uses a number of methods to oversee the
operations of SCPS.
• The Board contracts annually for the audit of its Annual Financial
Report.
• The Board receives and discusses detailed budget and
expenditure information as part of the budget approval process.
• Board members receive an expenditure report each month with
comparisons to budget amounts.
The Board Should Take Additional Steps to Assist in
Governance of SCPS
The Board should consider establishing an internal auditor
function – SCPS does not have an internal auditor. The use of an
internal auditor, independent of school system management, is a
recommended best practice of the Government Finance Officers
Association (GFOA). The GFOA notes that internal auditors
commonly assist directors in monitoring the design and proper
functioning of internal controls and procedures, and can play a
valuable role in conducting performance audits, special
investigations, and studies. As cited in this report, our audit
identified certain deficiencies in the SCPS system of internal control,
such as procedures over disbursements.
The Board should consider establishing a confidential
hotline – We noted that a confidential hotline had not been
implemented to enable employees and others to report suspected
fraud, waste, or mismanagement. If such a process was
established, the internal audit position could conduct the initial
investigations of information received via the hotline or direct the
information to appropriate officials, such as law enforcement.
The Board should ensure that comprehensive performance
measures are adopted and reported for key operations –
The SCPS budget does not contain goals, objectives, and financial
related performance measures. Performance information can
57
Office of
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 68 ---
assist the Board in overseeing and evaluating the progress of its
budget and Master Plan. Examples of useful performance
measures may include comparisons, such as transportation and
facility cost per student and cost per school meal served. When
implemented correctly, financial and efficiency performance
measures can be used to assist in decision-making processes, such
as allocating resources and budgeting, and to report on
departmental effectiveness and efficiency.
The Board should ensure its ethics policy is followed – The
Board has adopted a detailed ethics policy that conforms to State
law and includes provisions for conflicts of interest and financial
disclosure. All provisions of this policy, except for financial
disclosure, are applicable to Board members as well as all SCPS
employees. SCPS established an Ethics Panel consisting of the
Board attorney and two other members, who are not subject to the
authority of the Board of Education, to interpret ethics policies and
provide advice on policy implementation. The Panel also reviews
and rules on any reported complaints of ethics violations. According
to the ethics policy, annual financial disclosure statements are
required to be filed by Board members, the Superintendent,
Assistant Superintendent, and other administrators (such as
Director of Finance). We reviewed the related statements for
calendar year 2008. Our review disclosed that 2 of the 12 persons
required to file disclosure statements for 2008 had not done so.
SCPS was not aware that the required financial disclosure
statements had not been filed until we brought this matter to its
attention.
Recommendation
22. The Board should enhance its oversight of SCPS operations by
considering the establishment of an internal audit function
and a hotline for the confidential reporting of operational
issues and suspected fraud, waste, and mismanagement. In
addition, the Board should adopt comprehensive performance
measures in key operational areas, such as transportation,
food service, and facilities management, to assist in its
oversight duties; such data should be periodically reviewed by
the Board. Furthermore, the Board should ensure that all
required financial disclosure statements are filed.
58
Office of
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 69 ---
Chapter 11
Other Financial Controls
This chapter addresses the management of cash, risk, health care
costs, and long-term debt such as lease/purchase agreements.
SCPS had procedures in place to govern its cash and risk
management, and SCPS is not permitted to issue bonds or other
long-term debt instruments to finance capital or operational needs.
However, SCPS did not establish sufficient controls to ensure the
propriety of health care costs.
Risk and Cash Management Best Practices Were in
Place
For risk management, SCPS uses a combination of self-insurance
and membership in the Maryland Association of Boards of
Education (MABE) Workers Compensation Pool. The school system
participates in the MABE Group Insurance Pool and the Workmen’s
Compensation Group Self-Insurance Fund for its general liability,
property, and workmen’s compensation insurance coverage.
According to the audited financial statements as of June 30, 2008,
settlements have not exceeded insurance coverage for the past
three years. To control workers’ compensation costs, SCPS used a
variety of methods such as an informal return to work program.
Furthermore, SCPS invested its cash in either FDIC insured deposits
or deposits that are collateralized with collateral that is held in
SCPS’ name. These investments are in accordance with the types
permitted by the Annotated Code of Maryland. According to SCPS’
audited financial statements, investments totaled $3.2 million as of
June 30, 2008.
59
Office of
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 70 ---
SCPS Should Take Steps to Verify the Propriety of
Health Care Costs
SCPS self-insures its health benefits. In this regard, SCPS is a
member of the Eastern Shore of Maryland Educational Consortium
(ESMEC) Health Alliance, which pools the buying power of six local
school systems to negotiate more favorable insurance rates.
Specifically, SCPS provides health benefit coverage to active and
retired employees through a modified billing arrangement with a
commercial insurance carrier. SCPS makes a monthly payment and
at the end of each coverage period (annually), settles with the
carrier for the difference between amounts paid and actual claims
and expenses. For fiscal year 2008, SCPS made payments totaling
$4.8 million, and was eligible for a refund of $47,000.
ESMEC has engaged consultants to review the commercial
insurance carrier’s performance and to seek recoveries when
warranted. However, SCPS did not take certain actions that could
help contain health care costs. Specifically, SCPS did not have a
process in place to verify the authenticity of program participants
and their listed dependents.
According to recommended practices published by the GFOA, health
care cost containment is a critical component of long-term financial
planning and budgeting. The GFOA recommends the establishment
of a cost containment program including specific steps such as:
evaluating plan design, management of vendors, management of
employee health, aggregation, and cost sharing. Although some of
these recommended steps (cost sharing by participating in ESMEC)
were implemented by SCPS, more can be done.
Recommendation
23. SCPS should institute processes to verify the authenticity of
health care program participants and their listed dependents.
60
Office of
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 71 ---
Audit Scope, Objectives,
and Methodology
Scope
We conducted a performance audit to evaluate the effectiveness
and efficiency of the financial management practices of the
Somerset County Public Schools (SCPS). We conducted this audit
under the authority of the State Government Article, Section 2-
1220(e) of the Annotated Code of Maryland and performed it in
accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards.
Those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to
obtain sufficient, appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable
basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit
objectives. We believe that the evidence obtained provides a
reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our
audit objectives.
Objectives
We had two broad audit objectives:
1. To evaluate whether the SCPS procedures and controls were
effective in accounting for and safeguarding its assets
2. To evaluate whether the SCPS policies provided for the
efficient use of financial resources
In planning and conducting our audit, we focused on the major
financial-related areas of operations based on assessments of
materiality and risk. Our audit approach, including the specific
objectives of our local school system audits, was approved on
September 14, 2004 by the Joint Audit Committee of the Maryland
General Assembly in accordance with the enabling legislation. As
approved, the audit objectives excluded reviewing and assessing
61
Office of
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 72 ---
student achievement, curriculum, teacher performance, and other
academic-related areas and functions. We also did not review the
activities, financial or other, of any parent teacher association,
group, or funds not under the local board of education’s direct
control or management. Finally, we did not evaluate the SCPS
Comprehensive Education Master Plan or related updates.
Methodology
To accomplish our objectives, we reviewed applicable State laws
and regulations pertaining to public elementary and secondary
education, as well as policies and procedures issued and
established by SCPS. We also interviewed personnel at SCPS, the
Maryland State Department of Education (MSDE), and staff at other
local school systems in Maryland (as appropriate7). Our audit
procedures included inspections of documents and records, and
observations of SCPS operations. We also tested transactions and
performed other auditing procedures that we considered necessary
to achieve our objectives, generally for the period from July 1, 2007
through December 31, 2008. For our audit work on revenue and
federal grants, we primarily relied on the results of an independent
audit of fiscal year 2008 activity.
In addition, we contacted a number of other state auditors’ offices
and legislative program evaluation agencies that had a history of
conducting audits or reviews of local school systems. We
interviewed those officials and inspected their work programs and
resultant reports to identify specific audit techniques and
operational practices at schools that could be adapted for our
school system audits. Finally, we used certain statistical data--
including financial and operational--compiled by the MSDE from
various informational reports submitted by the Maryland local
school systems. This information was used in this audit report for
background or informational purposes, and was deemed
reasonable. For comparison purposes, information provided was
generally limited to those Maryland school systems of similar sizes,
based on student enrollment and/or system budget. In many cases,
this information was self reported by the school systems. The data
7 During the course of the audit, it was necessary to contact other systems to
identify policies or practices for comparative purposes and analysis.
62
Office of
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 73 ---
were neither audited nor independently verified by us. Finally,
information provided in this report was obtained from various
reports readily available during our fieldwork.
Other Independent Auditors
When developing the approach for the audits of school system
financial management practices, a consideration was the reliance
on the work of other independent auditors to the extent practicable
to avoid unnecessary duplication of audit effort. With respect to
SCPS, the results of other auditors that we considered were
reported in three distinct audit reports: one related to the
administration of its federal grants; second, the management letter
from the audit of its financial statements audit; and third,
independent audits of the school activities and cafeteria funds.
During the course of this audit, we relied on these results. We
performed certain steps to satisfy ourselves as to the reliability of
the reported results of the independent federal grants audits of the
SCPS federal financial assistance programs for compliance with
federal laws and regulations and the SCPS financial statement and
school activity and cafeteria funds audits. Accordingly, we
significantly reduced the scope of our work in Chapter 1 “Revenue
and Billing Cycle,” and in Chapter 2 “Federal Funds.”
Limitations of Internal Control
SCPS management is responsible for establishing and maintaining
effective internal control. Internal control is a process designed to
provide reasonable assurance that objectives pertaining to the
reliability of financial records, effectiveness and efficiency of
operations including safeguarding of assets, and compliance with
applicable laws, rules, and regulations are achieved.
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud
may nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of
any evaluation of internal control to future periods are subject to the
risk that conditions may change or compliance with policies and
procedures may deteriorate.
In addition to the conditions included in this report, other less
significant findings were communicated to SCPS that did not
warrant inclusion in this report.
63
Office of
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 74 ---
Fieldwork and SCPS Responses
We conducted our fieldwork from February 2009 to August 2009.
The SCPS response to our findings and recommendations is
included as an appendix to this report.
64
Office of
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 76 ---
Somerset County Public Schools
Responses to Legislative Audit
Revenue and Billing Cycle
Recommendation 1
SCPS should ensure that all receipts are immediately recorded and safeguarded until
deposit, and that checks are restrictively endorsed upon receipt. In addition, an
employee independent of the cash receipts process should verify that all recorded
receipts were deposited.
Response: We agree with the recommendation and will implement the process of
recording cash receipts and restrictively endorsing checks as received. We agree
with the need for an independent verification of the cash receipts and will review
staff assignments to identify another person; however, with a small division,
segregation of duties is challenging.
Federal Funds / Grants
Recommendation 2
SCPS should document its efforts to identify all students eligible for Medicaid-
subsidized services.
Response: We agree with the recommendation in that identification and
documentation of all MA eligible students is critical. As a small county, we are able
to check all special education students (including 504 students) within the county
using the MA Electronic Verification system. We will continue checking all students;
going forward we will document the process of verification for review.
Procurement and Disbursement Cycle
Recommendation 3
SCPS should amend its existing policies to require Board approval for all
procurements over a specified amount and to address all categories of purchases,
including services and sole source procurements.
Response: We agree with the recommendation and will update Board policies in the
next revision cycle.
Recommendation 4
SCPS should improve controls over its invoice processing system by segregating
incompatible functions and restricting access to critical system functions to only
those employees who need the capabilities to perform their job duties. Furthermore,

--- Page 77 ---
SCPS should restrict access to the signature plate to employees who are
independent of the invoice processing functions.
Response: We agree with the recommendation and will reduce this number to four.
For the record, we do want to document that other controls are in place that restrict
access to the check printer and signature plate. The check printer is maintained in
an upstairs closet (there is no elevator), pre-printed check stock is not used and the
signature plate is separate from the printer. Prior to and during the audit the door
had been opened daily to facilitate the authorized individuals coming upstairs to print
checks. This practice has now been discontinued. We remain firm in our belief that
there was no significant risk.
Recommendation 5
SCPS should obtain goods through a competitive procurement process in accordance
with its policies and fully document procurement decisions. Furthermore, SCPS
should ensure that it receives available discounts and that it documents analyses
regarding extending contracts without rebidding.
Response: Two points in the Finding Narrative need clarification. One, the computer
equipment purchase was taken from the State bid list, discussed with the vendor
who then provided a total cost below the amount on the bid list. We agree with the
recommendation to competitively bid all procurements. However, we must be
forthright and note in the absence of a Purchasing Department, the additional steps
to verify appropriate discounts cannot take precedence over other fiscal and
instructional priorities.
We agree with the recommendation to formally document analysis extending
contracts; however, the examples cited were for “services,” which legally are not
required to be bid. We will identify sole source procurements and in items such as
the ones cited above. We will document how the change would have been
detrimental to the years of work invested in setting up and using the data warehouse
($62,492 hosting services).
Human Resources and Payroll
Recommendation 6
SCPS should ensure that payroll functions are adequately separated and that critical
system access capabilities are granted in accordance with those functions. In
addition, SCPS should ensure that all payroll-related transactions and information
recorded in the system are reviewed and approved, at least on a test basis, by an
employee independent of the payroll processing function using supporting
documentation.

--- Page 78 ---
Response: We agree with the recommendation; however, with limited staff it is
difficult to completely segregate duties. The Director of Finance will continue the
practice of periodic random checking and reviewing information until such time as
staff can be increased. We believe this current practice validates this audit’s note of
no evidence of any unauthorized payments.
Recommendation 7:
SCPS should expand its workforce planning to include key non-instructional positions
in critical operational units.
Response: We agree with the recommendation. We wish to make note that all
administrators are charged with developing future leaders as part of their annual
evaluation; however, we agree that a formal plan for workforce development is
necessary and would be beneficial.
Inventory Control and Accountability
Recommendation 8
SCPS should develop comprehensive written policies and procedures to govern the
recording, accounting, and safeguarding of equipment, including sensitive items
costing less than $1,000.
Response: We agree with this recommendation and we have recognized the need for
these controls for several years but have been fiscally unable to dedicate time and
staff to making this become a priority. Additional staffing is necessary to fully
implement this recommendation.
Recommendation 9
SCPS should develop formal policies and procedures for accounting and controlling
its textbooks, which include a requirement that the physical count of textbooks be
compared to the inventory records.
Response: We agree with the recommendation and a draft policy has been written
and will be presented to the Board. We will be able to extend the Media Center
inventory control system to include a comprehensive site textbook inventory.
Information Technology Services
Recommendation 10
SCPS should implement appropriate security measures to safeguard its applications
and data systems by improving password protection, enabling logging and reporting
of all critical security events, eliminating unnecessary accounts, and installing
software updates. SCPS should also establish adequate physical controls and

--- Page 79 ---
safeguards for its computer rooms and store backup copies of data from critical
servers at an appropriate offsite location.
Response: We disagree with this recommendation. We agree in theory that it would
be good to have the ability to set these controls over the passwords in the student
information system; however, it does not provide a direct way to implement these
recommendations. We also disagree with this recommendation as it is referring to
accounts that access the database which is in the background of the student
information system. According to the student information system vendor, a user in
the system does not have the ability to access these accounts. We do not have the
ability to implement or change any controls over these accounts.1
We disagree with the recommendation regarding the logging and reporting of security
events. The student information system vendor does not recommend enabling
database logging and SCPS does not have the ability to make changes to the
database. The vendor’s representative stated “Not only do I recommend that you not
make any changes to your database but you as a customer do not have the ability to
perform these changes. Direct modifications to the database outside of our support
are not something that we can support you in”.1
We agree with the recommendation to improve physical controls and safeguards for
the computer room. The school where the computer room is located is currently
going through a three year renovation project and these items will be taken care of
as part of the planned project.
Although we agree in theory with the recommendation that a backup be kept at a
secure offsite location, the implementation is not as simple as storing tapes offsite.
The student information system server does not backup to tapes, due to the large
volumn of data. Currently the data is being copied to a second server which is
located in the same room. This backup server cannot be moved to another location
because it serves other purposes at the school. SCPS will be purchasing additional
hard drives and enclosures in order to be able to swap out the drives and move the
backups offsite. Backup drives will be stored at another SCPS location which is 6.3
miles away from the current computer room location. A schedule for manually
swapping out hard drives will be established.
1Auditor’s Comment: With respect to passwords used to access SCPS’ student
information system, we acknowledge that SCPS does not have the capability to enforce
certain password provisions through software security settings. Nevertheless, at a
minimum, SCPS should establish a password policy to define attributes such as
password length to mitigate the risks involved. With respect to SCPS’ database, despite
its response to the contrary, SCPS does have the capability to improve password
protection over passwords used to access the database and to enable logging of critical
security events related to its database activities.

--- Page 80 ---
Recommendation 11
SCPS should develop and implement a comprehensive disaster recovery plan.
Response: SCPS does have a DRP in place and we agree that it can be improved with
the addition of the above mentioned items, with one exception. We will develop all of
the lists and procedures mentioned above and add them into our current DRP. The
exception is the recommendation for “Alternative site processing arrangements”. A
“best practices” solution for this would involve contracting with a vendor to provide
this service. Funding is currently not available for a solution involving an outside
vendor. We believe our revised backup procedures will be adequate to enable us to
get our student information system server back online in the event of a system wide
disaster. Procedure for this solution will be added to the DRP.
Facilities
Recommendation12
SCPS should develop a performance measurement system that establishes
standards and expectations for maintenance and custodial operations, and report
the measurement results to the Board. SCPS should also fully use the existing work
order system for maintenance operations by recording estimated labor and material
costs and using the system as a performance measurement and budgeting tool.
Additionally, SCPS should retain documentation of all preventive maintenance
performed. Finally, SCPS should consider implementing a formal customer feedback
program to assist in evaluating performance and improving maintenance and
custodial operations.
Response: We agree that in an ideal world, a performance measurement system
would be a needed enhancement; however, with limited staff and limited funding,
implementation will be delayed. We will however, research various systems and
report findings to the Board including potential benefits and risks. Research to date
indicates that the Technology Division’s work order system could also be applied to
maintenance operations. It provides the ability to control priorities and analyze
effectiveness.
Recommendation 13
SCPS should develop a formal process to identify, prioritize, plan, and report all
deferred maintenance.
Response: We agree with the recommendation; however, we have been prioritizing
maintenance projects based on available funds both within the Operating Budget
and Capital Improvement Funding sources. The process will be formalized and
documented.
Recommendation 14
SCPS should comply with its procurement policy by obtaining bids for facility-related
purchases and ensure that contract awards do not violate its ethics policy.

--- Page 81 ---
Response: With regard to the bleachers referenced, the construction manager of the
project (Somerset Intermediate School New Construction) obtained price quotes,
reviewed them and recommended the best price to be with the same firm that was
contracted for the project to provide the gymnasium equipment. With regard to the
masonry work, it is important to note that these were three distinct and separate
jobs. One of these three jobs was an emergency situation which should have been
Board approved but was not. This process will be more closely monitored and
corrected with future projects.
Transportation Services
Recommendation 15
SCPS should better document all procedures used to determine bus routes, including
all appropriate factors that comprise the route planning process and should fully use
its routing software to help ensure efficient services.
Response: We agree with the recommendation and will formalize the process and
documentation. It should be noted that in recent years, we have had two separate
consultants provide feedback on route efficiency. With the sprawling layout of the
county, sparse population, minimal roads, and the consideration for student ride
times, options are extremely limited.
Recommendation 16
SCPS should establish a written policy on how components of the bus contractor
table of rates are to be determined each year. SCPS should maintain documentation
that shows each year how the rates were determined and that the policy was
adhered to.
Response: We agree with the recommendation and will be taking a policy to the
Board in the immediate future.
Recommendation 17
SCPS should analyze bus contractors pay (including the PVA) to determine whether
the rates are reasonable and necessary. In addition, SCPS should ensure that its
bus contractor selection requirements comply with all applicable laws and
regulations. Furthermore, SCPS should periodically prepare a documented analysis
to determine whether continued use of outside contractors to provide student bus
services is, in fact, cost beneficial for the school system. Finally, SCPS should adhere
to the Board approved policy for fuel reimbursements to bus contractors.
Response: We agree with the recommendation; however, the PVA factor is part of
the competitive process in procuring contractors; changes could hamper our ability to

--- Page 82 ---
attract and maintain contractors. We will investigate the legality of adjusting PVAs,
the potential risks in so doing and take the findings to the Board for a final decision.
Response: We agree with the recommendation that cost benefit studies provide
useful information; however, we are confident that the current use of outside vendors
(contractors) is the most economical option for Somerset County. With dollars
scarce, we cannot make such a study a priority at this time. It should be noted that
in recent years, we have had two separate consultants provide feedback on route
efficiency. With the sprawling layout of the county, sparse population, minimal roads,
and the consideration for student ride times, options are extremely limited.
Having experienced (in a negative manner) the recovery of excess payments during
the period January – June, 2008, the Board, in a closed session, advised no recovery
efforts be made for November, 2008 – February, 2009. We agree that this should
have been formally approved in open session.
Recommendation 18
SCPS should use its observations of bus route times and distances to ensure that the
applicable payments to contractors accurately reflect the actual bus services
provided.
Response: We have been verifying bus contractor manifests and going forward will
institute a signature process for documentation. Additionally, the new video cameras
installed in buses this year document miles; this documented information will also be
used to verify the validity of the bus manifests.
Recommendation 19
SCPS should develop a performance measurement system for transportation
services and periodically report the results to the Board.
Response: We agree that in an ideal world, a performance measurement system
would be a needed enhancement and will research various systems and report
findings to the Board including potential benefits and risks.
Food Services Operations
Recommendation 20
SCPS should improve controls over its purchase of food supplies by requiring
advance approval by independent supervisory personnel for purchases and
competitive bids in accordance with SCPS policies, and by entering into formal
contracts with food suppliers, when applicable. In addition, duties should be properly
segregated over the procurement and custody of food service items.
Response: We agree with the recommendation; however, it will be difficult to
implement with limited staff. We currently manage internal control through

--- Page 83 ---
predetermined order forms (to limit item choice) and specific inventory control and
monitoring. The FNS Coordinator will ensure that all orders are pre-approved and will
use this information when reviewing monthly invoices to be paid. Small schools with
limited staffing are challenged to provide the recommended segregation of duties.
Recommendation 21
SCPS should identify all food service department costs, including utility and custodial
costs, to properly reflect the department’s full operating costs. In addition, SCPS
should establish a performance measurement system to assist in monitoring the
efficiency of food service operations.
Response: We do not agree with the recommendation and further cite that it is not
our practice to pass indirect costs to other Federal programs received.2
School Board Operations
Recommendation 22
The Board should enhance its oversight of SCPS operations by considering the
establishment of an internal audit function and a hotline for the confidential
reporting of operational issues and suspected fraud, waste, and mismanagement. In
addition, the Board should adopt comprehensive performance measures in key
operational areas, such as transportation, food service, and facilities management,
to assist in its oversight duties; such data should be periodically reviewed by the
Board. Furthermore, the Board should ensure that all required financial disclosure
statements are filed.
Response: We agree with the recommendation; however, it cannot take priority over
needed resources for students during this current economic environment.
We agree with the need to expand whistleblower protection through a separate
policy. Some protection now exists in Policy 700-4 which deals with harassment. We
encourage open communication, investigate all concerns and take appropriate
action while honoring the confidentiality of all involved. With limited resources
establishing a fraud hotline cannot be a priority at this time.
2Auditor’s Comment: SCPS indicated that it did not agree to identify all food service
department costs, including indirect costs. We continue to believe that SCPS should
allocate indirect costs to the food service department so that the department’s full
operating costs can be determined and reported to the Board.

--- Page 84 ---
We agree that in an ideal world, a performance measurement system would be a
needed enhancement. We will research various systems and report findings to the
Board including potential benefits and risks.
We agree with the recommendation and will implement a detailed check off process
and system to ensure all that all disclosures are completely investigated and a
response returned in a timely manner.
Other Financial Controls
Recommendation 23
SCPS should institute processes to verify the authenticity of health care program
participants and their listed dependents.
Response: We agree with the recommendation and will request that the vendor
annually provide a list of individuals for whom claims have been paid for our review
and validation that each individual is in fact a SCPS employee or eligible dependent.
During the next open enrollment period, we will verify enrollment data and document
that verification.

--- Page 85 ---
A T
UDIT EAM
Stephen C. Pease, CPA
Audit Manager
Richard L. Carter, CISA
Information Systems Audit Manager
Ken H. Johanning, CFE
Senior Auditor
Amanda L. Roller
Information Systems Senior Auditor
R. Frank Abel, CPA, CFE
Joseph E. McWilliams
Staff Auditors
Cristen M. Ervin
Information Systems Staff Auditor