Title: Review of Community College Audit Reports - Fiscal Year Ending June 30, 2011
Date: 11/01/2012
Type: Special Reports and Letters
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5a945d3dcc9d72404c150b3f
Extracted: 2025-06-18T09:02:44.505877
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Review of Community College Audit Reports
Fiscal Year Ending June 30, 2011
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
 This report and any related follow-up correspondence are available to the public through the
Office of Legislative Audits at 301 West Preston Street, Room 1202, Baltimore, Maryland
21201. The Office may be contacted by telephone at 410-946-5900, 301-970-5900, or 1-877-
486-9964.
 Electronic copies of our audit reports can be viewed or downloaded from our website at
http://www.ola.state.md.us.
 Alternate formats may be requested through the Maryland Relay Service at 1-800-735-2258.
 The Department of Legislative Services – Office of the Executive Director, 90 State Circle,
Annapolis, Maryland 21401 can also assist you in obtaining copies of our reports and related
correspondence. The Department may be contacted by telephone at 410-946-5400 or 301-
970-5400.

--- Page 4 ---
2

--- Page 5 ---
Purpose of Review and Background Information
In accordance with the provisions of the Education Article, Section 16-315(h) of
the Annotated Code of Maryland, we have reviewed the audit reports that must be
filed by 15 of the State’s community colleges with the Maryland Higher
Education Commission (MHEC) for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2011. We
reviewed these audit reports to determine compliance with the applicable statutes
and the guidelines promulgated by MHEC. We also reviewed the reports to
determine if any of the community colleges had deficit balances in unrestricted
net assets, or uninsured/uncollateralized bank deposits. This report contains the
results of that review.
According to the State's records, State aid totaling approximately $258.1 million
for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2011 was granted to 15 of Maryland’s 16
community colleges. This aid primarily consisted of funding based on cost and
student enrollment data. In addition, it included certain retirement benefits and
various other grants. The remaining college (Baltimore City Community College)
is a budgetary unit of the State and receives an annual State appropriation.
Baltimore City Community College is not subject to the Education Article,
Section 16-315(h) of the Annotated Code of Maryland; however, it obtains annual
financial statement audits that are conducted by a certified public accounting
firm. The College is also subject to fiscal compliance audits by the Office of
Legislative Audits. We issue separate reports on the College, which contain
information regarding the results of these audits.
The Education Article, Section 16-315(a) of the Annotated Code of Maryland
requires the Maryland Higher Education Commission (MHEC) to adopt
guidelines for the preparation of annual audit reports on the colleges. The
guidelines promulgated by MHEC require independent auditors to express
opinions as to the fairness of presentation of the colleges’ financial statements as
well as to the cost and student enrollment data used for calculating the State aid to
the colleges. The guidelines also require the auditors to issue management letters
containing all material weaknesses in the colleges’ systems of internal controls.
While not required, many of the auditors issue management letters that contain
additional recommendations that were not considered material weaknesses.
3

--- Page 6 ---
Results of Review
Audit Reports
All 15 audit reports for fiscal year 2011 were filed timely.
Our review disclosed that all 15 community college audit reports were filed
timely with MHEC for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2011.
The State’s community colleges are required by law to file annual audit reports
within 90 days of the fiscal year end (June 30) unless an extension is granted.
All audit reports expressed unqualified opinions; however, two reports were
not presented in accordance with generally accepted auditing standards.
Our review disclosed that all 15 community college audit reports for the fiscal
year ended June 30, 2011 contained unqualified opinions from their auditors.
An unqualified opinion is issued when the auditor states that the applicable
financial statements are presented fairly, in all material respects, in conformity
with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America.
However, 2 of the 15 community colleges’ audit reports reviewed for fiscal year
2011 were not presented in accordance with certain generally accepted auditing
standards. Specifically, one community college’s audit report (Wor-Wic
Community College) did not express opinions on all opinion units included in the
College’s basic financial statements. In this regard, the independent auditor’s
report did not express an opinion regarding the College’s aggregate remaining
fund information (that is, the College’s Fiduciary Fund financial statements). In
addition, one other community college’s audit report (Frederick Community
College) did not describe the degree of responsibility assumed in relation to prior-
period financial information presented in the College’s basic financial statements,
which were audited by a different certified public accounting firm. MHEC
advised us that it would notify the community colleges of the deficiencies and
ensure that the deficiencies are corrected in future audits.
MHEC’s audit guidelines require the auditors to express opinions as to the
fairness of the presentation of the colleges’ financial statements and that the audits
be performed in accordance with generally accepted auditing standards.
4

--- Page 7 ---
Financial Statements
Two community college’s financial statements disclosed deficit balances in
the unrestricted portion of their net assets at June 30, 2011.
Our review disclosed two colleges with deficit balances in the unrestricted
component of their net assets as of June 30, 2011. Specifically, Anne Arundel
and Carroll Community Colleges had unrestricted net assets deficits of
$5,735,738 and $4,769,815, respectively. Furthermore, this situation has been
noted in regard to the financial statements for Carroll Community College for
each fiscal year since 2009. An unrestricted net assets deficit balance represents
the costs of current or past services that will need to be financed in future periods
and could indicate a potential financial problem.
We did not perform a detailed analysis to determine the cause of these deficits;
nevertheless, the Colleges’ financial statements and accompanying notes
contained certain pertinent information relative to the deficits. Specifically, both
Colleges’ financial statements disclosed that the decrease in net assets
experienced during fiscal year 2011 was due in part to the other post employment
benefit liability which increased by $3.8 million for Anne Arundel Community
College and $2.4 million for Carroll Community College during fiscal year 2011.
Anne Arundel Community College’s financial statements also identified a $10.4
million transfer made to the County (to offset a budget shortfall) as the primary
reason for the decrease in unrestricted net assets.
Generally accepted accounting principles specify that liabilities for post
employment benefits (such as healthcare benefits), which are deferred until
retirement or another future event, be recognized in the years in which the
employee provides services rather than during the postemployment period when
payments are made.
Management Letters
Management letters for fiscal year 2011 included a total of 22
recommendations for improvement, including a total of 5 recommendations
considered to be material weaknesses in two colleges’ systems of internal
control.
We reviewed the management letters applicable to the audits of the community
colleges that were filed with MHEC for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2011. Our
5

--- Page 8 ---
review disclosed that 7 of the community colleges did not receive any
recommendations, while the remaining 8 community colleges received a total of
22 recommendations, 5 of which were considered material weaknesses in the
colleges’ systems of internal control. The material weaknesses were found to
exist at the College of Southern Maryland and Garrett College and were related to
the colleges’ grants, financial reporting, and fixed assets.
As required by the Education Article, Section 16-315(c) of the Annotated Code of
Maryland, MHEC evaluated the adequacy of the colleges’ responses to the
material weaknesses and determined that appropriate follow-up action had been
taken.
MHEC did not formally evaluate the adequacy of the colleges’ responses to the
17 other recommendations since, in accordance with MHEC’s guidelines,
comments and suggestions related to these deficiencies are not required. When
auditors include such items in the letters, the colleges’ follow-up actions are
subject to the auditors’ review during subsequent audits.
The following schedule provides a summary of the fiscal year 2011
recommendations by fiscal area. Nine of the 22 recommendations (3 of which
were also considered material weaknesses in 2010, with 1 of these 3 having been
repeated since 2008) were repeated from the preceding year.
Number of
Fiscal Area of Recommendation Recommendations
Financial aid 13
Grants and contracts 3
Accounting and financial reporting 3
Fixed assets, inventory 2
Student enrollment and residency 1
Total 22
6

--- Page 9 ---
A T
UDIT EAM
Adam J. Westover, CPA
Audit Manager
Catherine M. Easter
Senior Auditor