Title: Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services - Inmate Medical Healthcare Service Contract
Date: 09/12/2017
Type: Special Reports and Letters
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5a945d3bcc9d72404c150ab9
Extracted: 2025-06-18T11:02:52.603737
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Special Report
Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services
Monitoring of Contractor Performance for the Assessment of Liquidated
Damages Under the Inmate Medical Healthcare Service Contract
September 2017
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
For further information concerning this report contact:
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
301 West Preston Street, Room 1202
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Phone: 410-946-5900 · 301-970-5900
Toll Free in Maryland: 1-877-486-9964
Maryland Relay: 711
TTY: 410-946-5401 · 301-970-5401
E-mail: OLAWebmaster@ola.state.md.us
Website: www.ola.state.md.us
The Office of Legislative Audits operates a Fraud Hotline to report fraud, waste, or abuse
involving State of Maryland government resources. Reports of fraud, waste, or abuse
may be communicated anonymously by a toll-free call to 1-877-FRAUD-11, by mail to the
Fraud Hotline, c/o Office of Legislative Audits, or through the Office’s website.
The Department of Legislative Services does not discriminate on the basis of age, ancestry, color,
creed, marital status, national origin, race, religion, gender, gender identity, sexual orientation,
or disability in the admission or access to its programs, services, or activities. The Department’s
Information Officer has been designated to coordinate compliance with the nondiscrimination
requirements contained in Section 35.107 of the Department of Justice Regulations. Requests for
assistance should be directed to the Information Officer at 410-946-5400 or 410-970-5400.

--- Page 5 ---
Table of Contents
Background Information 5
Inmate Healthcare Service Contract 5
Liquidated Damages Provisions Within the Contract 6
Contract Monitoring Responsibilities 9
Scope, Objectives, and Methodology 11
Conclusions 14
Findings
Finding 1 – During fiscal year 2016, the Office of Inmate Health Clinical 16
Services had not established processes to pursue liquidated damages
for contractor noncompliance regarding the timeliness of initial
reception/intake examinations and the administration of medications.
Finding 2 – High staffing vacancy rates in some service delivery areas 17
during fiscal year 2016 suggest that liquidated damages should be
assessed at that level rather than on a statewide level to ensure
quality of care is not compromised.
Finding 3 – The Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services 20
(DPSCS), based on contractor-supplied data, routinely assessed
liquidated damages for the contractor’s failure to meet required staffing
levels, but improvements are necessary to ensure the reliability of that
data.
Finding 4 – Contractor reports were not verified nor used to assess 21
liquidated damages for reception/intake examinations (RIE) identified
as untimely, and those reports did not contain data to determine the
full extent of untimely RIEs that may have occurred.
Finding 5 – A process had not been established to assess liquidated 23
damages when medication was not administered timely or the
administration was not documented in the medical records, even
though there were indications of some problems with contractor
performance.
3

--- Page 6 ---
Finding 6 – The lack of automated reports was an impediment to 25
effectively determining the full extent of contractor noncompliance
for purposes of assessing liquidated damages for RIE and medication
administration.
Finding 7 – DPSCS did not make use of a sampling methodology, as 26
permitted by the contract, for purposes of determining compliance
with contract provisions and assessing liquidated damages.
Recommendations 28
Exhibit 1 – DPSCS Inmate Medical Health Care and Utilization 29
Services Liquidated Damages
Agency Response Appendix
4

--- Page 7 ---
Background Information
Inmate Healthcare Service Contract
In fiscal year 2012, the Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services
(DPSCS) entered into a five-year inmate medical healthcare service contract, to
provide inmate medical services within DPSCS detention and correctional
facilities. As of November 2016, there were 27 detention and correctional
facilities covered by the contract and according to DPSCS records, the average
daily population was 22,132 inmates.
The contractor is the primary provider of somatic (physical) medical services to
inmates using various categories of medical professionals. The contract also has a
utilization management component whereby the contractor acts a gatekeeper by
referring inmates to other community healthcare providers when certain
specialized medical services (such as dental care, mental health counseling, and
specialty care) are required, but cannot be obtained on-site. The scope of services
to be provided under the contract includes but is not limited to
 an immediate intake screening of inmates upon arrival at a DPSCS facility to
determine whether hospitalization or infirmary care is necessary;
 performing a more detailed medical exam of each inmate within seven days of
arrival at a DPSCS facility to determine whether each inmate requires routine
follow-up care, specialty care, or no additional treatment; and
 prescribing and administering medications to inmates.1
Under the original terms, the contract was to terminate on June 30, 2017;
however, the Board of Public Works on May 24, 2017 approved a six-month
extension through December 31, 2017 while a new contract procurement is being
finalized.2 The original contract was an annual fixed price contract billed semi-
monthly with a not to exceed amount of $598 million. On April 17, 2013, a $2.3
million contract modification was approved to obtain enhanced telemedicine
services, increasing the five-year total contract value to $600.3 million. After the
third year of the contract, the contract amounts were subject to annual evaluation
and adjustment based on the consumer price index, but this did not affect the total
1 The medical healthcare services contractor is responsible for prescribing and administering
medication to inmates, but the drugs themselves are obtained from a vendor under a separate
DPSCS contract.
2 A request for proposal for the next contract was solicited on December 29, 2016 with proposals
due by May 10, 2017. The review and evaluation of this procurement was not included in the
scope of this review.
5

--- Page 8 ---
contract value. The contract was also subject to an adjustment for variations in
the inmate average daily population for the month. According to DPSCS records,
payments to the contractor over the four-year period ended June 30, 2016 were
reduced by approximately $20 million due to lower average daily populations and
$8 million for liquidated damages.
According to DPSCS records, total payments for this contract during fiscal year
2016 were approximately $100 million. According to the related contract
solicitation documents it was anticipated that labor costs would constitute 95
percent of the total contract value. The contract with the medical service
contractor contains staffing requirements expressed as full time equivalent (FTE)
positions for each position (for example, physician and registered nurse). For
fiscal year 2016, the number of contractor positions budgeted for the medical
services contract was approximately 748 FTEs. The contract also allows the
contractor to receive reimbursement for allowable and approved expenditures,
such as for the purchase of equipment. The contractor is paid a fixed amount each
month and submits a monthly staffing report for each facility and service delivery
area (SDA).
Liquidated Damages Provisions Within the Contract
Section three of the related request for proposal (RFP), which was incorporated
by reference into the inmate healthcare service contract, listed the scope of work
to be provided under the contract. The scope included numerous specific contract
requirements in approximately 130 pages, including those related to contractor
staffing, reporting, the performance of inmate reception/intake, annual, and
periodic physical examinations, sick call, medication administration, chronic care
clinics, and certain specialty care.
Forty-one of the requirements included in the contract had provisions for
liquidated damages when the contractor’s performance did not meet certain goals
or benchmarks. These liquidated damages provisions are shown in Exhibit 1.
Since it is impractical or extremely difficult to correlate an actual dollar amount
of damage for the failure to perform up to a specific requirement, the RFP sets
forth the actual dollar value of the liquidated damages for each of the
aforementioned 41 requirements. The contract documents stated that such
amounts were to be considered liquidated damages and not penalties, and
permitted DPSCS to deduct any liquidated damages assessed from amounts due to
the contractor or bill them as a separate item.
6

--- Page 9 ---
Examples of critical requirements with liquidated damages significantly
influencing the level of care an inmate receives include contractor staffing levels,
reception/intake examination (RIE), and medication administration.
Staffing Levels
The contract required the contractor to maintain certain monthly clinical staffing
levels. The clinical staffing positions consist of medical directors, physicians,
physician assistants (or certified registered nurse practitioners), registered nurses,
licensed practical nurses, and phlebotomists. In accordance with the contractually
required staffing plan approved by DPSCS, the contractor was to provide a certain
level of FTE positions for each staffing position in each of the four geographic
SDAs established by the contract (Eastern, Western, Jessup, and Baltimore).3
Although there was a unique staffing plan for each facility in an SDA, DPSCS
was only entitled to recover a portion of the contractor’s monthly fee by assessing
liquidated damages to the extent staffing levels were not met at a statewide level.
Specifically, the contract allowed the State to assess damages at the contractor’s
hourly billable rate for any clinical position that does not meet the 96 percent
minimum fill rate per position, in aggregate, at the statewide level.
In accordance with the contract, the contractor was required to use a biometric
time and attendance system. Contractor staff use a biometric fingerprint swipe to
clock-in and clock-out on days worked. The software contains data analysis
capabilities and note taking capabilities, including recording any changes made to
staff schedules or any changes made to employee’s time and attendance records to
determine abnormal staffing behavior. DPSCS had read-only access to this time
and attendance system. This system data is the basis for contractually required
clinical staffing reports submitted to DPSCS monthly by the contractor; DPSCS
reviews these reports, which serve as the basis for assessing liquidated damages.
Reception/Intake Examination
The contractor is required to provide an initial reception/intake health and
physical exam (RIE), which functions as a preliminary medical health screening,
within seven-days of an inmate’s entrance to a DPSCS facility. The RIE is to
include a hearing and vision test, oral screening and initial dental examination,
relevant diagnostic testing, and an assessment for any necessary follow-up
requirements, such as a referral to DPSCS’ dental contractor or a chronic care
consultation.
DPSCS’ Offender Case Management System (OCMS) is a server-based system,
which contains data on, and is used to manage and monitor, arrestees housed by
3 For service delivery purposes, the contract assigns each DPSCS facility into one of four service
delivery areas based on their geographic location.
7

--- Page 10 ---
the Division of Pretrial and Detention Services and inmates incarcerated by the
Division of Correction. Upon intake of an arrestee at a facility, the contractor
performs a preliminary medical health screening using the Intake Medical/Mental
Health Screening (IMMS) form that identifies and addresses any urgent medical,
mental, or dental needs. Subsequently, the contractor has seven days to complete
an RIE, which is a comprehensive medical evaluation that is documented in the
Electronic Patient Health Record (EPHR). The IMMS form, and the information
it contains, is to be documented within the OCMS and then electronically
transferred to the EPHR, which is established following the inmate’s
commitment. The findings of the RIE and any follow-up needed are required to
be documented immediately in the EPHR. The contractor provides a report
documenting the seven day RIEs that it performed each month to DPSCS.
The contractual RIE requirement reads, “Conduct a complete medical health
examination on all inmates, including parole violators and escapees within 7-days
of reception. Provide medical intake evaluations every day.” The defined
performance standard from a liquidated damages perspective is any occurrence of
a failure to perform the above and the amount that may be assessed for damages is
$50 for each occurrence of an RIE not completed below a 98 percent threshold.
Administration of Medication
The medical contractor is responsible for administering prescribed medications to
the inmate population. A paper monthly medication administration record is
maintained by the contractor for each inmate who is prescribed medications, to
document the dates and times the medications were administered by clinical staff,
and to document the reason for any missed medications. The contractor is
required to properly document medical administration records in accordance with
DPSCS’ policy.
Although the medication prescribed to inmates is recorded in the EPHR, as
previously noted, the actual delivery or administration of the medication to the
inmate is not. Specifically, DPSCS’ pharmacy contractor downloads a text file of
prescribed medications from the EPHR and delivers the required medication to
the medical contractor at the various facilities at least daily. Medications are to be
administered in accordance with written orders and consistent with DPSCS
policy, and recorded manually on paper records by the contractor’s clinical staff.
According to DPSCS records, during March 2017, there were approximately
104,000 medication orders filled across all DPSCS facilities. Due to the nature of
the medication, approximately 79,000 of these orders were for medication that
was distributed to inmates, who kept a supply of the medication on their person.
The remaining 25,000 orders were for medications the contractor directly
administered by nursing staff to the inmates.
8

--- Page 11 ---
The liquidated damages provision of the contract for the administration of
medication differs from how the administration of medication is actually
documented. The contractor is required to maintain an electronic medication
administration record (e-MAR) when implemented. Specifically, liquidated
damages may be assessed at $200 for each e-MAR that is not completed below a
95 percent threshold, where the measured event is an individual who does not
receive medication within 2 hours of receipt of the medication from the pharmacy
contractor; or an individual e-MAR not documented (that is, the delivery of the
medication is not documented). Since there is no e-MAR either within or outside
of the EPHR, DPSCS relies on the paper record to gauge contractor performance.
Contract Monitoring Responsibilities
The responsibility for monitoring the delivery of all inmate health services and
overseeing the related contractor’s performance for the separate medical, mental
health, dental, and pharmacy services contracts rests with DPSCS’ Office of
Inmate Health Clinical Services (OICS), under the Director of Clinical Services.
There are five units within OICS, Contract Administration, Nursing, Substance
Abuse, Mental Health, and Social Work, with the Contract Administration Unit
(CAU) responsible for monitoring compliance with the health services contract’s
financial terms and conditions. As of May 2016, CAU had seven employees, all
of whom had an accounting/auditing background. CAU’s responsibilities with
regard to the inmate healthcare service contract include reviewing inmate medical
service invoices for agreement with contract terms and billing rates, verifying the
mathematical accuracy of the invoice prior to payment by the DPSCS Office of
the Secretary, reviewing medical services contract staffing levels, and assessing
liquidated damages, as deemed appropriate for the aforementioned 41 contract
requirements that have liquidated damages provisions. CAU is also responsible
for monitoring several other contracts and performing various procurement and
accounting functions.
OICS is generally responsible for monitoring the inmate medical contractor’s
required quality improvement program. Other responsibilities of OICS include
determining whether the contractor adhered to contract requirements to provide
sufficient qualified staffing and timely medical healthcare treatment services
(such as healthcare for inmates with infectious diseases or chronic health
conditions). OICS employees participate in investigations of inmate health-care
related complaints received from inmates, DPSCS corrections personnel, and
contractor employees. OICS also attends monthly contractor quality
improvement meetings held in each of the four SDAs in the State, as well as
quarterly statewide meetings at OICS headquarters in Baltimore. Finally, OICS’
Nursing Unit routinely meets with the medical services contractor management
and on-site personnel, and conducts audits (hereinafter referred to as clinical
9

--- Page 12 ---
audits) to verify compliance with the medical contract’s quality of care
requirements, in addition to various other duties. The Nursing Unit had 15
positions as of May 2016, 6 of which were vacant.
10

--- Page 13 ---
Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
Scope
We conducted a special review of the Department of Public Safety and
Correctional Services’ (DPSCS) monitoring of contractor performance for the
purpose of assessing liquidated damages related to certain inmate healthcare
contract deliverables. We conducted this review under the authority of the State
Government Article, Section 2-1221 of the Annotated Code of Maryland based on
a legislative request. The scope of our review was less than that of an audit
conducted in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards.
Objectives and Methodology
Our objective was to review DPSCS’ procedures for monitoring the inmate
healthcare contractor’s performance under three key contract requirements and
the assessment of allowable liquidated damages. The three key requirements we
reviewed were maintaining required staffing levels, conducting timely
reception/intake exams, and administering medication timely within DPSCS’ 27
detention and correctional facilities.
To accomplish our objective, we obtained and reviewed relevant current medical
inmate healthcare services contract documents. We also conducted interviews of
the contractor’s staff and employees of certain DPSCS facilities and the DPSCS
Office of Inmate Health Clinical Services (OICS), which is responsible for
monitoring the contract and overseeing the delivery of medical services to
inmates. We obtained an understanding of the contract and a general knowledge
of each of the 41 contract requirements that had a specific liquidated damages
provision. To focus our review, after consultation with OICS staff, we then
identified three of the contract requirements deemed vital to the quality of inmate
medical care: maintenance of required contractor staffing levels, conducting
timely reception/intake medical exams, and the administration of medication to
inmates. Our review focused on fiscal year 2016 activity.
Staffing Levels
We reviewed the OICS Contract Administration Unit’s (CAU) monitoring
procedures to ensure that the minimum clinical staffing levels were being
provided and liquidated damages were assessed when levels were below the
minimum standard. We reviewed CAU’s process to verify contractor reported
staffing data accumulated and reported from the biometric timekeeping system.
We compared the actual level of staffing provided, as reported by the contractor,
against the contractor’s staffing plan that had been previously approved by OICS.
11

--- Page 14 ---
For three months during fiscal year 2016, we tested CAU’s calculation for
liquidated damages when staffing levels at the statewide level were not met and
determined whether CAU had properly reduced the invoice payments. We also
analyzed staffing levels at each service delivery area (SDA) to determine if it
would be appropriate to have a liquidated damages provision at that staffing level.
Reception/Intake Examination
We reviewed OICS’ monitoring process over the contractor’s completion of
timely reception/intake exams, including the contractor’s monthly reports of this
activity. These intake exams, referred to as RIEs, consist of a number of
individual examination procedures and are required to be completed within seven
days of admission to a DPSCS facility. For the purposes of our review, we
focused our analysis of OICS’ RIE monitoring of pre-trial facilities within the
Baltimore SDA, which represented 7,964 admissions or 51 percent of the annual
admissions during fiscal year 2016. This was done since these RIEs would be
conducted for individuals taken directly off the streets for their initial detainment,
as opposed to transfers of inmates between DPSCS facilities, and there is a higher
health risk concern with these detainees.
For the RIE requirement, we performed several tests. Specifically, we performed
a test of RIE timeliness by selecting 20 inmates from a DPSCS report of
individuals entering the Baltimore SDA’s pre-trial facilities in June 2016. For
these individuals we determined whether (1) they were included on the
contractor’s monthly report; (2) the contractor’s reported RIE dates agreed with
the electronic patient health records; (3) liquidated damages were assessed for
those deemed untimely by the contractor; and (4) the medical tests performed
during the RIE were documented in the patient records.
In addition, the Nursing Unit performs clinical audits to determine if various
medical tests and exams during the RIE were completed and documented by the
contractor in the patient records for quality of care purposes. We reviewed the
results of two clinical audits performed during September 2015 and July 2016 to
determine what impact they could potentially have for assessing liquidated
damages. From those audits, we performed additional testing to determine
whether the reported results agreed with the available documentation.
Administration of Medication
For the administration of medication requirement, the Nursing Unit conducts
audits of patient records to determine if inmates were receiving the prescribed
medications timely and any missed medications were properly documented in the
inmate’s paper record of medications administered (referred to as medication
administration records or MAR).
12

--- Page 15 ---
We reviewed and summarized the results of the Unit’s seven MAR audits
conducted during fiscal year 2016 to assess the potential impact for assessing
liquidated damages. To assess their accuracy, we compared the audit results for
10 individuals under two of these audits with the related inmate paper records of
administered medications. Further, we summarized contractor-calculated MAR
compliance rates based on 18 self-assessments performed for the period from
November 2015 to June 2016. Finally, to determine whether the paper records of
administered medications contained all medications to be administered, we
selected 20 inmates from the pharmacy contractor’s records of medications issued
for the month of June 2016 and traced one medication for each inmate to the
paper records.
13

--- Page 16 ---
Conclusions
Although the Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services (DPSCS)
had established a process to pursue liquidated damages when required contractor
medical staffing levels were not met, a process was not in place during fiscal year
2016 for assessing damages for initial reception/intake examination (RIE) and the
administration of medication requirements. Except for staffing levels, we found
that DPSCS did not have a process to review or prioritize for review the 40 other
contract requirements with liquidated damages provisions for contractor non-
performance. The results of clinical audits to assess quality of care, which had
identified performance deficiencies, were not considered by the unit responsible
for monitoring contractor performance to target its efforts for the purpose of
assessing damages.
We found that DPSCS was properly calculating and assessing liquidated damages
($2.8 million during fiscal year 2016) when the contractor failed to maintain
statewide medical staffing levels for seven types of positions (for example,
physician and registered nurse) in accordance with the staffing plans.
Nevertheless, certain procedures should be implemented to ensure the reliability
of contractor-supplied attendance data, which is used in the calculations.
The approach established under the current contract to assess liquidated damages
for staffing shortages, which provides for the aggregation of staffing levels of
each position for the four separate service delivery areas (SDA) within the State,
does not consider the potential impact on the quality of care at individual SDAs.
That is, SDAs with full staffing would offset vacancies at other SDAs, which
reduces the overall liquidated damages assessment. SDAs with full staffing do
not help ensure the quality of care at SDAs with high vacancy rates. We found
that all SDAs had staffing problems, one SDA consistently failed to meet
established staffing levels. According to DPSCS, the next contract will provide
for assessing liquidated damages at the individual facility level.
DPSCS did not verify that the contractor conducted complete RIEs for at least 98
percent of inmates within seven days of intake on a statewide basis, which is the
standard under which liquidated damages ($50 per occurrence below the 98
percent threshold) may be assessed. The timely completion of RIEs as reported
by the contractor was not verified to either DPSCS admission records or the
electronic patient health records. We found that the contractor’s reports
containing the dates RIEs were conducted did not necessarily mean all required
exam procedures had been completed at that time, thus affecting reliability.
Based on the work performed by DPSCS’ clinical staff, it is likely that many
more untimely RIEs would be subject to liquidated damage assessments if the
14

--- Page 17 ---
completion of all exam procedures was considered. Even when the contractor
reported untimely or incomplete RIEs, DPSCS did not assess liquidated damages,
which would have totaled $16,250 during fiscal year 2016.
DPSCS had no procedure to verify that the contractor provided an individual
medication dose to an inmate timely (based on a standard defined in the contract)
or that an individual medication was documented in the medication administration
records. According to the contract, a $200 liquidated damage could be assessed
for each occurrence of an untimely drug administration or lack of documentation
regarding the administration in the records below a 95 percent threshold.
According to DPSCS, about 25,000 individual medication orders are administered
directly to inmates statewide each month. Based on the results of DPSCS’
clinical staff reviews and the contractor’s self-assessments of medication
administration, it is likely liquidated damages could have been assessed.
The lack of automated reports was an impediment to effectively determining the
full extent of contractor noncompliance for purposes of assessing liquidated
damages for RIE and medication administration. Regarding RIE, the contractor’s
reports did not contain necessary data to determine the full extent of untimely
RIEs that may have occurred. That is, the contractor reports did not list each
required attribute (for example, a specific medical test) and when it was
conducted. Furthermore, due to limited reporting capabilities, this information
was not readily available from DPSCS’ electronic patient health records.
Similarly, automated records of medication administered daily to each inmate also
would be needed. Currently, only manual records are maintained for each inmate
on which the contractor employee records medication given to each inmate when
it is administered.
DPSCS did not use audit sampling techniques to assess the contractor’s
compliance with various contract requirements as permitted under the contract. In
the absence of automated summary reports, selecting a random sample of RIEs
and instances of medication administration would provide a reliable basis for
determining the magnitude of any existing problems, gauging overall contractor
performance, and assessing liquidated damages.
15

--- Page 18 ---
Findings
Finding 1
During fiscal year 2016, the Office of Inmate Health Clinical Services (OICS)
had not established processes to pursue liquidated damages for contractor
noncompliance regarding the timeliness of an inmates’ initial
reception/intake examination (RIE) and the administration of medications.
Analysis
With the exception of contractor medical staffing levels, for which $2.8 million in
liquidated damages were properly assessed during fiscal year 2016, OICS had not
established processes to pursue liquidated damages for contractor noncompliance
with the other two contract provisions we tested. Specifically, OICS’ Contract
Administration Unit (CAU), which is responsible for auditing contract payments
and identifying when contractor performance warranted the assessment of
permissible liquidated damages, did not have an applicable process in place for
the initial reception/intake examination (RIE) and the administration of
medication requirements.
Our inquiries with CAU personnel disclosed that, except for staffing levels, no
substantive efforts were made to pursue liquidated damages as allowed for 40
other contract requirements, including the aforementioned 2 requirements. CAU
did not have a process to review or prioritize for review the various contract
requirements with liquidated damages provisions for contractor non-performance.
In this regard, CAU did not consider the results of clinical audits to identify
problems with contractor performance that may warrant further review.
OICS management advised us that a decision was made by the previous CAU
contract monitor to discontinue assessing damages on all other contract
requirements except for staffing levels. We were further advised that although at
one time CAU conducted audits of contractor performance for other requirements
(in addition to staffing levels); these were stopped by the previous contract
monitor. Apparently, in order to more efficiently audit, the requirements were to
be prioritized and audited in that order, however this process was never
completed. OICS management was unaware the audits had stopped until a new
contract monitor was assigned in June 2016, when, according to OICS
management the audits resumed. However, the exact timing of the decision to
stop auditing could not be determined by OICS management.
In addition, OICS’ Nursing Unit conducted clinical audits of certain medical
requirements to assess quality of care; however, these audit results were not used
to identify potential areas needing more targeted expanded reviews by CAU for
16

--- Page 19 ---
purposes of assessing liquidated damages, even when these audits indicated
problems with contractor performance. OICS management advised us that the
Nursing Unit’s clinical audits were intended only to improve the quality of care
and were not designed to be used for pursuing liquidated damages. Specifically,
the purpose of the clinical audits is to determine the causes for noncompliance
and methods to improve deficient processes to ensure inmates receive the proper
quality of care.
OICS management advised the 41 different liquidated damages contained in the
contract, with the exception of the staffing damages, provide a means to
encourage performance improvement and are generally used in the event of a
serious incident of gross contractor misconduct.
Finding 2
High staffing vacancy rates in some service delivery areas (SDA) during
fiscal year 2016 suggest that liquidated damages should be assessed at that
level rather than on a statewide level to ensure quality of care is not
compromised.
Analysis
Although we determined that liquidated damages were properly calculated and
assessed when required staffing levels were not met at the statewide level (see
Table 1 for a breakdown of the fiscal year 2016 liquidated damages by medical
staff position), we found that many times, high medical staff vacancy rates (where
actual position staffing was below that number in the DPSCS approved staffing
plan) existed within the four individual SDAs for certain positions. The concept
of assessing liquidated damages at the SDA level was included in the original
request for proposal (RFP) but subsequently amended to a statewide approach.
The use of a statewide approach, to the exclusion of a liquidated damage
provision that also considers vacancies by position in each SDA, means that
SDAs with full staffing would offset vacancies at other SDAs, which reduces the
overall liquidated damage assessment. But such statewide aggregation does not
consider the potential impact on quality of care at individual SDAs. SDAs with
full staffing do not help ensure the quality of care at SDAs with high vacancy
rates.
We analyzed staffing levels by SDA, see Tables 2 and 3, and found numerous
instances when various medical positions within an SDA were less than 96
17

--- Page 20 ---
percent staffed.4 We noted for example, that in the Baltimore SDA, the physician
and physician assistant positions were less than 96 percent staffed during every
month of fiscal year 2016 with a staffing percentage ranging from 70 percent to
84 percent and from 53 percent to 69 percent, respectively. In Table 3, we also
quantified the number of months, by SDA, during fiscal year 2016 when 96
percent staffing was not achieved for each of the 7 medical contractor positions in
each SDA, to demonstrate the prevalence of low staffing levels within certain
SDAs. Finally, we quantified the total number of times (months) during the year
when each medical position was staffed below the 96 percent requirement.
To accomplish this, we determined the total number of months during the year the
contractor was accountable for staffing each medical position at each SDA based
on the approved staffing plan. For example in the Baltimore SDA, each of the 7
medical positions was required to be staffed for 12 months during fiscal year 2016
(that is, 7 positions times 12 months equals 84 accountable months for the
Baltimore SDA). This calculation was performed for each of the SDAs, which
resulted in a combined total of 312 months to be staffed.
As noted in Table 3, we found that the total number of months when a medical
position was staffed below the 96 percent requirement to be 199, or stated another
way, for 63.8 percent of the accountable months, SDA staffing levels were below
the threshold for assessing liquidated damages. While all SDAs had staffing
problems during the year, for one SDA, staffing levels were below the
requirement for 84.5 percent of the combined months for all medical positions.
Table 1
Fiscal Year 2016 Liquidated Damages by Medical Staff Position
Annual Percentage of Overall
Medical Staff Position
Liquidated Damages Annual Damages
Medical Director/Physician $570,437 20%
Physician Assistant $1,356,399 49%
Registered Nurse/Charge $655,591 23%
Registered Nurse
Licensed Practical Nurse $192,212 7%
Phlebotomist $30,236 1%
Total $2,804,874 100%
Source: Contractor Monthly Staffing Level Report
4 Table 2 represents full staffing of the DPSCS approved annual staffing plan. The contractor’s
failure to maintain statewide staffing levels of at least 96 percent of the approved staffing plan
can result in the assessment of liquidated damages.
18

--- Page 21 ---
Table 2
Number of Contractor Medical Staff Positions Required
Per DPSCS Approved Staffing Plan for Fiscal Year 2016
Number of Required Positions by SDA
Baltimore Jessup Eastern Western
Medical Director 2 3 1 2
Physician 19.4 7.225 1.6 7
Physician Assistant 32.1 11.8 4.8 9.4
Registered Nurse 86.4 46.6 19.4 40
Charge-Registered 14 11.4 2 3
Nurse
Licensed Practical 82.1 59.6 20.3 57
Nurse
Phlebotomist 6 0 1 0
Total 242.0 139.625 50.1 118.4
Source: Contractor Staffing Plan
Table 3
Number of Months During Fiscal Year 2016
When Staffing Levels Were Below the 96 Percent Requirement (by SDA and Position)
Baltimore Jessup Eastern Western Total
Number of Staffing Number of Staffing Number of Staffing Number of Staffing Number of
Months Level Months Level Months Level Months Level Months
<96% Range <96% Range <96% Range <96% Range <96%
Staffing Staffing Staffing Staffing Staffing
Medical Director 3 75%- 12 60%- 12 60%- 6 41%- 33
90% 91% 93% 68%
Physician 12 70%- 0 All 7 37%- 2 91%- 21
84% >96% 93% 94%
Physician Assistant 12 53%- 12 67%- 5 82%- 12 56%- 41
69% 91% 94% 95%
Registered Nurse 11 83%- 5 84%- 2 91%- 1 91% 19
94% 95% 92%
Charge-Registered Nurse 12 71%- 6 87%- 12 18%- 12 3%- 42
79% 95% 90% 72%
Licensed Practical Nurse 9 84%- 0 All 3 91%- 12 80%- 24
93% >96% 94% 92%
Phlebotomist 12 63%- N/A N/A 7 74%- N/A N/A 19
94% 93%
Total Understaffed Months 71 35 48 45 199
Total Accountable Months 84 72 84 72 312
Percentage of Months 84.5% 48.6% 57.1% 62.5% 63.8%
Understaffed
Source: Contractor Monthly Staffing Level Report
19

--- Page 22 ---
We noted that the solicitation for the new contract being procured by DPSCS
includes a provision for the assessment of liquidated damages by staffing levels at
each of the 27 facilities. It appears that this new methodology could result in
higher liquidated damages assessments as it removes the statewide aggregation
methodology.
Finding 3
DPSCS, based on contractor-supplied data, routinely assessed liquidated
damages for the contractor’s failure to meet required staffing levels, but
improvements are necessary to ensure the reliability of that data.
Analysis
During fiscal year 2016, DPSCS assessed the contractor liquidated damages
totaling approximately $2.8 million for the failure to maintain certain statewide
staffing levels, but that assessment was based on contractor-supplied data that was
not verified for reliability. Liquidated damages were assessed because the
contractor reported to CAU that it failed to maintain 96 percent of the planned
staffing statewide during every month of that fiscal year.
Since CAU did not validate the reliability of contractor-reported staffing data and
merely relied on the contractor’s own biometric timekeeping system to report
contractor staffing at DPSCS facilities, assurance was lacking that all actual
vacancies were reported, which could affect the accuracy of the liquidated
damages assessments. We noted the following procedures were not performed to
help assess data reliability.
 The CAU did not independently verify contractor employee hours during
fiscal year 2016. We identified an available report from the contractor’s
biometric timekeeping system that in real-time shows every contractor
employee currently logged into the timekeeping system at a facility, which
could be used by CAU with the assistance of DPSCS monitors located at the
facilities, to perform periodic spot checks at work locations to verify
employee attendance and work time.
 CAU did not use available time reports, which could be generated from the
contractor’s biometric timekeeping system to determine the extent of and
frequency of manual time entries recorded by the contractor for employees
who did not swipe-in biometrically. In addition, CAU did not obtain or
review forms that were required to be filled out by contractor employees
documenting the reason for the manual time entry (in lieu of the biometric
entry system).
20

--- Page 23 ---
We reviewed a report of manual entries for May 2016, and noted 262 clinical
contractor employees with at least one occurrence of a manual entry.
According to the DPSCS approved staffing plan for fiscal year 2016, there
were approximately 550 clinical employees. This report could be used by
CAU to identify any potential patterns of employees who are not
biometrically signing in or out, follow up to ensure the employees did work
the reported hours, or target certain employees for future physical sightings at
their scheduled work location.
Finding 4
Contractor reports were not verified nor used to assess liquidated damages
for RIEs identified as untimely, and those reports did not contain data to
determine the full extent of untimely RIEs that may have occurred.
Analysis
The CAU did not verify that the medical contractor conducted complete RIEs for
at least 98 percent of inmates within seven days of intake on a statewide basis,
which is the standard under which liquidated damages may be assessed.
Specifically, the timely completion of an RIE as reported by the contractor was
not verified to either DPSCS records or the RIE results in the inmate's Electronic
Patient Health Record (EPHR). Further, when untimely or incomplete RIEs
below the 98 percent threshold were identified by the contractor’s own reporting,
CAU did not assess liquidated damages.
The contractor self-reports the completion of RIEs and includes the dates of
critical events, which are the individual's intake into a DPSCS facility and the
completion of medical procedures that collectively make up an RIE. However,
those dates are not verified by CAU against DPSCS records that independently
record the same activity, such as facility admission records in the Offender Case
Management System and medical notes recorded on the inmate's EPHR. Our
tests of 20 inmates entering the Baltimore SDA’s pre-trial facilities in June 2016
confirmed that these inmates were included on the contractor’s monthly report
and the related RIE completion dates reported by the contractor agreed with the
EPHR dates. However, it appears that the recorded RIE completion dates do not
necessarily mean all required medical procedures were performed at those times.
Based on the results of the Nursing Unit’s clinical audits and contractor self-
assessments of RIE, it is likely that many more untimely RIEs would be subject to
liquidated damages assessments if the completion of all exam procedures
established in the contract and by DPSCS policies was considered.
21

--- Page 24 ---
Based on the contractor’s self-reported fiscal year 2016 RIE results, which
showed 325 RIEs (below the 98 percent requirement) had not been completed
timely, liquidated damages totaling at least $16,250 could have been assessed for
late exams ($50 for each exam below the 98 percent requirement). However,
results from limited work conducted by the Nursing Unit indicate that the
potential problem of untimely and/or improperly completed RIEs could be much
worse.
The Nursing Unit conducted two clinical audits in September 2015 and July 2016
of pretrial facilities with each audit reviewing the associated records for 15 and 30
inmates, respectively. During those clinical audits, the Unit was to review 17 RIE
attributes for each inmate record, although not every attribute (for example, a
pregnancy test) was applicable for each inmate. After excluding the attributes
deemed not applicable, 528 total attributes were subject to review for the two
audits combined. The review would rely on the documentation of the
performance of each exam attribute in the patient’s EPHR.
The Unit found that the overall compliance rate was 60 percent for both audits
(with individual audit results of 48 and 68 percent). However, our review of the
Nursing Unit’s audit work disclosed that at least one exam attribute for each of
the 45 inmates tested had not been performed, even though the attribute was
applicable. If the failure to perform every attribute means an RIE is incomplete,
then all of the 45 tested could have been subject to liquidated damages. Although
we did not validate the Nursing Units results, our test of the RIEs performed for
20 inmates also found that certain medical tests required as part of the RIE were
not documented in the patient records for 7 inmates.
Consequently, it does not appear that the RIE information self-reported monthly
by the contractor for this standard provided assurance that all exam attributes
were completed. Specifically, although the contractor data showed the date
between intake and when the exam was performed, those reports did not identify
all required initial exam procedures (such as medical tests) and when they were
performed. Consequently, all contract attributes for RIEs may not have been
completed in that timeframe even though the reports may suggest otherwise.
Given the results of the two fiscal year 2016 clinical audits, we inquired with
OICS management whether the failure to perform all RIE procedures included in
the Nursing Unit’s audits would mean an RIE was not complete. They were non-
committal since a specific definition of what constitutes a complete RIE exam
apparently has not been previously considered for purposes of liquidated damages
assessment.
22

--- Page 25 ---
Finally, our review of this situation identified one further issue. The importance
of the Nursing Unit’s clinical audits in determining and ensuring the quality of
care is of paramount importance, but the assessment of liquidated damages plays
a role as well. However, the lack of reliable automated reports of RIE results and
the seemingly inconsequential individual damage provision ($50 for each exam
below the 98 percent requirement), may mitigate the usefulness of assessing
liquidated damages. Specifically, if all the initial exams for the approximately
15,000 intakes during FY 2016 had been performed untimely, the maximum
liquidated damages assessment would have been approximately $750,000 (based
on $50 per occurrence), which could be deemed a relatively insignificant amount
compared to the total annual contract payments (in excess of $100 million).
We were advised by OICS management the amount of damages per untimely
exam used to be higher under older contracts but a number of years ago they were
advised by DPSCS procurement officials that this was too punitive and it was
lowered in later contracts, with the lower amount retained in the new RFP. OICS
could not explain the basis for the damage amount.
Finding 5
A process had not been established to assess liquidated damages when
medication was not administered timely or the administration was not
documented in the medical records, even though there were indications of
some problems with contractor performance.
Analysis
The CAU had no procedure to verify that the contractor provided an individual
medication dose to an inmate timely (based on a standard defined in the contract)
or that an individual medication was documented in the medication administration
records for purposes of assessing liquidated damages, even though there were
indications of some problems with contractor performance. According to the
contract, a $200 liquidated damage could be assessed for each occurrence of an
untimely drug administration or lack of documentation regarding the
administration in the records below a 95 percent threshold. Based on information
provided to us by the Nursing Unit, about 25,000 individual medication orders are
administered directly to inmates by nursing staff each month.
Based on similar results from both the Nursing Unit’s clinical audits and the
contractor’s self-assessments of medication administration, it is likely liquidated
damages could have been assessed. For example, the Nursing Unit conducted
seven clinical audits in fiscal year 2016 that indicated the contractor’s overall
performance was below contract requirements. The purpose of these audits was
23

--- Page 26 ---
to determine if the administration of the medication was properly documented in
the paper medical record from a quality of care perspective. Some of the
attributes audited included the recordation of the date and type of medication
administered, missed medications with reasons, medication start and stop dates,
and keep-on person medication (medicine to be retained by the inmate for self-
administration).
Medication records were reviewed for 86 inmates during these 7 audits (each at a
different facility), with 15 attributes to be reviewed for each inmate record,
although not every attribute was applicable for each inmate reviewed. Ultimately,
the Nursing Unit tested 1,047 individual attributes for compliance, and concluded
that the combined compliance rate was 91 percent (which equates to a 9 percent
error rate). Two of those seven audits had compliance rates below 90 percent (at
84 and 67 percent). Of the 15 attributes tested from the audit with 67 percent
overall compliance, which was conducted for one facility, one attribute (legibility
of nurses’ signatures) had 0 percent compliance and 5 attributes (for example,
name and dose of medication administered) had compliance rates between 50 and
67 percent. Our tests of 10 individuals from two of the audits disclosed that the
results generally agreed with the paper records of medications administered, but a
few errors were noted. For these seven audits, DPSCS could have assessed
liquidated damages of at least $6,000 after considering adjustments for the errors
noted during our review.
Our summary of the results for 18 contractor self-assessments performed from
November 2015 to June 2016 for various facilities showed a similar overall
compliance rate of 89 percent for the 6 medication administration attributes it
tested. Furthermore, our test work disclosed similar problems with the
contractor’s performance. Specifically, our test of the paper records of
medications administered for 20 inmates in June 2016 disclosed that for 10 of the
inmates, medications provided by the pharmacy contractor were not always
documented on the paper record as being provided to the inmate nor was there an
explanation as to why the inmate did not receive the medication on a given day.
For these 10 inmates, the number of days with no indication of the medication
being provided ranged from 1 to 5 days.
24

--- Page 27 ---
Finding 6
The lack of automated reports was an impediment to effectively determining
the full extent of contractor noncompliance for purposes of assessing
liquidated damages for RIE and medication administration.
Analysis
The lack of automated reports was an impediment to effectively determining the
full extent of contractor noncompliance for purposes of assessing liquidated
damages for RIE and medication administration. Our review of three liquidated
damages provisions disclosed that, for two of these, automated reports that would
enable CAU to identify all occurrences of noncompliance with key contract
requirements were not available either from the contractor (finding 4) or DPSCS’
records. This condition is in contrast to the medical staffing requirement, where
CAU receives monthly reports of staffing levels from the contractor that enable it
to identify statewide staffing levels and any related shortages that may trigger
liquidated damages.
The lack of automated DPSCS records appears to be a direct result of a past
failure to fully implement a comprehensive Electronic Patient Health Record
(EPHR) system. For example, in June 2005, DPSCS contracted for the
development and implementation of the EPHR system, but the resultant system
did not achieve the functionality intended. The system was to record each
inmate’s comprehensive health history while in DPSCS custody and was to be
used to analyze the adequacy of the delivery of inmate health care services.
However, we were advised by DPSCS staff that limited reporting capabilities
have limited its usefulness. For example, a system module that would have
allowed for implementation of an electronic medication administration record was
never developed. Since the EPHR does not have the ability to track the
administration of medication, a paper record is maintained.
In our opinion, to assess contractor RIE performance effectively for all inmate
intakes would require automated summary reports of relevant information from
the contractor and from DPSCS’ patient health records, such as each medical
procedure performed during the RIE and the date and time. This information is
not available from the contractor nor does the reporting capability currently exist
within DPSCS systems.
Similarly, automated records of medication administered daily to each inmate also
would be needed. Currently, only manual records are maintained for each inmate
on which the contractor employee records medication given to each inmate when
it is administered. Due to the large volume of activity and decentralized nature of
the services provided under this contract, automated records are critical to
25

--- Page 28 ---
effective oversight of this contract. If DPSCS systems are not capable of tracking
the information needed to monitor key contract requirements, this raises a
question as to whether the contractor should be required to provide this
information.
Finding 7
DPSCS did not make use of a sampling methodology, as permitted by the
contract, for purposes of determining compliance with contract provisions
and assessing liquidated damages.
Analysis
The CAU did not use audit sampling techniques to assess the contractor’s
compliance with various contract requirements. The contract permitted DPSCS to
apply a statistically derived compliance rate over activities during a related
timeframe at a specific facility, from where the sample was drawn, for purposes
of assessing liquidated damages. For example, selecting a random sample of
RIEs and instances of medication administration would provide a reliable basis
for determining the magnitude of any existing problems and for gauging overall
contractor performance, in the absence of automated summary reports. DPSCS
could then extrapolate those results to the respective population subject to
sampling to assess liquidated damages.
Sampling could be especially efficient for evaluating medication administration,
given the number of daily dosages prescribed statewide. For example, DPSCS
records indicate that typically 25,000 medication orders are administered monthly
directly to inmates. While we cannot assume that the 9 percent error rate noted by
the Nursing Unit’s clinical audits in Finding 5 are representative of the entire
statewide population, if a similar error rate was actually found to exist throughout
the entire population based on a sampling methodology which would allow for
extrapolating the results, the potential liquidated damages could be significant.
For example, those error rates occurring within the aforementioned 25,000
monthly medication orders, at $200 an occurrence, would suggest potential
liquidated damages of about $200,000 for the month.
CAU advised that although this sampling provision was allowable under the
contract, it had not been used because of likely challenges to the results by the
contractor and varying operational conditions at each facility. Therefore, the
provision to allow for sampling for extrapolating results and assessing liquidated
damages was removed by DPSCS from the upcoming contract. While we
recognize that a valid methodology would need to be developed, the lack of
automated records as noted in Finding 5 makes statistical sampling the only viable
26

--- Page 29 ---
approach to gauging the full extent of the problem and establishing damages
representing the impact on the inmate population.
27

--- Page 30 ---
Recommendations
We recommend that DPSCS:
1. Establish a process to assess liquidated damages for vital quality of care
contract provisions, especially RIE and medication administration. In
this regard, a definition of what constitutes a complete RIE should be
established. OICS should compile the Nursing Unit’s clinical audit
results (using the correct definition of the services to be provided) and the
contractor self-assessment results to help target CAU’s efforts for the
purpose of assessing liquidated damages.
2. Enhance the reliability of contractor-reported staffing levels based on the
contractor’s automated timekeeping data. Specifically, OICS should
a. perform spot checks of contractual employees (sight employees at
their workstations) using real-time attendance reports available
from the timekeeping system, and
b. review reports of manual time entries in the timekeeping system
and obtain supporting documentation for the entries.
3. Ensure that, in accordance with the provisions under the next contract,
staffing levels at each facility are monitored and liquidated damages are
assessed as allowed.
4. Re-evaluate the suitability of the current liquidated damages provision
for RIE to address contractor non-performance and the related potential
impact on the quality of inmate health care.
5. Investigate approaches for obtaining relevant automated data reports to
facilitate the monitoring of contractor performance and the assessment of
liquidated damages for key contract requirements, including requiring
the contractor to provide such reports as part of the contract provisions.
6. Consider whether the next contract should be amended to include a
provision allowing DPSCS to use a random sampling audit protocol to
assess contractor performance and assess liquidated damages.
28

--- Page 31 ---
Exhibit 1
DPSCS Inmate Medical Health Care and Utilization Services
Liquidated Damages
Source: Inmate Medical Health Care and Utilization Services Request for Proposal
for original contract period 7/1/12 to 6/30/17
(edited for presentation purposes) Page 1 of 7
Liquidated Damages Description Minimum Liquidated Damages Performance Standard
Threshold Amount
Percent
(if applicable)
96% Rate calculated on hourly An occurrence is total number of hours for each position that
Provides clinical staffing (Physician, PA, CRNP, RN, LPN and
1 rate per clinical positions. does not meet the 96% minimum fill rate per position Statewide.
Phlebotomist) in accordance with its current DPSCS approved
staffing plan.
2 Contractor maintains Credential Files. 99% $100 for each missing An occurrence is each missing credentialing information item
credentialing required for each employee past or present not submitted to
information item the agency.
required for each
employee past or
present below
minimum threshold.
3 Contractor shall develop and maintain a $250 for each employee An occurrence represents any staff that does not receive a pre‐service
comprehensive competency based orientation that has not completed a orientation. The orientation shall include a review of the Policies and
program for new staff. documented orientation. Procedures manual of the Agency, the Policies and Procedures
manual of the Provider, how to access those manuals, electronic
health record training basics of working in a prison setting and a
review of the limits of the scope of responsibility based on
competency.
4 Contractor provides Emergency Care. $500 per incident that An occurrence is each individual 911 event that does not follow the
emergency care is not first aid and emergency procedures related to emergency triage to a
adequately provided. community based hospital or infirmary.
5 Contractor provides On‐call Physician List. $100 per month that on An occurrence is each time an on call list is not updated or posted as
call list is not updated or required in the infirmary, dispensary and sick call areas.
posted as required.
6 Contractor provides Equipment Inventory Reporting as required. $100 per day annual An occurrence is each day past the Annual Inventory Report due
inventory report is date and each equipment item without a State tag number.
greater than 15 days past Liquidated damages will NOT be assessed against the Contractor for
due date and $25 for a missing piece of equipment that is the responsibility of one of the
each equipment item not Other Healthcare Contractors. Liquidated damages will be assessed
affixed with State tag each day greater than 15 days past the due date.
number.
29

--- Page 32 ---
Exhibit 1
DPSCS Inmate Medical Health Care and Utilization Services
Liquidated Damages
Page 2 of 7
Liquidated Damages Description Minimum Liquidated Damages Performance Standard
Threshold Amount
Percent
(if applicable)
7 Provide Equipment Maintenance Database and Report. 98% $25 for any element An occurrence is any element missing in the database and
report.
missing below 98% in the
database and report.
8 Each inmate admitted to the infirmary, shall only be 100% $100 for each admission An occurrence is when any inmate assessment is not
admitted upon physician order which may be performed without a documented performed, thus no documentation in electronic health
telephonically. order. record (EHR).
9 Each Inmate in the infirmary shall receive an Assessment $100 for each history and An occurrence is any admission history and
within 24 hours of Admission, which shall include a History, physical on admission not physical not documented in EHR within 24
physical, and Treatment Plan documented in the EHR. documented in EHR. hours.
10 Infirmary and isolation unit rounds shall be made daily $50 for each round not made An occurrence is any time daily rounds are not
(1x/day) by the Clinician and documented in the EHR. daily by Clinician and conducted and documented and Nursing rounds not
Nursing rounds shall be performed per shift (3x/day) and documented and $50 for conducted per shift and documented.
evidence of such shall be documented in the EHR. Nursing round not made per
shift and documented.
11 An intake screening, to include a hearing test, of any newly within 10 minutes $50 for each occurrence An occurrence represents any timeframe beyond the 2‐
of 2‐hour
admitted Inmate to any DPSCS institution conducted beyond 2‐hour 10‐minute hour and 10 minute allowance.
timeframe (i.e. 2
utilizing the Intake Medical/Mental Health Screening timeframe.
hours and 10
(IMMS) form within two hours of entry into a facility. minutes)
12 An intake screening, to include a hearing test, of any newly $50 per question for each A question represents any question with a missing
admitted Inmate to any DPSCS institution conducted utilizing question missed in IMMS. component of the receiving process missed in IMMS.
the IMMS form and the completion of all form questions
within two hours of entry into a facility.
13 Conduct a complete medical health examination on all 98% $50 for each occurrence of Any occurrence represents any failure to perform.
inmates, including parole violators and escapees within 7‐days a medical health exam not
of reception. Provide medical intake evaluations every day. completed below 98%
threshold.
30

--- Page 33 ---
Exhibit 1
DPSCS Inmate Medical Health Care and Utilization Services
Liquidated Damages
Page 3 of 7
Liquidated Damages Description Minimum Liquidated Damages Performance Standard
Threshold Amount
Percent
(if applicable)
14 Offer either blood or oral testing (with blood 98% $50 per occurrence An occurrence is any detainee/inmate that does not have
confirmation) and provide counseling and education. below 98% threshold. documentation of HIV testing being offered and
counseling being completed within the required
timeframe.
15 Each inmate with sufficient period of incarceration shall receive 95% $50 for each occurrence An occurrence is any physical re‐exams not completed on
physical re‐evaluations during his or her period of incarceration. exam not completed within inmates once every 4 years (under 50); or if over 50 years of
10 days of schedule age once per year. Liquidated damages will be assessed again
requirements below 95% each month that the requirement is not performed, provided
threshold. the Department has notified the Contractor of the omission or
lack of performance.
16 An inmate shall be tested (screened) for tuberculosis 100% $100 per annual Annual tuberculosis tests must be completed on all inmates
annually whether or not scheduled for physical re‐ tuberculosis test not and detainees as required. Liquidated damages will be
examination. provided to patient as assessed again each month that the requirement is not
required. performed, provided the Department has notified the
Contractor of the omission or lack of performance.
17 Inmates shall be re‐informed of his or her opportunity 95% $50 for each occurrence An occurrence is any re‐educations not completed on
for HIV testing at every physical re‐examination. re‐ education not inmates at every physical re‐examination. Liquidated
completed within 10 days damages will be assessed again each month that the
of schedule requirements requirement is not performed, provided the Department
below 95% threshold. has notified the Contractor of the omission or lack of
performance.
18 Each sick call clinic shall continue operation on that day 95% $25 per patient scheduled An occurrence is when an inmate scheduled for a clinic
until it is completed; i.e. no “backlogs”. but not seen in daily sick session is not seen.
call below 95% threshold.
19 Each sick call clinic shall continue operation on that day until it 100% $50 per triage patient An occurrence is when same day referrals from triage
is completed; i.e. no “backlogs”. Same day referrals from triage not seen in daily sick (emergent complaints) not seen during a clinic session on
(emergent complaints) shall be seen during a clinic session on call. the same day that the inmate appears for services.
the same day that the Inmate appears for services.
20 Contractor maintains Medication Security. 100% (narcotic) $100 for each occurrence An occurrence is any incidence of medication not secured
95% (other than
of medication not secured appropriately.
narcotic)
appropriately.
31

--- Page 34 ---
Exhibit 1
DPSCS Inmate Medical Health Care and Utilization Services
Liquidated Damages
Page 4 of 7
Liquidated Damages Description Minimum Liquidated Damages Performance Standard
Threshold Amount
Percent
(if applicable)
21 Perform scanning of all medications ordered and shipped. 100% $100 for each order An occurrence is each medical medication order
and shipment not (including STAT orders) and shipment not scanned.
scanned.
22 Contractor maintains electronic Medication 95% $200 for each e‐MAR An occurrence is an individual dose not received within 2
Administration Record (e‐MAR). that is not completed hours after receipt; or an individual e‐MAR not
below 95% threshold. documented.
23 Shall follow national guidelines for disease/condition 95% $250 for each deviation An occurrence is a deviation from established treatment
programs.
specific organizations in the development of treatment from established
programs. treatment programs
below 95% threshold.
24 Perform monthly chart review by a RN or Clinician for 95% $100 for each occurrence An occurrence is when a chronic care patient does not
chronic care patients. per audited patient record receive a chart review by a RN or Clinician every month.
that was not provided in
accordance with the OIHS
Clinical Care Manuals
below 95% threshold.
25 Chronic care patients shall be seen by a Clinician every ninety 95% $250 for each occurrence An occurrence is where a chronic care patients are not
days at a minimum. per audited patient record seen by a Clinician every 90 days.
that was not provided in
accordance with the Office
of Inmate Health Clinical
Services Clinical Care
Manuals below 95%
threshold.
26 Make available appropriate prenatal care, specialized 100% $250 per element not An element is non‐performance as required in the Office of
obstetrical services twice weekly and postpartum care for performed as required in the Inmate Health Clinical Services Pregnancy Management
pregnant inmates. Office of Inmate Health Manual.
Clinical Services Pregnancy
Management Manual.
27 The transfer form designated by the Agency and contained 90% $50 for each medical An occurrence represents an incomplete or absent
within the EMR, shall be completed by the Clinician within transfer assessment form transfer assessment form in EHR.
twelve hours of having been notified of transfer or release. not submitted below 90%
threshold.
32

--- Page 35 ---
Exhibit 1
DPSCS Inmate Medical Health Care and Utilization Services
Liquidated Damages
Page 5 of 7
Liquidated Damages Description Minimum Liquidated Damages Performance Standard
Threshold Amount
Percent
(if applicable)
28 Utilize a Continuity of Care Form (hardcopy) consistent with 95% $250 for each occurrence a An occurrence represents a Continuity of Care
Department Policy and Procedure in conjunction with Inmate Continuity of Care Form is Form not being complete in the discharge planning
release. not complete in the process
discharge planning process
below 95% threshold.
29 Operate a comprehensive infection control program that 100% $150 for each occurrence An occurrence represents any failure to document the
ensures that communicable diseases are appropriately of failure to document diagnosis of an Infectious Disease as well as providing
diagnosed, treated, and controlled to prevent and minimize diagnosis/treatment of an the necessary treatment.
infectious disease outbreaks. infectious disease.
30 Contractor addresses Administrative Remedy Procedures 99% $50 for each ARP that is not An occurrence is each ARP not submitted by the due date.
(ARP) & ARP Appeals timely and completely. completed by due date
below 99% threshold and
$25 per day each ARP is
past the due date below
99% threshold.
31 Implement the continuous quality improvement (CQI) program. 100% $100 per occurrence An occurrence represents a failure to conduct
required CQI meetings.
32 Performs Safety and Sanitation inspections. 100% $1,000 per each An occurrence is any inspection not performed and any
inspection not report not submitted within 30 days as required.
performed and $100
per each report not
submitted within 30
days as required.
33 Performs Morbidity and Mortality (M&M) reviews of 100% $125 for each M&M An occurrence when the M&M review is not completed
adverse patient outcomes. review not performed within the 72 hours timeframe and the M&M report of
and $125 per each Multi‐disciplinary input is not submitted within 10
report not submitted. business days.
34 Provide Methadone maintenance according to Federal 100% $1000 per incident that An occurrence is any incident whereby License is not
and State mandates. required Methadone maintained as current and available for inspection.
licensure is not in place.
33

--- Page 36 ---
Exhibit 1
DPSCS Inmate Medical Health Care and Utilization Services
Liquidated Damages
Page 6 of 7
Liquidated Damages Description Minimum Liquidated Damages Performance Standard
Threshold Amount
Percent
(if applicable)
35 Maintain the methadone program currently in place 100% $250 for each occurrence An occurrence is any incident of non‐compliance with
at any approved DPSCS facility for: of non‐compliance with Methadone program
Methadone program.
(1) Utilization in the detoxification / withdrawal of any
Inmate experiencing withdrawal from opiates
when prescribed by a physician; or
(2) Maintenance on methadone of Inmates arrested at
a time where the Inmate is enrolled and
participating in a bona fide methadone program in
the community.
36 Maintain a complete electronic health record (EHR). 95% $50 per occurrence of non‐ An occurrence is every instance of failure to document
completion of patient record patient records properly in EHR.
in EHR below 95% threshold.
37 Provides complete utilization management report. 98% $25 per each missing An element represents any item described in specific
element below 98% sections of the request for proposal.
threshold.
38 Submission of all reports. 99% $25 for each day beyond An occurrence represents any report not submitted as
required.
the due date for each
report below 99%
threshold.
39 Contractor Participation in Meetings as assigned. 99% $50 per meeting that An occurrence is any instance where the required
required representation is attendance of a contractor does not report as required.
not present below 99%
threshold.
40 Submit State Stats Reports. 100% $100 each day past due date. An occurrence is each day past thedue date.
34

--- Page 37 ---
Exhibit 1
DPSCS Inmate Medical Health Care and Utilization Services
Liquidated Damages
Page 7 of 7
Liquidated Damages Description Minimum Liquidated Damages Performance Standard
Threshold Amount
Percent
(if applicable)
41 Contractor shall not prevent any of its staff below the 100% The equivalent of three An occurrence is any time current Staff of the Contractor
Statewide management level from working for a successor month’s salary for each below the statewide management level declines an offer of
invoking a non‐compete clause. State position that is employment because a non‐compete clause it signed with
offered employment by a the Contractor is being invoked and it is verified to the
successor contractor but satisfaction of the DPSCS Contract Manager that this
that declines such rationale is accurate.
employment because a
non‐compete provision it
has signed with the
Contractor is being
invoked by the Contractor.
The means to calculate the
amount of damages for
each position so affected is
to take the hourly rate for
that position as contained
in the Contractor’s
Attachment R contained in
its final technical proposal
times 540 hours. (180
hours to obtain a monthly
damages amount, times 3
months = 540 hours)
35

--- Page 39 ---
Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services
Office of the Executive Director of Field Support Services
6776 Reisterstown Road • Baltimore, MD 21215-2342
(410) 585-3303 • FAX (410) 318-6072 • TOLL FREE (877) 379-8636 • V/TTY (800) 735-2258 • www.dpscs.maryland.gov
STATE OF MARYLAND
September 8, 2017
LARRY HOGAN
GOVERNOR
BOYD K. RUTHERFORD
LT. GOVERNOR
The Honorable Stephen T. Moyer, Secretary
STEPHEN T. MOYER
SECRETARY
Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services
300 East Joppa Road, Suite 1000
WILLIAM G. STEWART
DEPUTY SECRETARY
ADMINISTRATION Towson, Maryland 21286-3020
J. MICHAEL ZEIGLER
DEPUTY SECRETARY
OPERATIONS
Dear Secretary Moyer:
RHEA L. HARRIS
ASSISTANT SECRETARY
PROGRAM AND SERVICES
Included are the itemized responses to the Office of Legislative Audit’s Draft
DAVID N. BEZANSON Legislative Audit Report dated August 2017. This audit examined the monitoring
ASSISTANT SECRETARY
CAPITAL PROGRAMS of contractor performance for the assessment of liquidated damages under the
Department’s Inmate Medical Healthcare Service Contract.
PATRICIA GOINS-JOHNSON
EXECUTIVE D IRECTIOR
FIELD SUPPORT SERVICES
Recommendation #1:
SHARON BAUCOM, M.D.
Establish a process to assess liquidated damages for vital quality of care
DIRECTOR
CLINICAL SERVICES
contract provisions, especially RIE and medication administration. In this
regard, a definition of what constitutes a complete RIE should be established.
OICS should compile the Nursing Unit’s clinical audit results (using the
correct definition of the services to be provided) and the contractor self-
assessment results to help target CAU’s efforts for the purpose of assessing
liquidated damages.
We agree.
Although the Office maintains that the process of continuous quality improvement
(CQI) should be separated from the liquidated damages process, we do agree that
there are circumstances under which liquidated damages should be assessed for
failure to provide care that results in adverse outcomes, and we have been able to
demonstrate assessment for liquidated damages under those circumstances. We
also agree that when the vendor has failed to demonstrate substantial compliance
after a corrective action plan has been implemented following the CQI process
that the Office will take steps necessary to assess liquidated damages for failure to
perform, barring contributory factors beyond the vendor’s control.
The Office will take the following steps:
1 | Page

--- Page 43 ---
A T
UDIT EAM
Adam J. Westover, CPA
Audit Manager
Robert A. Wells, Jr. CPA
Senior Auditor
Tony M. Kinsler
Staff Auditor