Title: Department of Human Resources - Department of Housing and Community Development - Electric Universal Service Program
Date: 11/05/2007
Type: Performance
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5a945d3bcc9d72404c150aa8
Extracted: 2025-06-18T11:01:25.544742
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Performance Audit Report
Department of Human Resources
Department of Housing and Community Development
Electric Universal Service Program
Procedures for the Processing and Disbursement of Benefits Should Be Improved
Weatherization Assistance Services Were Not Properly Monitored
Administrative Expenditures Were Proper and Complied with State Law
November 2007
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
• This report and any related follow-up correspondence are available to the public through the
Office of Legislative Audits at 301 West Preston Street, Room 1202, Baltimore, Maryland
21201. The Office may be contacted by telephone at 410-946-5900, 301-970-5900, or 1-877-
486-9964.
• Electronic copies of our audit reports can be viewed or downloaded from our website at
http://www.ola.state.md.us.
• Alternate formats may be requested through the Maryland Relay Service at 1-800-735-2258.
• The Department of Legislative Services – Office of the Executive Director, 90 State Circle,
Annapolis, Maryland 21401 can also assist you in obtaining copies of our reports and related
correspondence. The Department may be contacted by telephone at 410-946-5400 or 301-
970-5400.

--- Page 3 ---
November 5, 2007
Delegate Steven J. DeBoy, Sr., Co-Chair, Joint Audit Committee
Senator Nathaniel J. McFadden, Co-Chair, Joint Audit Committee
Members of Joint Audit Committee
Annapolis, Maryland
Ladies and Gentlemen:
We conducted a performance audit of the Electric Universal Service Program
(EUSP), which provides energy assistance benefits, including weatherization
assistance, to low-income households. Our audit included the related activities
performed by the Department of Human Resources – Office of Home Energy
Programs (OHEP), selected local administering agencies (LAAs), and the
Department of Housing and Community Development (DHCD) which, since
October 2005, administers the weatherization portion of EUSP. We conducted
this audit in accordance with the requirements of the Public Utility Companies
Article, Section 7-512.1 of the Annotated Code of Maryland.
Our audit disclosed that procedures for processing energy assistance applications
and related payments need improvement. Our tests at two large LAAs found that
required applicant documentation used by LAAs to award energy assistance
benefits was not always obtained, even though, in response to our prior audit
report, a monitoring process had been put in place by OHEP. We also noted that
OHEP had not established procedures to help prevent overpayments and that it
relied upon utility companies to detect and refund overpayments. In addition, we
found that OHEP prepaid utility companies for an entire program year for each
EUSP recipient’s benefits, rather than pay those benefits on a monthly basis, as
allowed by law. This practice resulted in significant lost investment income. For
fiscal year 2006, for example, we estimated that approximately $450,000 in
investment income was lost.
Adequate procedures were also not in place to ensure that contractor billings were
only for weatherization services needed and that the related services were properly
performed. This deficiency existed while the program was administered by OHEP
as well as by DHCD.

--- Page 4 ---
Finally, the recorded EUSP administrative expenditures that we tested were valid
and were properly authorized, and total administrative expenditures were within
the limit established by the Public Service Commission.
We wish to acknowledge the cooperation extended to us by OHEP, DHCD, and
the LAAs during the audit.
Respectfully submitted,
Bruce A. Myers, CPA
Legislative Auditor
2

--- Page 5 ---
Table of Contents
Executive Summary 5
Background Information 7
State Laws and Regulations 7
Agency Responsibilities 7
Awarding of EUSP Bill Payment and Arrearage Retirement Benefits 9
Awarding of EUSP Weatherization Assistance Services 9
Prior Performance Audit 10
Scope, Objectives, and Methodology 11
Findings and Recommendations 13
Energy Assistance Application and Benefit Payments
* Finding 1 – Local Administering Agencies Did Not Always Obtain 13
Documentation to Support Benefits Awarded
* Finding 2 – Procedures Were Not Established to Help Prevent 14
Overpayments
Finding 3 – The Practice of Pre-Paying Utility Companies for an Entire 15
Program Year for each Recipient’s Benefits Resulted in the Loss of
Investment Income of Approximately $450,000 in Fiscal Year 2006
Weatherization Services
Finding 4 – OHEP and DHCD Had Not Established Adequate Procedures to 16
Ensure that Weatherization Services Billed Were Necessary and Proper
Administrative Expenditures
Finding 5 – Recorded EUSP Administrative Expenditures in Fiscal Years 17
2005 and 2006 Appeared to be Appropriate and, in Total, Did Not
Exceed the Limit Established by the Public Service Commission
Agencies’ Responses Appendix
* Denotes item repeated in full or part from preceding audit report
3

--- Page 6 ---
4

--- Page 7 ---
Executive Summary
Background
As authorized by State law, on January 28, 2000, the Public Service Commission
(PSC) issued an order to establish the Electric Universal Service Program (EUSP)
to assist low-income electric customers with bill payment, retirement of electric
bill arrearages, and weatherization assistance. State law assigned responsibility
for administering the program to the Department of Human Resources – Office of
Home Energy Programs (OHEP). The EUSP began providing assistance on July
1, 2000. Annual budgeted program funding for each fiscal year since inception,
and including fiscal year 2006, has been $34 million, of which $1 million is
allocated for weatherization assistance services. Effective fiscal year 2007, the
annual funding increased to $37 million. The weatherization assistance portion of
the program was transferred to the Department of Housing and Community
Development (DHCD) on October 1, 2005, and the aforementioned annual
funding is provided to DHCD from the EUSP.
Our current performance audit was conducted in accordance with the Public
Utility Companies Article, Section 7-512.1 of the Annotated Code of Maryland,
which requires us to conduct a performance audit of EUSP once every three years,
or at another interval if so directed by the Joint Audit Committee.
Conclusions
Although OHEP has taken some action in response to our last audit, our current
audit results indicate that enhancements are still needed to the procedures and
policies for processing energy assistance applications and for awarding benefits.
Our audit also disclosed that OHEP and DHCD had not established adequate
procedures to ensure the propriety of weatherization billings. Finally, we noted
that the recorded EUSP administrative expenditures tested were valid and were
properly authorized, and total administrative expenditures did not exceed 10
percent of the EUSP funding—the maximum allowed by the Public Service
Commission.
Two of the findings in this report are repeated from our preceding EUSP
performance audit report dated January 5, 2004. An overview of our major
findings, for which corrective actions are required, is reflected on the next page.
5

--- Page 8 ---
Overview of Major Findings
Problem Area Comments/Examples
Objective 1 – Energy Assistance Application and Benefit Payments
Although OHEP had instituted a process to monitor the
Documentation of
completeness of applicant data used to determine benefit
Required
amounts, based on our tests in two LAAs, we continued to note
Application Data
instances in which the required documentation was not
Was Not Always
obtained. In one LAA tested, procedures were not sufficient to
Obtained
determine the existence of all sources of income. (Finding 1)
Adequate OHEP lacked procedures to help prevent overpayments.
Procedures Were Rather, it relied on utility companies to identify and return any
Not Established to overpayments. Our review of the fiscal year 2006 payments to
Help Prevent the utility companies for recipients under one large LAA
Overpayments disclosed that numerous overpayments were made. (Finding 2)
Payments to utility companies, on behalf of recipients, were
OHEP’s Practice of
made for the entire program year, rather than on a monthly
Paying Utility
basis. Based on current benefit levels, we estimate that
Companies Resulted
investment income of approximately $450,000 could have been
in the Loss of
earned during fiscal year 2006 by modifying this practice, as
Investment Income
allowed by State law. (Finding 3)
Objective 2 – Weatherization Services
OHEP and DHCD had not established adequate procedures to
Monitoring the
ensure that weatherization billings were valid and that the
Propriety of
related services were needed. Our test of contractor-billed
Weatherization
weatherization services disclosed instances in which there were
Billings Was
no verifications that the services had been satisfactorily
Inadequate
performed. (Finding 4)
Objective 3 – Administrative Expenditures
EUSP Tested administrative expenditures incurred by OHEP for fiscal
Administrative years 2005 and 2006 were valid and were properly authorized,
Expenditures Were and the totals for the aforementioned fiscal years did not exceed
Proper the limit established by the PSC. (Finding 5)
Recommendations
We recommend that OHEP establish adequate procedures over energy assistance
application processing to ensure that the proper benefit amounts are paid only on
behalf of eligible applicants. We also recommend that each applicant’s benefits be
disbursed to utility companies on a monthly, rather than yearly, basis. Finally, we
recommend that DHCD conduct site visits to ensure that proposed weatherization
service work is necessary and that DHCD ensure that weatherization services billed
by contractors were completed in a satisfactory manner.
6

--- Page 9 ---
Background Information
State Laws and Regulations
In accordance with the Public Utility Companies Article, Section 7-512.1 of the
Annotated Code of Maryland, in January 2000, the Public Service Commission
(PSC) established the Electric Universal Services Program (EUSP) to assist low-
income electric customers with bill payment, retirement of electric bill arrearages,
and weatherization assistance. Although the law charged PSC with oversight
responsibility for EUSP, it assigned responsibility for administering EUSP to the
Department of Human Resources (DHR). EUSP began providing assistance on
July 1, 2000. Chapter 468, Laws of Maryland, 2005, effective October 1, 2005
transferred the responsibility for weatherization services from DHR to the
Department of Housing and Community Development (DHCD), which provided
weatherization services under a similar, but much larger, program.
Agency Responsibilities
The DHR Office of Home Energy Programs (OHEP) is responsible for
administering the bill payment and arrearage retirement provisions of EUSP and,
prior to October 2005, for administering the weatherization assistance provisions
of EUSP. OHEP contracts with local administering agencies (LAAs), which
determine the eligibility of EUSP applicants and which process applications
relating to bill payment and arrearage retirement benefits. OHEP disburses these
EUSP benefits to utility companies for approved applicants. Applicants approved
by OHEP for bill payment and arrearage retirement benefits are also eligible for
weatherization services which, since October 1, 2005, have been administered by
DHCD. Similar to OHEP, DHCD contracts with its LAAs to administer these
services.
USP is funded by surcharge fees collected monthly by each utility company from
industrial, commercial, and residential electric customers and remitted to the
Comptroller of the Treasury for deposit with EUSP. State law stipulates that the
$34 million (increased to $37 million effective fiscal year 2007) in annual
program funding be collected from electric customers: $24.4 million
(subsequently increased to $27.4 million) from industrial and commercial
customers, and $9.6 million from residential customers. Table 1 on the following
page summarizes EUSP funding and expenditures during fiscal years 2004
through 2006. Table 2 on the following page details the number of households
and the average benefit per household for EUSP bill payment, arrearage
retirement, and weatherization assistance during fiscal year 2006.
7

--- Page 10 ---
TABLE 1
EUSP Funding and Expenditures for Fiscal Years 2004 - 2006
Fiscal Year Fiscal Year Fiscal Year
2004 2005 2006
Program Funding $34,000,000 $34,000,000 $34,000,000
Administrative
$2,904,720 $3,202,581 $3,235,309
Expenditures
Administrative
Expenditures as a
8.54% 9.42% 9.52%
Percentage of Program
Funding (cid:110)
Program Expenditures (cid:111) $27,546,485 $27,313,658 $32,359,171
Total Program and
Administrative $30,451,205 $30,516,239 $35,594,480
Expenditures
Unexpended Funds (cid:112) $3,548,795 $3,483,761 $(1,594,480)
Source: OHEP Fiscal Year 2004, 2005, and 2006 Annual Reports
(cid:110) The Public Service Commission (PSC) established a limit of 10 percent of program
funding for administrative expenditures.
(cid:111) These expenditures do not include those related to prior year unspent funds.
(cid:112) Fiscal year 2004 and 2005 unexpended funds were retained, based on approval from the
PSC, for future EUSP activities. Excess program expenditures in fiscal year 2006 were
funded by a deficiency appropriation.
TABLE 2
Fiscal Year 2006 EUSP Assistance Statistics
Bill Arrearage
Weatherization
Payment Retirement
Amount of Assistance
$29,591,519 $1,667,604 $1,000,000
Paid (cid:110)
Number of Households
83,853 3,937 628
Served
Average Benefit Per
$353 $424 $1,592
Household
Source: OHEP and DHCD Annual Reports for Fiscal Year 2006
(cid:110) Excludes $100,048 in allowable outreach costs included in Table 1.
8

--- Page 11 ---
Awarding of EUSP Bill Payment and Arrearage Retirement
Benefits
Low-income households apply for EUSP bill payment and arrearage retirement
assistance by submitting an application to one of twenty OHEP LAAs. Generally,
the LAAs are local departments of social services or private community assistance
agencies, which are paid by OHEP for related administrative services. Applicants
must meet eligibility criteria, such as limitations on total household income. LAA
personnel are required by State regulations to obtain documentation to verify
certain information recorded on each application, such as total household income,
residency status, and household size. LAA personnel enter each applicant’s
information into OHEP’s automated benefit system, which determines the
applicant’s eligibility and, if the applicant is deemed to be eligible, LAA
personnel calculate the amount of awarded assistance.
The amount of assistance awarded depends upon the applicant’s total household
income, household size, and the amount of electricity used by the applicant.
OHEP’s procedures provide that LAA supervisory personnel review each
application, supporting documentation, and the information on the automated
system, and approve the application online. The LAAs submit each approved
application electronically to OHEP for payment. OHEP prepays the energy
assistance benefits for the remaining portion of the applicable fiscal year directly
to the applicant’s utility company.
Awarding of EUSP Weatherization Assistance Services
Approved applicants for EUSP bill payment and arrearage retirement assistance
can also elect to have their households weatherized (such as the repair and
insulation of doors and windows) to increase energy efficiency and to reduce
future electricity usage. EUSP’s prioritization for applicants receiving
weatherization services is based on several criteria: (1) the applicant’s household
electricity usage, (2) the results of an on-site inspection of the applicant’s
residence, and (3) whether the applicant’s residential heating source is electric.
During the period from December 2002 through September 2005, OHEP
contracted with a private firm to administer and provide the weatherization
services (including the preliminary on-site inspections noted above). Legislation
subsequently transferred the responsibility for weatherization assistance services
to DHCD, effective October 1, 2005. Additionally, DHCD receives an annual
transfer from EUSP to provide funds for these services. As a result, DHCD
9

--- Page 12 ---
(using a number of contractors to perform the actual work) now administers these
services, as well as a similar, but much larger, weatherization program (that had
been in existence for many years) for DHCD qualified applicants.
Prior Performance Audit
On January 5, 2004, we issued our preceding performance audit report on the
EUSP. In that report, we identified a number of issues related to the propriety of
administrative expenditures, the monitoring of contracts and contractor payments,
and the procedures for processing energy assistance applications and awarding
benefits. Six report items were presented along with detailed recommendations
for improving EUSP performance and operations. Two of the findings in this
report are repeated from this prior EUSP performance audit report; the remaining
four were satisfactorily addressed.
10

--- Page 13 ---
Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
Scope
We conducted a performance audit of the Electric Universal Service Program
(EUSP), which provides energy assistance benefits (including weatherization
assistance) to low-income households. Our audit included the related activities
performed by the Department of Human Resources’ Office of Home Energy
Programs (OHEP), the Department of Housing and Community Development
(DHCD), and selected local administering agencies (LAAs). The audit was
conducted to comply with the requirements of the Public Utility Companies
Article, Section 7-512.1 of the Annotated Code of Maryland. The audit was
conducted under the authority of the State Government Article, Section 2-1221 of
the Annotated Code of Maryland, and was performed in accordance with
generally accepted government auditing standards.
Objectives
The objectives of our audit were as follows:
(1) To assess the adequacy of procedures for processing energy assistance
applications during fiscal years 2005 and 2006, and to determine whether
assistance payments were made only on behalf of eligible applicants in the
proper amounts
(2) To assess the adequacy of OHEP’s and DHCD’s monitoring of contractor
performance relating to the EUSP weatherization services
(3) To determine whether EUSP administrative expenditures made during
fiscal years 2005 and 2006 were valid administrative charges to the
programs, were properly authorized and supported, and were monitored by
OHEP to ensure that such costs did not exceed 10 percent of energy
assistance program funding in accordance with limitations imposed by the
Public Service Commission
Our audit did not include a review of the collection of EUSP surcharges by utility
companies and the transfer of those funds to the Comptroller of the Treasury.
11

--- Page 14 ---
Methodology
To accomplish our objectives, we reviewed applicable State laws and regulations,
as well as policies and procedures established by DHR, DHCD, and the LAAs.
We also reviewed OHEP’s calculation of the percentage of EUSP costs spent on
the administration of the program and conducted related tests of administrative
and program costs. Additionally, we reviewed OHEP’s process for procuring
service contracts, for monitoring contractor performance and compliance with
these contracts, and for processing the related contractor payments. Finally, we
interviewed LAA personnel involved in determining applicant eligibility for
energy assistance benefits and conducted tests of benefits awarded on behalf of
low-income households. In this regard, we judgmentally selected energy
assistance applications for households in two of the largest LAAs based on total
annual assistance payments, accounting for more than 40 percent of the total
EUSP applications.
Fieldwork and Agency Responses
Our fieldwork was conducted primarily from September 2006 through January
2007. The DHR and DHCD responses to our findings and recommendations
appear as an appendix to this report. As prescribed in the State Government
Article, Section 2-1224 of the Annotated Code of Maryland, we will advise each
Department regarding the results of our review of its response.
12

--- Page 15 ---
Findings and Recommendations
Energy Assistance Application and Benefit Payments
Conclusions
The Department of Human Resources’ Office of Home Energy Programs (OHEP)
did not always obtain documentation in support of applicant data used to
determine the amount of energy assistance benefits awarded. Specifically, our
tests at two local administering agencies (LAAs) —Baltimore City and Baltimore
County— disclosed that they did not always document that applicants met the
requirements for benefits (such as income requirements). In addition, OHEP had
not established adequate procedures to help prevent overpayments of energy
assistance benefits. Furthermore, OHEP prepaid utility companies for an entire
program year for each recipient’s Electric Universal Service Program (EUSP)
benefits, rather than pay those benefits on a monthly basis. As a result, the State
lost investment income of approximately $450,000 during fiscal year 2006.
Finding 1
LAAs did not always obtain documentation to support applicant data used to
determine the amount of energy assistance benefits awarded.
Analysis
The two LAAs tested did not always obtain required documentation to support
data on the applications used to compute the amount of energy assistance benefits
awarded. Specifically, our test of 25 energy assistance applications, for which the
related bill payment assistance totaled $15,264 during fiscal years 2005 and 2006,
disclosed that 9 applications (some from each LAA), for which related assistance
totaled $5,760, lacked complete documentation required by State regulations to
support eligibility. Missing documentation included proof of residency and proof
of identity for applicants, household income, and social security numbers for all
household members. At one of these two LAAs, we noted that it did not use a
checklist to identify all sources of countable household income (such as
unemployment insurance benefits and child support payments); this checklist is
required by OHEP since the application form does not list the specific types of
income to be reported.
Similar findings were noted in our two prior EUSP performance audit reports. In
response to our prior audit report finding, OHEP established ongoing site visits to
monitor LAA compliance with energy assistance application processing
requirements. While we were advised by OHEP management that, as a result of
13

--- Page 16 ---
these site visits, improvements have been noted in this area, our audit results
indicate that increased monitoring is needed. Such monitoring is critical as the
failure to verify applicant data could result in improper benefit awards.
Recommendation 1
We again recommend that OHEP take appropriate steps (for example,
increase monitoring) to ensure that LAAs obtain documentation to support
data on applications used to compute energy assistance benefits awarded to
applicants.
Finding 2
OHEP had not established adequate procedures to help prevent
overpayments.
Analysis
OHEP had not established adequate procedures to help prevent overpayments,
including duplicate payments, for energy assistance benefits. Rather, OHEP relied
upon utility companies to unilaterally detect and refund overpayments. According
to OHEP records, during fiscal year 2006, refunds from utility companies totaled
approximately $1.3 million.
For one of the LAAs audited, OHEP’s database of bill payment assistance
applications in fiscal year 2006 reflected 529 instances in which two or more
payments were made on behalf of applicants with identical names. Our review
also disclosed that the related social security numbers were identical in 72 of these
instances and were only slightly different (that is, differed by one digit) in 21 of
these instances. To the extent that refunds were not received from utility
companies, potential overpayments in these 93 instances, totaled $34,643.
Our detailed review of 15 of these 93 instances confirmed that the applicants had
been overpaid by $9,660; the utility companies had detected and refunded the
overpayments applicable to 13 of these applicants. Subsequent to our fieldwork,
OHEP advised that refunds were received for the remaining 2 overpayments.
OHEP’s procedures provide that LAA supervisory personnel review each
application, supporting documentation, and the information on the automated
system, and approve each application online. Although OHEP management did
not identify the causes of these specific overpayments, it did advise us that the
overpayments could have been caused, in part, by a system deficiency, which
could allow previously-paid benefits to be converted to an “awaiting certification”
status, and erroneously paid twice. A condition regarding OHEP’s failure to
14

--- Page 17 ---
prevent overpayments was noted in our preceding audit report; in its response,
DHR advised that the overpayments were caused by human errors which the
aforementioned supervisory review should have detected and prevented.
Recommendation 2
We again recommend that OHEP establish procedures to help prevent
overpayments from occurring. We also again recommend that OHEP review
all duplicate names to identify the cause(s) and, if necessary, take
appropriate corrective action, including recovery of overpayments and
modifications to the automated system.
Finding 3
OHEP’s practice of paying the utility companies for an entire program year
for each recipient at one time resulted in the loss of investment income
totaling approximately $450,000 during fiscal year 2006.
Analysis
OHEP paid utility companies for an entire program year for each recipient’s
benefits at one time, rather than make these payments on a monthly basis.
Furthermore, we were advised that the utility companies prorated the benefits
received as monthly credits on the applicants’ bills. OHEP’s payment practice
resulted in the loss of investment income to the State. Based on our calculations,
had OHEP processed each recipient’s monthly benefit separately, the State would
have earned investment income totaling approximately $450,000 during fiscal
year 2006. Similar savings would have been earned in previous years. This
income could have been used for additional EUSP benefits.
Although State laws and regulations do not mandate the frequency of benefit
payments to utility companies, legislation passed during the 2006 special
legislative session modified the EUSP statute to provide that benefits may be paid
to these companies by OHEP on a monthly basis for each recipient.
Recommendation 3
We recommend that OHEP maximize investment income by modifying its
benefit payment system to provide for benefits to be paid on a monthly basis
for each recipient.
15

--- Page 18 ---
Weatherization Services
Conclusions
Adequate procedures were not in place to ensure that contractor billings were for
services needed, and that contractor invoices were for services actually performed.
This deficiency existed while the program was administered by OHEP as well as
since its transfer to DHCD in October 2005.
Finding 4
OHEP and DHCD had not established adequate procedures to ensure the
propriety of weatherization services provided and related billings.
Analysis
OHEP and DHCD had not established adequate procedures to ensure that
weatherization services provided were needed and that the related billings were
valid. Our review of the procedures and controls over the program disclosed the
following conditions:
• Procedures were not in place to ensure that weatherization services provided
were necessary. Specifically, while these services were under OHEP, the
contractor was responsible for determining what weatherization services were
needed and for performing that work. Effective October 2005, with the
transfer of responsibility to DHCD, the LAAs determined what services
needed to be performed, and various contractors were responsible for
performing the work. However, employees of OHEP or DHCD did not verify
the necessity of the proposed work (such as by performing site visits).
• OHEP and DHCD did not ensure that weatherization services billed by the
contractor were proper and that the work had been satisfactorily completed.
As evidence of satisfactory completion, quality control forms are required to
be completed and signed by both the customer and the LAA. However our
test of 11 households, reported as receiving approved weatherization services
totaling $33,434 during the period from September 2004 to January 2006,
disclosed deficiencies related to the quality control forms for 7 households
with related weatherization costs totaling $19,918. For example, in 3
instances, those forms were not completed and, in another 2 instances, the
forms were dated prior to the project completion dates.
Recommendation 4
We recommend that employees of DHCD conduct site visits to ensure that
proposed work is necessary. In addition, to ensure that all billed services
16

--- Page 19 ---
were completed in a satisfactory manner, we recommend that DHCD ensure
that required quality control forms are properly completed and submitted
for each household receiving weatherization services.
Administrative Expenditures
Finding 5
Recorded EUSP administrative expenditures in fiscal years 2005 and 2006
appeared to be appropriate and, in total, did not exceed the limit established
by the PSC.
Analysis
Our review of OHEP procedures and controls and related testing of administrative
expenditures disclosed that tested administrative expenditures from fiscal years
2005 and 2006 were valid EUSP charges and were properly authorized and
supported. Additionally, we noted that expenditures, in total, were properly
monitored by OHEP and, for the aforementioned years, they did not exceed 10
percent of program funding—the maximum limit established by the PSC.
Recommendation 5
None
17

--- Page 21 ---
MARYLAND DEPARTMENT OF HUMAN RESOURCES
COMMUNITY SERVICES ADMINSTRATION
OFFICE OF HOME ENERGY PROGRAMS
RESPONSE TO FINDINGS OF THE DRAFT PERFORMANCE AUDIT
ON THE ELECTRIC UNIVERSAL SERVICE PROGRAM
Finding 1
LAAs did not always obtain documentation to support applicant data used to
determine the amount of energy assistance benefits awarded.
Response:
OHEP will take action to assure that proper documentation is obtained for all applicants.
OHEP will issue a transmittal to local administering agencies re-iterating the required
documentation. OHEP, in addition to its regular monitoring of local agencies will take an
additional quarterly sample of cases in the agencies identified in the finding. The first
sample will take place by the end of November. OHEP will also confer with the two
agencies by the end of November and identify a process to assure that all workers are
familiar with the policy.
Finding 2
OHEP had not established adequate procedures to detect and prevent overpayment.
Response:
OHEP agrees that any payment over the eligible benefit established by the qualifications
under EUSP or a duplicate payment should be prevented. OHEP has already reviewed
software functions and has identified a change that will help eliminate this situation. A
work request has already been submitted to the OHEP software contractor that
implements a procedure for identifying second payments prior to approval of an
application for a benefit. Implementation is anticipated at the end of January.

--- Page 22 ---
Finding 3
OHEP’s practice for paying the utilities companies for an entire program year for
each recipient at one time resulted in the loss of investment income totaling
approximately $450,000 during fiscal year 2006.
Response:
Any recommendation regarding the change to monthly payments from annual payments
should be made on the basis of what is good for the customer and not potential gain in
investment income. The issue of monthly payments is being examined by the Public
Service Commission as a possible policy change as identified in PSC Order 81638 in
Case No. 8903. Since the PSC has oversight responsibility of EUSP and OHEP’s
administration of the program, no action is planned at this time until the PSC issues an
order relating to monthly payments.

--- Page 26 ---
A T
UDIT EAM
Brian S. Tanen, CPA, CFE
Audit Manager
Joseph E. Adriani
Senior Auditor
Tracy D. Mayet
W. Thomas Sides
Jennifer L. Thompson
Staff Auditors