Title: Department of General Services - Possible Conflict of Interest Related to Certain Architectural and Engineering Contracts
Date: 02/28/2008
Type: Fraud, Waste, and Abuse
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5a945d33cc9d72404c1509e6
Extracted: 2025-06-18T06:02:35.034783
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Special Review
Department of General Services
Possible Conflict of Interest Related to Certain
Architectural and Engineering Contracts
A DGS Management Employee and Subordinate Were Directly Involved in
Contracts Awarded to Firms That Employed the Management Employee’s Spouse
Better Policies and Procedures Are Needed to Prevent Conflicts of Interest
February 2008
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
• This report and any related follow-up correspondence are available to the public through the
Office of Legislative Audits at 301 West Preston Street, Room 1202, Baltimore, Maryland
21201. The Office may be contacted by telephone at 410-946-5900, 301-970-5900, or 1-877-
486-9964.
• Electronic copies of our audit reports can be viewed or downloaded from our website at
http://www.ola.state.md.us.
• Alternate formats may be requested through the Maryland Relay Service at 1-800-735-2258.
• The Department of Legislative Services – Office of the Executive Director, 90 State Circle,
Annapolis, Maryland 21401 can also assist you in obtaining copies of our reports and related
correspondence. The Department may be contacted by telephone at 410-946-5400 or 301-
970-5400.

--- Page 3 ---
February 28, 2008
Senator Verna L. Jones, Co-Chair, Joint Audit Committee
Delegate Steven J. DeBoy, Sr., Co-Chair, Joint Audit Committee
Members of Joint Audit Committee
Annapolis, Maryland
Ladies and Gentlemen:
We conducted a follow-up review of a Special Review report we issued in
November 2003, regarding an allegation received through our fraud hotline. The
allegation related to possible improper activity in the procurement of architectural
and engineering services by the Department of General Services (DGS). In that
report, we noted that a management employee at DGS and/or the employee’s
subordinates were involved with procuring two architectural and engineering
service contracts totaling $3.6 million from a firm where the management
employee’s spouse was employed as a vice president. At that time, we
recommended that the matter be referred to the State Ethics Commission for
further review and investigation and that DGS establish procedures to ensure that
conflicts of interest do not occur when awarding State contracts in the future.
DGS referred the case to the State Ethics Commission which entered into a
disposition agreement on May 27, 2004 with the DGS management employee.
The agreement indicated, in part, that the management employee’s participation in
the aforementioned contracts was a violation of Section 15-501 of the Public
Ethics Law. The agreement further provided that the management employee
would not participate either directly or through supervisory duties in any project
involving the management employee’s spouse’s firm. According to the
agreement, DGS had revised its internal operating policies to ensure that no such
conflict occurred in the future.
Our current review disclosed that the revised operating policies were inadequate.
Specifically, despite the Ethics Commission’s findings, the DGS management
employee continued to supervise an employee with responsibilities relating to one
of the aforementioned contracts involving the firm that employed the management
employee’s spouse for a seven-month period. In addition, the same management
employee was directly involved in a new contract totaling $4.3 million awarded to
another firm that subsequently employed the management employee’s spouse.

--- Page 4 ---
The participation in these transactions by the management employee and
subordinate appears to be a violation of one or more provisions of the State Ethics
Law as well as certain provisions of State procurement laws.
Due to the questionable nature of these activities, we referred these matters to the
Office of the Attorney General’s Criminal Division.
Respectfully submitted,
Bruce A. Myers, CPA
Legislative Auditor
2

--- Page 5 ---
Scope, Objective, and Methodology
We conducted a follow-up review of a Special Review report we issued in
November 2003 regarding an allegation received through our fraud hotline. The
allegation related to possible improper activity in the procurement of architectural
and engineering services by the Department of General Services (DGS). In that
report, we noted that a management employee at DGS and/or the employee’s
subordinates were involved with procuring two architectural and engineering
service contracts totaling $3.6 million from a firm where the management
employee’s spouse was employed as a vice president. At that time, we
recommended that the matter be referred to the State Ethics Commission for
further review and investigation. We also recommended that DGS establish
procedures to ensure that conflicts of interest do not occur when awarding State
contracts in the future.
The purpose of our current follow-up review was to determine whether DGS
complied with our prior report recommendations. This review was performed in
accordance with State Government Article, Section 2-1220 of the Annotated Code
of Maryland.
Our review consisted of tests, analyses, observations, and discussions with DGS
personnel as we deemed necessary to achieve our objective. Our review did not
constitute an audit conducted in accordance with generally accepted government
auditing standards. Had we conducted an audit in accordance with generally
accepted government auditing standards, other matters may have come to our
attention that would have been reported. Our review was conducted primarily
from September through November 2007. Certain fiscal compliance issues
related to one of the contracts discussed in this report will be included in the audit
report on our fiscal compliance audit of the Department of General Services –
Office of the Secretary and Other Units for the period beginning November 24,
2003 and ending January 31, 2007.
DGS’s response to our findings and recommendations is included in the appendix
to this report. As prescribed in the State Government Article, Section 2-1224 of
the Annotated Code of Maryland, we will advise DGS regarding the results of our
review of its response.
3

--- Page 6 ---
Background Information
The DGS Office of Facilities Planning, Design and Construction (the Office)
provides professional management and technical services for State agencies in the
planning, budgeting, design, construction, and maintenance of State facilities.
State agencies generally must coordinate all phases of the design and construction
of certain capital projects with DGS.
4

--- Page 7 ---
Findings and Recommendations
Background
In November 2003, we issued a special report addressing an allegation related to
the Department of General Services (DGS) that was received through our fraud
hotline. The report noted that a DGS management employee was directly
involved in and/or supervised employees involved in the procurement of two
architectural and engineering (A&E) service contracts with a firm where the
management employee’s spouse was a vice president. We recommended that
DGS immediately refer this issue to the State Ethics Commission for further
review and investigation and that DGS establish procedures to ensure that
conflicts of interest do not occur when awarding State contracts in the future.
DGS referred the case to the State Ethics Commission which entered into a
disposition agreement on May 27, 2004 with the DGS management employee.
The agreement indicated, in part, that the management employee’s participation in
the aforementioned contracts was a violation of Section 15-501 of the Public
Ethics Law. The agreement further provided that the management employee
would not participate either directly or through supervisory duties in any project
involving the management employee’s spouse’s firm and that DGS had revised its
internal operating policies to ensure that no such conflict occurred.
Finding
A DGS management employee continued to supervise an employee with
responsibilities relating to a contract involving the firm that employed the
management employee’s spouse despite an agreement with the State Ethics
Commission to the contrary. The same management employee was directly
involved in a new contract totaling $4.3 million awarded to another firm that
subsequently employed the management employee’s spouse.
Analysis
Despite an agreement to the contrary with the State Ethics Commission, a DGS
management employee continued to supervise an employee with responsibilities
relating to a contract involving the firm that employed the management
employee’s spouse. In addition, we noted that the same management employee
was directly involved in a new contract totaling $4.3 million awarded to another
firm that subsequently employed the management employee’s spouse, and DGS’
revised operating policies had not prevented or detected this potential conflict.
Specifically, our review disclosed the following conditions:
5

--- Page 8 ---
• After the signing of the aforementioned disposition agreement in May 2004,
the management employee continued to act in a supervisory capacity for an
employee involved with one of the contracts addressed in our 2003 Special
Review report for approximately a seven-month period, until the employee’s
spouse left the firm’s employment. This was in direct violation of the
disposition agreement signed by the employee, since the DGS employee’s
spouse was still employed by the firm during the aforementioned period.
During that period, DGS made payments totaling $183,000 to the
aforementioned firm.
• The management employee subsequently participated in another procurement,
and, as of October 1, 2007, acted as the project manager, on a contract totaling
$4.3 million to another A&E firm where the management employee’s spouse
was subsequently employed. Although the management employee was not a
member of the Qualification Committee, which was responsible for rating the
technical qualifications of the A&E firm and the ultimate selection of the firm,
the management employee played a key role in the price negotiations on the
contract. The employee’s spouse started receiving compensation from the
new firm in calendar year 2005, shortly after the firm’s services had been
procured. During the period from August 2004 through August 2007, the
management employee was directly responsible for approving contract
billings, including some billings related to change orders, totaling
approximately $3.1 million.
• Although the disposition agreement indicated that DGS had revised its
internal operating policies to ensure that conflicts of interest do not occur
when awarding State contracts, our review disclosed that the revised policies
were inadequate. Specifically, the policies only required management
employees involved in certain aspects of the procurement (such as members
of the Qualification Committee) to complete an affidavit relating to such
conflicts, and the policies did not include a provision to detect potential
conflicts that may arise after the award of contracts.
• The management employee did not disclose that his/her spouse was employed
by an entity that was doing business with the State on the calendar year 2005
and 2006 financial disclosure statements filed with the State Ethics
Commission, as required. In addition, we were advised by DGS management
that they were unaware of the spouse’s employment with the current firm.
The management employee’s and subordinate’s involvement with the
aforementioned contracts appear to violate one or more provisions of State Ethics
Law which is contained in Title 15 of the State Government Article of the
6

--- Page 9 ---
Annotated Code of Maryland. Specifically, Section 15-501 of the Article states
that an employee may not participate in a matter if a qualifying relative of the
employee (such as a spouse) has an interest in the matter and the employee knows
of the interest. In addition, if the management employee’s spouse is an owner of
the aforementioned firm, Section 15-502 of the Article states, in part, that an
employee’s spouse may not have a financial interest of more than three percent in
an entity that is negotiating or has entered into a contract with the employee’s
governmental unit. Finally, Section 15-506 of the Article states that an employee
may not intentionally use the prestige of office or public position for that
employee’s private gain or that of another.
In addition, the management employee’s involvement in these A&E contracts
may have violated the State Finance and Procurement Article, Section 4-304
which governs DGS employees. This Article states that an employee of DGS
may not accept or receive, directly or indirectly, whether by rebate, gift or
otherwise, from a person to whom a contract may be awarded any money or thing
of value or any promise, obligation, or contract for future reward or
compensation.
Furthermore, on the calendar year 2005 and 2006 disclosure statements submitted
to the State Ethics Commission, the management employee made an oath or
affirmed under penalty of perjury that the contents of the financial disclosure
statement, are complete, true, and correct to the best of the employee’s
knowledge, information, and belief. However, as noted above, the disclosure
statements indicated that neither the employee nor his spouse had salaried
employment or held any office or directorship with an entity that did business
with the State. This appears to violate provisions of the Criminal Law Article of
the Annotated Code of Maryland. Specifically, Section 9-101 of that Article
states that a person may not willfully and falsely make an oath or affirmation as to
a material fact in an affidavit required by any State, federal, or local law or under
the Maryland Rules, which would include the State Ethics Commission disclosure
statements.
Finally, certain of these conditions appear to violate provisions of a Governor’s
Executive Order related to standards of conduct for Executive Branch employees.
Specifically, the Executive Order states, in part, that an employee shall not solicit
or accept any gift or other item of monetary value from any person or entity
seeking official action from, doing business with, or conducting activities
regulated by the employee’s agency, or whose interests may be substantially
affected by the performance or nonperformance of the employee’s duties. The
Order further states that employees shall avoid any actions creating the
appearance that they are violating applicable law or the ethical standards.
7

--- Page 10 ---
As a result of the aforementioned questionable activity, we referred these matters
to the Office of the Attorney General’s Criminal Division.
Recommendation
We recommend that DGS immediately refer this issue to the State Ethics
Commission for further review and investigation. Additionally, we again
recommend that DGS establish adequate procedures to ensure that conflicts
of interest do not occur when awarding State contracts in the future. Finally,
we recommend that DGS fully cooperate with the Office of the Attorney
General’s Criminal Division regarding this matter.
8