Title: Somerset County Public Schools

NOTE: In accordance with Chapter 261, 2016 Laws of Maryland, this system has obtained an exemption from one audit which extends the time until the next audit from 6 years to 12 years.
Date: 09/15/2014
Type: Local School Systems
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5a945d38cc9d72404c150a32
Extracted: 2025-06-18T10:47:29.782847
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Financial Management Practices Audit Report
Somerset County Public Schools
September 2014
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
 This report and any related follow-up correspondence are available to the public through
the Office of Legislative Audits at 301 West Preston Street, Room 1202, Baltimore,
Maryland 21201. The Office may be contacted by telephone at 410-946-5900, 301-970-
5900, or 1-877-486-9964.
 Electronic copies of our audit reports can be viewed or downloaded from our website at
http://www.ola.state.md.us.
 Alternate formats may be requested through the Maryland Relay Service at 1-800-735-
2258.
 The Department of Legislative Services – Office of the Executive Director, 90 State Circle,
Annapolis, Maryland 21401 can also assist you in obtaining copies of our reports and
related correspondence. The Department may be contacted by telephone at 410-946-
5400 or 301-970-5400.

--- Page 5 ---
Table of Contents
Executive Summary 5
Background Information 7
Statistical Overview 7
Oversight 7
External Audits 7
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report 8
Findings and Recommendations 9
Revenue and Billing Cycle
Finding 1 – Collections Were Not Always Deposited Timely Nor 9
Adequately Secured Prior to Deposit
Finding 2 – SCPS Lacked Written Policies and Procedures for 10
Controlling Student Activity Funds
Federal Funds 11
Procurement and Disbursement Cycle
Finding 3 – Users’ Capabilities on the Automated Procurement and 12
Accounts Payable System Were Not Adequately Restricted
* Finding 4 – SCPS’ Procurement Policies Generally Did Not Require 13
Board Approval for Certain Purchases and Did Not Address
Contractual Services
* Finding 5 – Contracts Were Frequently Not Awarded Through 14
Competitive Procurements and Payment Processing Was Not
Always Adequate
Human Resources and Payroll
* Finding 6 – Independent Reviews of Payroll and Personnel 15
Transactions Processed Were Lacking
Finding 7 – Documentation Was Lacking That the Board Possessed 16
All Pertinent Information Prior to Approving an Employee
Termination Settlement Agreement
Inventory Control and Accountability
* Finding 8 – Equipment Policies Were Not Comprehensive and 17
Disposals Were Not Approved
* Denotes item repeated in full or part from preceding audit report
3

--- Page 6 ---
Information Technology
Finding 9 – SCPS’ Network Was Not Adequately Secured and Certain 19
User Capabilities Were Not Properly Restricted
* Finding 10 – Monitoring, Account, and Password Controls Over 20
SCPS’ Academic System Were Not Sufficient
Facilities Construction, Renovation, and Maintenance
Finding 11 – Certain Construction Related Goods and Services Were 21
Procured Without Obtaining Competitive Bids
Transportation Services
 Finding 12 – Certain Payments to Transportation Contractors Were 22
Not Based on Market Conditions or Actual Costs
 Finding 13 – SCPS Did Not Ensure the Accuracy of Data Used to 24
Compute Certain Payments to Bus Contractors
Food Services
Finding 14 – Invoices Were Not Adequately Verified Prior to Payment 25
School Board Oversight
 Finding 15 – Financial Disclosure Statements Were Not Always Filed 26
As Required
Other Financial Controls
 Finding 16 – SCPS Did Not Ensure the Propriety of Payments for 27
Certain Employee and Retiree Health Care Costs
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology 29
Agency Response Appendix
* Denotes item repeated in full or part from preceding audit report
4

--- Page 7 ---
Executive Summary
Legislative Audit Report on the Somerset County Public Schools (SCPS)
September 2014
According to data compiled by the Maryland State Department of Education,
SCPS ranks 23rd in student enrollment among the 24 public school systems in
Maryland. In fiscal year 2013, SCPS had a total full-time regular and special
education pupil population of 2,943 at its 10 schools. SCPS’ operating and
capital expenditures totaled $41.5 million during that year.
The Office of Legislative Audits has conducted its second audit of SCPS’
financial management practices. The results of the first audit were issued in
a report dated March 25, 2010. Our current audit identified a number of
opportunities for SCPS to improve internal controls, to adopt more cost
effective processes, and to enhance policy direction.
SCPS Needs To Improve Internal Controls and Accountability
SCPS needs to improve internal controls in several financial areas. For
example, we noted that SCPS lacked an independent review to ensure that
critical personnel and payroll transactions processed were proper. SCPS also
needs to restrict user access capabilities to record critical transactions on its
automated human resources and payroll system and its procurement and
accounts payable system. SCPS also needs to implement adequate security
measures and monitoring procedures to protect its network and related
critical devices from security risks. Account and password controls to protect
critical systems were not sufficient.
SCPS needs to verify the propriety of payments to contractors for health care
services and student transportation. SCPS is self-insured for employee
medical benefits and uses a third-party administrator to process related
claims. The propriety of claims paid on SCPS’ behalf by the administrator was
not audited to ensure the related services had been provided, nor had SCPS
verified that enrolled dependents were eligible to receive health care
coverage. Payments to the administrator totaled $5.8 million in fiscal year
2013. In addition, SCPS did not always ensure the accuracy of payments for
student transportation services; consequently, we identified overpayments
totaling approximately $184,000.
5

--- Page 8 ---
SCPS Should Consider Implementing Certain Steps to Improve Cost
Effectiveness
SCPS should establish payment rates to bus contractors in a manner that
ensures that the amounts are reasonable, considering market conditions and
actual costs. For example, we estimated potential cost savings of $670,000
over the estimated 15-year life of seven buses owned by contractors if a
particular payment component was based on market rates. According to
SCPS records, fiscal year 2013 transportation costs totaled $2.8 million with
84 percent paid to contractors.
SCPS Needs to Improve Its Procurement Policies and Practices
SCPS needs to amend existing policies pertaining to the procurement of
certain services and the approval of contracts by the Board. For example,
SCPS frequently selected vendors without obtaining competitive bids or Board
approval. Our test of 12 contracts disclosed that 10 contractors with fiscal
year 2013 payments totaling $1.2 million were selected without competitive
procurements. We also noted that contracts (other than construction
contracts) were generally not approved by the Board. Furthermore, for one
boat contractor, the contract included a provision for SCPS to reimburse the
boat’s purchase price over a period of years; however, it appears that SCPS’
payments toward the purchase price of the boat may have already exceeded
the boat’s recorded purchase price.
6

--- Page 9 ---
Background Information
Statistical Overview
According to student enrollment records compiled by the Maryland State
Department of Education (MSDE), Somerset County Public Schools (SCPS)
ranks 23rd in student enrollment among the 24 public school systems in
Maryland. Fiscal year 2013 total full-time student population was 2,943
students. SCPS has 10 schools, consisting of 5 elementary schools, 1
intermediate school, 2 high schools, 1 technology and career center, and 1
alternative learning school.
According to SCPS’ audited financial statements, expenditures totaled $41.5
million in fiscal year 2013. The largest expenditure category was salaries and
wages, including benefits, which accounted for 74.5 percent of total operating
expenditures during fiscal year 2013. According to MSDE records, during the
2012-2013 school year, SCPS had 453 full-time equivalent positions which
consisted of 307 instructional and 146 non-instructional employees.
Oversight
SCPS is governed by a local school board, consisting of five elected voting
members and two non-voting student members. The State and the Somerset
County government provide the majority of SCPS funding. In addition, MSDE
exercises considerable oversight through the establishment and monitoring of
various financial and academic policies and regulations, in accordance with
certain provisions of the Annotated Code of Maryland. MSDE also works with
SCPS to comply with the requirements and mandates of federal law.
Somerset County government exercises authority over SCPS, primarily through
review and approval of SCPS’ annual operating and capital budgets.
External Audits
SCPS engages a certified public accounting firm to independently audit its
fiscal year-end financial statements. Additionally, the auditor conducts what
is referred to as a Single Audit of SCPS federal grant programs (as required by
federal regulations). The resulting financial statement and Single Audit
reports for fiscal year 2013 were issued in October 2013.
Due to similarities between the work of the independent certified public
accounting firm that audited SCPS’ financial statements and conducted the
Single Audit of federal grants, and the risks and scope of our audit in certain
areas, we relied on the results of those fiscal year 2013 audits. This reliance
7

--- Page 10 ---
allowed us to reduce the scope of our audit work related to certain revenues
(amounts due from other governments) and federal grant activity.
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report
Our audit included a review to determine the status of 24 of the 35 findings
contained in our preceding audit report dated March 25, 2010 (the 35
findings resulted in 23 detailed recommendations in that report). We followed
up on these 24 findings based on our current assessment of significance and
risk relative to the audit objectives. We determined that SCPS satisfactorily
addressed 13 of these findings. The remaining 11 findings are repeated in
this report.
8

--- Page 11 ---
Findings and Recommendations
Revenue and Billing Cycle
Background
Somerset County Public Schools (SCPS) revenues consist primarily of funds
received from Somerset County, the State, and the federal government.
According to the SCPS audited financial statements, revenues from all
sources totaled $41.5 million during fiscal year 2013. In addition to these
revenue sources, schools also collect funds for various purposes, such as for
student activities, clubs, and school publications. Because they are not
considered school revenue, these student activity funds are accounted for
separately by each school and are reported in summary in the audited
financial statements. Although this revenue is raised through student-related
activities, SCPS has a fiduciary duty to safeguard these funds. For fiscal year
2013, school activity fund collections totaled $570,000 and the June 30,
2013 balance was $254,000.
External Audits
Due to the similarities between the work of the independent certified public
accounting firm that audited the SCPS financial statements and our objectives
for this area, we placed significant reliance on the results of the firm’s audit
for certain revenues, including food services revenues, for which the auditor’s
procedural reviews and testing disclosed no material weaknesses or
deficiencies.
Finding 1
Collections were not always deposited timely nor adequately secured prior to
deposit.
Analysis
Collections were not always deposited timely and SCPS had not established
adequate controls over collections received at the Central Office which,
according to SCPS’ records, totaled approximately $10 million during fiscal
year 2013, including $9.1 million in funds received by check from Somerset
County. Our test of 10 deposits totaling $2.7 million, disclosed that
collections totaling $452,000 related to 6 deposits were deposited from 3 to
13 working days after receipt. Untimely deposits increase the possibility of
loss or misappropriation. We also noted that prior to deposit those collections
were stored in an unattended room readily accessible to headquarters
employees.
9

--- Page 12 ---
Recommendation 1
We recommend that SCPS
a. deposit all funds in a timely manner,
b. properly safeguard cash receipts prior to deposit, and
c. investigate with the Somerset County government the possibility of
receiving funds by electronic transfer rather than check.
Finding 2
SCPS did not have written policies and procedures for controlling student
activity funds.
Analysis
SCPS did not have written policies and procedures for controlling student
activity funds. Many other school systems we audited had detailed
accounting manuals to provide policy guidance to schools administering such
funds. The manuals were designed to enhance the control over these funds
and specify requirements for separation of duties, verification that collections
are deposited, and ensuring the propriety of disbursements. In addition,
some school systems implemented frequent monitoring practices, such as
using internal audit units (which SCPS lacks) or hiring independent public
accounting firms to evaluate compliance.
We reviewed controls over student activity fund collections at SCPS’ two high
schools, which collected $242,324 or 42 percent of the total student activity
funds collected by SCPS in fiscal year 2013, and noted control deficiencies at
both schools. At one school, independent accountings of athletic tickets were
not performed for comparison to the related cash collected. At the other
school, there was no independent verification that all recorded collections
were deposited. Consequently, for both schools’ activity funds, there was a
lack of assurance that all collections received were deposited.
Recommendation 2
We recommend that SCPS
a. develop policies and procedures governing controls and accountability
over student activity funds, and
b. ensure that the developed procedures are followed.
10

--- Page 13 ---
Federal Funds
Background
SCPS receives funds pertaining to federal government programs that are
generally restricted for use for a specified program (such as the School Lunch
Program or Special Education). According to the audited Schedule of
Expenditures of Federal Awards, fiscal year 2013 expenditures of federal
award funds totaled $4.8 million.
Single Audit Report Disclosed Reportable Conditions Regarding Federal Grant
Management
Due to work performed by the independent certified public accounting firm
that conducted the Single Audit of SCPS federal grants and the objectives of
our audit in this area, we relied on the auditor's work and results. Besides
expressing an opinion on SCPS compliance with the terms of several grant
programs, the auditor also considered the existing internal control structure's
impact on compliance and audited the fiscal year 2013 required Schedule of
Expenditures of Federal Awards. The related report stated that SCPS
complied, in all material respects, with the requirements applicable to its
major federal programs. With respect to internal controls over compliance
with, and the operation of, major federal programs, the auditors did identify
two material weaknesses. These weaknesses related to bank reconciliations
that were not prepared timely and various payroll and other liability accounts
that were not reconciled throughout the year.
We were advised that the reconciliations were not performed timely due to
personnel resources being devoted to implementing new financial software.
As of July 2013, bank reconciliations had not been completed since June
2012. Subsequently, SCPS paid its external auditors approximately $14,000
to complete the bank reconciliations for fiscal year 2013. As of October
2013, SCPS had reconciled all of its accounts for fiscal year 2013.
Medicaid Funds Were Received for Eligible Services
SCPS had established a procedure to identify students eligible for Medicaid-
subsidized services. Medicaid is an entitlement program for which certain
service costs can be reimbursed to SCPS. Medicaid activity is not covered by
the Single Audit of federal grants. Our tests of selected activity disclosed that
reimbursement was requested for the Medicaid-subsidized services provided.
According to agency records, fiscal year 2013 reimbursement for Medicaid-
subsidized services totaled approximately $703,000.
11

--- Page 14 ---
Procurement and Disbursement Cycle
Background
According to SCPS records, non-payroll disbursements totaled $8.2 million
during fiscal year 2013. Requisitions are computer generated by the
requesting department and must be approved by supervisory personnel (such
as a respective department head). Approved requisitions are then converted
to purchase orders and approved by the Chief Financial Officer. The SCPS
procurement policy requires that certain procurements over $25,000 be
competitively bid and approved by the Board. The policy also requires
solicitation of quotes (either verbal or written depending on the value of the
procurement) for purchases of goods and construction services over $5,000.
Payments are processed by the finance department through an automated
system that prints vendor checks and also posts the payment to the financial
records.
Finding 3
SCPS did not adequately restrict users’ capabilities on its automated
procurement and accounts payable system.
Analysis
SCPS did not adequately restrict users’ capabilities on its automated
procurement and disbursement system to prevent unauthorized purchasing
and disbursement transactions. As a result, certain employees could process
critical transactions without independent approval.
Five employees could initiate and approve purchase orders and add vendors
without independent approvals. Therefore, these employees could make
unauthorized purchases without detection. Also, two of these five employees
had system administrator access allowing them to add or change employee
accesses and capabilities, including their own, in the automated system. A
similar condition regarding segregating incompatible functions and restricting
system access to critical system functions was commented upon in our
preceding audit report.
Invoices are matched to approved purchase orders by the system to ensure
that billings from vendors correspond with the specific goods and services
acquired by SCPS. However, this process does not provide sufficient controls
because as noted above, the purchase approval may not have been
independently authorized. Also, a finance office employee examines invoices
before they are paid, but this review would not necessarily detect improper
disbursements since the employee may not have sufficient knowledge of the
purchasing needs of all SCPS schools and departments. Moreover, this
12

--- Page 15 ---
review was being performed by one of the employees that could initiate and
approve purchase orders.
Recommendation 3
We recommend that SCPS strengthen its controls over the automated
procurement and accounts payable system and processes. Specifically, we
recommend that SCPS
a. restrict users’ capabilities to eliminate the ability of users to perform
incompatible duties (repeat), and
b. establish independent electronic approval requirements for all critical
purchasing and accounts payable transactions.
Finding 4
SCPS’ procurement policies generally did not require Board approval for
certain purchases and did not address contractual services.
Analysis
SCPS’ policies in effect during the audit did not require Board approval for the
majority of high-value purchases. While SCPS had developed formal
procurement policies to address the acquisition and approval of certain
procurements over $25,000, it did not require Board approval for all
purchases above this level. Specifically, only facility improvements and
equipment procurements required Board approval. Furthermore, SCPS’
policies did not address the procurement of contractual services, particularly
competitive bidding requirements for those services (see Finding 5). A similar
condition regarding inadequate procurement policies was commented upon in
our preceding audit report.
Our test of fiscal year 2013 disbursements for items over $25,000 (such as,
special education and therapy services) disclosed that the contracts for 10 of
12 items were not approved by the Board. Disbursements for fiscal year
2013 to these 10 vendors totaled approximately $1.2 million.
Recommendation 4
We recommend that SCPS amend its existing policies for procurement to
address all categories of purchases, including services, and establish a formal
dollar threshold requiring Board approval, such as for contracts exceeding
$25,000 (repeat).
13

--- Page 16 ---
Finding 5
Contracts were frequently not awarded through competitive procurements
and payment processing was not always adequate.
Analysis
Our test of payments to 12 vendors with fiscal year 2013 disbursements
totaling $1.4 million disclosed that 10 of the vendors, who received payments
for good or services totaling $1.2 million during fiscal year 2013, were not
selected through competitive procurement methods. In addition, there were
no documented sole-source justifications for these procurements. For four of
these vendors, no contract document existed to establish the scope of
services or agreed upon rates. These vendors provided goods or services
including bulk fuel oil delivery and trash removal services. SCPS did not use
eMaryland Marketplace to publish bids or awards for any of the items tested,
each of which was in excess of $25,000. State law requires a local school
system to publish a procurement notice or notice of award greater than
$25,000 on eMaryland Marketplace.
We also noted that for three vendors with payments totaling $250,000 during
fiscal year 2013, the review and approval of vendor invoices was insufficient
to ensure the propriety of the payment amount. For example, invoices for
office supplies were approved without verification of the billed amounts to the
original order pricing.
Furthermore, for two vendors providing student boat transportation, SCPS
monthly calculates and pays for adjustments in the price of fuel; however,
during fiscal years 2010 to 2013 SCPS miscalculated the adjustment
amounts resulting in overpayments of $68,000. The related contracts allowed
for monthly adjustments to compensate for changes in fuel prices by
multiplying the contractors’ monthly fuel usage by the percentage increase in
fuel costs. However, SCPS calculated the percentage change in fuel costs
each month and multiplied the percentage by the contractors’ annual fuel
usage to determine the monthly fuel adjustments resulting in inflated
adjustments. For example, during a seven-month period during fiscal year
2013, one contractor received seven monthly fuel adjustments of $1,466
although the payments should have each been only $147.
The awarding of contracts without competitive bidding was commented upon
in our preceding audit report.
Recommendation 5
We recommend SCPS
a. award contracts though competitive procurement methods or document
why competitive procurement methods cannot be used (repeat),
b. prepare written contracts to document the agreed upon terms,
14

--- Page 17 ---
c. use eMaryland Marketplace for contract procurements or awards as
required by State law, and
d. ensure that vendor payments are proper and in accordance with the terms
of the contracts.
Human Resources and Payroll
Background
Payroll expense represents the largest single cost component in the SCPS
budget. According to SCPS records, fiscal year 2013 salary, wage, and benefit
costs totaled $30.9 million. According to Maryland State Department of
Education reports, during the 2012 - 2013 school year, SCPS had 453 full-
time equivalent positions, which consisted of 307 instructional positions and
146 non-instructional positions.
SCPS uses an automated integrated human resources and payroll system to
maintain human resources information, record employee time, track leave
usage, and to process and record payroll transactions. The system
automatically generates semi-monthly time records and any adjustments are
processed by central payroll personnel. The system generates payroll checks
and direct deposit advices. Payroll processing involves both automated
processes (such as compiling leave and running edit reports) and manual
processes (such as data entry of new employee information).
Finding 6
Independent reviews of payroll and personnel transactions were lacking and
access to the automated system was not properly restricted.
Analysis
Independent reviews of personnel and payroll changes processed were not
performed and certain system users had unneeded capabilities in the
automated human resources and payroll systems.
 SCPS lacked an independent review to ensure that processed employee
personnel and payroll transactions were correct and appropriate.
Transaction reports of new employees added to the system or changes to
employee data, including salary changes, were not generated for
verification to source documentation by an independent employee. During
our test of terminations we noted two overpayments due to errors in SCPS
calculations: one employee was paid for four holidays after their
termination date and another terminated employee was overpaid $2,450.
We also noted five terminated employees who were underpaid a total of
$13,395.
15

--- Page 18 ---
 SCPS did not adequately restrict employees’ capabilities to perform
certain critical functions, such as changing employee salary and direct
deposit information. Our review of critical functions related to human
resources and payroll disclosed that 5 of 18 system users had
unnecessary or excessive capabilities that could allow improper entries to
go undetected. Specifically, we noted that two employees (IT employees)
had complete access to the system allowing them to perform all personnel
and payroll functions. Two additional employees had incompatible access
to change salary information and process payroll (such as overtime) and
one other employee due to a position reassignment no longer required the
access. Our test of human resources and payroll changes and
adjustments did not disclose any inappropriate transactions. A similar
condition regarding inappropriate access to critical system functions was
commented upon in our preceding audit report.
Recommendation 6
We recommend that SCPS
a. perform a documented independent review of personnel and payroll
transactions,
b. resolve the noted payment errors,
c. limit assignments of critical system functions to those employees who
require such capabilities to perform their job duties (repeat), and
d. eliminate the capability of system users to perform incompatible
functions.
Finding 7
There was no documentation that the Board possessed certain pertinent
information prior to approving an employee contract settlement agreement
totaling $168,000.
Analysis
There was no documentation (such as in the minutes of Board meetings) that
the Board was aware of the amount SCPS would be required to pay a former
school official under an employment settlement agreement.
The former official’s employment contract stated that the official shall be
entitled to all benefits applicable to administrative employees of SCPS with 11
years of service. We discussed this contract provision with legal counsel to
the Maryland General Assembly, who concurred with our assessment that this
provision of the contract was ambiguous as it relates to sick leave.
Specifically, it could be interpreted to mean that sick leave is earned
prospectively at the rate of an 11-year employee, or that sick leave would be
16

--- Page 19 ---
credited as if the official had worked and earned the leave at SCPS for 11
years. Since SCPS used the latter interpretation, the official’s sick leave
balance was increased by 220 days six months after beginning employment
with SCPS to reflect the total amount of sick leave a SCPS employee would
earn in 11 years.
In 2013, the Board executed a settlement agreement in which the official
agreed to resign after two years of employment. The agreement stated that
the official would be paid for unused leave, including sick leave. However, at
the time the agreement was executed, there was no documentation to
indicate that the Board was formally advised or knew of the amount (number
of days) or dollar value of that credited leave. Considering the ambiguous
leave provision in this official’s contract, we believe the Board should have
received all pertinent information, including management’s interpretation of
the settlement agreement that obligated SCPS to pay the former official
$168,000, $117,000 of which was due to the aforementioned 220 days of
credited sick leave.
Recommendation 7
We recommend that for any future contract settlements, SCPS ensure that all
pertinent information is provided to the Board regarding contract
interpretations and the related fiscal impact, as part of the decision-making
process.
Inventory Control and Accountability
Background
According to SCPS audited financial statements, the undepreciated value of
its capital equipment inventory totaled approximately $3.9 million as of June
30, 2013. SCPS uses automated records to track equipment inventory with a
cost of $1,000 or more (including items capitalized for financial statement
purposes).
Finding 8
SCPS equipment policies were not comprehensive and disposals were not
approved.
Analysis
Our review disclosed that SCPS procedures and controls over equipment were
not adequate in several areas.
 The equipment policies did not address segregation of duties, time
requirements for performing physical inventories, and a comparison of
17

--- Page 20 ---
inventory counts to recorded amounts. In addition, SCPS' policy does not
contain appropriate procedures to be followed if equipment items are
identified as lost or stolen. We did note that in the fall of 2012, SCPS
performed an inventory of IT equipment. SCPS has not conducted a
complete physical inventory for many years. The lack of adequate
equipment policies was commented upon in our preceding audit report.
 SCPS did not obtain approval from supervisory personnel to dispose of
equipment although the SCPS equipment policy required the
superintendent to approve disposals. Our review disclosed 1,570 items
marked as disposed of in the inventory records and 100 of these items
had a cost totaling approximately $91,000 while the remaining 1,470
items had no recorded cost. SCPS had no evidence that the
superintendent approved the disposal of any of these 1,570 items.
Recommendation 8
We recommend that SCPS improve its procedures and controls over
equipment. Specifically, we recommend that SCPS
a. update its existing procedures to include requirements for segregating
duties, performing physical inventories, comparing inventory counts to
recorded amounts, and for following up on lost and missing items (repeat);
and
b. obtain required approval of all disposals of equipment.
Information Technology
Background:
The SCPS Department of Technology (DOT) provides information systems
services to all SCPS technology users. Specifically, DOT maintains the SCPS
academic information application, which includes student grades,
demographics, and scheduling, and is responsible for computer operations.
DOT uses a vendor maintained system for its finance, human resources, and
payroll applications. DOT also operates the SCPS network which links the
individual schools’ local networks to the computer resources located at the
SCPS data center and the Internet.
18

--- Page 21 ---
Finding 9
The SCPS network was not properly secured and user capabilities on
workstations were not properly restricted.
Analysis
The SCPS network was not properly secured and user capabilities on
workstations were not properly restricted.
 SCPS did not adequately secure its internal network from improper
network level access from SCPS high school students using either
computer lab workstations or media center workstations. SCPS did not
use network access control software or network level traffic filtering to
protect its network from activity emanating from these workstations.
Student access from these workstations should be limited to devices and
ports necessary for these students to perform required tasks.
 Local administrator privileges were not properly restricted. Our test of
eight regular users noted that seven of these users were assigned local
administrative rights to their workstations. As a result, if these
workstations were infected with malware, the malware would run with
administrative rights and expose these workstations to a greater risk of
compromise than if the workstations’ user accounts operated with only
user rights. In addition, as a result of this condition, these seven users
could disable the antivirus software on their workstations.
 The antivirus software used to protect SCPS workstations was not properly
configured to limit users’ capabilities. Specifically, users on all eight
workstations tested could disable features of the antivirus software that
would render it unable to protect against network and file based threats.
Recommendation 9
We recommend that SCPS
a. implement controls to limit network level student access to only
authorized local school and headquarters network resources,
b. limit local administrative rights on user workstations to only personnel that
require such rights for their job duties, and
c. disable the settings which allow users to override and modify default
security controls established by management.
19

--- Page 22 ---
Finding 10
Monitoring, account, and password controls over the SCPS’ academic
information system were not sufficient.
Analysis
Monitoring, account, and password controls over the SCPS’ academic
information system were not sufficient.
 The database supporting the academic information application was not
configured to log any database security activity and operations executed
via several critical accounts were not set to log. These conditions could
result in unauthorized or inappropriate activities (affecting the integrity of
the production database information) going undetected by management.
 The account and password controls over the application and database
were not in accordance with the settings recommended by best practice
guidelines from the State of Maryland Department of Information
Technology’s Information Security Policy. For example, application
password controls with respect to password age, length, complexity, and
history were not in accordance with the aforementioned security policy.
Similar conditions were commented upon in our preceding audit report.
Recommendation 10
We recommend that SCPS
a. enable logging of all critical database security activities and of all
operations executed via critical database accounts (repeat), and
b. implement recommended account and password settings over the
academic information application and database (repeat).
Facilities Construction, Renovation, and Maintenance
Background
SCPS employs a staff of approximately 31 employees to maintain its 10
schools and the administrative office, which is within a school. According to
the fiscal year 2013 Capital Improvement Plan, necessary construction, major
renovations, and systemic improvements to SCPS facilities over the next six
years were estimated to cost $11.4 million.
Processes are in Place to Minimize Energy Costs
SCPS has processes in place to minimize energy costs. For example, SCPS
participates in a consortium with other Eastern Shore entities to purchase
energy at the best possible terms for the members of the consortium. In
20

--- Page 23 ---
addition, SCPS utilizes an energy management system that monitors and
accounts for energy usage and employs an energy management program
manager trained in conservation techniques and monitoring energy practices
(such as usage reports and year-to-year comparisons). According to reports
prepared by the program manager (which we did not audit), SCPS has avoided
over $1.5 million in energy costs since implementation of the program in
2008.
Finding 11
Construction related goods and services totaling approximately $321,000
were procured without obtaining competitive bids.
Analysis
Our review of construction related procurements disclosed that competitive
bids were not always obtained.
 SCPS executed a $98,000 change order that materially altered the scope
of the project specified in the $134,800 original contract rather than seek
bids for the new work. This change order increased the original contract
amount by approximately 73 percent to expand the flooring work to a
separate lobby area not covered under the original contract. Change
orders should not be used when the new work materially changes the
scope of the project as this is contrary to State law.
 Our test of 10 construction contracts totaling $8.8 million disclosed SCPS
did not receive competitive bids for a $223,000 contract. A similar
condition was commented upon in our preceding audit report.
Furthermore, SCPS payments to this contractor included $47,000 of travel
expenses. If the contract had been competitively procured, SCPS may
have found a company in closer proximity, which could have avoided or
reduced travel expenses. State law requires school systems to select
construction contractors through a competitive procurement process.
Recommendation 11
We recommend that SCPS
a. not use change orders for tasks that materially alter the scope of the
original project, and
b. obtain goods and services through a documented competitive
procurement process (repeat).
21

--- Page 24 ---
Transportation Services
Background
SCPS has approximately 2,850 students eligible to receive student
transportation services. These students were transported 825,000 route
miles during the 2012-2013 school year using 33 contractor-owned buses
and two contractor-owned boats (for students residing on islands). According
to SCPS audited financial statements, fiscal year 2013 transportation costs
totaled $2.8 million, with $2.3 million (82 percent) representing payments for
contracted bus services and $214,000 for boat services. Payments to bus
contractors consist of amounts for the purchase of a bus (known as a per
vehicle allotment or PVA which consists of a reimbursement for the cost of the
bus and a flat rate of return on investment) and for operating costs (such as
driver salaries, fuel use, maintenance costs, and certain administrative costs).
The contracts for the two boat operators provide for the payment of fuel costs,
with adjustments for changes in fuel prices throughout the year.
Finding 12
Certain SCPS payments to transportation contractors did not consider market
conditions, actual costs, or available discounts.
Analysis
Certain elements used to determine payment amounts to student
transportation contractors did not reflect market conditions, actual costs, or
available discounts. SCPS’ bus contracts are for one year with annual
renewals generally granted over the 15-year useful life of the bus. Boat
contracts are also for a one-year period and are generally renewed. Our
review of the contract payments disclosed the following conditions:
 SCPS pays bus contractors an annual PVA for each bus. The PVA
reimburses the bus contractor for the cost of the bus over the 15 years the
bus is in use (depreciation expense is paid each year as 1/15th of the cost
of the bus) and also provides an annual return on investment (ROI) for
using the bus contractors’ funds to buy the bus. The ROI for fiscal year
2013 was 9.93 percent. However, SCPS could not justify the 9.93 percent
ROI rate based on market conditions or otherwise.
To estimate the financial impact to SCPS of using the ROI rates over the
life of a bus, we calculated the PVA for each of the 7 new buses placed
22

--- Page 25 ---
into service from July 2008 through August 2013 using the prime interest
rate1 as the ROI and SCPS’ 15-year estimated useful life in the PVA
formula, and compared our PVA results to the SCPS’ PVA payments. This
comparison showed that the SCPS annual PVA payments per bus were
$4,635 to $7,338 higher than the payments would have been had the
prevailing prime rate been used in the calculation. The effect is that, over
the 15-year life of these 7 new buses, SCPS will pay out approximately
$670,000 more than if the prime rate was used for ROI to determine the
PVA payments. This analysis does not include the effects for any new bus
purchases that may be made after August 2013 and the lost interest
income that could have been earned by SCPS on the excess amounts
paid. A similar condition was commented upon in our preceding audit
report.
 The SCPS fiscal year 2013 payments also included a $0.75 per-mile fee to
reimburse the contractors for bus maintenance costs. However, SCPS
could not show that these payments were supported by documented or
specifically estimated maintenance and repair costs.
 SCPS did not exclude federal fuel excise taxes when paying bus
contractors for fuel. According to federal law, SCPS contractors are
exempt from the $0.244 per gallon excise tax for diesel fuel and are able
to receive a credit for federal fuel taxes paid when they file their income
tax returns. As a result, SCPS’ total fuel payments to bus contractors were
$116,000 higher than necessary for school years 2010 through 2013.
 SCPS also did not competitively procure its two student boat
transportation contracts. Furthermore, we reviewed the contract of one
boat owner and SCPS could not substantiate how the annual payments to
compensate the owner were determined. The annual contract with this
owner includes an amount for amortization and interest, to enable the
operator, over a period of time, to recover the boat’s purchase price.
During fiscal years 2010 to 2013, this payment amount totaled
approximately $35,000 annually. However, SCPS had not determined if
the total of the annual payments already made had reimbursed the
contractor fully for the cost of the boat. According to Department of
Natural Resources’ records, the boat currently used was purchased in
1999. Since according to SCPS, the contractor has been continuously
providing these transportation services to SCPS since that year at similar
annual payment amounts, it appears SCPS payments to date may have
1The use of the prime interest rate was recommended in a November 1999 study commissioned by
another Maryland school system. Also, in 1975 an MSDE study recommended the prime rate as a
reasonable ROI interest rate. The prime rate is actually a lending rate that nearly always exceeds the
available market investment rate: therefore, it is deemed to be reasonable for the ROI calculation.
23

--- Page 26 ---
already exceeded the recorded purchase price of the boat (based on the
titling documents). Furthermore, the boat is not used exclusively for
student transportation, but is used by the contractor for other commercial
purposes such as cruises.
 SCPS could not provide us with any documentation indicating that the
Board had approved the rates used to calculate payments to both bus
contractors and the aforementioned boat owner.
Recommendation 12
We recommend that SCPS establish payment amounts to transportation
contractors in a manner that ensures all costs are reasonable and necessary.
Specifically, we recommend that SCPS
a. use market investment rates as the basis for establishing contractor rates
for the annual PVA (repeat),
b. use actual bus operating costs as a basis for establishing contractor rates
for per mile maintenance costs,
c. exclude federal fuel excise taxes from contractor payments,
d. establish an equitable basis for determining the annual contract amounts
for boat contractors, such as the use of competitive procurements, and
e. obtain Board approval of the rates used to determine transportation
contractor payments.
Finding 13
SCPS did not adequately ensure the accuracy of data used to compute certain
payments to the bus contractors.
Analysis
SCPS did not ensure the accuracy of the time and mileage payments to bus
contractors. Three times each school year, the contractors completed a
manifest, which included the total time and miles driven on each route. SCPS
used the data on these manifests without verifying the accuracy of the
information to calculate the hourly pay and maintenance and fuel cost
components of the semi-monthly payments to the contractors. Similar
conditions were commented on in our preceding audit report.
Based on available documentation we estimated that during fiscal year 2013,
hourly payments and base mileage payments for maintenance and fuel to
contractors totaled approximately $1 million.
24

--- Page 27 ---
Recommendation 13
We recommend that SCPS
a. independently verify bus contractor’s manifests, at least on a test basis,
to ensure that the payments to the contractors accurately reflect the
actual bus services provided (repeat);
b. document the verification process; and
c. recover any overpayments to the bus contractors identified by that
process.
Food Services
Background
SCPS has a cooking cafeteria at 8 of its 10 schools. Food and related
supplies are received and stored in each school. In fiscal year 2013, SCPS
had 24 cafeteria positions (comprised of 23 cafeteria positions and 1
administrative position). According to the fiscal year 2013 audited financial
statements, food service operation expenditures exceeded food service
operation revenues by approximately $71,000.
Finding 14
Food services invoices were not adequately verified prior to payment.
Analysis
Food services invoices were not adequately verified prior to payment. Our test
of 10 invoices totaling $168,324 related to 5 vendors with fiscal year 2013
payments for food expenditures totaling $800,000 disclosed that for all 10
invoices there was no evidence of a documented review for propriety prior to
payment. Specifically, there was no indication that the invoice prices were
compared to the contract prices or approved price lists. Furthermore, SCPS
procurement policies were not adhered to for food expenditures. Specifically,
three vendors included in our test, with SCPS purchases of $175,000, did not
have formal contracts with SCPS and the contracts for the two other vendors,
with purchases of $625,000, were not approved by the Board as required.
Total food expenditures for fiscal year 2013 were approximately $844,000.
Recommendation 14
We recommend that SCPS ensure
a. that formal contracts are executed with vendors and the contracts are
approved by the Board in accordance with SCPS policy, and
b. invoice prices are compared to the contract prices prior to payment.
25

--- Page 28 ---
School Board Oversight
SCPS Adopted an Ethics Policy that Met the Requirements of State Law
In 2012 the Board of Education adopted a detailed ethics policy that,
according to the State Ethics Commission, conforms to State law and includes
provisions for conflicts of interest and financial disclosure. Provisions of this
policy are applicable to Board members as well as all SCPS employees. SCPS
established an Ethics Panel consisting of three members to interpret ethics
policies and provide advice on policy implementation. The Panel also reviews
and rules on any reported complaints of ethics violations. According to the
ethics policy, annual financial disclosure statements are required to be filed
by Board members, candidates for the Board, the Superintendent, Assistant
Superintendent, and a number of other administrators (such as the Chief
Financial Officer and Director of Human Resources) by April 30th of each year.
The policy also required that individuals in these positions file within 30 days
of appointment or within 60 days of leaving an office.
Finding 15
SCPS financial disclosure statements were not always filed as required.
Analysis
SCPS did not ensure that a financial disclosure statement was filed by all
employees required to do so.
 Three of 11 employees required to file a statement for calendar year 2012
did not file the required statement and 1 was filed late (in September).
 None of the 3 employees who were hired during 2013 and were required
to file a statement had filed within 30 days of being hired.
 Two employees who left employment during 2013 and were required to
file a statement within 60 days for 2013 failed to do so.
Agency personnel indicated that they were unaware that these employees had
not filed the required statement. This condition was commented upon in our
preceding audit report.
Recommendation 15
We recommend that SCPS actively enforce its ethics policy and ensure that all
required disclosure statements are filed and reviewed by the ethics panel
(repeat).
26

--- Page 29 ---
Other Financial Controls
Healthcare Background
SCPS is a member of a consortium for employee and retiree health care. The
Consortium members are self-insured for healthcare costs up to the
designated stop-loss limit. The Consortium contracts with a vendor to provide
administrative services, such as claims processing for participants’ medical,
dental and vision costs, and for the stop-loss coverage. Stop-loss coverage
indemnifies SCPS against health insurance claim amounts that exceed a
certain threshold for a member.
Medical providers submit claims to the administrator who pays them on
behalf of SCPS. SCPS pays the administrator for claims the administrator
reports it paid and pays an administrative fee for these services. Amounts
paid for health care during fiscal year 2013 totaled $5.7 million, including
approximately $250,000 for administrative fees.
Finding 16
SCPS did not ensure the propriety of payments for employee and retiree
health care costs.
Analysis
SCPS lacked procedures and controls to ensure that amounts paid to the
third-party administrator for medical claims were proper.
 SCPS paid for claim reimbursements invoiced by the administrator without
any verification that the amounts invoiced were proper. SCPS did not
receive detailed claims data and therefore could not verify that the billed
amounts agreed to the amounts of reported claims. Furthermore, SCPS
did not audit the propriety of the claims paid on its behalf by the program
administrator to ensure that the services were actually provided, were
covered by the health plans, and were appropriately priced.
 SCPS did not verify that claims exceeding the stop-loss limit were
reimbursed by the administrator under the stop-loss coverage. SCPS
relies on the administrator to notify it of any payments above the stop-loss
limit. According to the annual settlement, the offset to claims due to
individual claims reaching the stop-loss limit are included in the paid
claims amount. Since SCPS did not receive documentation of all claims
invoiced and stop-loss offsets are not provided for separately, SCPS lacks
assurance that it did not pay claims that should have been covered by the
stop-loss insurance. For fiscal year 2013, stop-loss insurance paid by
SCPS totaled approximately $271,000.
27

--- Page 30 ---
 SCPS did not verify that enrolled dependents of employees and retirees
were eligible to receive health care coverage. As of November 2013, there
were approximately 460 dependents who received health coverage from
SCPS. Verifications performed by other school systems have identified
ineligible dependents, which can result in unnecessary health care
expenses. This condition was commented upon in our preceding audit
report.
Recommendation 16
We recommend that SCPS establish procedures to verify the amounts paid for
health insurance. Specifically, we recommend that SCPS
a. obtain documentation to support actual claim payments, and verify the
propriety of the claims paid by agreeing the invoiced amounts with the
related support, and conducting audits of the claims paid by the
administrator;
b. use detailed claims payment data to ensure that claims paid above the
stop-loss limit are reimbursed by the insurer; and
c. verify the eligibility of enrolled health care dependents (repeat).
28

--- Page 31 ---
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We conducted a performance audit to evaluate the effectiveness and
efficiency of the financial management practices of the Somerset County
Public Schools (SCPS). We conducted this audit under the authority of the
State Government Article, Section 2-1220(e) of the Annotated Code of
Maryland, and performed it in accordance with generally accepted
government auditing standards. Those standards require that we plan and
perform the audit to obtain sufficient, appropriate evidence to provide a
reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit
objectives. We believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable
basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives.
We had two broad audit objectives:
1. To evaluate whether the SCPS procedures and controls were effective
in accounting for and safeguarding its assets
2. To evaluate whether the SCPS policies provided for the efficient use of
financial resources
In planning and conducting our audit of SCPS, we focused on 11 major
financial-related areas of operations as approved on September 14, 2004 by
the Joint Audit Committee of the Maryland General Assembly in accordance
with the enabling legislation. The scope of the work performed in each of
these areas was based on our assessments of significance and risk.
Therefore, our follow-up on the status of findings included in our preceding
audit report on SCPS dated March 25, 2010, was limited to those findings
that were applicable to the current audit scope for each of the 11 areas.
The audit objectives excluded reviewing and assessing student achievement,
curriculum, teacher performance, and other academic-related areas and
functions. Also, we did not evaluate the SCPS Comprehensive Education
Master Plan or related updates, and we did not review the activities, financial
or other, of any parent teacher association, group, or funds not under the local
board of education’s direct control or management.
To accomplish our objectives, we reviewed applicable State laws and
regulations pertaining to public elementary and secondary education, as well
as policies and procedures issued and established by SCPS. We also
interviewed personnel at SCPS, the Maryland State Department of Education
29

--- Page 32 ---
(MSDE), and staff at other local school systems in Maryland (as appropriate).2
Our audit procedures included inspections of documents and records, and
observations of SCPS operations. We also tested transactions and performed
other auditing procedures that we considered necessary to achieve our
objectives, generally for the period from July 1, 2010 through June 30, 2013.
For certain areas within the scope of the audit, we relied on the work
performed by the independent accounting firm that annually audits SCPS’
financial statements and conducts the federal Single Audit.
We used certain statistical data—including financial and operational—
compiled by MSDE from various informational reports submitted by the
Maryland local school systems. This information was used in this audit report
for background or informational purposes, and was deemed reasonable.
We also extracted data from SCPS’ automated finance management system
for the purpose of testing expenditure, inventory, and payroll transactions. We
performed various audit procedures on the relevant data and determined the
data were sufficiently reliable for the purposes the data were used during the
audit.
SCPS’ management is responsible for establishing and maintaining effective
internal control. Internal control is a process designed to provide reasonable
assurance that objectives pertaining to the reliability of financial records,
effectiveness and efficiency of operations including safeguarding of assets,
and compliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations are achieved.
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate. In
addition to the conditions included in this report, other less significant
findings were communicated to SCPS that did not warrant inclusion in this
report.
We conducted our fieldwork from June 2013 to January 2014. The SCPS
response to our findings and recommendations is included as an appendix to
this report. As prescribed in the State Government Article, Section 2-1224 of
the Annotated Code of Maryland, we will advise SCPS regarding the results of
our review of its response.
2During the course of the audit, it was necessary to contact other systems to identify policies or
practices for comparative purposes and analysis.
30

--- Page 34 ---
Somerset County Public Schools
Response to Legislative Audit Final Report
Finding 1
Collections were not always deposited timely nor adequately secured prior to deposit.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that SCPS
a. deposit all funds in a timely manner,
b. properly safeguard cash receipts prior to deposit, and
c. investigate with the Somerset County government the possibility of receiving funds by
electronic transfer rather than check.
SCPS Response: Agree.
We agree with the recommendations and have implemented the following updated
procedures for Cash Receipts to document that “Cash deposits are hand delivered to the
bank within three (3) business days of receipt. Undeposited checks and cash are secured in
the vault.” Finance Department staff has been cross-trained to process cash receipts to
ensure timely deposits even when the staff member who is primarily responsible is out on
leave.
We agree with the recommendation to better safeguard cash receipts. A small safe has
been purchased to secure cash until deposit. Access by security code will be limited to staff
responsible for collecting and depositing cash receipts.
In April 2014 we contacted Somerset County to discuss the possibility of receiving funds by
wire transfer. Their Treasurer’s Office does not yet offer electronic deposits. They are in the
process of evaluating electronic transactions but have not scheduled implementation. We
will continue discussions with the County for receiving funds electronically when they begin
providing the service.
Finding 2
SCPS did not have written policies and procedures for controlling student activity funds.
Recommendation 2
We recommend that SCPS
a. develop policies and procedures governing controls and accountability over student
activity funds, and
b. ensure that the developed procedures are followed.
SCPS Response: Agree

--- Page 35 ---
We agree with the recommendation to develop policies and procedures. The Finance
Department has created an accounting manual regarding School Activity Funds and
provided it to school bookkeepers and principals. The School Activity Funds manual outlines
the responsibility of the Principal (or their assignee) to review and verify Deposit Records for
School events as an independent review. The independent review includes reconciliation to
receipts and consecutive ticket numbering.
Written procedures have been created for Finance Staff to use in the periodic review
process of School Activity Funds. Documentation of the reviews will be kept in the Finance
Office.
Finding 3
SCPS did not adequately restrict users’ capabilities on its automated procurement and accounts
payable system.
Recommendation 3
We recommend that SCPS strengthen its controls over the automated procurement and accounts
payable system and processes. Specifically, we recommend that SCPS
a. restrict users’ capabilities to eliminate the ability of users to perform incompatible duties
(repeat), and
b. establish independent electronic approval requirements for all critical purchasing and
accounts payable transactions.
SCPS Response: Agree
We agree with the recommendation to implement effective internal controls over the
accounts payable and procurement systems. A review of staff having access to enter
requisitions, approve purchase orders, create new vendors and issue AP checks will be done
on an annual basis. This review will be conducted by the CFO and verified by the Assistant
Superintendent for Administration. Documentation of the review will be kept on file by the
CFO.
We agree with the recommendation to perform an independent review of purchase orders
approved by the system administrator. An automated report has been created and will
generate on a monthly basis showing all purchase orders approved by anyone other than the
CFO. This report will be emailed directly to the CFO who will verify that approvals listed are
appropriate. The report will be kept on file by the CFO.
Finding 4
SCPS’ procurement policies generally did not require Board approval for certain purchases and did
not address contractual services.
Recommendation 4

--- Page 36 ---
We recommend that SCPS amend its existing policies for procurement to address all
categories of purchases, including services, and establish a formal dollar threshold requiring
Board approval, such as for contracts exceeding $25,000 (repeat).
SCPS Response: Disagree
We disagree that the Bidding & Purchasing Policy (200-14), which was revised in 2013 to
address sole-source procurements and in 2014 to address services purchased with Federal
funds needs to be revised again to address all categories of purchases. We believe we are in
compliance with state law regarding purchasing. The policy already has an established
threshold of $25,000.1
Finding 5
Contracts were frequently not awarded through competitive procurements and payment
processing was not always adequate.
Recommendation 5
We recommend SCPS
a. award contracts though competitive procurement methods or document why competitive
procurement methods cannot be used (repeat),
b. prepare written contracts to document the agreed upon terms,
c. use eMaryland Marketplace for contract procurements or awards as required by State
law, and
d. ensure that vendor payments are proper and in accordance with the terms of the
contracts.
SCPS Response: Agree
We agree with the recommendation and will implement a process to ensure that
procurements are competitively bid whenever practical and are consistent with Board
policies. All purchases and contracts will be reviewed by the Assistant Superintendent for
Administration before being approved or signed in order to ensure they comply with Board
policy. Documentation of sole source purchasing will be kept on file with contracts when
necessary.
1 Auditor’s Comment: The SCPS response indicates that Board procurement policy does not need to be revised to
address competitive procurements and Board approval for services. In addition, the response indicates that the
current procurement policy complies with State law. While State law does not require school system procurement
policies to address services, comprehensive procurement policies that require competitive procurements for all
types of purchases as well as board approval for all purchases above a specific limit is a recognized best practice.
Moreover, other Maryland school systems have established comprehensive procurement policies, including
requirements to conduct competitive procurements for service contracts and to obtain board approval for all
contracts over a designated value.

--- Page 37 ---
We agree that written contracts should be acquired to document the agreed upon terms. A
review of services in the maintenance and operations department will be completed by the
newly hired supervisors. Written contracts will be requested from any vendor currently
providing services. A review of services needing to be put out to bid will also be conducted.
We agree with the recommendation to ensure the use of eMaryland Marketplace for
procurements or contract awards. SCPS has registered with eMaryland Marketplace and
posted all procurement documents for qualifying projects this year. The newly hired
Supervisor of Facilities and Capital Planning will develop and implement a procedure to
ensure this practice is continued.
We agree with the recommendation to monitor services received and reconcile these
records with invoices. A test on services provided by each vendor will be preformed quarterly
by the appropriate supervisor and verified by the Assistant Superintendent of Administration.
Results of the test will be documented and kept on file by the Operations & Facilities
Associate.
Finding 6
Independent reviews of payroll and personnel transactions were lacking and access to the
automated system was not properly restricted.
Recommendation 6
We recommend that SCPS
a. perform a documented independent review of personnel and payroll transactions,
b. resolve the noted payment errors,
c. limit assignments of critical system functions to those employees who require such
capabilities to perform their job duties (repeat), and
d. eliminate the capability of system users to perform incompatible functions.
SCPS Response: Agree
We agree that a documented review of personnel and payroll transactions should be
performed by an independent employee. We disagree that SCPS lacked such a process. A
process was in place but was not being followed consistently by the appropriate staff. We
will establish a written procedure for the independent review which will include printing a
report on a monthly basis of changes made and having it verified by the Human Resources
Supervisor.
The CFO is looking into the status of the noted payment errors and will report to the
Assistant Superintendent for Administration on the appropriate resolution.
We agree that access to critical functions should be limited to those employees who require
such capabilities to perform their assigned job duties. Employees with inappropriate access
had those rights taken away immediately upon notification by the auditors. The two IT

--- Page 38 ---
employees mentioned in the findings are the System Administrators and as such require
total access to perform their job duties.
Finding 7
There was no documentation that the Board possessed certain pertinent information prior to
approving an employee contract settlement agreement totaling $168,000.
Recommendation 7
We recommend that for any future contract settlements, SCPS ensure that all pertinent
information is provided to the Board regarding contract interpretations and the related fiscal
impact, as part of the decision-making process.
SPCS Response: Agree
We agree that the Board should gather all pertinent information regarding the fiscal impact
of any settlement agreement prior to approving it. A written procedure will be established to
ensure this happens.
Finding 8
SCPS equipment policies were not comprehensive and disposals were not approved.
Recommendation 8
We recommend that SCPS improve its procedures and controls over equipment.
Specifically, we recommend that SCPS
a. update its existing procedures to include requirements for segregating duties,
performing physical inventories, comparing inventory counts to recorded amounts, and
for following up on lost and missing items (repeat); and
b. obtain required approval of all disposals of equipment.
SCPS Response: Agree
We agree with the recommendation to update procedures for inventorying equipment.
Procedures and policies for both Fixed Assets and Sensitive equipment inventories will be
reviewed and updated as necessary. The updated procedures will include a process that
provides for approval of all disposals of equipment. Although we recognize the need for
these controls it will be difficult to fully implement this recommendation with existing staff.
Finding 9
The SCPS network was not properly secured and user capabilities on workstations were not
properly restricted.
Recommendation 9

--- Page 39 ---
We recommend that SCPS
a. implement controls to limit network level student access to only authorized local school
and headquarters network resources,
b. limit local administrative rights on user workstations to only personnel that require such
rights for their job duties, and
c. disable the settings which allow users to override and modify default security controls
established by management.
SCPS Response: Agree with exception
We agree with the recommendation to strengthen controls to limit access to our networks.
We are going to work with a network consultant to redesign our local and wide networks
using VLANs and access control lists. This will be a multi year project and will be finished as
funding permits.
We have such a small IT staff, we count on our regular staff members to help themselves,
their students and their colleagues with technical issues. That requires all staff members to
have local administrator privileges for doing things like installing software, installing updates
to software and renewing computer certificates. We have also moved to a better antivirus
product which is password protected. It cannot be automatically disabled or uninstalled by
non IT staff.
We agree with the recommendation to not allow users to override and modify security
controls. We have already moved to a different antivirus product which is password
protected.
Finding 10
Monitoring, account, and password controls over the SCPS’ academic information system
were not sufficient.
Recommendation 10
We recommend that SCPS
a. enable logging of all critical database security activities and of all operations executed
via critical database accounts (repeat), and
b. implement recommended account and password settings over the academic information
application and database (repeat).
SCPS Response: Agree with exception

--- Page 40 ---
SCPS will work with the application vendor to determine the best possible way to implement the
recommendation that we enable logging of all critical database security activities in a way that
doesn’t compromise the licensing agreement between the application vendor and the database
vendor. As this requires third-party involvement, it will be difficult to establish a reasonable timeline
for the completion of this item.
We agree with the recommendation to strengthen the password security over the academic
information application and database and are working within the abilities of the application to
comply. We have already changed the password again rule to 360 days for students and 60 days for
staff. We now require the password length of 8 characters as a minimum and are enforcing the
complexity rules. In addition we have changed the Password Reuse Rule to 10 for all users and the
lockout rate to be disabled after not more than four consecutive failed login attempts.
Finding 11
Construction related goods and services totaling approximately $321,000 were procured
without obtaining competitive bids.
Recommendation 11
We recommend that SCPS
a. not use change orders for tasks that materially alter the scope of the original project,
and
b. obtain goods and services through a documented competitive procurement process
(repeat).
SCPS Response: Agree
We agree with the recommendation to not use change orders for tasks that materially alter the
scope of a project. The Change Order Procedures Policy has been revised to include a process of
having the Construction Manager and the project Architect confirm the proposed change order is
warranted and is consistent with the original scope of work. Material additions to the original project
scope must be bid separately.
We agree with the recommendation that all goods and services should be competitively bid in
accordance with SCPS policy 200-14. See response to Finding #4.
Finding 12
Certain SCPS payments to transportation contractors did not consider market conditions,
actual costs, or available discounts.
Recommendation 12
We recommend that SCPS establish payment amounts to transportation contractors in a manner
that ensures all costs are reasonable and necessary. Specifically, we recommend that SCPS
a. use market investment rates as the basis for establishing contractor rates for the annual
PVA (repeat),

--- Page 41 ---
b. use actual bus operating costs as a basis for establishing contractor rates for per mile
maintenance costs,
c. exclude federal fuel excise taxes from contractor payments,
d. establish an equitable basis for determining the annual contract amounts for boat
contractors, such as the use of competitive procurements, and
e. obtain Board approval of the rates used to determine transportation contractor
payments.
SCPS Response: Agree
We agree with the recommendation that SCPS should establish payment amounts to transportation
contractors in a manner that ensures all costs are reasonable and necessary. We will continue to
work with our Board to investigate our method for establishing contractor rates for the annual PVA as
well as per mile and maintenance costs. In this process the Board will consider excluding federal
excise taxes from contractor payments. These methods will be establish for both boat and bus
contractors.
We agree with the recommendation to seek Board approval of the rates used to determine
transportation contractor payments each year as part of the formal budget process.
Finding 13
SCPS did not adequately ensure the accuracy of data used to compute certain payments to
the bus contractors.
Recommendation 13
We recommend that SCPS
a. independently verify bus contractor’s manifests, at least on a test basis, to ensure that
the payments to the contractors accurately reflect the actual bus services provided
(repeat);
b. document the verification process; and
c. recover any overpayments to the bus contractors identified by that process.
SCPS Response: Agree
We agree with the recommendation that bus contractor’s manifests need to be independently
verified. The newly hired Supervisor of Transportation will be responsible for developing and
implementing a process to verify manifests. The process will include documentation and a process
for attempting to recover any adjustments.
Finding 14
Food services invoices were not adequately verified prior to payment.

--- Page 42 ---
Recommendation 14
We recommend that SCPS ensure
a. that formal contracts are executed with vendors and the contracts are approved by the
Board in accordance with SCPS policy, and
b. invoice prices are compared to the contract prices prior to payment.
SCPS Response: Agree
We agree with the recommendation that formal contracts are executed with vendors and contracts
are approved by the Board in accordance with SCPS policy. SCPS participates in the Shore Four
Group which competitively bids services for many products and services. A process will be put in
place to ensure the Board is notified of all contracts being used to purchase food and food related
products.
We agree with the recommendation to compare invoice prices with contract or agreed-upon prices. A
test on food prices for each vendor invoice will be performed to match the price list and documented
on a monthly basis, along with the monthly food cost comparison chart. It should be noted that due
to USDA regulations, food purchases are at an extremely high cost which is primarily on fresh fruits
and vegetables. Our produce company provides us with a new price sheet each month. Product
choices are determined by price. We must continue to offer our students fresh fruits and vegetables
in order to be compliant.
Finding 15
SCPS financial disclosure statements were not always filed as required.
Recommendation 15
We recommend that SCPS actively enforce its ethics policy and ensure that all required
disclosure statements are filed and reviewed by the ethics panel (repeat).
SCPS Response: Agree
We agree with the recommendation that SCPS actively enforce its ethics policy and ensure that all
disclosure statements are filed and reviewed by the ethics panel. The Assistant Superintendent for
Administration will submit a list to the Board Associate of employees required to fill out a financial
disclosure statement form in October each year. Forms will be sent out to employees by the Board
secretary in January to be completed and returned no later than April 30th. The Board secretary will
submit names of anyone who has not turned in a form to the Assistant Superintendent for
Administration by May 15th.
Finding 16
SCPS did not ensure the propriety of payments for employee and retiree health care costs.
Recommendation 16

--- Page 43 ---
We recommend that SCPS establish procedures to verify the amounts paid for health
insurance. Specifically, we recommend that SCPS
a. obtain documentation to support actual claim payments, and verify the propriety of the
claims paid by agreeing the invoiced amounts with the related support, and conducting
audits of the claims paid by the administrator;
b. use detailed claims payment data to ensure that claims paid above the stop-loss limit
are reimbursed by the insurer; and
c. verify the eligibility of enrolled health care dependents (repeat).
SCPS Response: Agree
We agree with the recommendation and recognize that better controls need to be in place to verify
amounts paid for health insurance. This is a challenge due to the nature of the ESMEC Trust.
However, SCPS will be presenting the findings to the ESMEC trust to help ensure that controls are
put in place. SCPS would accept and be appreciative for any advice on how this can be accomplished
with the health care trust structure that is now in place for the purpose of reducing costs. SCPS
ESMEC Trustee started a conversation at the recent meeting on this topic. ESMEC has agreed to
work with the legislative auditors to resolve this issue.

--- Page 44 ---
A T
UDIT EAM
Stephen C. Pease, CPA
Audit Manager
Richard L. Carter, CISA
Stephen P. Jersey, CPA, CISA
Information Systems Audit Managers
Ken H. Johanning, CPA, CFE
Senior Auditor
Eric Alexander, CPA
Christopher D. Jackson
Information Systems Senior Auditors
R. Frank Abel, CPA, CFE
Jessica A. Foux
Kelly M. McNemar, CPA
Staff Auditors