Title: Board of License Commissioners for Anne Arundel County
Date: 02/03/2016
Type: Performance
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5a945d3acc9d72404c150a54
Extracted: 2025-06-18T10:52:51.479559
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Performance Audit Report
Board of License Commissioners for Anne Arundel
County
The County Restricted Authorized Expenditures Below Budgeted Amounts
Approved by the Comptroller of Maryland
The Lack of Formal Processes for Assigning Work Tasks Precluded a
Determination of the Reasonableness of Contractual Legal Work and Costs
February 2016
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
For further information concerning this report contact:
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
301 West Preston Street, Room 1202
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Phone: 410-946-5900 · 301-970-5900
Toll Free in Maryland: 1-877-486-9964
Maryland Relay: 711
TTY: 410-946-5401 · 301-970-5401
E-mail: OLAWebmaster@ola.state.md.us
Website: www.ola.state.md.us
The Office of Legislative Audits operates a Fraud Hotline to report fraud, waste, or abuse
involving State of Maryland government resources. Reports of fraud, waste, or abuse
may be communicated anonymously by a toll-free call to 1-877-FRAUD-11, by mail to the
Fraud Hotline, c/o Office of Legislative Audits, or through the Office’s website.
The Department of Legislative Services does not discriminate on the basis of age, ancestry, color,
creed, marital status, national origin, race, religion, gender, gender identity, sexual orientation,
or disability in the admission or access to its programs, services, or activities. The Department’s
Information Officer has been designated to coordinate compliance with the nondiscrimination
requirements contained in Section 35.107 of the Department of Justice Regulations. Requests for
assistance should be directed to the Information Officer at 410-946-5400 or 410-970-5400.

--- Page 5 ---
Table of Contents
Background Information 4
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology 6
Overview of Findings and Conclusions 8
Findings and Recommendations 10
Objective 1
Finding 1 – Anne Arundel County Restricted Authorized Expenditures for 10
Legal Services Below the Amounts Approved by the Comptroller of
Maryland for Fiscal Years 2015 and 2016 Contrary to State Law
Objective 2
Finding 2 – Certain Work Performed by BLC’s Contractual Attorney 12
Appeared to Overlap the Responsibilities of BLC’s Staff Counsel and
Administrative Staff, and the Overall Reasonableness of Hours and
Related Costs of Legal Services Could Not be Assessed
Finding 3 – BLC’s Contractual Attorney Represented a Business Applying 14
for a Liquor License Which Raises Questions Regarding a Potential
Conflict of Interest
Exhibit – Legal Services Provided To Selected Liquor Licensing Boards 16
In Maryland
Agency Response Appendix
3

--- Page 6 ---
Background Information
The Board of License Commissioners for Anne Arundel County (BLC)1 is a
hybrid agency that is deemed to be part of the State government for some
purposes and part of the Anne Arundel County (County) government for others.
BLC operations are governed by Article 2B of the Annotated Code of Maryland
and, consistent with that law, are under the authority of the Comptroller of
Maryland (Comptroller). BLC is responsible for processing new applications for
and renewals of licenses to sell beer, wine, and liquor; conducting periodic
inspections of businesses licensed to sell alcoholic beverages; fining, suspending,
or revoking the licenses of violators of alcoholic beverage laws; and processing
related collections.
BLC prepares and submits its annual budget with its estimated licensing revenues
and expenses to the Comptroller for approval. Once approved by the
Comptroller, BLC’s budget is submitted to the County for inclusion in its annual
budget. According to the Annotated Code of Maryland, the County is required to
pay BLC’s expenses, as approved by the Comptroller, from BLC’s licensing
revenues. If the expenses incurred by BLC exhaust the amount originally
budgeted, BLC may request the Comptroller’s approval for an amendment to
increase the budget to the extent revenues are available. BLC is required by State
law to comply with the County’s procurement regulations, and all of BLC’s
contracts are executed by the County, on behalf of BLC.
BLC Revenues and Expenditures
BLC’s revenues have historically
exceeded its expenditures (see Fiscal Year
2013 2014 2015
table) and, in accordance with
Total Revenue $ 1,019,594 $ 1 ,071,995 $ 1,040,062
State law, unused annual revenues
Personnel 515,851 528,051 538,496
are retained by the County for its Contractual Services 95,717 100,776 146,129
own general purposes. Supplies and Materials 22,423 10,178 8,646
Business and Travel 7,133 6,188 2,938
Capital Expenditures 14,881 5,816 1,662
State law provides that BLC is Total Expenditures $ 6 56,005 $ 6 51,009 $ 697,871
governed by a three-person board Net Income (Surplus) $ 3 63,589 $ 4 20,986 $ 342,191
whose members are appointed by
Source: Anne Arundel County Records
the Governor with the advice and
consent of the Senate. The law further provides that BLC may employ 3 full-time
staff and 20 part-time inspectors and shall appoint an attorney, who is paid a fixed
annual salary of $20,000. This attorney is BLC’s staff counsel who attends the
Board meetings and provides legal advice to the Board and its administrative
staff.
1 For purposes of this report, “BLC” refers to the agency, including all staff, while the term
“Board” refers to the three-member Board of Commissioners.
4

--- Page 7 ---
The County, on behalf of BLC, entered into a one-year contract for the term July
1, 2010 through June 30, 2011 (with an option for four one-year extensions which
were executed) with another attorney to supplement the services it received from
its staff counsel. The contractual attorney was to provide a variety of services:
 Providing legal advice regarding  Advising the Board on legislation,
applications, transfers, renewals, and amendments to rules and
and terminations of liquor licenses regulations
 Enforcing violations of State and  Representing the Board in all legal
local liquor licenses actions
 Handling all appeals  Attending monthly Board meetings
The contract provided for the attorney to be paid $200 per hour with a specified
contract maximum for each year. The costs of the contractual attorney’s services
increased from $55,646 in fiscal year 2013 to $118,543 in fiscal year 2015 (see
table). The increase in costs in fiscal year 2015 was primarily the result of certain
appeals and protests,
which we were advised
Contractual Attorney Expenditures
by BLC management
Fiscal Year
required extensive legal
Type of Services 2013 2014 2015
work. We were further
General and Legislation $ 23,710 $ 19,520 $ 28,355
advised that a new
New and Renewal License Opinions 21,236 14,710 16,008
contract was not Appeals, Protests, and Injunctions 10,700 14,990 74,180
executed because of the Total $ 55,646 $ 49,220 $ 118,543
restriction of authorized Source: Anne Arundel County Records
expenditures by the County (as discussed in Finding 1).
5

--- Page 8 ---
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
Audit Scope
We conducted a performance audit to assess Anne Arundel County’s (County)
control of the finances of the Board of License Commissioners for Anne Arundel
County (BLC) and the reasonableness of the work performed by BLC’s attorneys
and the related expenses. The audit was conducted at the request of the Maryland
General Assembly.
We conducted this audit under the authority of the State Government Article,
Section 2-1221 of the Annotated Code of Maryland and performed it in
accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards. Those
standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient,
appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and
conclusions based on our audit objectives. We believe that the evidence obtained
provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit
objectives.
Objectives and Methodology
Our audit included the following objectives:
1. Determine whether the extent of the County’s control over BLC finances was
consistent with State law.
2. Determine the reasonableness of the work performed by BLC’s attorneys and
the related expenses.
To accomplish our objectives, we interviewed members of the Board of License
Commissioners, BLC employees, and other County and State employees as
necessary. In addition, we reviewed BLC’s financial records and, using BLC’s
financial information from the County’s automated accounting system, we
summarized BLC’s revenues and expenditures for fiscal years 2013 through 2015.
We also performed certain procedures unique to each of the objectives.
For Objective 1, we obtained an understanding of BLC’s budget and funding
processes and reviewed both State and County budget records to evaluate BLC’s
funding process. We also obtained advice from legal counsels to the Maryland
General Assembly and the County.
6

--- Page 9 ---
For Objective 2, we used BLC’s invoices to compile a schedule of all BLC legal
services expenditures for fiscal years 2013 through 2015 and analyzed the nature
of the services being provided by BLC’s contractual attorney. We reviewed
BLC’s procedures and controls for monitoring the work of and related payments
to BLC’s contractual attorney. Specifically, we reviewed the contract and related
invoices, and inquired of the BLC and the Board as to their monitoring of the
attorney’s activities. In addition, we performed a test using BLC’s financial
records and the attorney’s invoices to determine if BLC was effectively
monitoring the work and related payments. We also reviewed a particular
business liquor license application and listened to audio of a related Board
meeting during this period. Finally, we interviewed liquor licensing board
personnel from four other Maryland jurisdictions in an attempt to determine the
reasonableness of the scope of BLC’s legal work and related expenditures.
Fieldwork and Agency Response
We conducted our fieldwork during the period from July through September
2015. BLC’s response to our findings and recommendations is included as an
Appendix to this audit report. As prescribed in the State Government Article,
Section 2-1224 of the Annotated Code of Maryland, we will advise BLC
regarding the results of our review of its response.
7

--- Page 10 ---
Overview of Findings and Conclusions
Determine whether Anne Arundel County’s control over the
Board of License Commissioners for Anne Arundel County (BLC)
finances was consistent with State law (Objective 1).
Anne Arundel County (County) restricted BLC’s authorized expenditures for
legal services below the amounts approved by the Comptroller of Maryland for
fiscal years 2015 and 2016 which, according to legal counsel to the Maryland
General Assembly, was contrary to State law. Furthermore, the County’s reasons
for reducing authorized expenditures for legal services by $35,000 in fiscal year
2015 did not appear to provide sufficient justification for its actions. All legal
fees for that year, however, were paid using the budget amount that was approved
by the County and other unspent budgeted funds. For fiscal year 2016, the
County reduced BLC’s authorized expenditures by $112,400, precluding BLC
from obtaining contractual legal services.
BLC, the Comptroller of Maryland, and the County should clarify their roles
and responsibilities pertaining to BLC’s budget and expenditures.
Determine the reasonableness of the work performed by BLC’s
attorneys and the related expenses (Objective 2).
During fiscal year 2015, expenditures for contractual legal services ($118,543)
were considerably higher than in previous years primarily because of legal fees
associated with appeals and protests ($71,090). The nature of these services for
appeals and protests appeared reasonable; nevertheless, certain other work
performed by the contractual attorney appeared to overlap the responsibilities of
BLC’s staff counsel and administrative staff, the extent of which could not be
readily determined. In addition, the overall reasonableness of the hours charged
and related costs of these activities and other contractual legal services could not
be determined because of a lack of documentation and an inability to obtain
comparable information from other liquor licensing boards. For example, tasks
assigned to the contractual attorney were generally authorized by the Board on an
informal basis with no documented agreement as to the hours needed for specific
assignments.
While not documented, Board members advised us that they reviewed the
invoices and verified that the services were for work they had requested the
contractual attorney to perform, and that the dates and amount of time charged
were reasonable. However, both Board members and BLC staff acknowledged
that duplication of services was likely.
8

--- Page 11 ---
During the course of our review, we determined that the contractual attorney,
while under contract with BLC, also represented a business applying to BLC for a
liquor license. According to legal counsel to the Maryland General Assembly and
counsel for the State’s Attorney Grievance Commission, this situation warrants a
review for a potential conflict of interest.
BLC could better control its legal expenditures by limiting contractual
attorney work assignments to those tasks that cannot be performed by BLC
staff, formalizing procedures for assigning work to the contractual attorney,
agreeing on the related chargeable hours, documenting all legal
arrangements, and instituting documented invoice approval procedures.
BLC should refer the attorney representation matter to the State’s Attorney
Grievance Commission.
9

--- Page 12 ---
Findings and Recommendations
Objective 1 – County Control of BLC Finances
Finding 1
Anne Arundel County (County) restricted expenditures for legal services
below the amounts authorized by the Comptroller of Maryland for fiscal
years 2015 and 2016 contrary to State law.
Analysis
The County restricted the Board of License Commissioners for Anne Arundel
County’s (BLC) authorized expenditures in fiscal years 2015 and 2016 below the
amounts in the Comptroller of Maryland’s (Comptroller) approved budgets.
According to legal counsel to the Maryland General Assembly, the Annotated
Code of Maryland requires the County to pay BLC’s expenses from its licensing
revenues, as approved by the Comptroller. Furthermore, legal counsel to the
Maryland General Assembly advised that, while BLC is subject to the County’s
budget and procurement policies, the County does not have the authority to apply
these policies in a way that restricts the services to be obtained by BLC.
During fiscal year 2015, the County restricted $35,000 in BLC expenditures. The
Comptroller approved BLC’s original budget of $676,900 and two subsequent
budget amendments for legal expenditures ($50,000 in December 2014 and
$20,000 in April 2015), increasing the overall budget by $70,000 to $746,900.
Although BLC revenues were ultimately available to fund both budget
amendments, the County did not concur with the amendments and only approved
an additional $35,000 in expenditures. We were advised by a BLC management
employee that the legal fees in excess of the County’s approved amount were paid
using unspent BLC funds budgeted for other purposes.
The County contends that the legal services provided were not reasonable and
necessary to carry out BLC’s function and purpose. The County also contends
that the legal services provided were not in accordance with County procurement
policies because certain services provided by the contractual attorney (such as
representing individual Board members in an ethics complaint) were beyond the
scope of the contract and the legal fees incurred exceeded the maximum allowed
by the contract.
Legal counsel to the Maryland General Assembly advised us that the County
exceeded its authority when it restricted these expenditures because the
expenditures were authorized by the Comptroller and sufficient funds were
available. Also, legal counsel to the Maryland General Assembly did not believe
10

--- Page 13 ---
the County’s reasons were sufficient for denying the additional budget
amendment amount. Specifically, we were advised that the general descriptions
of the legal services to be provided in the contract could be interpreted to include
the services the County contends were outside the contract scope. In addition, the
legal fees incurred beyond the contract maximum, in violation of County
regulations, appeared to be unavoidable since BLC was unable to request a
modification to the contract amount because of the County’s failure to approve
the related budget requests. As noted above, legal counsel to the Maryland
General Assembly advised that the County does not have the authority to apply its
policies in a way that restricts the services to be obtained by BLC.
For fiscal year 2016, the Comptroller approved BLC’s budget of $727,500, but
the County only authorized budgeted expenditures of $615,100 in its records,
essentially reducing the approved budget by $112,400. (The County Executive
had reduced the authorized expenditures by $52,400 and the County Council
further reduced the authorized expenditures to a total of $112,400.) The reduced
authorization of $112,400 included a $90,000 reduction for legal fees which we
were advised prevented BLC from obtaining the services of an additional attorney
to assist with its legal matters.
The County’s legal counsel advised us that the County has a right to authorize
expenditures below the amount approved in the Comptroller’s budget under
certain circumstances (such as to ensure the budget is balanced). However, legal
counsel to the Maryland General Assembly again advised us that the County did
not have the authority to authorize expenditures below the budgeted amount
approved by the Comptroller as long as there was sufficient revenues available
from BLC operations.
As noted in the table on page 4 of this report, there has historically been sufficient
funding to cover the budget approved by the Comptroller and surplus funds have
been retained by the County at the end of each year. Restricting BLC’s
expenditures enables the County to increase the amount of unspent funds it can
retain for its general operations.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that BLC
a. seek the concurrence of the Comptroller, legal counsel, and County
officials regarding the Comptroller’s authority for its budget and the
County’s role in paying BLC expenditures consistent with County
requirements and the approved budget; and
b. work with the County to authorize fiscal year 2016 expenditures
consistent with the Comptroller’s approved budget.
11

--- Page 14 ---
Objective 2 – Reasonableness of BLC Legal Expenditures
Finding 2
Certain work performed by BLC’s contractual attorney appeared to overlap
the responsibilities of BLC’s staff counsel and administrative staff. The
overall reasonableness of the hours charged and related costs for its
contractual attorney could not be assessed primarily because of a lack of
documentation.
Analysis
Certain work performed by BLC’s contractual attorney appeared to overlap the
responsibilities of BLC’s staff counsel and administrative staff. Due primarily to
a lack of documentation, as well as a lack of comparable information from other
liquor licensing boards, we could not assess the overall reasonableness of the
hours charged by the contractual attorney and related costs. The Board members
contend the services provided by its contractual attorney were authorized and the
costs were reasonable. Such costs increased from $55,646 in fiscal year 2013 to
$118,543 in fiscal year 2015.
 While the nature of certain services provided by the contractual attorney (such
as representing the Board during appeals and protests) appeared reasonable,
certain work performed by BLC’s contractual attorney appeared to overlap
the responsibilities of BLC’s staff counsel and administrative staff. During
fiscal years 2013 through 2015, the contractual attorney was annually paid
between $34,230 and $44,946 for services such as attending Board meetings,
reviewing legislation, and drafting opinions on new and renewal license
applications for subsequent Board review and approval. For example, during
fiscal year 2015, the contractual attorney was paid $28,355 for general legal
services provided to the Board, including attending Board meetings and
reviewing proposed legislation that could affect BLC.
Although the extent to which the same services were actually provided or
could have been provided by the BLC staff counsel and administrative staff is
unknown, BLC Board members and BLC staff both acknowledged that
duplication of services was likely. Specifically, all three Board members
concurred that there was a duplication of work to some degree and two of the
members acknowledged that certain of these services, such as drafting license
opinions, was previously performed by BLC administrative staff.
 The reasonableness of the hours charged and related costs of services
provided by the contractual attorney could not be reliably assessed primarily
because of a lack of documentation. Tasks assigned to the contractual
12

--- Page 15 ---
attorney were generally authorized by the Board on an informal basis with no
documented agreement as to the hours needed for specific tasks assigned.
While not documented, the Board members advised us that they reviewed the
invoices and verified that the services were for work they had requested the
contractual attorney to perform and that the dates and amount of time charged
were reasonable. The Board members also advised that the increase in fiscal
year 2015 legal service expenditures, which primarily related to appeals and
protests, was warranted. In this regard, the contractual attorney was paid
$49,700 in fiscal year 2015 for work related to three appeals by license
applicants, for which fees ranged from $8,020 to 28,870 for each case.
During that same year, this attorney was also paid $21,390 for work related to
various protests filed against the renewals of expiring liquor licenses (such as
by property owners objecting to the renewal of a liquor license). For
comparison purposes, the attorney was paid $3,640 for protest work in fiscal
year 2014 and was not paid for any protest work in fiscal year 2013.
We contacted four other liquor licensing boards in Maryland jurisdictions with
a similar or higher number of liquor licenses to compare the nature and cost of
the work performed by their legal counsels with that of BLC’s attorneys.
Because of the varying nature of the services provided and the sources used to
obtain the legal services, we were unable to use the information gathered to
reliably assess whether the scope of services and costs for BLC attorneys, in
particular the contractual attorney, were reasonable as compared with other
jurisdictions (see Exhibit). In addition, the level of legal services required is
dependent on the number and complexity of appeals and protests, which could
vary among the jurisdictions.
Recommendation 2
We recommend that BLC
a. discontinue assigning work to the contractual attorney for tasks that are
the responsibilities of, or could be performed by, BLC’s staff counsel and
administrative staff;
b. formalize procedures to assign specific tasks to the contractual attorney,
agree on the related chargeable hours, and document all the legal
arrangements; and
c. institute documented invoice approval procedures.
13

--- Page 16 ---
Finding 3
BLC’s contractual attorney represented a business applying to BLC for a
liquor license; this relationship raises questions regarding a potential conflict
of interest.
Analysis
BLC’s contractual attorney’s representation of BLC and an entity that applied for,
and ultimately received, a liquor license from BLC raises questions regarding a
potential conflict of interest. Specifically, in April 2015, the contractual attorney,
acting on behalf of this entity, submitted an application for a new license to
BLC’s administrative staff. A letter accompanying the application stated that the
attorney’s law firm represented the entity applying for the new license. Prior to
the June 2015 meeting at which the Board was scheduled to review the
application, the attorney informed BLC’s administrative staff that an attorney
from another law firm would represent the applicant at the meeting. The
contractual attorney continued to submit the applicant’s documentation to BLC
staff until the day before the Board meeting. The application was reviewed by the
BLC staff counsel prior to the meeting.
Audio of the meeting disclosed that the BLC staff counsel was unable to attend
the meeting. Another attorney was present to represent the applicant at the
meeting, whereas BLC’s contractual attorney, functioning as the Board’s counsel,
assisted the Board during the hearing by obtaining clarification from the applicant
on certain questions for consideration by the Board during the approval process.
The contractual attorney did not disclose, for the meeting record, the relationship
with the applicant or otherwise obtain written consent of the dual role from the
applicable parties. The applicant was ultimately approved for the license. The
contractual attorney’s invoice for services provided in June 2015 included
approximately $500 in charges for preparing for and attending the meeting.
Based on our discussion with the three Board members, two Board members were
aware of the contractual attorney’s relationship with the applicant prior to the
Board meeting and one member was not. Upon consulting legal counsel to the
Maryland General Assembly and counsel to the State’s Attorney Grievance
Commission, both agreed that this situation warranted review by the Attorney
Grievance Commission.
State law provides that a lawyer may not represent a client if the representation
involves a conflict of interest. An exemption may be allowed if “(1) the lawyer
reasonably believes that the lawyer will be able to provide competent and diligent
representation to each affected client; (2) the representation is not prohibited by
law; (3) the representation does not involve the assertion of a claim by one client
14

--- Page 17 ---
against another client represented by the lawyer in the same litigation or other
proceeding before a tribunal; and (4) each affected client gives informed consent,
confirmed in writing.”
We were advised by representatives of both the State and County ethics
commissions that situations involving potential conflicts of interest by contractors
are not within their jurisdictions.
Recommendation 3
We recommend that BLC
a. refer this matter to the State’s Attorney Grievance Commission, and
b. prohibit its attorneys from representing applicants and licensees in
matters involving the BLC.
15

--- Page 18 ---
Exhibit
Legal Services Provided To Selected Liquor Licensing Boards in Maryland
We contacted four other liquor licensing boards in Maryland jurisdictions with a similar or higher
number of liquor licenses to compare the nature and cost of the work performed by their legal
counsels with that of the Board of License Commissioners for Anne Arundel County (BLC)
attorneys. As noted in the table below, the nature of the work performed by the attorneys in each of
these jurisdictions varied and legal services were obtained in a variety of ways, including full or part-
time attorneys, the jurisdiction’s legal counsel, contractual attorneys, or a combination of one or
more of these resources. Furthermore, comparable expenditure data for these four board’s legal costs
were unavailable; the cost data that were furnished were based on estimates of the time allocated to
liquor licensing board activities.
Therefore, we were unable to use the information gathered to reliably assess whether the scope of
services and costs for BLC’s attorneys, in particular the contractual attorney, were reasonable as
compared with those of other jurisdictions.
Scope of Legal Work at Selected Liquor Licensing Boards
Number Fiscal Year
Jurisdiction of Liquor 2015 Legal Scope of Work
Licenses Expenditures
Baltimore 1,480 Unknown The Baltimore City Board of Liquor License
City Commissioners’ Deputy Executive Secretary (annual
salary of $82,250) serves as general attorney for the
Board. In addition, the Board employs another attorney
(annual salary of $78,000) who handles appeals and other
litigation, and uses the Baltimore City Law Department
for miscellaneous issues such as legislation and zoning.
Montgomery 1,029 $32,900 The Montgomery County Board of License
County (35 percent of Commissioners uses an attorney from the Office of the
the $94,000 County Attorney who attends Board meetings, handles
annual salary) litigation, provides legal advice, and reviews legislation.
Baltimore 831 Unknown The Board of Liquor License Commissioners for
County Baltimore County uses an attorney from the Baltimore
County Office of Law who reviews files, attends Board
meetings, provides legal advice, and reviews legislation.
Prince 667 $43,500 The Board of License Commissioners for Prince George’s
George’s County has one part-time attorney ($18,500) who reviews
County files and attends Board meetings, provides legal advice,
and reviews legislation; another contractual attorney
($25,000) handles appeals and litigation only.
Source: Liquor Licensing Board Personnel from the Applicable Jurisdiction
16

--- Page 20 ---
Recommendation 3
a. The Board will refer the matter discussed in the Audit to the State's Attorney
Grievance Commission for its possible consideration.
b. The Board will prohibit its attorneys from representing applicants and licensees in
matters involving the Board.
The Board appreciates the assistance provided by the Office of Legislative Audits
and recommendations provided by the Legislative Auditor.
Respectfully submitted:
The Board of License Commissioners
for Anne Arundel County
yv\~ tJ~lA'----.-.-,"J"±------
Melvin Hyatt, Chainn7n1J~
John
James C. Thomas, Commissioner

--- Page 21 ---
A T
UDIT EAM
Brian S. Tanen, CPA, CFE
Audit Manager
Joseph E. McWilliams, CFE
Senior Auditor