Title: Caroline County Public Schools
Date: 04/27/2010
Type: Local School Systems
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5a945d35cc9d72404c150a00
Extracted: 2025-06-18T06:04:44.764844
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Financial Management Practices Performance Audit Report
Caroline County Public Schools
April 2010
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
• This report and any related follow-up correspondence are available to the public through
the Office of Legislative Audits at 301 West Preston Street, Room 1202, Baltimore,
Maryland 21201. The Office may be contacted by telephone at 410-946-5900, 301-970-
5900, or 1-877-486-9964.
• Electronic copies of our audit reports can be viewed or downloaded from our website at
http://www.ola.state.md.us.
• Alternate formats may be requested through the Maryland Relay Service at 1-800-735-
2258.
• The Department of Legislative Services – Office of the Executive Director, 90 State Circle,
Annapolis, Maryland 21401 can also assist you in obtaining copies of our reports and
related correspondence. The Department may be contacted by telephone at 410-946-
5400 or 301-970-5400.

--- Page 3 ---
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY
April 27, 2010
Karl S. Aro Bruce A. Myers, CPA
Executive Director Legislative Auditor xxx
Senator Verna L. Jones, Co-Chair, Joint Audit Committee
Delegate Steven J. DeBoy, Sr., Co-Chair, Joint Audit Committee
Members of Joint Audit Committee
Annapolis, Maryland
Ladies and Gentlemen:
We conducted an audit of the financial management practices of the Caroline
County Public Schools (CCPS) in accordance with the requirements of the
State Government Article, Section 2-1220(e) of the Annotated Code of
Maryland. CCPS is the 19th largest public school system in Maryland based on
the number of students enrolled. The educational services are delivered in 10
schools, with fiscal year 2009 expenditures of $66 million. The objectives of
this audit were to evaluate whether CCPS procedures and controls were
effective in accounting for and safeguarding its assets and whether its
policies provided for the efficient use of financial resources.
In many cases, CCPS had procedures and controls in place to ensure the
safeguarding of assets and the efficient use of financial resources.
Nevertheless, our report contains 18 recommendations to CCPS to enhance
controls and processes in areas such as procurement, information technology
services, and student transportation. For example, CCPS needs to update
policies over procurements to reflect current bidding practices as well as to
require Board approval of significant sole source procurements and
procurements which “piggyback” on contracts previously procured by others,
such as local governments. CCPS should establish better controls over critical
information technology systems. CCPS should also implement certain
recommendations designed to make student transportation services more
cost effective, including evaluating certain factors used to make payments to
bus contractors. Other issues to be addressed include establishing controls
over equipment, and taking steps to ensure the propriety of health care cost
payments.

--- Page 4 ---
An executive summary of our findings can be found on page i, immediately
following this cover letter, and our audit scope, objectives and methodology
are explained on page 59. The CCPS response to this audit is included as an
appendix to this report. We wish to acknowledge the cooperation extended to
us during our audit by CCPS.
Respectfully submitted,
Bruce A. Myers, CPA
Legislative Auditor

--- Page 5 ---
Executive Summary
The Office of Legislative Audits has conducted an audit to evaluate
the effectiveness and efficiency of the financial management
practices of the Caroline County Public Schools (CCPS) in
accordance with the State Government Article, Section 2-1220(e) of
the Annotated Code of Maryland. State law requires the Office to
conduct such an audit of each of the 24 public school systems in
Maryland and provides that the related audit process be approved
by the Joint Audit Committee. Since the Committee approved the
audit process in September 2004, we have issued audit reports
related to 19 school systems; CCPS represents the twentieth to
date. The approved process included 11 areas to be audited at
each system. The following are summaries of the findings in these
areas at CCPS.
Revenue and Billing Cycle (see pages 7 through 9)
According to the audited CCPS financial statements, $67 million in
revenue was received from all sources during fiscal year 2009, the
vast majority of which was received via electronic fund transfers
from other governmental entities. Procedures and controls for
these revenue sources were generally found to be adequate;
however, based on findings of the independent certified public
accounting firm, controls over student activity funds maintained by
the schools need to be improved. In its response to the certified
public accounting firm, CCPS stated that documentation and
internal controls would be strengthened. School activity fund
collections totaled $980,000 for fiscal year 2009.
Federal Funds (see pages 11 through 13)
Annually, CCPS is subject to an audit of its federally funded
programs (often referred to as the Single Audit, and required by
Circular A-133, which is issued by the U.S. Office of Management
and Budget). Due to parallels between that work and the scope of
our audit, we placed significant reliance on the results of the
independent audit of the fiscal year 2009 grant activity. The related
i
Office of
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 6 ---
report stated that CCPS complied, in all material respects, with the
requirements applicable to its major federal programs. In addition,
with respect to internal controls over compliance with, and the
operation of major federal programs, the firm noted no matters
considered to be significant deficiencies or material weaknesses.
Reported federal fund expenditures totaled $6.1 million during
fiscal year 2009.
CCPS had an adequate process for the identification of children
eligible for Medicaid-subsidized services and recovery of related
costs. In addition, CCPS participated in the federal E-Rate program,
which provides financial assistance for school systems in the areas
of telecommunications and Internet access.
Procurement and Disbursement Cycle (see pages 15
through 20)
According to CCPS records, non-payroll disbursements totaled
$20.5 million during fiscal year 2009. CCPS had established
beneficial procurement practices (such as piggybacking on
contracts procured by other government entities) as well as policies
for purchasing card use and travel. However, the audit disclosed
that other existing procurement policies were outdated and did not
address all types of procurements, such as sole source
procurements. In addition, a number of employees had unrestricted
access to the automated procurement system that did not require
such access to perform their job duties. Finally, certain large
procurements were not presented to the Board for approval and
CCPS did not always maintain documentation to support prices paid
or discounts allowed by vendors.
Human Resources and Payroll (see pages 21 through 23)
CCPS employed 781 full-time equivalent employees as of October
2008, and payroll and benefit costs during fiscal year 2009 totaled
approximately $45.6 million. CCPS has taken steps to address
workforce planning for all employees of the System. However, CCPS
should take steps to address unnecessary and inappropriate
accesses that were given to certain personnel on the CCPS human
resource and payroll system, and a lack of supervisory review of
certain human resource and payroll transactions.
ii
Office of
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 7 ---
Inventory Control and Accountability (see pages 25
through 26)
CCPS had not developed written policies to control capital and
sensitive equipment, which totaled $3.9 million as of June 30,
2009. In addition, CCPS should improve control over its equipment
inventories and the related record keeping. For example, our
testing disclosed equipment at various locations that had not been
tagged or otherwise identified as CCPS property, and had not been
recorded in the inventory records.
Information Technology Services (see pages 27 through
29)
CCPS maintains and administers a computer network, computer
operations, and a number of significant financial and academic
information system applications. CCPS had developed a written
technology plan and used in-school staff to assist the information
technology (IT) department. The audit also found, however, that
CCPS did not have comprehensive security and disaster recovery
plans, and needs to improve procedures over backup of certain
data and implement better password and security practices.
Facilities Construction, Renovation, and
Maintenance (see pages 31 through 35)
CCPS maintains 10 schools and several other facilities (such as
administration and support offices) with a staff of 47 custodial and
maintenance personnel. CCPS has implemented a number of best
practices to help reduce construction and maintenance costs for its
facilities. However, CCPS had not established formal performance
measures and related benchmarks, a formal customer feedback
program, and estimated time and cost amounts to assess program
efficiency for both custodial and maintenance operations. In
addition, CCPS could not provide documentation that all required
routine preventive maintenance had been performed at its facilities.
iii
Office of
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 8 ---
Transportation Services (see pages 37 through 42)
CCPS is responsible for the safe transportation of more than 4,700
eligible students. CCPS used a number of recognized best practices
to increase student transportation efficiency, such as staggering
school arrival and dismissal times to enable buses to perform
multiple runs. However, we noted several areas where
improvements could be made. For example, in its calculation to
determine certain payments to bus contractors, CCPS was using a
shorter period for the useful life for buses as compared to the
length of time such payments were made, resulting in higher
payments than were necessary. Also, CCPS paid maintenance costs
for non-county owned buses at a significantly higher rate than what
was paid for maintenance on its own vehicles. In addition, CCPS did
not use automated routing software to help efficiently plan bus
routes and had not developed formal performance measures to
monitor and evaluate the efficiency and effectiveness of
transportation services.
Food Services Operations (see pages 43 through 48)
CCPS has implemented a number of best practices to help reduce
food service costs, such as utilization of United States Department
of Agriculture (USDA) commodities and participation in purchasing
cooperatives. CCPS has adequate procedures in place to identify
students eligible for free meals and reduced-price meals under the
federal national school meals programs. However, we found
controls over the procurement, ordering, and receiving of goods and
supplies need to be improved. In addition, CCPS needs to enhance
its use of performance measures to help ensure efficient
operations.
School Board Operations and Oversight (see pages 49
through 53)
Oversight of CCPS operations included the five-member Board
receiving financial updates, such as monthly budget variances, to
assist it in monitoring the use of funds. The Board is also
extensively involved in a comprehensive budgeting process. CCPS
has a detailed ethics policy and had established a process to
independently investigate ethics issues and complaints.
Nevertheless, the Board should adopt formal policies in a number of
iv
Office of
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 9 ---
financial-related areas. In addition, the Board could improve
oversight of operations by receiving and reviewing key financial and
operational performance measure data. The Board should also
consider establishing an internal audit function and a confidential
hotline for employees and others to report operational concerns and
suspected fraud and abuse.
Other Financial Controls (see pages 55 through 57)
CCPS had certain practices and procedures in place to govern its
cash and risk management. However, certain assets were at risk at
year-end, CCPS did not have written policies governing its use of
long-term liabilities, such as financing agreements, nor did it
establish sufficient controls to ensure the propriety of health care
costs.
v
Office of
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 10 ---
vi
Office of
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 11 ---
Table of Contents
Executive Summary i
Background Information 5
Oversight 5
Statistical Overview 5
External Audit of Fiscal Year 2009 Activity 6
Chapter 1: Revenue and Billing Cycle 7
Background 8
Revenue and Billing Cycle Activities Were Generally Adequate Although 9
Internal Controls Over Student Activity Funds Could Be Improved
Recommendation 9
Chapter 2: Federal Funds 11
Background 12
CCPS Established Adequate Internal Controls Over Federal Grants and 12
Complied with Federal Grant Requirements
Processes Were in Place to Identify Students Eligible for Medicaid 12
Services and to Obtain Federal Cost Reimbursements
CCPS Participated in the Federal E-Rate Program 13
Chapter 3: Procurement and Disbursement Cycle 15
Background 15
CCPS Used Several Best Practices to Address Its Procurement and 16
Disbursement Needs
Board Policies for Certain Procurements Should Be Reevaluated and 17
Updated
CCPS Should Strengthen Internal Controls Over Its Procurements 18
And Disbursements
Recommendations 20
1
Office of
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 12 ---
Table of Contents
Chapter 4: Human Resources and Payroll 21
Background 21
Human Resources and Payroll Internal Controls Need to Be Strengthened 22
Workforce Planning Addressed Future Critical Needs 23
Recommendation 23
Chapter 5: Inventory Control and Accountability 25
Background 25
Policies, Controls, and Record Keeping Over Equipment Need 26
Improvement
Recommendation 26
Chapter 6: Information Technology Services 27
Background 27
CCPS Has Taken Actions to Address Information Technology Needs 27
Data Processing Operations Should Be Better Secured 28
Steps Should Be Taken to Ensure Access to IT Software Applications 29
and Databases Are Appropriate and Controlled
Recommendations 29
Chapter 7: Facilities Construction, Renovation, and Maintenance 31
Background 31
A Number of Best Practices Were in Place to Enhance the Efficiency and 33
Effectiveness of the CCPS Facility Construction and Maintenance
Department
Certain Processes Should Be Implemented to Increase the Effectiveness 34
of Maintenance and Custodial Operations
Recommendation 35
2
Office of
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 13 ---
Table of Contents
Chapter 8: Transportation Services 37
Background 37
Several Best Practices Were in Place to Enhance Bus Route 38
Efficiency and to Control Related Costs
Bus Routing Procedures Should Be Enhanced and Routing Software 39
Should Be Fully Used
Payments to Bus Contractors Should Be Based on Documented Criteria 40
And Controls Over Payments Should Be Enhanced
Performance Should Be Measured 42
Recommendations 42
Chapter 9: Food Services Operations 43
Background 43
Certain Best Practices Were in Place 44
CCPS Needs to Improve Controls Over Purchasing of Food-Related Items 47
Performance Measures Should be Used to Help Assess the Efficiency of 48
Food Service Operations
Recommendations 48
Chapter 10: School Board Operations and Oversight 49
Background 49
Certain Oversight Had Been Put in Place Regarding CCPS Operations 50
The Board Should Establish Formal Policies in a Number of Financial 51
Related Areas
The Board Should Consider Additional Steps to Assist It in Governing CCPS 52
Recommendations 53
3
Office of
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 14 ---
Table of Contents
Chapter 11: Other Financial Controls 55
Cash and Risk Management Policies Were in Place 55
Certain Assets Were at Risk 56
CCPS Need to Develop a Policy on Long-Term Lease Obligations 56
CCPS Should Take Steps to Ensure the Propriety of Health Care Costs 56
Recommendations 57
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology 59
Response of Caroline County Public Schools Appendix
4
Office of
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 15 ---
Background Information
Oversight
Caroline County Public Schools (CCPS) is governed by a local
school board, consisting of five appointed members and two non-
voting student members. The vast majority of CCPS funding is
provided by the Caroline County government and the State. In
addition, the Maryland State Department of Education (MSDE)
exercises considerable oversight through the establishment and
monitoring of various financial and academic policies and
regulations in accordance with certain provisions of the Annotated
Code of Maryland. MSDE also works with CCPS to comply with the
requirements and mandates of the federal No Child Left Behind
Act of 2001. Oversight by the Caroline County government is
limited, although the CCPS annual operational and capital budgets
require County approval.
Statistical Overview
According to MSDE student enrollment records, CCPS ranks 19th in
student enrollment among the 24 public school systems in
Maryland. From fiscal year 2000 to 2009, the total full-time
regular and special education pupil population has decreased
three percent from 5,685 to 5,513, but the State projects an
increase to 6,710 by 2017. For the 2009-2010 school year, CCPS
had 10 schools, consisting of 5 elementary schools, 2 middle
schools, 2 high schools, and 1 career and technology center.
According to its audited financial statements, CCPS expenditures
were $66 million in fiscal year 2009. The largest expenditure
category was salaries, wages, and benefits, which accounted for
69 percent of total expenditures during fiscal year 2009. The
CCPS budgeted full-time positions in fiscal year 2009 totaled 781,
which consisted of 531 instructional and 250 non-instructional
employees.
Certain statistical information contained in this report was taken
from reports distributed by MSDE and represents the most current
information available at the time of our audit. These MSDE
reports are based on self-reported data from the 24 public school
5
Office of
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 16 ---
systems, and MSDE does not warrant the comparability or
completeness of the data.
External Audit of Fiscal Year 2009 Activity
Annually, CCPS engages a certified public accounting firm to
independently audit its fiscal year-end financial statements.
Additionally, the auditor conducts what is referred to as a Single
Audit of CCPS federal grant programs (as required by federal
regulations). The resulting audit reports for the 2009 fiscal year
were issued in September 2009. Neither report disclosed any
material weakness in CCPS record keeping, processes and
controls but the audit of the year-end financial statements
included a significant deficiency in internal controls as commented
upon in Chapter 1 (Revenue and Billing Cycle).
6
Office of
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 17 ---
Chapter 1
Revenue and Billing Cycle
According to the CCPS audited financial statements, $67 million of
revenue was received by CCPS during fiscal year 2009. Due to
similarities between the work of the independent certified public
accounting firm that audited the CCPS financial statements,
student activity funds, and cafeteria funds, and the scope of our
audit in this area, we placed significant reliance on the results of
those fiscal year 2009 audits for revenues and accounts
receivable (for example, amounts due from other governments).
The firm’s procedural reviews and testing for the most significant
revenue types (the majority of which was received via electronic
fund transfers from other government entities) and for accounts
receivable, disclosed a significant deficiency1 over financial
reporting for school activity funds. For fiscal year 2009, school
activity fund collections totaled $980,000.
1 A significant deficiency is a control deficiency, or combination of control
deficiencies, that adversely affects the entity’s ability to initiate, authorize,
record, process, or report financial data reliably in accordance with generally
accepted accounting principles such that there is more that a remote
likelihood that a misstatement of the entity’s financial statements that is
more than inconsequential will not be prevented or detected by the entity’s
internal control. With respect to Single Audit, a significant deficiency is a
control deficiency, or combination of control deficiencies, that adversely
affects the entity’s ability to administer a federal program such that there is
more than a remote likelihood that noncompliance with a type of compliance
requirement of a federal program that is more than inconsequential will not
be prevented or detected by the entity’s internal control.
7
Office of
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 18 ---
Background
CCPS revenues consist primarily of funds received from Caroline
County and the State. Other sources include federal grant funds,
interest income, receipts from the sale of food, and other
miscellaneous sources. Chart 1 (below) shows CCPS fiscal year
2009 revenues of $67 million by major source.
Chart 1
Sources of Fiscal Year 2009 Revenue
($67 Million)
Federal
$5,313,954
8% State
Caroline County $47,030,649
$13,103,740 70%
19%
Other
$1,764,711
3%
Sources: CCPS fiscal year 2009 audited financial
statements and supporting CCPS records
In addition to the revenues in Chart 1, schools also collect funds
for various purposes, such as student groups, clubs, and school
publications. These school activity funds2 are accounted for
separately by each school and are reported in summary in the
2 The Board has a fiduciary responsibility to ensure that school activity funds
are used only for intended purposes by those to whom the assets belong.
Receipts for the school activity fund are not included in the $67 million
revenue total because the Board cannot use these assets to finance its
operations.
8
Office of
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 19 ---
audited financial statements. For fiscal year 2009, school activity
fund collections totaled $980,000 and the June 30, 2009 balance
was $354,000.
Revenue and Billing Cycle Activities Were Generally
Adequate Although Internal Controls Over Student
Activity Funds Could Be Improved
Due to similarities between the work of the independent certified
public accounting firm that audited the CCPS financial statements
and the scope of our audit in this area, we placed significant
reliance on the results of the financial statement audit of the fiscal
year 2009 financial statements. The auditor’s procedural review
and testing disclosed no material weaknesses3 regarding the
collection of any accounts receivable or revenues from local,
State, federal, and other sources (such as food service
operations), including electronic fund transfer transactions.
However, the auditor identified a significant deficiency in the
internal controls over student activity funds, commenting that
controls over the related cash receipts were not adequate to
minimize the risk of such receipts being misappropriated.
Specifically, detailed records were not retained at the school level
to sufficiently substantiate transactions to allow for proper review
and audit. In its corrective action plan submitted in response to
the audit, the Board stated that documentation and internal
controls would be strengthened.
Recommendation
1. CCPS should implement internal controls over school activity
funds as recommended by its independent certified public
accounting firm.
3 A material weakness is a significant deficiency, or combination of significant
deficiencies, that results in more than a remote likelihood that a material
misstatement of the financial statements (or, with respect to Single Audit,
material noncompliance with a type of compliance requirement of a federal
program) will not be prevented or detected by any entity’s internal control.
9
Office of
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 20 ---
10
Office of
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 21 ---
Chapter 2
Federal Funds
Annually, CCPS is subject to an audit of its federally funded grant
programs (often referred to as the Single Audit, and required by
Circular A-133 issued by the U.S. Office of Management and
Budget). The report on the audit of fiscal year 2009 federal grant
activity was issued by the independent certified public accounting
firm on September 28, 2009.
In that report, the auditor stated that CCPS complied, in all
material respects, with the requirements applicable to its major
federal grant programs. With respect to internal controls over
compliance with and the operation of major federal programs, the
auditors did not identify any significant deficiencies or material
weaknesses.
CCPS had an adequate process for the identification of children
eligible for Medicaid-subsidized4 services and for recovering
related costs. In addition, CCPS participated in the federally
funded E-Rate program, which provides discounts for school
systems related to telecommunications and Internet access.
4 The Federal Medical Assistance Program, or Medicaid, is not a grant program
under Circular A-133 and is not included in the Single Audit.
11
Office of
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 22 ---
Background
CCPS receives funds primarily from Caroline County, the State, and
the federal government. Most funds received from Caroline
County and the State are unrestricted; however, federal funds are
generally restricted for use for a specified program (such as the
School Lunch Program or Special Education). According to the
audited Schedule of Federal Awards, fiscal year 2009
expenditures of federal award funds totaled $6.1 million.
According to the audited financial statements, CCPS also received
an additional $226,000 of federal fee-for-service payments during
fiscal year 2009 for Medicaid-subsidized services for qualified
students. In addition, according to CCPS’ records, for fiscal year
2008, CCPS received $113,000 as a Medicare Part D subsidy for
keeping retirees on the CCPS prescription plan. (Funds related to
fiscal year 2009 had not been received as of December 11,
2009.)
CCPS Established Adequate Internal Controls Over
Federal Grants and Complied with Federal Grant
Requirements
In the report on the audit of fiscal year 2009 federal grant activity
issued by the CCPS external auditor on September 28, 2009, the
auditor stated that CCPS complied, in all material respects, with
the requirements applicable to each of its major federal programs
for the year ended June 30, 2009. With respect to internal
controls over compliance with and the operation of major federal
programs, no material weaknesses or significant deficiencies were
noted.
Processes Were in Place to Identify Students Eligible
for Medicaid Services and to Obtain Federal Cost
Reimbursements
Our review of Medicaid-subsidized services disclosed that CCPS
had adequate processes in place to identify students eligible for
Medicaid services and to recover the related costs. Specifically,
12
Office of
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 23 ---
CCPS periodically compares listings of all children whose families
are participating in Medicaid, as determined by the Department of
Health and Mental Hygiene, to the student information system to
identify newly eligible students and the continuation of eligibility
for previously identified students. In addition, there is outreach to
families during meetings to discuss educational services for
special needs students (including programs and services subject
to Medicaid funding) to identify potential eligibility and to
encourage program participation. Finally, CCPS ensures that all
services provided are billed and costs are recovered.
CCPS Participated in the Federal E-Rate Program
CCPS has a process in place to request and receive
reimbursement for technology expenditures from the federal
School and Libraries Universal Service Program (E-Rate). The E-
Rate program provides funding to schools for telecommunications
expenses (such as Internet access). The funding is based on the
level of poverty and the rural status of the school district. CCPS
received approximately $171,000 of E-Rate funds for funding year
2008, the most recent year for which expenditures had been
reimbursed.
Recommendation
None
13
Office of
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 24 ---
14
Office of
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 25 ---
Chapter 3
Procurement and Disbursement Cycle
CCPS has certain beneficial procurement policies and practices in
place such as piggybacking onto contracts already procured by the
other local governments and participating in purchasing
consortiums. CCPS has also established policies for credit card
use and employee travel. However, the audit found that other
existing CCPS procurement policies were outdated and did not
address certain types of procurements, such as sole source
procurements. In addition, significant weaknesses in internal
control existed over the automated CCPS procurement and
disbursement system. For example, a number of employees were
provided with unrestricted access to the system that allowed them
to add or adjust vendor information, generate purchase orders,
and process payments. Our testing of contracts and related
expenditures found that procurements made through consortiums
or via piggybacking onto other government contracts were not
presented to the Board. CCPS also did not maintain contract
pricing documents to ensure that it was getting appropriate prices
or discounts from these vendors.
Background
CCPS uses an automated system for purchasing and
disbursements. Requisitions entered by departments are subject
to departmental approval. Purchase orders, solicitations, bids,
and contracts are generally handled by a central purchasing office.
Similar to State regulations, CCPS procurement practices require
15
Office of
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 26 ---
that purchases over $25,000 be formally bid. The receipt of
goods and services is verified by the receiving school or
department and payments are then processed by the finance
office. Vendor payments are processed using the automated
system. According to the CCPS financial statement, non-payroll
disbursements totaled $20.5 million during fiscal year 2009.
During fiscal year 2009, CCPS records indicated that its
employees used credit cards to make a total of $180,000 in
purchases, and it had 34 active credit cards with the monthly
charges being paid directly by the school system.
CCPS Used Several Best Practices to Address Its
Procurement and Disbursement Needs
CCPS had instituted certain best practices, including the following,
to enhance the cost effectiveness of its procurement and
disbursement transactions.
• CCPS participates in purchasing consortiums with other
governmental entities (such as other school systems) for items
such as energy, fuel, and equipment. CCPS also piggybacks
onto contracts procured by the State of Maryland and other
governmental entities, as appropriate, to take advantage of
already negotiated favorable terms. CCPS also participates in
the U.S. Communities Government Purchasing Alliance, a
purchasing forum designed to reduce the cost of goods
through pooling the purchasing power of public agencies
nationwide.
• CCPS had established a travel policy to control employee travel
costs, including a requirement that all out-of-county travel
requests be approved by the superintendent or assistant
superintendent. According to CCPS records, travel expenses
totaled $158,000 during fiscal year 2009.
• CCPS had established a credit card procurement program for
authorized employees, including Board members. CCPS
developed written procedures that specify the appropriate
uses of the card and that include requirements regarding
supervisory approval and reconciliation of charges to monthly
statements. According to CCPS records, credit card purchases
16
Office of
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 27 ---
totaled $180,000 during fiscal year 2009. Our review of card
activity disclosed that charges appeared to be for appropriate
school-related activities (such as maintenance and
instructional supplies).
Board Policies for Certain Procurements Should Be
Reevaluated and Updated
CCPS procurement policies and procedures were outdated,
including the current administrative procedures (that provide
detail guidance for small procurements) which were last updated
in December 1996. For example, the existing policy requires
advertising and bidding for acquisitions of goods and services
exceeding $15,000, even though the current state law and CCPS
practices have increased this amount to $25,000. In addition, the
procedures do not address certain types of CCPS procurement
activities, such as sole source procurements.
CCPS frequently piggybacked onto various contracts (noted
previously as a best practice), and CCPS did not require Board
review or approval of these procurement awards. Current
practices require that procurements of $25,000 or more be
competitively bid and approved by the Board. However,
piggybacked and consortium purchases (which were not bid) were
not addressed in CCPS policy and, therefore, were not presented
to or approved by the Board even when the procurements
exceeded $25,000. Our test of 10 procurements with fiscal year
2009 expenditures totaling $1.8 million disclosed that none of the
3 procurements using piggybacked contracts were presented to
the Board for its review and approval. These three procurements,
for items such as a playground and office equipment, totaled
$542,000.
Policies also did not address the appropriate use of sole source
procurements and any Board review and approval requirements,
and did not specify the related requirement to document the
justification for such purchases. Although sole source
procurements should be infrequent, the reason for using this
procurement method should be documented in each instance to
substantiate that the best value was obtained or that the
procurement was obtained from the only available vendor. Our
aforementioned test of 10 procurements also disclosed one sole
17
Office of
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 28 ---
source procurement, totaling $235,000, that was not submitted to
the Board for review and approval.
CCPS Should Strengthen Internal Controls Over Its
Procurements and Disbursements
Procurement and disbursement controls need to be
strengthened – Access to the automated system used to
prepare requisitions and process invoice payments needs to be
restricted to improve internal control. Specifically, we found that
the access granted to seven employees was excessive and
allowed them to perform incompatible duties. Specifically, these
employees had unrestricted purchasing and accounts payable
functions, including entering and updating purchase orders,
adding vendors, and printing disbursement checks. In addition,
while we were advised that a CCPS employee compared checks to
related supporting documentation, this review was not
documented and the employee was one of the seven employees
with unrestricted access to the system.
Although we were advised that blank check stock and the
signature plate used to process checks were kept in a locked
closet, we found that the closet was open on a number of
occasions. The seven employees with unrestricted access to the
system were among the employees with access to the closet.
Finally, monthly bank reconciliations for the CCPS general
disbursement account were not reviewed and approved by
supervisory personnel.
Contract pricing information needs to be maintained – Our
test of 10 contracts and 21 related invoices (the invoices totaled
approximately $1 million) processed primarily in fiscal year 2009
disclosed the following conditions:
• CCPS could not provide documentation (such as price lists) to
support the amounts charged on 7 invoices totaling $391,000.
These invoices related to items purchased under a consortium
agreement or a “piggyback” contract of another entity.
• Even after we obtained pricing documentation from the
vendors, we could not always determine if CCPS received
appropriate discounts specified in the agreements or contracts
18
Office of
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 29 ---
mentioned above. For example, a consortium agreement with
one vendor specified discount percentages for each type of
goods sold by the vendor; however, the related invoices
processed by CCPS did not include sufficient information to
determine whether any discount was provided.
Sole source contracts should be properly justified and the
related contracts and invoices should be more detailed –
During our test of procurements, we noted that CCPS awarded
three one-year contracts with a three-year value of $166,089. The
contractor was required to perform professional development and
teacher evaluation support services during fiscal years 2008 to
2010. Our review of these contracts disclosed the following
conditions:
• The contracts were procured as sole source although there
was no documentation that these services were unavailable
from other vendors or that competitive bidding was not
appropriate to ensure the best possible cost.
• Although there was evidence that the Board was advised of the
services being provided, none of the three contracts were
specifically approved by the Board. The contracts were valued
at $39,616, $61,901, and $64,572 for fiscal years 2008,
2009, and 2010, respectively. As previously mentioned, CCPS
policies did not address any Board review and approval
requirements for sole source contracts.
• All contracts stated that payment would be made upon
successful completion of required services. In addition, the
contract for fiscal year 2010 stated that the vendor payments
would be spread throughout the year. However, the contracts
did not include specific deliverables or other requirements to
be provided by the vendor in providing these leadership
development and professional growth services, nor did the
contracts require the vendor to provide detailed
documentation to support amounts to be paid.
• Although CCPS officials advised that the services were
performed, none of the vendor invoices were supported by
detailed documentation, such as days worked, schools visited,
or staff trained. Instead, the invoices simply stated that the
vendor was to be paid for “services rendered per contract.”
19
Office of
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 30 ---
The vendor was paid bi-weekly for a proportionate share of the
total contract value without providing documentation of the
services rendered.
Recommendations
2. CCPS should update its existing procurement policies to reflect
actual practices and current State law, as well as sole source
procurements. In addition, CCPS should enhance its existing
procurement policies to require that contract awards resulting
from the use of other agency contracts and sole source awards
be reported to and approved by the Board when the awards
exceed a predetermined dollar value (such as $25,000).
3. CCPS should improve its controls over purchasing and the
invoice payment process by separating incompatible functions
and by restricting access to critical system functions to only
those who need those capabilities to perform their job duties.
In addition, CCPS should establish a process to ensure that a
proper and independent review of all disbursement checks and
bank reconciliations is performed. CCPS should also maintain
contract pricing information on file, including the applicable
contracts, and verify the accuracy of vendor billings. Finally,
CCPS should ensure that the justification for all sole source
contracts is documented and that contracts and related
invoices are sufficiently detailed to support the services to be
performed and subsequently paid for.
20
Office of
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 31 ---
Chapter 4
Human Resources and Payroll
CCPS has taken steps to address workforce planning for all
employees of the System. However, CCPS should address certain
procedural and control deficiencies with respect to human
resources and payroll functions. Specifically, unnecessary and
inappropriate access capabilities were given to certain personnel
on the CCPS human resource and payroll system and there was a
lack of supervisory review of certain critical human resource and
payroll transactions.
Background
Payroll expense represents the largest single cost component in
the CCPS budget. Fiscal year 2009 salary and wage costs,
including benefits, totaled $45.6 million. According to MSDE
reports, as of October 2008, CCPS had 781 full-time equivalent
positions. The ratio of CCPS students to employees (7.1 to 1) was
comparable to similarly sized school systems (see Table 1).
CCPS uses an automated integrated human resources and payroll
system to maintain human resources information, record
employee time, and track leave usage. The system automatically
generates biweekly time records, and any adjustments are
processed by central payroll personnel. The system generates
payroll checks and direct deposit advices. Payroll processing
involves both automated processes (such as compiling leave and
21
Office of
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 32 ---
running edit reports) and manual processes (such as data entry of
new employee information).
Table 1
Comparison of Student to Employee Ratios – Fall 2008
(Unaudited)
Number of
Number of Full-Time
Student to
Students Equivalent
School System Employee
(as of September Employees
Ratio
30, 2008) (as of October
2008)
Caroline County 5,513 781 7.06 to 1
Queen Anne’s County 7,859 963 8.16 to 1
Garrett County 4,425 643 6.88 to 1
Dorchester County 4,560 696 6.55 to 1
Worcester County 6,671 1,163 5.74 to 1
Source: MSDE Student/Staff Publications
Note: School systems selected for comparison are those with student
enrollments closest in number to CCPS.
Human Resources and Payroll Internal Controls Need
to Be Strengthened
CCPS did not establish adequate internal control over its
automated human resource and payroll system and related
processes. Seven employees had unrestricted access to human
resources and payroll functions, such as for adding and deleting
employees and processing payroll adjustments; three of these
employees did not require such access to perform their job
responsibilities. The other four employees could also change
social security numbers and direct deposit information without
independent approval. As a result of these incompatible
capabilities, improper or erroneous transactions could be
processed without detection.
22
Office of
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 33 ---
In addition, one of these employees who reviewed payroll
adjustments also had the capability to process such adjustments,
and the review did not include certain payroll adjustments (such
as employee terminations).
Workforce Planning Addressed Future Critical Needs
CCPS established a number of methods to identify and address
workforce needs involving critical instructional and non-
instructional positions. For example, CCPS annually projects
employees eligible for retirement based on age and years of
service, including non-instructional personnel, to determine the
impact on hiring decisions. In addition, CCPS uses an annual
intent process to identify employees considering leaving at the end
of the school year. In addition, the CCPS Master Plan sets the
strategic direction of the school system and provides coordination
and focus for initiatives to address the challenges faced by CCPS.
The Plan includes a number of objectives and strategies to
address human resource needs—which is evidence of workforce
planning. This allows CCPS to tailor its recruitment and retention
efforts.
Recommendation
4. CCPS should restrict critical system access capabilities to
those employees whose job duties require such access,
separate incompatible duties, and ensure that all transactions
(such as adding an employee or changing salaries) are subject
to independent review and approval.
23
Office of
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 34 ---
24
Office of
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 35 ---
Chapter 5
Inventory Control and Accountability
Our audit disclosed that CCPS had not developed written policies
and procedures governing the accounting and safeguarding of
equipment, including recording of equipment transactions,
documenting physical inventories, and any subsequent
adjustments needed to the equipment records. In addition, CCPS
should improve its control over its equipment inventories and the
related record keeping. For example, our testing disclosed
equipment at various locations that had not been tagged or
otherwise identified as CCPS property, and had not been recorded
in the inventory records.
Background
According to audited financial statements, as of June 30, 2009,
the undepreciated value of capital equipment was $3.9 million.
CCPS uses an automated system to track all property with a cost
of $5,000 or more. All property items with a cost of $5,000 or
more are capitalized and depreciated for financial statement
purposes. In addition, CCPS practices require the recording and
tagging of sensitive equipment items (such as computers and
digital cameras) costing more than $200.
25
Office of
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 36 ---
Policies, Controls, and Record Keeping Over
Equipment Need Improvement
CCPS should improve its procedures and controls to ensure
accountability over equipment. Specifically, the audit disclosed
the following conditions:
• Although CCPS had implemented certain practices and
controls over equipment inventories, CCPS has not developed
written policies and procedures to ensure proper accountability
and control of capital and sensitive items. Such policies and
procedures should address the accounting and safeguarding
of equipment, proper recording of equipment transactions, and
documenting physical inventories and any subsequent
adjustments needed to the equipment records.
• CCPS inventory records did not accurately reflect all items
owned by CCPS and certain items were not properly identified
as CCPS property. Specifically, our test of 123 inventory items
(including 118 items purchased during fiscal year 2009 and 5
items sighted at school locations) costing $136,000 disclosed
that 8 items costing $14,000 were not properly tagged and
recorded in CCPS’ inventory records.
• The inventory records for sensitive equipment items often did
not include the item’s cost and the date the system acquired
the item.
Recommendation
5. CCPS should adopt formal policies governing all equipment,
and should ensure that the related detail equipment records
are properly maintained and that all equipment items are
properly identified as CCPS property.
26
Office of
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 37 ---
Chapter 6
Information Technology Services
CCPS maintains and administers a computer network, computer
operations, and a number of significant financial and academic
information system applications. CCPS prepared a long-term
technology plan and used in-school staff to assist the information
technology (IT) department.
Nevertheless, we identified deficiencies in a number of areas
including system user access and security and disaster recovery
planning. Finally, the version of the student information database
application used by CCPS had not been updated with critical
security upgrades.
Background
CCPS operates a wide area network connecting the various
schools within Caroline County. CCPS maintains and administers
a network; academic, financial, and human resources information
applications; and other general computer operations.
CCPS Has Taken Actions to Address Information
Technology Needs
CCPS prepared an annual technology plan as part of the school
system’s Master Plan and prepared a separate, more extensive
27
Office of
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 38 ---
technology plan every three years. These plans establish a vision
and mission for technology in CCPS and have defined goals.
These plans address various topics including system security,
hardware and software replacement, replacement cost schedules,
professional development, and training. In addition, CCPS has
established technology support facilitators within each school to
assist the Office of Technology in meeting the goals of the plan,
including basic IT staff training and technology troubleshooting.
Data Processing Operations Should Be Better
Secured
CCPS needs to develop certain information technology (IT)
policies and plans – CCPS did not have a comprehensive
information security program to ensure that proper computer
security controls existed for its IT operations and applications. The
significance of IT requires the implementation of a comprehensive
information security program comprised of information security
policies, security procedures, and a supporting management
structure.
CCPS also lacked a formal, comprehensive, disaster recovery plan
for its computer operations. Without a plan, a disaster could
cause significant delays (for an undetermined period) in restoring
operations above and beyond the expected delays that would exist
in a planned recovery scenario. The plan should include the
following components:
• the identification of an alternate site in the event of a disaster
• applications prioritized for recovery
• disaster recovery team designations and areas of responsibility
• testing of the disaster recovery plan
• restoration of network connectivity
Procedures for the backup of critical servers need
improvement – Backup tapes of a critical server were not
adequately secured. Specifically, daily backups were stored on
the same server and, although weekly backups were stored
offsite, they were stored in an unsecured location. Accordingly, if a
disaster occurred, it is uncertain if all critical information could be
readily recreated.
28
Office of
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 39 ---
Steps Should Be Taken to Ensure Access to IT
Software Applications and Databases Are
Appropriate and Controlled
Access to CCPS computer resources was not adequately
controlled – Our review disclosed several deficiencies in
computer application security which increased the vulnerability of
various CCPS automated systems, programs, and data.
Enhancements should be made to existing procedures to ensure
that all access to computer resources is appropriate. For example,
for certain automated systems, automatic password expirations
were not enabled and CCPS did not set password complexity
requirements (to make them more difficult to hack). In addition,
for one critical application, system security reports were not
generated.
The student information database security software had
not been properly updated – As of September 2009, CCPS
had not installed three critical security updates dating back to
October 2008. Software product patches correct known security
vulnerabilities. Without the most current product patches
installed, the potential exists for hackers to exploit known security
weaknesses, which could disrupt operations or result in the
modification of critical production data.
Recommendations
6. CCPS should develop appropriate comprehensive plans to
address security practices and disaster recovery. CCPS
should also properly safeguard its computer operations, by
storing critical back-up files at a secure off-site location.
7. CCPS should implement appropriate security measures to
safeguard its applications and data systems by improving
account and password protection, and logging all significant
security-related activity for review. CCPS should also ensure
that databases used are updated with all critical security
upgrades in a timely manner.
29
Office of
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 40 ---
30
Office of
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 41 ---
Chapter 7
Facilities Construction, Renovation, and
Maintenance
CCPS used a number of best practices in its capital planning
process, as well as in controlling costs. These include (1) the
development of a long-term Capital Improvement Plan based on a
comprehensive and public process, (2) an energy management
and conservation program, and (3) use of periodic evaluations of
space utilization and portable classrooms to minimize the need for
new construction.
However, with respect to its maintenance and custodial
operations, CCPS had not established formal performance
measures, related benchmarks, and a formal customer feedback
program, and did not establish estimated time and cost amounts
to assess program efficiency for both custodial and maintenance
operations. In addition, CCPS could not document the
performance of routine preventive maintenance at its facilities.
Background
CCPS maintains 10 schools and several other facilities (such as
administration and support offices) with a staff of 43 custodial
personnel and 4 maintenance personnel.
31
Office of
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 42 ---
CCPS used a six-year Capital Improvement Plan (CIP) to identify
ongoing and projected needs for new buildings and major
renovations. The annual CIP was developed using student
demographic data and input from various sources, including public
meetings, and was approved by the Board. In the fiscal year 2010
CIP (prepared in fiscal year 2008), necessary major renovations,
repairs, and systemic improvements to existing schools over the
next six years were estimated to cost $113 million through 2015.
Table 2 compares CCPS fiscal year 2008 plant costs (that is,
maintenance and operational costs) with other similarly sized
school systems in Maryland. The table presents two cost
measures used to assess plant costs: cost per student and cost
per square foot. These statistics show that CCPS facilities
operation and maintenance costs are significantly less than its
peer group.
Table 2
Plant Cost Comparison Per Student and Per Square Foot
Fiscal Year 2008 (Unaudited)
Plant Costs Square Total
Per Footage Gross
School System Per
Total Square Per Square
Student(cid:110)
Foot Student Footage
Caroline County $ 4,244,011 $757.60 $5.10 148.60 832,272
Worcester County 7,666,568 1,141.66 7.22 158.10 1,061,804
Queen Anne’s County 7,544,340 967.86 6.93 139.60 1,087,959
Garrett County 4,707,007 1,047.26 5.89 177.80 799,176
Dorchester County 4,548,546 987.35 5.48 180.30 830,410
Average of
$ 6,116,615 $1,036.03 $6.38 163.95 944,837
Comparable Schools
Sources: MSDE Financial Data, MSDE Fact Book, Maryland Public School Construction Square Footage
Data (most recent data available)
(cid:110) - Based on Average Daily Enrollment 2007-2008
32
Office of
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 43 ---
A Number of Best Practices Were in Place to
Enhance the Efficiency and Effectiveness of the
CCPS Facility Construction and Maintenance
Department
CCPS has instituted several best practices to enhance project
results and cost effectiveness in its facilities and maintenance
department, in addition to the previously noted six-year CIP:
• Various methods were used to reduce the need for additional
construction. The periodic evaluation of space utilization
included consideration of capacity, enrollment projections,
redistricting students among schools, and the use of portable
classrooms.
• CCPS developed an educational specifications document for all
new construction which addresses all required building
requirements, including educational components required by
the State.
• CCPS contracted with a vendor for energy management
consulting services including computer software that monitors
and records energy usage at all facilities. As part of the
agreement, CCPS employs an energy manager to monitor
energy practices. Based on reports from the consultant, CCPS
cost savings totaled $181,000 for the first 9 months of the
program (October 2008 to June 2009). CCPS also participates
in a multi-party energy trust to purchase energy at the best
possible prices and has implemented in-house energy
management practices, such as the use of automated
monitoring systems in all schools to regulate heating and air
conditioning usage, as well as to shut down systems at
specified temperatures for occupied and unoccupied times at
each location.
33
Office of
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 44 ---
Certain Processes Should Be Implemented to
Increase the Effectiveness of Maintenance and
Custodial Operations
CCPS had not implemented a performance measurement
system and had not used available information to assess
current productivity or future needs – CCPS did not measure
and assess the efficiency of its maintenance operations, both for
internal self-evaluation purposes and for comparisons with other
systems, which could identify other best practices. Comparability
with other systems in Maryland could not necessarily be done
unilaterally since there would need to be a consensus on the
measures and methodology; however, other states (for example,
Michigan and Florida) have mandated the establishment and use
of measures and benchmarks to assist schools in the evaluation
of costs and practices.
We also noted that CCPS did not use a staffing formula to
periodically determine the number of maintenance employees
required to efficiently meet its needs. Our comparison disclosed
that CCPS maintenance staffing levels are significantly less than
the national medians, as reported by American School and
University Magazine. The national medians specify one
maintenance employee per 107,439 square feet of building
maintained. Using current staffing and square footage for CCPS
facilities, we calculated that CCPS had one maintenance employee
per 220,106 square feet of building maintained.
We also found that, although CCPS manually records the actual
amount of labor and materials used to perform tasks on the work
order requisition forms, this information is not entered in the
automated work order system. Additionally, estimated cost and
hours to complete tasks are not entered in the automated work
order system, based on either history or industry guidebooks. As a
result, actual time and costs were not compared to estimated time
and costs of performing routine tasks. An effective work order
system can be used to generate a variety of statistical data
including employee productivity, cost reports, and facility
assessments, all of which are key pieces of a performance
measurement system.
34
Office of
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 45 ---
CCPS could not provide documentation that all required
preventive maintenance work had been performed –
CCPS had developed a comprehensive maintenance plan that
included, among other details, preventive maintenance and
custodial task schedules and requirements. While periodic
preventive maintenance and custodial work are required to be
documented when conducted, our review disclosed that
documentation was not available to indicate that all preventive
maintenance required by the comprehensive maintenance plan
had been performed. For example, based on our test of 22 types
of preventive maintenance tasks to be conducted at CCPS schools
during fiscal year 2009 (such as emergency generator checks),
only 64 percent of required maintenance work was documented
as being completed.
Energy conservation and management programs could be
enhanced – Although CCPS had instituted several energy saving
programs, its program could be further enhanced. For example,
the program could include specific goals and related measures to
determine program success (such as reducing total energy use by
a stated percentage). We also noted that CCPS did not use school
incentive programs to encourage energy conservation. Some
school systems, including those in Montgomery and Howard
counties, allow funds saved from school conservation programs to
be provided to the school for use in other areas (such as
instruction).
Recommendation
8. CCPS should develop a performance assessment system for
maintenance and custodial operations and include in its work
order system a comparison of actual to budgeted resources.
CCPS should also document that preventive maintenance was
performed to ensure appropriate and timely maintenance is
provided to all facilities. Finally, CCPS should enhance its
current energy management practices to include specific
goals and consider implementing a school incentive program
to encourage lower energy usage.
35
Office of
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 46 ---
36
Office of
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 47 ---
Chapter 8
Transportation Services
CCPS used a number of recognized best practices to increase
student transportation efficiency, such as staggering school arrival
and dismissal times to enable certain buses to perform multiple
runs on the same route. However, we noted several areas where
improvements could be made. For example, in its calculation to
determine payments to bus contractors, CCPS was using a shorter
period for the useful life for buses as compared to the length of
time such payments were being made, resulting in higher
payments than were necessary. Specifically, by using a useful bus
life of ten years in its calculation but making the related payments
for twelve years, we estimated that CCPS could pay $549,100
more for the 22 buses placed in service by contractors since
2004. Also, CCPS paid maintenance costs for non-county owned
buses at a significantly higher rate than what was paid for
maintenance on its own vehicles. In addition, CCPS did not use
automated routing software to help efficiently plan bus routes, and
had not developed formal performance measures to monitor and
evaluate the efficiency and effectiveness of transportation
services.
Background
CCPS is the 19th largest school system in Maryland, based on
student enrollment. Approximately 4,700 students are eligible to
ride the bus each day. These students were transported on one of
43 contractor-owned buses or 11 of its own buses. According to
37
Office of
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 48 ---
agency records, fiscal year 2009 transportation costs totaled $3.6
million. Of the 1,148,400 reported route miles for the 2008-2009
school year, 15 percent were for transporting disabled students.
As seen in Table 3 below, the CCPS cost per rider for fiscal year
2008 was reasonable when compared with other similarly sized
school systems.
Table 3
Comparison of Transportation Costs per Rider and per Mile
Fiscal Year 2008 (Unaudited)
Number of Eligible Miles Average Annual
Riders (in thousands) Expenditures Cost per
School System
Non- Non- (in
Disabled Disabled Rider Mile
Disabled Disabled thousands)
Caroline County 4,712 87 949 216 $3,773 $786 $3.24
Worcester County 6,274 64 1,263 210 5,432 857 3.69
Garrett County 4,413 45 1,069 70 4,162 934 3.65
Dorchester County 4,370 81 829 123 3,065 689 3.22
Queen Anne’s County 7,742 81 1,787 529 5,882 752 2.54
Average of
5,700 68 1,237 233 $4,635 $808 3.28
Comparable Schools
Sources: MSDE 2007-2008 Fact Book, LEA Budget Documents
Several Best Practices Were in Place to Enhance Bus
Route Efficiency and to Control Related Costs
The CCPS transportation department had several practices in
place to help reduce student transportation costs:
• Staggering school arrival and dismissal times to enable certain
buses to perform multiple runs on the same day, thereby
reducing the need for CCPS to obtain additional buses through
bus contractors or purchase
• Using multiple drop-off points to reduce the number of routes
and maximizing the number of students transported (such as
transporting middle and high school students together) on the
same bus to take advantage of the close proximity of the
schools and to avoid sending multiple buses
38
Office of
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 49 ---
• Using county-owned facilities for fuel and maintenance for
system-owned buses
• Establishing walking distance requirements to determine
students eligible for transportation services
Bus Routing Procedures Should Be Enhanced and
Routing Software Should Be Fully Used
Bus routing procedures should be more comprehensive –
Although CCPS has an informal process for planning, reviewing,
and changing existing bus routes, its process was not
comprehensive and was not formalized. For example, the process
did not consider all relevant factors, such as busloads (that is,
desired capacity) and student ride times, when determining the
most appropriate bus routes.
CCPS should fully use its automated routing software –
CCPS did not fully use its automated bus routing system. For
example, we were advised that, although the software interfaces
with automated student information records to transfer student
demographic information, the student address information does
not always upload needed information since the mailing
addresses for some students in the automated student
information records are post office boxes which cannot be used by
the routing software. As a result, staff must enter student address
information manually into the routing software; however, CCPS has
not updated student addresses or made any revisions to existing
bus routes using the automated system since the 2007-2008
school year.
A fully functional automated routing system would enable staff to
complete its planning, reviewing, and revising of bus routes in a
more efficient and effective manner by providing student data
quickly and bus routes in a visual format. For example, we noted
that, for fiscal year 2009, 5 of the 46 buses used to transport non-
disabled students operated at levels significantly below desired
capacities. Specifically, according to driver manifests, none of the
39
Office of
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 50 ---
runs for these buses exceeded 75 percent of the CCPS desired
capacity5.
Another Eastern Shore school system advised that Implementation
of automated routing software resulted in estimated savings of
$45,000.
Payments to Bus Contractors Should Be Based On
Documented Criteria and Controls Over Payments
Should Be Enhanced
Annual payments to bus contractors should be
reevaluated – CCPS pays contractors an annual ‘per vehicle
allotment’ (PVA) for each bus. The CCPS PVA formula6 includes
reimbursement for the cost of the bus, related financing costs,
and a vehicle replacement factor.
Figure 1
The PVA formula is calculated for
Per Vehicle Allotment (PVA) Calculation
buses purchased each year by the 2008 – 2009 School Year
contractors to reflect the average (Based on a 72-passenger bus)
new bus cost and prevailing market
Average New Bus Cost $ 74,950
borrowing interest rates at the time. Sales Tax (6% of Cost) $ 4,497 (A)
The vehicle replacement factor Loan Interest Rate 6.00%
Amount Financed (70% of Cost) $ 52,465
included in the total PVA paid to
Monthly Payment $ 689.47
contractors is set at a flat rate of 66 Loan Payback Period 96 months
percent based on the cost of the Total Payments (Principal +
Interest) $ 66,189 (B)
bus.7 CCPS contractors receive the
Down payment (30% of cost) $ 22,485 (C)
annual PVA payment for the life of
Total Cash Payment (A+B+C) $ 93,171 (D)
the bus or 12 years. However, the Vehicle Replacement Factor (66%
Of Bus Cost $ 49,467 (E)
PVA is calculated as if the bus will
Total (D+E) $142,638 (F)
only be in operation for 10 years.
Yearly PVA (F divided by 10 years) $ 14,264
Specifically, CCPS calculates the
total PVA payment and then determines annual payments based
5 School bus capacities are lower than manufacturer stated capacities and
differ depending on the school. For example, the capacity for combined high
school/middle school and elementary school routes is 52 and 60 students,
respectively based on 72-passenger buses (manufacturer stated capacity).
6 The CCPS PVA formula is unique and not the same as the PVA formula used
by other local school systems in Maryland.
7 The vehicle replacement factor is in lieu of a return on investment (ROI)
percentage. Based on the 10-year return period used for the CCPS PVA
calculation, this works out to 6.6 percent per year. The prime rate, which we
have used to determine reasonableness of ROI in other school systems, has
fluctuated between 3.25 and 9 percent since 2000. Therefore, the vehicle
replacement factor used by CCPS appears reasonable.
40
Office of
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 51 ---
on 10 years; however, CCPS pays this figure annually for the 12-
year useful life of the bus, resulting in at least two additional years
of PVA payments. See an example of the calculation for the 2008-
2009 school year in Figure 1 on the preceding page.
In addition, CCPS has continued to pay the full PVA amount for
buses that remain in service past 12 years. Current State law
allows school buses to operate for up to 15 years as long as the
buses meet certain safety standards. For fiscal year 2010, two
contractors are operating buses in the 13th year of service and
continue to receive full PVA payments.
To estimate the financial impact to CCPS of paying the extra two
years of PVA payments (based on the 10-year calculation), we
calculated the PVA for each of the past six years (2004 to 2009)
using the 12-year useful life of the bus in CCPS’ PVA formula and
compared our PVA results to CCPS’ PVA amounts that were
calculated using a 10-year useful life. (We could not determine
the impact for buses placed in service prior to 2004 due to a lack
of documentation for the CCPS rate calculation.) Compared to our
PVA results, over the 12-year life of the 22 new buses put into
service by contractors since 2004, CCPS will pay out $549,100
more than if a 12-year cost reimbursement rate had been used.
Of the $549,100, $159,400 was paid through fiscal year 2009
and, unless changes are implemented, the remaining $389,700
will be paid out during fiscal years 2010 to 2020. This analysis
does not include the effects for any new bus purchases that may
be made after fiscal year 2009, payments made for buses
maintained in service after the 12th year, and the lost interest
income that could have been earned by CCPS on the excess
amounts paid.
Payments related to maintenance costs may be excessive –
In addition to the PVA amounts, CCPS payments to contractors
also include a per mile fee for maintenance costs. Our review of
the maintenance costs disclosed that such costs were not
supported (based on documented estimates of routine
maintenance and other repair costs, for example) and that
payments to contractors may be excessive. Based on CCPS
expenditure records, costs for maintenance on CCPS-owned buses
were $.15 per mile for fiscal years 2008 and 2009. However,
according to the CCPS contract, contractors were paid $.74 per
mile during fiscal year 2008, with an annual increase of $.01
41
Office of
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 52 ---
through fiscal year 2012 Using actual bus mileage for fiscal years
2008 and 2009, we estimated that maintenance related
payments to the contractors exceeded what the payments would
be based on actual CCPS cost experience by more than $500,000
each year. According to a comparison of costs for these school
systems using contractors to provide transportation services,
which was prepared by another school system, CCPS’ payments
for maintenance and operating costs were fourth highest in the
State.
Performance Should Be Measured
CCPS did not have a formal performance measurement system for
its transportation services. Performance measures that could be
considered include average bus occupancy, annual operational
cost per student, frequency of vehicle breakdowns per 100,000
miles, and the percentage of students delivered within established
ride times. Performance measures would serve as a tool that
management and the Board could use to monitor transportation
operations and to ensure accountability.
Recommendations
9. CCPS should establish formal, comprehensive bus routing
procedures and fully use its existing automated routing
software to help plan more efficient services.
10. CCPS should reevaluate the appropriateness of PVA and
maintenance amounts paid to bus contractors.
11. CCPS should establish a performance measurement system
for its transportation services.
42
Office of
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 53 ---
Chapter 9
Food Services Operations
CCPS had implemented a number of best practices, which include
participation in the United States Department of Agriculture
(USDA) commodity program, and membership in various food-
purchasing cooperatives. CCPS also had adequate procedures in
place to identify students eligible for the federal national school
meals programs. However, we found that controls over the
procurement, ordering, and receiving of goods and supplies need
to be improved. In addition, CCPS needs to enhance its use of
performance measures to help ensure efficient operations.
Background
CCPS has nine cooking cafeterias to provide meals to its 10
schools. Food and related supplies are received and stored at
each school. In fiscal year 2009, CCPS had 57 cafeteria
employees (30 full-time and 27 part-time) and food service sales
totaled approximately $872,000. According to the audited
financial statements, food service operation expenditures
exceeded revenues by $87,000 for fiscal year 2009. As noted in
Table 4 on the next page, the fiscal year 2008 cost per meal for
CCPS was similar to that of other similarly sized school systems in
Maryland. See Table 5 on page 46 for information regarding fiscal
year 2009 CCPS food services.
43
Office of
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 54 ---
Table 4
Comparison of Cost per Meal
Fiscal Year 2008 (unaudited)
Meals Served
Total Cost
School System Expenditures(cid:110) per
Breakfast Lunch A La Carte Total
Meal
Caroline County $ 2,326,469 120,679 597,631 140,373 858,683 $ 2.71
Garrett County 2,781,728 162,334 477,837 220,040 860,211 3.23
Worcester County 2,494,032 159,222 556,760 173,305 889,287 2.80
Dorchester County 2,276,201 219,857 497,064 131,750 848,671 2.68
Queen Anne’s County 2,367,861 80,111 596,558 237,220 913,889 2.59
Average of
Comparable Schools $ 2,479,955 155,381 532,055 190,579 878,014 $ 2.83
Note: Breakfast sales represent meal equivalents based on actual meals and sales using
National Food Service Management Institute guidelines.
(cid:110)Expenditures do not include USDA commodity costs (which are included in fiscal year 2009
expenditures in Table 5 on page 45) as this information was not included in the source
documents received from MSDE.
Sources: Local Education Agencies, MSDE Fact Book
Certain Best Practices Were in Place
CCPS implemented several practices to contain food
services costs – These measures helped to increase operational
efficiency and reduce food supply and material costs.
• CCPS maximized the use of convenience foods (heat and serve
items) to reduce the labor needed to prepare foods.
• CCPS participated in the USDA commodities free food program.
According to the audited financial statements, $119,398 in
USDA commodities was received in fiscal year 2009.
• CCPS participated in two food purchasing cooperatives to
maximize its buying power and to reduce food costs. According
to CCPS records, payments to the cooperative-selected
44
Office of
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 55 ---
wholesale vendors totaled $716,000 during fiscal year 2009
(out of $990,000 in total food related expenditures).
• CCPS used a number of methods to reduce waste including
monitoring menus, adjusting food production, standardizing
serving sizes and recipes, and reheating certain leftover items.
CCPS used several best practices to encourage
participation in the federal free and reduced-price meal
programs – CCPS used several best practices to encourage
participation in the free and reduced-price meal programs. These
practices include the use of a family application process — instead
of individual student applications — to simultaneously qualify more
students for the programs, and the use of a point-of-sale system
accessed by a student ID number (regardless of the method used
to purchase a meal) to eliminate the easy identification (and any
perceived stigma) of students in the free and reduced-price meal
programs. For fiscal year 2008, 78 percent of CCPS students
eligible to receive free lunches and 73 percent of the students
eligible to receive reduced-price lunches actually participated in
the programs. These participation rates were consistent with
those of similarly sized school systems (which had average
participation rates of 81 percent and 73 percent for free and
reduced-price meals, respectively).
45
Office of
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 56 ---
Table 5
Food Service Activity for Fiscal Year 2009
Average Cost per Meal $ 3.02
Number of Meals Served:
Breakfast Paid 18,084
Free 93,294
Reduced Price 12,873
124,251
Lunch Paid 217,822
Free 282,824
Reduced Price 76,178
576,824
Meal Equivalents
Snacks 7,441
Ala Carte Sales 76,036
Total Meals Served 784,552
Schools 10
Kitchens 9
Employees
Full-time 30
Part-time 27
Revenues:
Federal Cash payments $1,227,225
USDA Commodities 119,398
$1,346,623
Sales and other sources 890,084
State aid 47,042
Total Revenue (all sources) $2,283,749
Total Expenditures 2,370,973
Excess of Revenues over Expenditures $ (87,224)
Sources: MSDE Fact Book, CCPS Food Service Reports and Fiscal Year 2009
Audited Financial Statements
46
Office of
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 57 ---
CCPS Needs to Improve Controls Over Purchasing of
Food-Related Items
Controls over the ordering and receiving of food materials
and supplies need to be improved – Cafeteria managers at
each school are responsible for the ordering and receipt of all
supplies. All items received are stored at the individual schools.
Our review of purchases from the five largest vendors totaling
$846,000 disclosed a total of $366,000 was purchased from four
of these vendors without any review or oversight by the central
food services office. Since the employees responsible for ordering
also signed that all items ordered were subsequently received,
there was a lack of assurance that all items purchased were
necessary and actually received and used at the schools.
Procurements were not always covered by a contract or
were not in agreement with contract terms – Our testing of
ten invoices from the five previously mentioned vendors disclosed
that purchases from one of the vendors were not covered by an
approved contract even though payments to the vendor for fiscal
year 2009 totaled $67,000. In addition, a contract with another
vendor was not approved by the Board as required. Current
procurement procedures require Board approval for all contracts
exceeding $25,000.
Invoices received from the one vendor that did not have a
contract with CCPS were not reviewed to ensure that prices
charged agreed to the vendor’s price list. For example, our review
of invoices processed for one school, totaling $12,500, disclosed
that the school paid $800 more than the vendor’s price list for
goods received. In addition, CCPS often purchased items not
included on the vendor’s price list. These same invoices included
items totaling $400 that were not included on the price list, and as
a result, CCPS could not ensure that it received the best price for
these items.
47
Office of
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 58 ---
PerformanceMeasures Should Be Used to Help
Assess the Efficiency of Food Service Operations
Although CCPS generated certain performance measures on a
periodic basis, there was no documentation that this information
was used in any meaningful way to improve food service
operations. Specifically, CCPS calculates meals per labor hour
(MPLH - a common efficiency indicator) as well as overall
breakfast and lunch participation. While we were advised that this
information was used to modify operations (such as reallocation of
staff), such determinations were not documented. Industry
guidelines recommend a measure of 15 to 22 MPLH depending on
the daily meal equivalents (that is, total meals, snacks and ala
carte sales) and type of cafeteria (conventional vs. convenience).
However, we calculated that, for the 2008-2009 school year, only
two schools exceeded 17 MPLH (which is the CCPS minimum
benchmark for performance) and four schools had a measure of
less than 15 MPLH.
CCPS did not have other comprehensive performance and cost-
efficiency measures (such as cost per meal, and free and reduced-
price meal participation) in place to provide management with
information to evaluate the entire food service program. Best
practice models recommend the use of benchmarks and goals to
help school districts identify ways to increase efficiency and
reduce costs. Such a system should include realistic, justifiable
standards and goals, with a process for periodic measurement
and analysis of results.
Recommendations
12. CCPS should segregate the duties of ordering and receiving
food service items. CCPS should also ensure that purchases
receive prior approval of independent supervisory personnel.
CCPS should also enter into formal, competitively bid, and
Board-approved contracts with significant suppliers of food
service items, in accordance with CCPS policies.
13. CCPS should enhance its performance measurement system
to assist in monitoring the efficiency of food service
operations.
48
Office of
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 59 ---
C
hapter 10
School Board Operations and Oversight
Oversight of CCPS operations includes a comprehensive budget
process. The Board also receives regular financial updates,
including monthly budget variances, to assist it in monitoring the
efficient use of funds. The Board contracts with a certified public
accounting firm to conduct the annual financial statement audit
and the federal Single Audit. In addition, CCPS has a detailed
ethics policy and had established a process to independently
investigate ethics issues and complaints.
Several opportunities exist for the Board to improve operations
and oversight. For example, the Board should develop and adopt
policies governing a number of areas related to financial and
support services. In addition, the Board did not establish and
routinely monitor key financial and operational performance
measures. Finally, the Board should consider establishing an
internal audit function to act as an independent reviewer of CCPS
operations for the Board and should consider establishing a
confidential hotline as a mechanism for the reporting and
investigation of suspected fraud.
Background
CCPS is governed by a five-member board (not including two non-
voting student representatives) appointed by the Governor. By
law, the members must be residents of Caroline County. The
Board does not have an established committee structure, due to
its size, and generally acts in whole to carry out its oversight
49
Office of
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 60 ---
duties. To assist in its oversight function, the Board has
contracted with an independent auditor to conduct independent
audits of the CCPS financial statements, federal programs,
student activity funds, and cafeteria funds.
The Board is ultimately accountable for the success of CCPS in
providing the children of Caroline County with a quality education,
while wisely spending local, State, and federal funds. Following is
the CCPS stated policy on educational philosophy according to the
CCPS website:
Mission Statement
In partnership with family and the
community, the Caroline County
Public Schools will motivate and
challenge students to attain
educational excellence.
Board of Education Goals
• Maximize achievements for all children
• Effective involvement of all stakeholders in
communication, information and policy
matters
• Effective recruitment, retention, development
and training for all staff
• Create and sustain a school climate
conductive to the safety and security of
students and staff
• Acquire resources necessary to achieve the
priorities and mission of the school system
Certain Oversight Had Been Put in PlaceRegarding
CCPS Operations
The CCPS Board uses a number of methods to oversee the
operations of CCPS:
• The Board is actively involved in the development of the
budget.
50
Office of
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 61 ---
• The Board receives monthly expenditure data including budget
variances.
• The Board hires an independent certified public accounting
firm to perform audits of its financial statements and federally
funded grant programs, and annually meets with that firm to
review the results.
The Board adopted a detailed conflict of interest and ethics policy
to cover Board members and all CCPS employees. CCPS
established an Ethics Panel (composed of three individuals
appointed by the Board) to interpret ethics policies and provide
advice on policy implementation as well as to review and rule on
any reported complaints of ethics violations. The policy identifies
a number of supervisory employees and Board members required
to file annual financial disclosure statements. We verified that all
employees required to file disclosure statements filed the
statements for calendar year 2008.
The Board Should Establish Formal Policies in a
Number of Financial Related Areas
The Board needs to develop and adopt policies governing a
number of areas related to financial and support services. Based
on our review of the Board’s policies and our audit work in a
number of audit sections, we noted that the Board had not
provided formal guidance in the following areas:
• Procurement
• Transportation
• Inventory
• Debt Management
The Government Finance Officers Association (GFOA) recommends
that an entity should document its accounting policies and
procedures and that these documents should be reviewed and
updated on a periodic basis. The GFOA also has identified
financial and operational best practices that should be considered
when developing such policies and procedures.
51
Office of
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 62 ---
The Board Should Consider Additional Steps to
Assist It in Governing CCPS
CCPS should consider establishing an internal auditor
position – CCPS does not have an internal auditor. Although the
System has an employee who performs certain internal audit-like
functions (specifically, reviews of certain student activity fund
transactions) as part of other job responsibilities, this employee
does not communicate results of such work to the Board or senior
school system management. The use of an internal auditor,
independent of school system management, is a recommended
best practice of the GFOA. The GFOA notes that internal auditors
commonly assist directors in monitoring the design and proper
functioning of internal controls and procedures, and can play a
valuable role in conducting performance audits, special
investigations, and studies. As cited in this report, our audit
identified certain deficiencies in the CCPS system of internal
control, such as unnecessary and unrestricted access to
automated disbursement and payroll systems. While CCPS may
not be able to justify an internal audit position based on its size
(as the sixth smallest of all 24 public school systems in Maryland),
it should determine if such a position could be shared with other
local Boards. Alternatively, the Board could consider expanding
the scope of work performed by its independent auditor (similar to
the work done by the auditor for student activity funds as
commented upon in Chapter 1).
The CCPS Board should consider establishing a
confidential hotline and a whistleblower policy – We noted
that a process, such as a confidential hotline, had not been
implemented to enable employees and others to confidentially
report operational concerns and suspected fraud, waste, and
mismanagement. In addition, a whistleblower policy had not been
established. Typically, such confidential mechanisms bring to light
matters and issues previously unknown and unsuspected by
organizational managers. If such a process were established, in
conjunction with the establishment of a whistleblower policy and
an internal audit function, the internal auditor could conduct the
initial reviews of information received via the hotline or direct the
information to other appropriate officials, such as law
enforcement.
52
Office of
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 63 ---
The Board should receive and review key financial and
operational related performance measures – The Board
had not adopted any key performance indicators related to the
financial operations of CCPS, with the exception of actual
expenditure data, as previously noted. Without this information, it
is difficult for the Board to evaluate the progress of its budget and
Master Plan. Examples of useful performance measures include
cost comparisons, such as facility cost per student and
transportation costs per bus rider. When implemented correctly,
performance measures can assist in decision-making processes,
such as allocating resources and budgeting, and monitoring
departmental effectiveness and efficiency.
Recommendations
14. The Board should adopt policies to govern and monitor
financial and support services operations.
15. The Board should enhance its oversight of CCPS operations.
For example, the Board should consider establishing an
internal audit function or expanding the scope of work
performed by its independent auditor. The Board should
also consider establishing a hotline and whistleblower policy
for the confidential reporting of operational issues and
suspected fraud, waste, and mismanagement. Furthermore,
the Board should adopt comprehensive performance
measures in key operational areas, such as transportation,
food service, and facilities management, to assist in its
oversight duties; such data should be periodically reviewed
by the Board.
53
Office of
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 64 ---
54
Office of
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 65 ---
Chapter 11
Other Financial Controls
This chapter addresses the management of risk, cash, and debt
(for example, long-term lease agreements) within CCPS. CCPS has
practices in place to govern cash and risk management. However,
certain assets were at risk at year-end, and CCPS did not have
written policies governing its use of long-term liabilities, such as
financing agreements, and had not established sufficient controls
to ensure the propriety of health care costs.
Cash and Risk Management Policies Were in Place
CCPS used a combination of commercial insurance and self-
insurance to manage its risks. CCPS insured its liability, property,
and workers’ compensation coverage through participation in the
Maryland Association of Boards of Education (MABE) Group
Insurance Pool and the MABE Workers’ Compensation Group Self
Insurance Fund. The notes to the fiscal year 2009 audited
financial statements stated that settled claims had not exceeded
coverage in any of the past three fiscal years.
With respect to cash management, CCPS invested its cash in the
Maryland Local Government Investment Pool, in accordance with
Board approved policies. According to its audited financial
statements, as of June 30, 2009, cash and investments totaled
$7 million.
55
Office of
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 66 ---
Certain Assets Were At Risk
Although CCPS had adopted a cash management policy (as
previously noted) that requires CCPS to invest all funds in
accordance with State and county law, certain funds were not
adequately collateralized. According to the System’s audited
financial statements, funds totaling $96,000, $629,000, and
$21,069 for fiscal years 2007, 2008, and 2009, respectively,
were not fully insured or collateralized at year-end. According to
agency personnel, this condition is temporary and results from
transfers of funds between accounts to cover routine operating
expenses of the school system.
CCPS Needs to Develop a Policy on Long-Term Lease
Obligations
CCPS has not adopted a policy to govern its use of long-term lease
obligations to finance operations, as recommended by the GFOA.
Long-term liability levels, and the related annual costs, are
important long-term obligations that must be managed within
available resources. By law, CCPS is not authorized to issue bonds
or similar debt instruments to finance capital or operational
needs. CCPS did use capital leases to finance the acquisition of
energy equipment and vehicles. According to CCPS audited
financial statements for fiscal year 2009, the present value of
capital lease payments to be made through 2018 was $1.7
million, with approximately $361,000 due within one year.
CCPS Should Take Steps to Ensure the Propriety of
Health Care Costs
CCPS provides health care coverage to employees and eligible
dependents through the Eastern Shore of Maryland Educational
Consortium Health Insurance Trust. The Trust contracts with a
health care provider and each of the members pays premiums
directly to the provider. As CCPS is self-insured, to the extent that
premiums paid each year exceed actual and anticipated claims,
the school system is eligible for a refund (CCPS would reimburse
the provider to the extent that claims exceeded premium
payments for the year). For fiscal years 2007 and 2008, CCPS
56
Office of
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 67 ---
received refunds of $492,000 and $535,000, respectively, based
on payments to the Trust of $4.8 million and $5.1 million for 2007
and 2008. The fiscal year 2009 settlement has not been
completed.
The Trust, on behalf of the members, contracted with a third party
to conduct a claims review to assess the insurer’s administration
of the Trust’s self-funded health plans and compliance with the
administrative agreement governing the plans. However, neither
the Trust, nor CCPS, verified the authenticity of program
participants and their listed dependents. We were advised that as
of September 30, 2009, CCPS provided health care coverage to
880 employees and retirees (not including dependents).
Recommendations
16. CCPS should work with its financial institution to ensure all
funds are properly insured or otherwise secured by adequate
collateral.
17. CCPS should develop and adopt a formal policy governing
long-term obligations.
18. CCPS should institute processes to verify the authenticity of
health care program participants and their listed
dependents.
57
Office of
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 68 ---
58
Office of
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 69 ---
Audit Scope, Objectives,
and Methodology
Scope
We conducted a performance audit to evaluate the effectiveness
and efficiency of the financial management practices of the
Caroline County Public Schools (CCPS). We conducted this audit
under the authority of the State Government Article, Section 2-
1220(e) of the Annotated Code of Maryland, and performed it in
accordance with generally accepted government auditing
standards. Those standards require that we plan and perform the
audit to obtain sufficient, appropriate evidence to provide a
reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our
audit objectives. We believe that the evidence obtained provides
a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our
audit objectives.
Objectives
We had two broad audit objectives:
1. To evaluate whether the CCPS procedures and controls
were effective in accounting for and safeguarding its assets
2. To evaluate whether the CCPS policies provided for the
efficient use of financial resources
In planning and conducting our audit, we focused on the major
financial-related areas of operations based on assessments of
materiality and risk. Our audit approach, including the specific
59
Office of
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 70 ---
objectives of our local school system audits, was approved on
September 14, 2004 by the Joint Audit Committee of the Maryland
General Assembly in accordance with the enabling legislation. As
approved, the audit objectives excluded reviewing and assessing
student achievement, curriculum, teacher performance, and other
academic-related areas and functions. We also did not review the
activities, financial or other, of any parent teacher association,
group, or funds not under the local board of education’s direct
control or management. Finally, we did not evaluate the CCPS
Comprehensive Education Master Plan or related updates.
Methodology
To accomplish our objectives, we reviewed applicable State laws
and regulations pertaining to public elementary and secondary
education, as well as policies and procedures issued and
established by CCPS. We also interviewed personnel at CCPS, the
Maryland State Department of Education (MSDE), and staff at
other local school systems in Maryland (as appropriate).8 Our
audit procedures included inspections of documents and records,
and observations of CCPS operations. We also tested transactions
and performed other auditing procedures that we considered
necessary to achieve our objectives, generally for the period from
July 1, 2008 through June 30, 2009. For our audit work on
revenue and federal grants, we primarily relied on the results of
independent audits of fiscal year 2009 activity.
In addition, we contacted a number of other state auditors’ offices
and legislative program evaluation agencies that had a history of
conducting audits or reviews of local school systems. We
interviewed those officials and inspected their work programs and
resultant reports to identify specific audit techniques and
operational practices at schools that could be adapted for our
school system audits. We also used certain statistical data—
including financial and operational—compiled by MSDE from
various informational reports submitted by the Maryland local
school systems. This information was used in this audit report for
background or informational purposes, and was deemed
reasonable. For comparison purposes, information provided in
this report was generally limited to those Maryland school systems
of similar sizes, based on student enrollment and/or system
8 During the course of the audit, it was necessary to contact other systems to
identify policies or practices for comparative purposes and analysis.
60
Office of
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 71 ---
budget. In many cases, this information was self-reported by the
school systems. The data were neither audited nor independently
verified by us. Finally, information provided in this report was
obtained from various reports readily available during our
fieldwork.
Other Independent Auditors
When developing the approach for the audits of school system
financial management practices, a consideration was the reliance
on the work of other independent auditors to the extent
practicable to avoid unnecessary duplication of audit effort. With
respect to CCPS, the results of other auditors that we considered
were reported in two distinct audit reports: one related to the
administration of its federal grants and the other, the
management letter from the audit of its Comprehensive Annual
Financial Report.
During the course of this audit, we relied on these results. We
performed certain steps to satisfy ourselves as to the reliability of
the reported results of the independent federal grants audits of
the CCPS federal financial assistance programs for the evaluation
of internal controls and for compliance with federal laws and
regulations and of the CCPS financial statement audits.
Accordingly, we significantly reduced the scope of our work in
Chapter 1 “Revenue and Billing Cycle,” and in Chapter 2 “Federal
Funds.”
Limitations of Internal Control
CCPS management is responsible for establishing and maintaining
effective internal control. Internal control is a process designed to
provide reasonable assurance that objectives pertaining to the
reliability of financial records, effectiveness and efficiency of
operations including safeguarding of assets, and compliance with
applicable laws, rules, and regulations are achieved.
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud
may nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of
any evaluation of internal control to future periods are subject to
the risk that conditions may change or compliance with policies
and procedures may deteriorate.
61
Office of
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 72 ---
In addition to the conditions included in this report, other less
significant findings were communicated to CCPS that did not
warrant inclusion in this report.
Fieldwork and CCPS Responses
We conducted our fieldwork from May 2009 to December 2009.
The CCPS response to our findings and recommendations is
included as an appendix to this report.
62
Office of
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 74 ---
though is updated our policies to reflect this long standing practice. We piggyback on a lot of State and
National bids, which have already been legally approved and authorized. Over the next few months we will be
reviewing our existing policies relative to purchasing in an effort to comply with this recommendation. Our
goal is to complete this process by September, 2010.
3. Recommendation: CCPS should improve its controls over purchasing and the invoice payment process by
segregating incompatible functions and by restricting access to critical system functions to those who need
those capabilities to perform their job functions. In addition CCPS should establish a process to ensure that a
proper and independent review of all disbursement checks and bank reconciliations is performed. CCPS should
also maintain contract pricing information on file, including the applicable contracts, and verify the accuracy of
vendor billings. Finally, CCPS should ensure that the justification for all sole source contracts is documented
and that contracts and related invoices are sufficiently detailed to support the services to be performed and
subsequently paid for.
Response: Most of these ‘loose’ controls are due to the new software and the fact that at the time of audit we
were still conducting training and cross training. These controls have been locked down. In addition, a
workgroup has been established and is working on realignment of job duties and responsibilities to maximize
the segregation of duties and to ensure that internal controls are adequate. We anticipate that this work will be
completed by June 30, 2010. We have implemented new procedures within the finance office which ensure that
all disbursement checks and bank reconciliations are independently reviewed in a timely fashion. As we look at
updating Board policies relative to sole source and piggyback purchases, the regulations for those policies will
address the requirement that all related contract pricing be kept on file and referenced when invoices are
received to ensure that pricing is accurate and that all justification relative to the sole source contract be
maintained in the file. Finally, all contracts will be updated to include language which requires the vendor to
submit sufficiently detailed invoices.
Human Resources and Payroll
4. Recommendation: CCPS should restrict critical system access capabilities to those employees whose job
duties require such access, separate incompatible duties, and ensure that all transactions (such as adding an
employee or changing salaries) are subject to independent review and approval.
Response: As previously stated in response to recommendation number three, this is due to the new payroll
software and the fact that we were still training at the time of the audit. These controls have been locked down.
In addition, a workgroup has been established and is working on realignment of job duties and responsibilities
to maximize the segregation of duties and to ensure that internal controls are adequate. We anticipate that this
work will be completed by June 30, 2010.
Inventory Control and Accountability
5. Recommendation: CCPS should adopt formal policies governing all equipment, and should ensure that the
related detailed equipment records are properly maintained and that all equipment items are properly identified
as CCPS property.
Response: This represents another policy that needs to be updated and the corresponding regulation will ensure
that this recommendation is properly addressed. We anticipate that this work will be completed by September,
2010.
Information Technology Services
2

--- Page 75 ---
6. CCPS should develop appropriate comprehensive plans to address security practices and disaster recovery.
CCPS should also properly safeguard its computer operations, by storing critical back-up files at a secure off-
site location.
Response: We currently do not have a written comprehensive plan, however we do have documented backup
procedures and do have backup equipment on hand in case of machine failure. Although we currently do store
back-up files at an off-site location, it was determined that the site was not secure and therefore measures are
being taken to change the site to one that is secure. We will have the secure site operational before September,
2010.
7. CCPS should implement appropriate security measures to safeguard its applications and data systems by
improving account and password protection, and logging all significant security-related activity for review.
CCPS should also ensure that databases used are updated with all critical security upgrades in a timely manner.
Response: To the extent that the software allows us to improve account and password protection as discussed
during the audit, this will be complied with. We will also strive to do a better job of staying on top of critical
system upgrades.
Facilities Construction, Renovation, and Maintenance
8. Recommendation: CCPS should develop a performance assessment system for maintenance and custodial
operations and include in its work order system a comparison of actual to budgeted resources. CCPS should
also document that preventative maintenance was performed to ensure appropriate and timely maintenance is
provided to all facilities. Finally, CCPS should enhance its current energy management practices to include
specific goals and consider implementing a school incentive program to encourage lower energy usage.
Response: Our existing work order system was developed in house. We have already had two internal
meetings on expanding the features of the existing system to adequately address these recommendations. We
anticipate that many of these new features will be operational by September, 2010. The establishment of an
energy conservation incentive program is on our ‘to do’ list, however the contract that we have with Energy
Education, Inc. is very specific as to program direction and goals. We are currently in our second year of the
program with Energy Education, Inc. Once this second year’s data has been finalized, we will look to
implement an incentive program, using the first two years of data as the baseline.
Transportation Services
9. Recommendation: CCPS should establish formal, comprehensive bus routing procedures and fully use its
existing automated routing software to help plan more efficient services.
Response: We will be conducting a thorough review of our existing transportation policies as they relate bus
routing. Most of the delay associated with not using the automated routing software is due to the unfortunate
passing of our former driver trainer. Transportation staff members are currently receiving training on the
software so that we can utilize the software for next school year.
10. Recommendation: CCPS should reevaluate the appropriateness of PVA and maintenance amounts paid to
bus contractors.
3

--- Page 76 ---
Response: The basics of this formula have been in place for over 20 years. The 10 vs. 12 was and continues to
be a negotiated item. The bus contractors will argue that this difference in years represents a portion of the
profit factor that they need in order to make it a viable business venture. Regardless, the report reflects the fact
that our costs are very comparable to other school systems, and are below the average.
11. Recommendation: CCPS should establish a performance measurement system for its transportation
services.
Response: We will investigate the costs associated with implementing this suggestion, however given our
current fiscal situation implementation of such a system may be delayed because of a lack of resources.
Food Service Operations
12. Recommendation: CCPS should segregate the duties of ordering and receiving food service items. CCPS
should also ensure that purchases receive prior approval of independent supervisory personnel. CCPS should
also enter into formal, competitively bid, and Board-approved contracts with significant supplies of food service
items, in accordance with CCPS policies.
Response: We will review the existing job duties and responsibilities within food services in an effort to
accomplish greater segregation of duties. We will also review our internal procurement review process to
ensure that purchases are independently approved. We will also review prior year expenditures in an effort to
identify types of expenditures that justify entering into competitive bids. We anticipate that this work will be
completed prior to September, 2010.
13. Recommendation: CCPS should enhance its performance measurement system to assist in monitoring the
efficiency of food service operations.
Response: We are working on reducing the number of staff hours per cafeteria in an effort to increase the
number of meals per labor hour. To this end, for this fiscal year, as vacancies are created through normal
attrition, each position is carefully reviewed relative to the overall operation to determine whether the position
needs to be filled or eliminated. As a result several positions have been eliminated this school year, thus
making the food service operation more efficient. We will also investigate the availability of comparable
performance data from other State of Maryland school systems in an effort to ensure that our program remains
as efficient as possible.
School Board Operations and Oversight
14. Recommendation: The Board should adopt policies to govern and monitor financial and support services
operations.
Response: Many of the previous recommendations tie directly to this recommendation and will be addressed
within a timely fashion. The Board of Education considers their responsibilities relative to fiscal and support
services as very serious and feels that they do receive timely and accurate information relative to these
functions. However, the Board agrees that many of the policies which govern these areas are outdated and in
some instances lacking.
15. Recommendation: The Board should enhance its oversight of CCPS operations. For example, the Board
should consider establishing an internal audit function or expanding the scope of work performed by its
independent auditor. The Board should also consider establishing a hotline and whistleblower policy for the
4

--- Page 78 ---
A T
UDIT EAM
Edward L. Shulder, CPA
Audit Manager
Richard L. Carter, CISA
Information Systems Audit Manager
Nichole M. Becker
Senior Auditor
Amanda L. Roller
Information Systems Senior Auditor
Jonathan M. Bauman
Sandra C. Medeiros
Staff Auditors
Cristen M. Ervin
Information Systems Staff Auditor