Title: Department of Health and Mental Hygiene - Developmental Disabilities Administration - Follow-up Review
Date: 08/25/2014
Type: Special Reports and Letters
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5a945d3ccc9d72404c150b12
Extracted: 2025-06-18T11:13:10.284200
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Special Review
Department of Health and Mental Hygiene
Developmental Disabilities Administration
Follow-up Review
August 2014
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
 This report and any related follow-up correspondence are available to the public through the
Office of Legislative Audits at 301 West Preston Street, Room 1202, Baltimore, Maryland
21201. The Office may be contacted by telephone at 410-946-5900, 301-970-5900, or 1-877-
486-9964.
 Electronic copies of our audit reports can be viewed or downloaded from our website at
http://www.ola.state.md.us.
 Alternate formats may be requested through the Maryland Relay Service at 1-800-735-2258.
 The Department of Legislative Services – Office of the Executive Director, 90 State Circle,
Annapolis, Maryland 21401 can also assist you in obtaining copies of our reports and related
correspondence. The Department may be contacted by telephone at 410-946-5400 or 301-
970-5400.

--- Page 5 ---
Exhibit 1
Implementation Status of Findings in the October 2013
DDA Audit Report
Status as Status Based on
Determined by DDA Auditor’s Review
Prior Finding
as of as of
April 20141 April 2014
Consumers’ Services
1. DDA did not have procedures to verify that
consumers received required services and that In Progress
Substantial Progress
documentation of consumers’ medical (See Exhibit 2)
assistance eligibility reassessments was
obtained.
Federal Funds
2. DDA’s methodology for determining federal
Corrected Substantial Progress
reimbursement rates did not reflect the costs
incurred.
3. DDA did not have adequate procedures to
ensure that providers submitted all claims to Substantial Progress N/A
obtain federal fund reimbursement.
4. Federal fund reimbursement requests were
untimely resulting in loss of interest income of
Substantial Progress N/A
$262,000.
5. DDA did not investigate rejected claims with
potential federal fund reimbursements totaling Corrected Corrected
$2.2 million.
Contribution to Care
6. DDA did not ensure that consumers’
Minimal Progress N/A
contributions to care were proper, which could
affect DDA’s payments to providers.
Alcohol Tax Funds
7. DDA allowed certain funds from an increase
Corrected Corrected
in the alcohol tax to be used for purposes other
than those specified in its policies.
Page 1 of 2
N/A – Not applicable since we did not review the implementation status of this finding
________________________________
1
DDA’s detailed implementation status for each recommendation can be found in DDA’s status report
in Appendix A. The overall conclusion by finding presented in Exhibit 1 was discussed with, and
agreed to, by DDA management personnel.
3

--- Page 6 ---
Exhibit 1
Implementation Status of Findings in the October 2013
DDA Audit Report
Status as Status Based on
Determined by DDA Auditor’s Review
Prior Finding
as of as of
April 20141 April 2014
Provider Payment Reconciliations
8. DDA did not adequately monitor the
Corrected Corrected
submission of annual provider reports and the
related reconciliation process.
Accounts Receivable
9. DDA did not bill local jurisdictions $1.4
In Progress N/A
million for their share of day habilitation and
vocational service charges.
10. DDA did not recover provider overpayments
that were identified through certain program Minimal Progress N/A
audits.
Maintenance of Accounting Records
11. DDA did not maintain documentation to
Substantial Progress N/A
support accounting adjustments recorded in the
State’s records.
Provider Consumer Information System (PCIS2)
12. Proper security access controls had not been Corrected Corrected
established over critical PCIS2 data.
13. Certain security measures over the PCIS2
production database were not in effect. Corrected Corrected
Page 2 of 2
N/A – Not applicable since we did not review the implementation status of this finding
_________________________________
1
DDA’s detailed implementation status for each recommendation can be found in DDA’s status report
in Appendix A. The overall conclusion by finding presented in Exhibit 1 was discussed with, and
agreed to, by DDA management personnel.
4

--- Page 7 ---
Exhibit 2
Detailed Comments on the Finding Which DDA Had Not
Substantially Addressed
Consumers’ Services
Prior Finding 1
Developmental Disabilities Administration (DDA) did not have procedures to
verify that consumers received services from providers as stipulated in the
related individual service plans and that documentation for the consumers’
Medicaid eligibility reassessments was obtained.
Prior Report Recommendation 1
We recommended that DDA ensure that consumers receive the stipulated services
and that resource/service coordinators perform all required duties. Specifically,
we recommended that DDA
a. establish procedures to verify, at least on a test basis, that the resource/service
coordinators are ensuring that services are provided as required in the
individual service plans and that adequate documentation is maintained
(repeat);
b. monitor its resource/service coordinators to ensure that annual reassessments
of consumers are performed, as required by federal regulations (repeat); and
c. determine if eligibility can be restored to the 28 consumers noted in the
finding and if federal reimbursement can be obtained for services provided to
these consumers (repeat).
Auditor’s Assessment of Status – In Progress
DDA has established certain procedures to ensure that consumers receive the
stipulated services and that resource/service coordinators perform all required
duties. However, we noted that procedures were lacking in the following key
areas:
a. In July 2013, DDA added a “Resource Coordination” module to the existing
Provider Consumer Information System (PCIS2). This new module requires
the resource/service coordinators to report extensive details regarding the
services provided to consumers. For example, the resource/service
coordinators are required to report whether the consumers received all
specified services and whether progress was made on meeting the goals.
DDA also prepared draft procedures outlining how DDA will monitor and
audit the resource/service coordinators to ensure that services are provided to
5

--- Page 8 ---
consumers. Specifically, from the provider-reported information in PCIS2,
DDA will generate a quarterly report showing each resource/service
coordinator’s performance. This report will be used by the resource/service
coordinators to complete a self-evaluation. Upon review of these self-
evaluations by DDA, resource/service coordinators that are determined to not
comply with DDA guidelines and applicable State regulations will be required
to prepare a corrective action plan. As of April 2014, these procedures had
not been implemented.
Our review of these draft procedures noted that critical details or processes
were omitted. Specifically, DDA has not defined (1) the specific criteria to be
used to determine whether the performance of the resource/service
coordinators complies with DDA guidelines and State regulations and requires
a corrective action plan, (2) which DDA unit will conduct the self-evaluation
reviews, and (3) due dates for the completion of the self-evaluations and
related DDA reviews. Furthermore, the draft procedures did not include a
process to verify the information recorded in PCIS2 by the resource/service
coordinators. We were subsequently advised by DDA management that such
verifications will be performed on a test basis.
b. In March 2014, DDA prepared draft procedures for monitoring the
resource/service coordinators to ensure that annual reassessments of
consumers were performed. These procedures include requiring the
resource/service coordinators to document their follow-up activities with each
consumer. DDA will review the adequacy of the follow-up activities as part
of its review of the aforementioned self-evaluations. Additionally, the
procedures include DDA performing a quarterly review of 10 percent of the
consumers who have lost Medicaid eligibility for more than six months. As of
April 2014, these procedures had not been implemented.
c. As of April 2014, DDA followed up on the 28 consumers noted in the report
who had lost Medicaid eligibility because the resource/service coordinators
did not provide the required documentation timely. DDA was able to restore
eligibility for 19 of these consumers. Of the remaining 9 consumers, 6 were
pending additional follow-up actions, and 3 were determined not to be eligible
for various reasons. According to DDA’s records, approximately $1.2 million
in federal fund reimbursements had been obtained for services provided to
these 19 consumers, as of February 28, 2014.
6

--- Page 9 ---
Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We conducted a follow-up review of the actions taken by the Department of
Health and Mental Hygiene – Developmental Disabilities Administration (DDA)
as of April 11, 2014 to address the findings in our October 2, 2013 audit report.
In that report, we concluded that DDA’s fiscal accountability and compliance
rating was unsatisfactory.
The purpose of our review was to determine the status of DDA’s corrective
actions to address certain of our audit findings. This review was conducted based
on our long-standing practice of performing a follow-up review whenever an
agency receives an unsatisfactory rating in its fiscal compliance audit report. The
rating system was established, in accordance with State Government Article,
Section 2-1221 of the Annotated Code of Maryland, for the purpose of
determining an overall evaluation of an agency’s fiscal accountability and
compliance with State laws and regulations.
Our review consisted of obtaining the April 11, 2014 status report from DDA
(describing the level of implementation of each prior audit report
recommendation), performing tests and analyses of selected information, and
holding discussions with DDA personnel as we deemed necessary to determine
the status of DDA’s corrective actions to address selected findings from our
October 2, 2013 audit report. This review, which was conducted under the
authority of Section 2-1220(a)(4) of the State Government Article, did not
constitute an audit conducted in accordance with generally accepted government
auditing standards. Had we conducted an audit in accordance with generally
accepted government auditing standards, other matters may have come to our
attention that would have been reported. Our review was conducted primarily
during April through June 2014.
The Department of Health and Mental Hygiene’s response to our follow-up
review, on behalf of DDA, is included as an appendix to this report. As
prescribed in the State Government Article, Section 2-1224 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, we will advise the Department regarding the results of our
review of its response.
7

--- Page 10 ---
APPENDIX A
Office of Legislative Audits
Audit Status Updated
Developmental Disabilities Administration
Department of Health and Mental Hygiene
As of April 11, 2014
Updated May 15, 2014

--- Page 11 ---
of Findings
Overview
Finding Description
1* DDAdid not have procedures to verify that consumers received services from providers as stipulated in the related
individual service plans and that documentation for the consumers’ Medicaid eligibility reassessments was obtained.
2 DDA’s methodology for determining federal reimbursement rates for contractual payment system expenditures did not
accurately reflect the costs incurred. For one large program, reimbursements received were $2.4 million less than actual
reimbursable costs for a two‐year period.
3* DDA did not have adequate procedures to ensure that providers submitted all claims for contractual payment system
expenditures to obtain subsequent federal fund reimbursements.
4* Federal fund reimbursement requests were not made timely, resulting in a loss of interest income of $262,000.
5* DDA did not investigate rejected claims with potential federal fund reimbursements totaling $2.2 million.
6 DDA did not ensure that the consumers’ contribution to care amounts for residential services were proper, which could
affect the amounts of DDA’s payments to providers.
77 DDDDAA allllowedd certaiin ffundds dderiivedd ffrom a tax iincrease on allcohholliic bbeverages to bbe usedd ffor purposes othher thhan thhose
specified in its policies.
8 DDA did not adequately monitor the submission of annual provider reports and the related payment reconciliation process.
9 DDA did not bill four local jurisdictions for their share of day habilitation and vocational service charges totaling $1.4 million.
10 DDA did not recover provider overpayments that were identified through audits related to the Community Supported Living
Arrangement (CSLA) program.
11 DDA did not maintain documentation to support accounting adjustments recorded in the State’s records.
12* Proper security access controls had not been established over critical PCIS2 data.
13* Certain security measures over the PCIS2 production database were not in effect
2
* Repeat finding

--- Page 12 ---
Finding 1* ‐DDA did not have procedures to verify that consumers received services from
providers as stipulated in the related individual service plans and that documentation for the
consumers’ Medicaid eligibility reassessments was obtained.
Relevant Updates– DDA transitioned to a Targeted Case Management model (under the
Maryland State Plan) for resource coordination services on 7/1/2013. To support this transition,
the DDA implemented regulatory changes, improved guidance on the delivery of resource
ccoooorrddiinnaattiioonn sseerrvviicceess, aanndd eennhhaanncceedd iittss IITT ssyysstteemm ttoo iimmpprroovvee tthhee mmoonniittoorriinngg ooff rreessoouurrccee
coordination activity.
Recommendation #1: We recommend that DDA ensure that consumers receive the stipulated services and that
rreessoouurrccee//sseerrvviiccee ccoooorrddiinnaattoorrss ppeerrffoorrmm aallll rreeqquuiirreedd dduuttiieess. SSppeecciiffiiccaallllyy, wwee rreeccoommmmeenndd tthhaatt DDDDAA::
Sub recommendation Resolution Approach Status and POC
1a. establish procedures to verify, at • Monitoring and follow‐up Status: Substantial Progress
least on a test basis,, that the gguidance ((RC reqquirement to Projjected comppletion is 5//30//14
resource/service coordinators are monitor service provision) has
ensuring that services are provided been developed and provided to
as required in the individual service resource coordination providers
plans and that adequate • Draft procedures have been
ddooccuummeennttaattiioonn iiss mmaaiinnttaaiinneedd ddeevveellooppeedd ffoorr mmoonniittoorriinngg
(repeat); resource coordinator
performance through PCIS2 data
reports
3

--- Page 13 ---
Finding 1* ‐DDA did not have procedures to verify that consumers received services from
providers as stipulated in the related individual service plans and that documentation for the
consumers’ Medicaid eligibility reassessments was obtained.
Relevant Updates– DDA transitioned to a Targeted Case Management model (under the
Maryland State Plan) for resource coordination services on 7/1/2013. To support this transition,
the DDA implemented regulatory changes, improved guidance on the delivery of resource
ccoooorrddiinnaattiioonn sseerrvviicceess, aanndd eennhhaanncceedd iittss IITT ssyysstteemm ttoo iimmpprroovvee tthhee mmoonniittoorriinngg ooff rreessoouurrccee
coordination activity.
Recommendation #1: We recommend that DDA ensure that consumers receive the stipulated services and that
resource/service coordinators perform all required duties. Specifically, we recommend that DDA:
Sub recommendation Resolution Approach Status and POC
1b. monitor its resource/service • Quality assurance reports Status: In Progress.
coordinators to ensure that annual require RC providers to assess Projected completion is 8/1/14
rreeaasssseessssmmeennttss ooff ccoonnssuummeerrss aarree RRCC ssuuppppoorrtt ffoorr ccoonnttiinnuuoouuss
performed, as required by federal financial eligibility
regulations(repeat); • Reports are sent to RCs and
regional offices regarding waiver
status changes
• Developed a statewide tracking
of individuals who lost eligibility
• Developed draft guidance on
keeping people enrolled in the
wwaaiivveerr
• Drafted a procedure to audit RC
performance in instances where
individuals lost eligibility
4

--- Page 14 ---
Finding 1* ‐DDA did not have procedures to verify that consumers received services from
providers as stipulated in the related individual service plans and that documentation for the
consumers’ Medicaid eligibility reassessments was obtained.
Relevant Updates– DDA transitioned to a Targeted Case Management model (under the
Maryland State Plan) for resource coordination services on 7/1/2013. To support this transition,
the DDA implemented regulatory changes, improved guidance on the delivery of resource
ccoooorrddiinnaattiioonn sseerrvviicceess, aanndd eennhhaanncceedd iittss IITT ssyysstteemm ttoo iimmpprroovvee tthhee mmoonniittoorriinngg ooff rreessoouurrccee
coordination activity.
Recommendation #1: We recommend that DDA ensure that consumers receive the stipulated services and that
resource/service coordinators perform all required duties. Specifically, we recommend that DDA:
Sub recommendation Resolution Approach Status and POC
1c. determine if eligibility can be • DDA has followed up on the Status: Corrected as of 3/1/14
restored to the aforementioned 28 eligibility of the 28 identified
ccoonnssuummeerrss aanndd iiff ffeeddeerraall ccoonnssuummeerrss
reimbursement can be obtained for • Federal reimbursement has
services provided to these been obtain for services
consumers (repeat); provided to these consumers
who were reinstated
• Collections for these individuals
has continued beyond the audit
period
5

--- Page 15 ---
Finding 2‐ Finding 2: DDA’s methodology for determining federal reimbursement rates for
contractual payment system expenditures did not accurately reflect the costs incurred. For one
largge pproggram,, reimbursements received were $$2.4 million less than actual reimbursable costs for a
two‐year period.
Relevant Updates– The DDA has revised its methodology for determining federal reimbursement
rates for the contractual payment system expenditures in order to maximize the recovery of
ffeeddeerraall ffuunnddss ffoorr eelliiggiibbllee ccoossttss.
Recommendation #2: We recommend DDA:
SSuubb rreeccoommmmeennddaattiioonnss RReessoolluuttiioonn AApppprrooaacchh SSttaattuuss aanndd PPOOCC
2a. attempt to revise its • Developed reimbursement rates Status: Corrected as of 12/16/13
reimbursement methodology for for each individual based on
contractual payment system their annual budgets
eexxppeennddiittuurreess ttoo bbeetttteerr rreefflleecctt aaccttuuaall • IIssssuueedd iinnddiivviidduuaall bbaasseedd rraatteess vviiaa
costs incurred and to maximize rate letters on 12/16/13
recovery of federal funds.
2b. maintain documentation to • Documentation was developed Status: Corrected as of 11/7/13
ssuuppppoorrtt tthhee ccoonnttrraaccttuuaall ppaayymmeenntt ssuuppppoorrttiinngg nneewwllyy ddeevveellooppeedd
system reimbursement rate reimbursement rates
calculation, and
2c. establish procedures to ensure • Procedure was developed and Status: Corrected as of 12/16/13
that contractual ppayyment syystem documented, was reviewed byy
reimbursement rates are Medicaid, and has been
independently reviewed and accepted as the new
approved. methodology for FY14
6

--- Page 16 ---
Finding 3*‐ DDA did not have adequate procedures to ensure that providers submitted all claims
for contractual payment system expenditures to obtain subsequent federal fund reimbursements.
Relevant Updates– The DDA is in the process of establishing and executing procedures to ensure
that all provider claims for pre‐paid services under the contractual payment system have been
submitted.
RReeccoommmmeennddaattiioonn ##33: WWee rreeccoommmmeenndd DDDDAA:
Sub recommendations Resolution Approach Status and POC
3a. implement a process to ensure • A tracking file was developed for Status: Substantial Progress
tthhaatt aallll pprroovviiddeerr ccllaaiimmss ffoorr pprreeppaaiidd FFYY1144 ttoo ttrraacckk ssuubbmmiissssiioonn aanndd PPrroojjeecctteedd ccoommpplleettiioonn iiss 55//3300//1144
services under the contractual payment of monthly CMS 1500
payment system have been forms
submitted to DDA or MMIS II for • A procedure was developed and
federal reimbursement (repeat), and deadlines for submitting claims
were communicated to
providers
• Developing a process to follow
up with providers who haven’t
ssuubbmmiitttteedd ccllaaiimmss aanndd wwiitthhhhoolldd
payments for these providers as
appropriate
3b. follow up on the $5.2 million in • To date, $2.2 million worth of Status: Corrected as of 11/15/13
ppotential federal fund claims from the test pperiod have
reimbursements to ensure that been processed and paid; the
eligible claims are submitted and remaining amount is considered
processed for federal uncollectable given the 2 year
7
reimbursement. limit on claims

--- Page 17 ---
Finding 4*‐ Federal fund reimbursement requests were not made timely, resulting in a loss of
interest income of $262,000.
Relevant Updates– The majority of PCIS2 Rate Based Claims for FPS services are submitted
between 30 and 60 days of the date of service and efforts are being made to follow‐up with
providers on untimely submission of claims. Due to increased diligence in resolving denied claims
and maximizing the collection of eligible FFP, a small percentage of claims are still paid more than
6 months after the date of service.
Recommendation #4: We recommend DDA:
SSuubb rreeccoommmmeennddaattiioonnss RReessoolluuttiioonn AApppprrooaacchh SSttaattuuss aanndd PPOOCC
4. We recommend that DDA ensure • The majority of PCIS2 claims for Status: Substantial Progress
that future requests for federal fund FPS services are submitted Projected completion is 6/30/14
reimbursements are made in a between 30 and 60 days of the
ttiimmeellyy mmaannnneerr ((rreeppeeaatt)). ddaattee ooff sseerrvviiccee
• A procedure is being developed
for following up on claims that
have not been submitted in a
timely fashion
• Working with providers to
increase the electronic submission
of claims
8

--- Page 18 ---
Finding 5*‐ DDA did not investigate rejected claims with potential federal fund reimbursements
totaling $2.2 million.
Relevant Updates– A process has been created to address denied claims on a weekly basis and
track the aging and resolution of denied FPS claims through a database.
Recommendation #5 We recommend DDA in conjunction with MCPA:
Sub recommendations Resolution Approach Status and POC
5a. take immediate action to ensure • Documented pprocess for Status: Corrected as of 2//3//14
that rejected federal fund addressing denied claims on a
reimbursement claims are timely weekly basis
investigated, resolved, and • Created a Denied Claims Aging
recovered (repeat); and File (Access database) for tracking
tthhe resolluttiion off ddeniiedd cllaiims
5b. maintain documentation • The developed Denied Claims File Status: Corrected as of 2/3/14
supporting its actions taken to is being utilized to track and
resolve rejected claims maintain documentation on the
((rreeppeeaatt)). rreessoolluuttiioonn ooff rreejjeecctteedd ccllaaiimmss
9

--- Page 19 ---
Finding 6‐ DDA did not ensure that the consumers’ contribution to care amounts for residential
services were proper, which could affect the amounts of DDA’s payments to providers. (repeat).
Relevant Updates– DDA conducted an extensive review of CTC and identified that key changes to
policies, procedures and the CTC calculation itself were required to align with Federal regulations.
Implementation has been phased as a result of the need to manage resources while increasing
ccoommpplliiaannccee.
Recommendation #6: We recommend DDA:
Sub recommendations Resolution Approach Status and POC
6a. ensure the accuracy of CTC • Interim guidance was provided Status: In Progress
receipt amounts recorded in PCIS2, to DDA providers in December Projected completion is 1/1/15
and 2013 so that changes could be
reflected in January 2014 CTC
ccaallccuullaattiioonnss
• The DDA has been working
closely with the Eligibility
Determination Division (formally
DEWS) to update their CTC
calculation and align provider’s
calculations with the EDD
calculated CTC
10

--- Page 20 ---
Finding 6‐ DDA did not ensure that the consumers’ contribution to care amounts for residential
services were proper, which could affect the amounts of DDA’s payments to providers. (repeat).
Relevant Updates– DDA conducted an extensive review of CTC and identified that key changes to
policies, procedures and the CTC calculation itself were required to align with Federal regulations.
Implementation has been phased as a result of the need to manage resources while increasing
ccoommpplliiaannccee.
Recommendation #6: We recommend DDA:
Sub recommendations Resolution Approach Status and POC
6b. investigate the aforementioned • Potential sources for the Status: No Progress
differences and take appropriate differences between CTC
action amounts calculated by providers
and EDD were investigated.
AAfftteerr ccaarreeffuull rreevviieeww, tthhee DDDDAA
believes that the differences are
uncollectable from participants
and that it would not be
beneficial to further investigate
these specific differences.
• The reasons that have
prevented the DDA from looking
back at previously calculated
CCTTCC wwiillll bbee aaddddrreesssseedd aass ppaarrtt ooff
the revised CTC calculation and
process.
11

--- Page 21 ---
Finding 7 ‐ DDA allowed certain funds derived from a tax increase on alcoholic beverages to be
used for purposes other than those specified in its policies.
Relevant Updates– While the Services of Short Duration (SSD) program has ended, the DDA will
ensure that future policies clearly define exception criteria and that the DDA follows all defined
policies.
Recommendation #7: We recommend that DDA ensure that funds are used for purposes specified in its policies.
Sub recommendations Resolution Approach Status and POC
We recommend that DDA ensure that funds are
• DDA will follow its Status: Corrected as of 4/1/14
used for purposes specified in its policies.
policies in the
future
• A policy regarding
ffuuttuurree ppoolliicciieess hhaass
been developed
12

--- Page 22 ---
Finding 8 ‐ DDA did not adequately monitor the submission of annual provider reports and the
related payment reconciliation process.
Relevant Updates– DDA redesigned and executed a revised process for the FY2013 cost reports
based upon this finding and authorities available through statute.
Recommendation #8: We recommend DDA:
Sub recommendations Resolution Approach Status and POC
8a. establish a process to follow up • DDA redesigned processes to Status: Corrected as of 3/11/14
with providers who do not submit monitor cost reports and ensure
rreeqquuiirreedd rreeppoorrttss oonn aa ttiimmeellyy bbaassiiss. ccoommpplliiaannccee wwiitthh tthhee
documented procedure
• Cost report instructions were
updated and communicated to
providers
• Notification letters resulting
from the cost report reviews
have been sent to providers
8b. ensure that the certified • Letters have been sent to Status: Corrected as of 4/18/14
iinnddeeppeennddeenntt aatttteennddaannccee rreeppoorrttss proviidders requesttiing tthhe
include the number of attendance revision of attendance
days, and attestations to include the
number of attendance days
88cc. eessttaabblliisshh mmoonniittoorriinngg pprroocceedduurreess •• AA ttrraacckkiinngg ssyysstteemm wwaass SSttaattuuss:: CCoorrrreecctteedd aass ooff 1111//77//1133
to help ensure timely completion of developed and is being
the year‐end payment reconciliations. maintained to assess compliance
• Regular meetings with DCAR 13

--- Page 23 ---
Finding 9 ‐ DDA did not bill four local jurisdictions for their share of day habilitation and vocational
service charges totaling $1.4 million.
Relevant Updates– The DDA has closely examined the statutory requirements for local share and
has taken steps to either appropriately bill local jurisdictions or reduce provider payments on the
basis of direct payments from local jurisdictions to providers. In the future DDA will work to
ssttaannddaarrddiizzee tthhiiss pprroocceessss ffoorr aallll pprroovviiddeerrss aanndd jjuurriissddiiccttiioonnss.
Recommendation #9: We recommend DDA:
Sub recommendations Resolution Approach Status and POC
9a. bill the local jurisdictions as • One jurisdiction did pay but their Status: In Progress
appropriate in accordance payment had not been recorded Projected completion is 8/29/14
with State law; and correctly in RSTARS
• DDA has confirmed that the remaining
jjuriisddiicttiions pay tthheiir proviidders ddiirecttlly
• The DDA historically has reduced
payments to providers receiving direct
funding from Frederick and Worcester
• DDA has reqquested additional
information from Anne Arundel
• In the future DDA will bill all jurisdictions
for their local share
9b. in conjunction with legal • DDA will pursue recovery from providers Status: In Progress
counsel, investigate and pursue who were over‐paid given that local Projected completion is 8/29/14
the unbilled amounts and take jurisdictions were paying them directly
appropriate action.
14

--- Page 24 ---
Finding 10 ‐ DDA did not recover provider overpayments that were identified through audits
related to the Community Supported Living Arrangement (CSLA) program.
Relevant Updates– DDA is currently finalizing a new Request for Proposals (RFP) for a vendor to
complete Utilization Reviews. As part of this RFP, the DDA has included a requirement that the
vendor detail the financial impact of un‐provided services. The draft RFP is available for review.
UUnnffoorrttuunnaatteellyy rreeccoovveerryy ffrroomm hhiissttoorriiccaall aauuddiittss iiss cchhaalllleennggeedd aass iinnccoommpplleettee iinnffoorrmmaattiioonn iiss aavvaaiillaabbllee
from the previous vendor and the past audit process did not produce sound findings. While an
attempt was made to withhold payment from the previous vendor in lieu of data, data provided
in accordance with contractual requirements did not give the DDA adequate information to
ssuuppppoorrtt aa rreeccoovveerryy.
Recommendation #10: We recommend DDA:
Sub recommendations Resolution Approach Status and POC
10a. take timely action to recover • Payment to the previous vendor Status: Minimal Progress
overpayments identified through was withheld until contractual Projected completion is 11/1/14
CSLA audits, and requirements were met
• The DDA will begin the timely
recovery off auddiit resullts once
the new vendor is on board
10b. require its audit vendor to • A process has been developed Status: Minimal Progress
include the value of overpayments in which includes this requirement Projected completion is 11/1/14
iittss rreeppoorrttss. •• TThhee rreevviisseedd RRFFPP cclleeaarrllyy ssttaatteess
that this must be completed
15

--- Page 25 ---
Finding 11 – DDA did not maintain documentation to support accounting adjustments recorded in
the State’s records.
Relevant Updates– Since the FY13 year‐end close, the DDA has worked to improve its
documentation of accounting adjustments entered into RSTARS. However, given the complex
accounting entries required by the DDA’s payment system, work is underway to further improve
documentation requirements and processes for these entries.
Recommendation #11: We recommend that DDA maintain adequate supporting documentation for all
adjustments recorded in the State’s accounting records.
Sub recommendations Resolution Approach Status and POC
11. We recommend that DDA • A process is being defined for Status: Substantial Progress
maintain adequate supporting the documentation and review Projected completion is 5/30/14
documentation for all adjjustments of jjournal entries
recorded in the State’s accounting
records.
16

--- Page 26 ---
Finding 12* ‐ Proper security access controls had not been established over critical PCIS2 data.
RRellevantt UUpddattes– IImmeddiiatte acttiion was ttakken tto addddress iissues hhiighhlliighhttedd bby OOLLAA andd siince
then processes have been established to ensure that terminated employees are deactivated and
modification access is appropriate.
RReeccoommmmeennddaattiioonn ##1122: WWee rreeccoommmmeenndd DDDDAA:
Sub recommendations Resolution Approach Status and POC
12a. immediately deactivate user • Accounts were immediately Status: Corrected as of 9/18/13
llooggoonnss ooff tteerrmmiinnaatteedd eemmppllooyyeeeess, ddeeaaccttiivvaatteedd
• A process is being followed to
review DDA employee access
• DDA is sending notifications to
providers/ other agencies
requesting the verification of
current PCIS2 users on a
monthly basis
12b. grant modification access • The ability to modify critical data Status: Corrected as of 9/12/12
capabbiilliittiies tto criittiicall ddatta onlly tto iis now onlly grantedd to users
individuals with a need for such within the DDA that have a need
access (repeat), and for such access
12c. immediately eliminate • Upon discovery, the privilege Status: Corrected as of 9/12/12
uunnnneecceessssaarryy mmooddiiffiiccaattiioonn aacccceessss tthhaatt aalllloowweedd pprroovviiddeerrss ttoo mmooddiiffyy
(repeat). information in the demographics
screen in PCIS2 was revoked
17

--- Page 27 ---
Finding 13* ‐ Certain security measures over the PCIS2 production database were not in effect.
RRellevantt UUpddattes– UUnsecure serviices were iimmeddiiattelly ddeacttiivattedd andd enhhancedd lloggiing hhas
been established as part of a larger database log review process that is being executed on a
regular basis.
RReeccoommmmeennddaattiioonn ##1133:: WWee rreeccoommmmeenndd DDDDAA::
Sub recommendations Resolution Approach Status and POC
13a. log all critical security related • Database logging feature was turned Status: Corrected as of
events for the PCIS2 database on and configgured apppproppriatelyy 1//10//12
(repeat); • Criteria have been established to
support the review of security logs
• Criteria are continuously being
enhanced
13b. review all applicable database • Logs are being reviewed on a regular Status: Corrected as of
logs on a timely basis, investigate basis 10/3/13
questionable items, document these • Secondary review is being conducted
reviews and investigations, and retain internally
• LLooggss aarree sshhaarreedd wwiitthh OOIITT
tthhe ddocumenttattiion ffor veriiffiicattiion
purposes (repeat); and
13c. determine if the unsecure • Disabled the service Status: Corrected as of
service is needed and either disable 1/10/12
tthhiiss sseerrvviiccee oorr iimmpplleemmeenntt aapppprroopprriiaattee
controls to mitigate the security risk
of using this service.
18

--- Page 29 ---
Administration’s Response to Findings and Recommendations
Consumers’ Services
Prior Finding 1: Developmental Disabilities Administration (DDA) did not have
procedures to verify that consumers received services from providers as stipulated in the
related individual service plans and that documentation for the consumers’ Medicaid
eligibility reassessments was obtained.
Auditor’s Prior Report Recommendation 1: We recommended that DDA ensure that
consumers receive the stipulated services and that resource/service coordinators perform
all required duties. Specifically, we recommended that DDA:
a. Establish procedures to verify, at least on a test basis, that the resource/service
coordinators are ensuring that services are provided as required in the individual
service plans and that adequate documentation is maintained (repeat);
b. Monitor its resource/service coordinators to ensure that annual reassessments of
consumers are performed, as required by federal regulations (repeat); and
c. Determine if eligibility can be restored to the 28 consumers noted in the finding and if
federal reimbursement can be obtained for services provided to these consumers
(repeat).
Auditor’s Current Assessment / Finding: In Progress - DDA has established certain
procedures to ensure that consumers receive the stipulated services and that
resource/service coordinators perform all required duties. However, we noted that
procedures were lacking in the following key areas:
a. In July 2013, DDA added a “Resource Coordination” module to the existing
Provider Consumer Information System (PCIS2). This new module requires the
resource/service coordinators to report extensive details regarding the services
provided to consumers. For example, the resource/service coordinators are required
to report whether the consumers received all specified services and whether progress
was made on meeting the goals.
DDA also prepared draft procedures outlining how DDA will monitor and audit the
resource/service coordinators to ensure that services are provided to consumers.
Specifically, from the provider-reported information in PCIS2, DDA will generate a
Page 1

--- Page 30 ---
quarterly report showing each resource/service coordinator’s performance. This
report will be used by the resource/service coordinators to complete a self-
evaluation. Upon review of these self-evaluations by DDA, resource/service
coordinators that are determined to not comply with DDA guidelines and applicable
State regulations will be required to prepare a corrective action plan. As of April
2014, these procedures had not been implemented.
Our review of these draft procedures noted that critical details or processes were
omitted. Specifically, DDA has not defined (1) the specific criteria to be used to
determine whether the performance of the resource/service coordinators complies
with DDA guidelines and State regulations and requires a corrective action plan, (2)
which DDA unit will conduct the self-evaluation reviews, and (3) due dates for the
completion of the self-evaluations and related DDA reviews. Furthermore, the draft
procedures did not include a process to verify the information recorded in PCIS2 by
the resource/service coordinators. We were subsequently advised by DDA
management that such verifications will be performed on a test basis.
b. In March 2014, DDA prepared draft procedures for monitoring the resource/service
coordinators to ensure that annual reassessments of consumers were performed.
These procedures include requiring the resource/service coordinators to document
their follow-up activities with each consumer. DDA will review the adequacy of the
follow-up activities as part of its review of the aforementioned self-evaluations.
Additionally, the procedures include DDA performing a quarterly review of 10
percent of the consumers who have lost Medicaid eligibility for more than six months.
As of April 2014, these procedures had not been implemented.
c. As of April 2014, DDA followed up on the 28 consumers noted in the report who had
lost Medicaid eligibility because the resource/service coordinators did not provide
the required documentation timely. DDA was able to restore eligibility for 19 of these
consumers. Of the remaining 9 consumers, 6 were pending additional follow-up
actions, and 3 were determined not to be eligible for various reasons. According to
DDA’s records, approximately $1.2 million in federal fund reimbursements had been
obtained for services provided to these 19 consumers, as of February 28, 2014.
Administration’s Response:
Finding 1(a): DDA concurs with OLA’s assessment of this finding. As of April 11,
2014, DDA had developed draft procedures to outline steps to monitor and audit
resource/service coordinators to ensure that services are provided to consumers. At the
time of the OLA Special Review, the procedures had not been finalized, and were
missing specific criteria to identify non-compliant performance measures that would
require corrective action plans. To remediate this finding, DDA’s Plan of Correction
includes a review and revision of the procedure to monitor resource coordinators.
Page 2

--- Page 31 ---
Through this update to the procedure, DDA will: (1) ensure specific criteria are outlined
to identify non-compliant performance measures; (2) define critical steps, including
sampling on a test basis to identify trends at the provider level; (3) require that any
significant non-compliance require providers to develop a Corrective Action Plan; and
(4) identify the DDA unit and timing requirements for reviewing the quarterly
performance reports. The timetable for implementation of this revised process is August
29, 2014.
OLA also highlighted that the draft procedures did not include a process to verify the
information recorded in PCIS2 by the resource/service coordinators. While the quality
assurance process highlighted above uses PCIS2 to monitor trends in provider
performance, the DDA understands the need to audit the data entered on at least a test
basis. To remediate this finding, DDA’s Plan of Correction includes exploring and
determining a way to leverage data from other sources, not provided by resource
coordinators, to verify the completeness of data entered by resource coordinators in
PCIS2. The timetable for implementation is October 31, 2014.
Finding 1(b): DDA concurs with OLA’s assessment of this finding. To remediate this
finding, DDA’s Plan of Correction includes completing the first set of 10% audits of
consumers who have lost Medicaid eligibility, and continuing to conduct the 10% audits
each subsequent quarter. The timetable for implementation is September 30, 2014.
Finding 1(c): DDA concurs with OLA’s assessment of this finding. To remediate this
finding, DDA’s Plan of Correction included requesting documentation from the
consumers who had lost Medicaid eligibility and proactively following up to help those
that were still eligible become reinstated on the waiver. As of July 2014, of the 28
consumers who lost eligibility, 20 were restored, four (4) individuals after numerous
inquiries, did not provide the required documentation to support eligibility, and three (3)
were determined to no longer be eligible. DDA considers this action to be complete,
because DDA can only request that consumers attend scheduled appointments and
provide the required documentation, but will continue to encourage families to submit
applications for enrollment.
Page 3

--- Page 32 ---
A T
UDIT EAM
Joshua S. Adler, CPA, CFE
Audit Manager
Richard L. Carter, CISA
Information Systems Audit Manager
Adam M. Auerback
Senior Auditor
Kimberly J. Wagner
Staff Auditor
Matthew D. Walbert
Information Systems Staff Auditor