Title: Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services - Office of the Secretary and Other Units


NOTE: Effective July 1, 2012, DPSCS completed a departmental reorganization which established three regions within the State (North, Central, and South). OLA audits these regions separately. The Division of Parole and Probation ceased to exist as a budgetary unit as a result of the reorganization, and the related functions were absorbed by the Office of the Secretary and the three regions.
Date: 11/18/2015
Type: Fiscal Compliance
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5a981f2342120319c00870fc
Extracted: 2025-06-17T20:23:15.444258
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Audit Report
Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services
Office of the Secretary and Other Units
November 2015
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
For further information concerning this report contact:
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
301 West Preston Street, Room 1202
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Phone: 410-946-5900 · 301-970-5900
Toll Free in Maryland: 1-877-486-9964
Maryland Relay: 711
TTY: 410-946-5401 · 301-970-5401
E-mail: OLAWebmaster@ola.state.md.us
Website: www.ola.state.md.us
The Office of Legislative Audits operates a Fraud Hotline to report fraud, waste, or abuse
involving State of Maryland government resources. Reports of fraud, waste, or abuse
may be communicated anonymously by a toll-free call to 1-877-FRAUD-11, by mail to the
Fraud Hotline, c/o Office of Legislative Audits, or through the Office’s website.
The Department of Legislative Services does not discriminate on the basis of age, ancestry, color,
creed, marital status, national origin, race, religion, gender, gender identity, sexual orientation,
or disability in the admission or access to its programs, services, or activities. The Department’s
Information Officer has been designated to coordinate compliance with the nondiscrimination
requirements contained in Section 35.107 of the Department of Justice Regulations. Requests for
assistance should be directed to the Information Officer at 410-946-5400 or 410-970-5400.

--- Page 5 ---
Table of Contents
Executive Summary 5
Background Information 7
Agency Responsibilities and Organizational Change 7
Office of the Secretary Audit Scope 7
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Reports 8
Findings and Recommendations 9
Inmate Services Procurement
Finding 1 – The Structure of an Inmate Services Procurement May Have 9
Limited Competition and the Procurement Improperly Included
Items Available From a Provider With Procurement Preference
Interagency Agreement
Finding 2 – Interagency Agreements Enabled the Office to Augment 11
its Staff Beyond its Budgeted Positions and Enhance Related
Salaries
Inmate Mental Healthcare Contract
Finding 3 – Liquidated Damages Were Not Always Assessed for an 14
Inmate Mental Health Care Contract, and Contract Changes Were
Authorized Without Timely Board of Public Works Approval
Offender Case Management System
Finding 4 – The Office Did Not Ensure Certain Information Was 16
Properly Transferred to its New Offender Case Management
System
Finding 5 – Personally Identifiable Information Was Not Appropriately 18
Safeguarded
Finding 6 – Account, Password, and Monitoring Controls Were Not 19
Sufficient
3

--- Page 6 ---
Fines, Costs, Fees, and Restitution (FCFR)
* Finding 7 – The Cash Balance of FCFR Funds Was Not Adequately 20
Reconciled With the Corresponding Balance on the State’s
Records
Finding 8 – The Office Had Not Established Adequate Procedures 21
and Controls Over Certain Critical Transactions
Equipment
* Finding 9 – Information Technology Equipment Was Not Adequately 22
Controlled and Accounted For
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology 25
Agency Response Appendix
* Denotes item repeated in full or part from preceding audit report
4

--- Page 7 ---
Executive Summary
Legislative Audit Report on the
Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services
Office of the Secretary and Other Units
November 2015
 The Office structured the procurement of inmate services in a manner
that may have limited competition, resulting in only one contractor
bidding on the contract. The Office combined, into a single request for
proposal, the procurement of commissary operations (a revenue
producing contract) with the design and implementation of an inmate
banking information technology (IT) system and the procurement of
inmate welfare kits. The Office instructed bidders to include estimated
costs for implementing the IT system as a reduction from the proposed
commissions from commissary operations and, accordingly, the true
expected revenue from commissary operations and the actual costs of the
banking system were unknown. The Office did not consult with the
Department of Information Technology (DoIT) on this procurement.
Finally, the welfare kits should have been procured from a preferred
provider under State law (Finding 1).
The Office should ensure that future procurements are structured to promote
maximum competition. The Office should comply with State law when
purchasing supplies available from preferred providers and should consult
with DoIT on future IT procurements.
 The Office entered into interagency agreements with a State university
that enabled it to augment its staff beyond its budgeted positions. The
fiscal year 2015 agreement effectively created an additional 30 positions,
at a cost of $3.4 million, beyond the 214 positions authorized in the
budget for the Office’s Information Technology and Communications
Division. The university performed no oversight of these employees and
its involvement was generally limited to hiring the employees and paying
their salaries (Finding 2).
The Office should refrain from entering into interagency agreements to
augment its budgeted positions.
5

--- Page 8 ---
 Liquidated damages totaling $840,000 were not assessed against the
inmate mental healthcare contractor when required staffing levels were
not met for fiscal years 2013 and 2014. In addition, the Office authorized
the contractor to provide additional staffing levels for more than a year
before modifying the contract and seeking Board of Public Works’
(BPW) approval (Finding 3).
The Office should assess liquidated damages to the extent permitted under the
contract. The Office should modify contracts and present contract
modifications to BPW prior to changing contract terms.
 The Office did not ensure Division of Correction inmate release date
information was properly transferred from its Offender-Based State
Correctional Information System I to its new Offender Case Management
System (OCMS), which was implemented in August 2014. Noted
discrepancies in inmate release dates for at least 2,500 inmates were not
resolved. In addition, sensitive personally identifiable information was
not appropriately safeguarded in OCMS, and account, password, and
monitoring controls were not sufficient (Findings 4 - 6).
The Office should investigate the noted discrepancies, take the recommended
actions to ensure data transfers are properly controlled, and improve
information systems security and control.
 The Office did not adequately reconcile the cash balance of fines, costs,
fees, and restitution (FCFR) as reflected in its Offender-Based State
Correctional Information System II (OBSCIS II) with the corresponding
cash balance on the State’s accounting records. The Office also had not
established adequate procedures and controls over refunds to offenders
and changes in restitution recipient addresses that were processed in
OBSCIS II (Findings 7 and 8).
The Office should complete reconciliations in a timely manner and investigate
and resolve all differences. The Office should also establish controls over
these transactions, including generating output reports and performing
documented supervisory reviews.
6

--- Page 9 ---
Background Information
Agency Responsibilities and Organizational Change
The Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services (DPSCS) – Office of
the Secretary has statewide responsibility for the supervision and rehabilitation of
incarcerated and paroled individuals. The Office provides overall executive
direction and coordination for the activities of the operating units of DPSCS,
including establishing policy. The Office also provides central support services
(such as payroll, purchasing, maintenance of accounting records, and related
fiscal functions), oversight, and accountability for the agencies which constitute
DPSCS. Through the Information Technology and Communications Division, the
Office develops, maintains, and supports DPSCS’ information systems and is also
responsible for the maintenance of the State’s criminal history record information.
In addition, the Office is responsible for administering the 9-1-1 Trust Fund as
required by law. According to the State’s records, during fiscal year 2014,
expenditures for the budgetary units audited, which are indicated on page 25,
totaled approximately $218 million.
Effective July 1, 2012, the Office completed a departmental reorganization that
established three regions within the State (North, Central, and South). The
reorganization created a regional approach to providing inmate-related functions,
including incarceration, probation, parole, and reentry into society.
Office of the Secretary Audit Scope
In addition to the Office of the Secretary, our audit included the Deputy Secretary
for Operations, a unit that was created during the departmental reorganization.
The Deputy Secretary for Operations provides overall executive direction and
coordination for the activities of the corrections, detention, and community
supervision functions in the three regions. Certain of these functions were
previously performed by the Division of Corrections – Headquarters, which
ceased to exist as a result of the reorganization. The Deputy Secretary for
Operations staff is also responsible for the collection and disbursements of fines,
costs, fees, and restitution assessed in certain court cases.
The Division of Parole and Probation (DPP) also ceased to exist as a budgetary
unit as a result of the reorganization, and the related functions were absorbed by
the Office of the Secretary and the three regions. Our audit included the fiscal
activities (invoice processing, procurement, and payroll) previously performed by
DPP which were assumed by the Office. The previous DPP responsibilities for
the supervision of all adult offenders are now conducted under each Region.
7

--- Page 10 ---
Our audit did not include payroll support services for transportation staff of the
Security Operations Unit of the Deputy Secretary for Operations as these financial
activities are provided by the DPSCS – South Region and are included within the
scope of our audit of the South Region.
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Reports
Our audit included a review to determine the status of the three findings contained
in our preceding audit reports of DPSCS – Office of the Secretary, dated
November 7, 2012, and DPSCS – Division of Parole and Probation, dated
December 5, 2012. We determined that the Office satisfactorily addressed one of
these three findings. The remaining two findings are repeated in this report.
8

--- Page 11 ---
Findings and Recommendations
Inmate Services Procurement
Finding 1
The Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services – Office of the
Secretary structured an inmate services procurement in a manner that may
have limited competition. The procurement also did not protect the State in
the event of contractor nonperformance and improperly included items
which should have been procured from a provider with procurement
preference.
Analysis
In June 2012, the Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services
(DPSCS) – Office of the Secretary (Office) structured an inmate services
procurement in a manner that may have limited competition and did not ensure
the State received the best value. The procurement also did not adequately protect
the State in the event of contractor nonperformance and included items which
were available and, under State law, should have been procured from a provider
with procurement preference. Specifically, the Office combined the procurements
of three unrelated goods and services under a single request for proposal (RFP).
In this one RFP, the Office sought bids for (1) a revenue-producing contract for
prison commissary operations, (2) the design and implementation of an inmate
banking information technology system called the Maryland Offender Banking
System (MOBSII), and (3) the procurement of inmate welfare kits, which provide
DPSCS inmates with toiletries and necessities. Only one proposal was received
in response to the combined RFP.
In January 1, 2013, the Office entered into a three-year contract (with two one-
year renewal options) with the sole bidder. Under the contract award, the Office
was estimated to receive approximately $17.3 million in commissions for the full
five-year term for the commissary operations at the associated 25 facilities
mentioned in the RFP. These commissions were net of the costs to develop and
implement MOBSII. The costs for the inmate welfare kits over this period were
estimated at $1.5 million. This contract was approved by the Board of Public
Works (BPW) on December 19, 2012.
Because of the manner in which bids were requested, the true expected revenue
from commissary operations and the actual costs of MOBSII were unknown.
Specifically, the RFP did not require potential bidders to separately identify the
costs associated with the development of MOBSII. Rather, the RFP required
bidders to submit proposed commissary commission rates and to include the costs
of implementing MOBSII as a reduction to the proposed commission rates for the
9

--- Page 12 ---
first year. During the pre-bid conference, prospective bidders asked if separate
proposals could be submitted for the MOBSII development and the commissary,
but were advised that separate proposals could not be submitted. Ultimately, the
sole bidder submitted a single commission rate for all five years of the contract
and, therefore, the Office could not determine the costs of developing and
implementing MOBSII and assess if those costs were reasonable. Prior to this
procurement, the commissaries were operated directly by DPSCS employees at
the related facilities.
In addition, the Office did not consult with the Department of Information
Technology (DoIT) to determine if the MOBSII project should have been subject
to its oversight. We confirmed with DoIT personnel that it was not consulted on
this project, but DoIT could not conclude if it should have been involved because
the specific project costs were unknown. State law provides DoIT with oversight
of major information technology projects, which are generally projects costing
more than $1 million.
Although the contract included liquidated damages provisions to protect the
State’s interest with respect to commissary operations, there were no such
provisions for the MOBSII component in the event system requirements were not
met. When MOBSII launched in August 2014, it could not provide required
system reports, specified in the RFP, that were needed to ensure that MOBSII was
accurately recording transactions in the inmate bank accounts. While ultimately
the detailed system reports became available in June 2015, the DPSCS facilities
were unable to reconcile the value of inmate accounts in MOBSII with the State’s
financial management system during this period. This reconciliation process has
historically been a problem that we have commented upon in many DPSCS audit
reports. As a result of the lack of liquidated damages provisions related to the
MOBSII project, the Office did not have sufficient mechanisms to enforce
performance and delivery of these critical system requirements and recover
associated damages for nonperformance.
Finally, the Office included in the combined procurement the purchase of inmate
welfare kits rather than procuring the kits from Blind Industries and Services of
Maryland (BISM), which has a procurement preference. State Finance and
Procurement law requires State agencies to use certain entities with procurement
preferences when possible to benefit disadvantaged individuals. According to
State law, State agencies should purchase items from BISM when it is able to
provide goods or services not available from Maryland Correctional Enterprises.
The Office advised that it believed the winning bidder was providing the welfare
kits at a lower cost than BISM, which previously supplied the kits; however, State
law does not provide an exception in these situations. In addition, the
procurement of the welfare kits from a private vendor, and the related costs, were
10

--- Page 13 ---
not clearly conveyed in the agenda item presented to the BPW. Specifically, the
agenda item showed total revenue from the five-year contract as $15.8 million.
This amount netted the costs for the welfare kits ($1.5 million) against the
estimated revenue from the commissary operations ($17.3 million).
The Office’s decision to combine these goods and services into one procurement
may have limited the number of bidders and did not ensure that the State received
the best value. According to its records, the Office received approximately $2.8
million in commissions in fiscal year 2014. In addition, the Office paid
approximately $400,000 to the vendor on behalf of the three DPSCS Regions
(North, South, and Central) for the purchase of inmate welfare kits.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that the Office
a. ensure that future RFPs are structured to promote maximum
competition and to protect the State’s interests,
b. consult with DoIT on future procurements for the design and
implementation of information technology systems,
c. comply with procurement law regarding purchasing available goods and
services from preferred entities, and
d. provide BPW with clear and accurate cost information when requesting
approval for contract awards.
Interagency Agreement
Finding 2
The Office entered into interagency agreements with a unit of a State
university that enabled the Office to augment its staff beyond its budgeted
positions and enhance related salaries. In addition, the work performed
under the agreement did not appear consistent with the unit’s mission.
Analysis
The Office entered into interagency agreements with a unit of a State university
that allowed the Office to augment the staff of its Information Technology and
Communications Division (ITCD) beyond its budgeted positions and enhance
related salaries. In addition, the work performed by these contractual employees,
through these agreements, did not appear consistent with the primary mission of
the university unit under which they were hired. According to Office
management, this arrangement has existed for at least 10 years. Most recently,
the Office and the university entered into an agreement for fiscal years 2011
through 2013 for approximately $14 million, and the agreements for fiscal years
2014 and 2015 were in the amounts of $3.8 million and $3.4 million, respectively.
11

--- Page 14 ---
Although the fiscal year 2015 agreement was reported, the fiscal year 2014
agreement was not reported to the Department of Budget and Management
(DBM), as required.
The fiscal year 2015 agreement effectively created an additional 30 positions at a
cost of $3.4 million, beyond the 214 positions authorized in the budget for the
Office’s ITCD. The fiscal year 2015 State budget for ITCD appropriated the 214
positions at a cost of $16.1 million. Under the agreement, the Office reimbursed
the university for direct costs associated with salaries and fringe benefits and paid
an indirect cost rate of five percent of these direct costs. The indirect costs paid
for fiscal year 2015 were estimated at approximately $162,000.
We were advised by ITCD management that the interagency agreements with the
university allowed ITCD to hire staff at enhanced salaries. The university
performed no oversight or monitoring of these contractual employees and its
involvement was generally limited to hiring the employees and paying their
salaries. ITCD staff provided through the interagency agreements was hired by
the university specifically to work for ITCD. The university posted job
advertisements for new staff, as requested by ITCD, which noted the applicants
would be assigned to ITCD. ITCD reviewed the applications, selected candidates
to interview, conducted the preliminary interviews, and made hiring
recommendations to the university. The university performed the final interviews
and made the job and salary offers to the successful candidates. Although the
contractual employees worked at ITCD, they signed contracts with the university
and became university employees. ITCD was responsible for the daily oversight
of these individuals, including assigning projects and tasks. Employees
completed university timesheets, which were approved by their ITCD supervisors.
The services provided by the university through the interagency agreements did
not appear to directly relate to the mission of the university unit under which the
employees were hired. The mission of the university unit was to support science-
based initiatives to reduce drug trafficking, money laundering, firearms
trafficking, drug-related violence, and gang activity. However, according to the
fiscal year 2015 interagency agreement, the university provided employees “to
assist with the design, development, implementation, and operational
stabilization” of portions of five major information technology projects that
“demands a level of expertise that often exceeds the capacity of many in the ITCD
workforce.”
Furthermore, these university employees were integrated into the ITCD
organizational and management structure, and we observed them functioning as
regular ITCD personnel with similar roles and responsibilities. ITCD employees
12

--- Page 15 ---
hired through the agreements were named in the agreements and held positions
such as analyst, project manager, and programmer, and included an Assistant
Director and a Chief Networking Officer. For example, one university employee
was listed in the Maryland Manual as a Director within ITCD, while another was
described in the State’s phone directory as an employee with a Deputy Chief title.
We noted that 24 of the 30 employees named in the fiscal year 2015 agreement
were current employees who were also in the previous year’s agreement.
We discussed this situation with ITCD management who acknowledged that
providing these IT services is a side project outside the university unit’s normal
mission. ITCD management acknowledged that the agreements not only allowed
ITCD to obtain IT employees at a higher salary compared to DPSCS State
salaries, but also allowed ITCD to expand and contract its staff as needed, dismiss
employees without union issues for poor performance, and provide a benefits
package that exceeds new hires for State employees.
Finally, the fiscal year 2014 agreement was not reported to DBM as required.
While interagency agreements are exempt from State procurement laws, including
the requirements for competitive procurement and Board of Public Works’
approval, State budget law (Chapter 462, Laws of Maryland, 2014) requires State
agencies to report to DBM any interagency agreements valued at more than
$100,000 with a public institution of higher education. The Office paid the
university approximately $2.8 million under this agreement in fiscal year 2014, of
which we estimate $140,000 was for the university’s indirect costs.
ITCD’s control of the selection, work duties, and oversight raises questions as to
the propriety of using interagency agreements rather than competitively procuring
the services or hiring additional DPSCS staff. Accordingly, assurance was
lacking that these services were obtained at the most advantageous prices to the
State.
Recommendation 2
We recommend that the Office
a. refrain from entering into interagency agreements to augment budgetary
positions, and
b. report interagency agreements in excess of $100,000 with public higher
institutions to DBM as required.
13

--- Page 16 ---
Inmate Mental Healthcare Contract
Finding 3
The Office did not assess its inmate mental healthcare contractor with
liquidated damages, totaling $840,000, for not meeting required staffing
levels. In addition, the Office authorized an increase in staffing levels for
more than a year before modifying the contract and seeking BPW approval.
Analysis
The Office did not assess liquidated damages, totaling $840,000, against its
inmate mental healthcare services contractor when required staffing levels at
DPSCS facilities were not met for fiscal years 2013 and 2014. In addition, the
Office authorized staffing level increases without processing a formal contract
modification and seeking BPW approval as required; instead, the Office sought
retroactive BPW approval 18 months later. According to DPSCS records,
contract payments totaled approximately $42.6 million for the period from May
2012 through May 2015.
In May 2012, the Office entered into a five-year $73 million contract for mental
healthcare services for inmates and detainees in DPSCS custody. The mental
healthcare services contract required certain monthly staffing levels to be
provided by the contractor. To the extent staffing levels were not met, the Office
was entitled to recover a portion of the monthly fee by assessing liquidated
damages after September 30, 2012. The contract allowed the State to assess
damages at 110 percent of the contractor’s hourly billable rate for any position not
staffed by the contractor at 96 percent of the contracted level. Contracted staffing
levels were required both for the state as a whole (the statewide staffing level) and
for each individual service delivery area (Eastern, Western, Jessup, and
Baltimore).
However, the Office had not assessed any liquidated damages for staffing levels
that were not met at individual service delivery areas. We estimate the Office did
not assess liquidated damages totaling $840,000 related to staffing for the
individual service delivery areas for the period October 1, 2012 through June 30,
2014. We were advised by Office management that these damages were not
assessed because other inmate healthcare contracts (for example, medical
services) do not have a provision for liquidated damages at the individual service
delivery area level and it had meant to remove this provision from this contract.
Therefore, it does not intend to pursue these liquidated damages and will seek a
retroactive contract modification.
14

--- Page 17 ---
The Office also authorized additional mental healthcare staffing services from the
contractor, because of the Departmental reorganization, beginning in November
2012. However, the Office did not prepare a formal contract modification and
seek approval for the modification from BPW until April 30, 2014. The BPW
agenda item estimated the contract modification to cost $1.1 million through June
30, 2017. State procurement regulations require all contract modifications
exceeding $50,000 to be approved by the BPW. Such approval should be
obtained prior to the commencement of related services.
Finally, the Office did not begin to assess liquidated damages for statewide
staffing levels that were not met until May 2014, when it began to pay for the
aforementioned additional healthcare services provided. In this regard, after the
BPW approval for the contract modification in April 2014, the Office paid the
contractor $163,000. This amount was intended as payment for the additional
services provided by the contractor through April 2014, less statewide staffing
liquidated damages not previously assessed through March 2014. (April damages
were not yet available.) However, our review of the calculation supporting this
payment noted that the contractor was overpaid by about $18,000 because the
Office did not use the correct penalty rate when calculating statewide liquidated
damages. (The Office withheld liquidated damages of approximately $180,000
when it should have withheld $198,000.)
Recommendation 3
We recommend that the Office
a. assess liquidated damages applicable for staffing service level shortages to
the extent permitted by the contract, and
b. comply with State procurement regulations by seeking the required BPW
approval before the related services are initiated.
Offender Case Management System
Background
The Office, through its Information Technology and Communication Division
(ITCD) receives automated management information services and criminal
history record information which is used by DPSCS and other criminal justice
agencies in the State. ITCD supports several critical applications including the
Maryland Online Sex Offender Registry System, the Maryland Automated
Fingerprint Identification System, and the Offender Case Management System
(OCMS). OCMS, which is a server-based system, contains data on parolees,
probationers, and mandatory releasees, and such data are used for supervision,
monitoring, and investigative functions. OCMS also contains data on inmates
15

--- Page 18 ---
incarcerated by the Division of Correction (DOC). These data are used to manage
and monitor inmates while incarcerated by the DOC. These DOC data were
previously stored in the Office’s Offender Based State Correctional Information
System I (OBSCIS I)
Finding 4
The Office did not ensure DOC inmate release date information was
properly transferred from OBSCIS I when it implemented OCMS. In
addition, noted discrepancies with inmate release dates were not resolved.
Analysis
The Office did not establish control procedures to ensure that DOC inmate release
date information was properly transferred from its former offender case
management system (OBSCIS I) to the new Offender Case Management System
(OCMS). In addition, although the Office noted discrepancies in inmate release
dates between the two systems, the discrepancies were not resolved. In August
2014, the Office implemented OCMS as the official record for DOC inmate
release date information. Inmate release dates are calculated by OCMS based on
inmates sentencing information and any diminution credits. Because of the noted
discrepancies, certain release date information in OCMS was inaccurate and
unreliable, necessitating the use of a manual process to ensure inmates are
released on the proper dates.
The transfer of critical DOC offender data from OBSCIS I to OCMS, that was
performed by ITCD, was not controlled. In December 2011, ITCD began the
transition of information between the two systems, including data used to
determine inmate release dates (sentencing information and diminution credits).
ITCD established a process to periodically transfer diminution credit data, used
for release date calculations, from OBSCIS I to OCMS, and targeted July 2014 as
the full implementation date for the DOC module of OCMS. In June 2014,
believing that there were problems with the transfer of diminution credits from
OBSCIS I to OCMS, Office management instructed ITCD to delete all previously
transferred diminution credit data from OCMS and to transfer all of these data
again.
Discrepancies in inmate release dates that were noted between the two systems
after this final transfer were not resolved. During July 2014, ITCD ran three data
matches comparing release dates of inmates recorded in OBSCIS I with OCMS.
Each of these three matches resulted in a different total count of release date
discrepancies (that is, 4,132; 2,499; and 3,082). ITCD could not provide an
explanation for these release date discrepancies and did not retain the original data
16

--- Page 19 ---
files used in the matches. As a result, we could not assess the reliability of the
match results. We were advised by ITCD that the initial match included both
active and inactive cases, and so the second match was performed. ITCD and
Office personnel were unable to explain the reason for the third match. We were
advised by ITCD and Office management that the second match showing 2,499
discrepancies was considered the final listing of the inmate release date transfer
discrepancies; however, a basis for this conclusion was not provided.
Notwithstanding these discrepancies, OCMS became the official record for
inmate release date information in August 2014.
Office management further advised us that the 2,499 discrepancies would not be
individually researched and resolved. Rather, Office management advised us it
would continue to rely on a manual release date review process that is conducted
several months prior to each inmate’s scheduled release. This process, which
continues to rely on information in OBSCIS I, is a manual redetermination of the
inmate release date. DOC management also advised that this process is being
used as an opportunity to check the accuracy of diminution credits as reflected in
OCMS for that particular inmate. While this manual process may help ensure
inmates are released on the proper date, use of such a manual process nevertheless
creates inefficiencies that an automated process would avoid and could be prone
to human error.
Our review of the 346 inmates (from the match resulting in 2,499 discrepancies)
scheduled in OCMS for release during the period from August 2014 through May
2015 disclosed that the release dates in OCMS were both later and earlier than
those dates in OBSCIS I. The discrepancies ranged from inmates potentially
being released 28 years earlier than appropriate and inmates potentially being
released 7 months later than appropriate. Of these 346 inmates, there were 34 in
which OCMS showed a release date that was more than one year earlier than that
shown in OBSCIS I. We determined that, as of June 2015, none of these inmates
has been released. DOC management believes that the release dates for inmates
incarcerated after OCMS was implemented are being properly calculated.
As a result of these control deficiencies, certain release date information in the
Office’s official records is inaccurate and unreliable. In fiscal year 2014, there
was an average inmate population of 20,868 inmates incarcerated in DPSCS’
correctional facilities.
17

--- Page 20 ---
Recommendation 4
We recommend that the Office
a. investigate the discrepancies noted between the release dates recorded in
OBSCIS I and OCMS and take corrective action to resolve the
differences; and
b. in the future, establish procedures to ensure data transfers between
systems are controlled and documented.
Finding 5
Sensitive personally identifiable information was not appropriately
safeguarded.
Analysis
Sensitive personally identifiable information (PII) was stored in the OCMS
database in clear text. Specifically, we noted that as of June 22, 2015 the OCMS
database contained sensitive PII for 370,067 unique individuals in clear text. This
included the individuals’ full names and social security numbers. In addition, we
determined that this sensitive PII was not protected by other substantial mitigating
controls.
This PII, which is commonly sought by criminals for use in identity theft, should
be protected by appropriate information system security controls. The State of
Maryland Information Security Policy states that agencies should protect
confidential data using encryption technologies and/or other substantial mitigating
controls.
Recommendation 5
We recommend that the Office
a. perform an inventory of its systems and identify all sensitive PII,
b. determine if this sensitive information is properly protected by
encryption or other substantial mitigating controls, and
c. use approved encryption methods to encrypt all sensitive PII not
otherwise properly protected.
18

--- Page 21 ---
Finding 6
Account, password, and monitoring controls over OCMS were not sufficient.
Analysis
Account, password, and monitoring controls over OCMS were not sufficient.
 Account lockout for repeated unsuccessful logon attempts did not exist for the
OCMS application and server hosting the OCMS database.
 Password controls for the OCMS application, database, and server hosting this
database were not in accordance with the requirements of the Information
Security Policy. Specifically, password length, complexity, aging, history,
and sharing provisions did not meet the minimum requirements of the Policy.
 The OCMS database was not configured to log any database security activity
including privileged operations. Examples of database activities which should
be logged and analyzed include, but are not limited to, direct changes to
critical data tables, changes to database security settings, and use of certain
critical privileges. This condition could result in unauthorized or
inappropriate activities (affecting the integrity of the production database
information) going undetected by management.
The State of Maryland Information Security Policy requires that userids
associated with a password should be disabled after not more than four
consecutive failed login attempts while allowing a minimum fifteen minute
automatic reset of the account. The Policy also requires that passwords have an
eight-character minimum length, meet certain complexity requirements, be
changed at regular intervals, and not be shared. In addition, the Policy requires
that information systems generate audit records for all security-relevant events,
including all security and system administrator accesses.
Recommendation 6
We recommend that the Office
a. establish OCMS account and password settings in accordance with the
aforementioned Information Security Policy; and
b. set the OCMS database to log all critical security-related events,
regularly review these logs, document these reviews, and retain this
documentation for future reference.
19

--- Page 22 ---
Fines, Costs, Fees, and Restitution
Background
The Office collects court-imposed fines, costs, fees, and victim restitution
(FCFR). All offender payments for FCFR are deposited into a non-budgeted fund
upon receipt. Periodically, the Office distributes these funds to the proper parties,
such as to the courts and to crime victims (restitution), and allocates them to the
State’s General Fund or to the appropriate special fund.
The Office uses the Offender-Based State Correctional Information System
(OBSCIS II) to account for the collection and disbursement of these funds.
According to the Office’s records, fees collected and allocated to the State’s
General Fund or to the appropriate special fund totaled approximately $13.5
million in fiscal year 2014. During fiscal year 2014, the Office also disbursed
$9.5 million, $696,558, and $768,362 related to restitution to victims, court-
ordered fines, and costs, respectively.
Finding 7
The Office did not adequately reconcile its cash balance of FCFR funds with
the corresponding balance on the State’s accounting records.
Analysis
The Office did not adequately reconcile its cash balance of FCFR in OBSCIS II
with the corresponding balance on the State Comptroller’s records. A monthly
reconciliation is to be performed to compare the amount of cash in the FCFR non-
budgeted fund, according to the State Comptroller’s records, with the amount
reported as on hand in OBSCIS II. However, as of May 2015, monthly
reconciliations for the period from July 2013 through May 2014 had not been
completed. Furthermore, although the Office had completed reconciliations for
the period from June 2014 through February 2015, each reconciliation for this
nine-month period contained an unreconciled difference of $70,522. Specifically,
the balance in the State Comptroller’s records ($3,877,155) exceeded the balance
in OBSCIS II ($3,806,633) by $70,522. The Office did not investigate and
resolve this difference. Furthermore, the supervisory reviews of the
reconciliations that were performed were not documented.
As a result, the Office lacked assurance that all cash transactions were properly
accounted for. Our two preceding audit reports on the Division of Parole and
Probation commented on similar deficiencies with the reconciliations.
20

--- Page 23 ---
Recommendation 7
We recommend that the Office adequately reconcile the OBSCIS II cash
balance with the balance on the State Comptroller’s records. Specifically, we
recommend that the Office
a. complete all reconciliations in a timely manner,
b. investigate and resolve differences identified during the reconciliation
process in a timely manner (repeat), and
c. ensure that a comprehensive supervisory review of the reconciliations is
adequately performed and documented (repeat).
Finding 8
The Office had not established adequate procedures and controls over
certain critical OBSCIS II transactions, and output reports of certain critical
transactions were not generated and reviewed for propriety.
Analysis
The Office had not established adequate procedures and controls over refunds
made to offenders for FCFR overpayments and changes to restitution recipient
addresses within OBSCIS II. Output reports of these critical transactions
processed were not generated and independently reviewed for propriety.
 The Office had not established a mechanism within OBSCIS II to process and
approve refunds to offenders for overpayments of FCFR. As offenders
fulfilled certain terms of probation mandated by the courts, fees may be
reduced accordingly and offenders could be entitled to refunds for certain
previously paid fees. However, these refund payments were not appropriately
accounted for, were not subject to independent supervisory review, and output
reports of refunds were not generated to facilitate the review of these refunds.
Specifically, the Office processed offender refunds as restitution payments to
offenders. The field office employee monitoring the offender completed the
appropriate authorizing form, adjusted the offender account in OBSCIS II, and
notified the Office, via email, of the need to process the refund. The Office
established the offender as a victim in OBSCIS II and processed the refund as
it would a restitution payment. There was no supervisory review of the
refunds processed. These refunds would be subject to review during the
Office’s periodic payment obligation audits, which review all changes made
in OBSCIS II in the court-ordered amount of fees; however, these audits only
review 10 percent of all changes processed and therefore the number of
offender refunds selected for review would be very limited. According to
Office records, $9.5 million in restitution payments were made in fiscal year
21

--- Page 24 ---
2014. DPSCS personnel identified refunds totaling approximately $528,000
that were processed during fiscal year 2014.
 The Office had not established adequate controls over changes to restitution
recipient addresses in OBSCIS II. Most often, the Office became aware of the
need to change a recipient address when a restitution payment was returned in
the mail as undeliverable. Address changes were also made upon a recipient’s
request. These address changes were made in OBSCIS II by Office
employees and were not subject to independent supervisory review.
Furthermore, output reports of address changes were not generated to
facilitate this review. Finally, there was no formal process for documenting
the reason for the address changes so that they could be verified for propriety.
The number of address changes made to restitution recipient addresses was
not available.
Recommendation 8
We recommend that the Office
a. establish a mechanism to separately account for and process offender
refunds that includes a documented supervisory review using output
reports; and
b. generate output reports of address changes to restitution recipient
addresses and establish a process for independent verification to
supporting documentation, and document and retain these verifications
for future reference.
Equipment
Finding 9
Equipment maintained by the Office’s ITCD was not adequately controlled
and accounted for.
Analysis
Controls and record keeping procedures relating to equipment maintained by the
Office’s ITCD (primarily computer-related equipment) were not sufficient.
According to the Office’s detail equipment records, as of March 27, 2015, ITCD
equipment totaled approximately $40 million and constituted the vast majority of
the Office’s total equipment inventory.
 The Office did not periodically reconcile its control account balance for ITCD
equipment with the total of the related detail records. As of June 2014, the
ITCD control account balance totaled $46.1 million while the related detail
22

--- Page 25 ---
records totaled $43.5 million, a difference of $2.6 million. Rather than
investigate this difference, ITCD reduced the control account balance to
match the total of the detail records at the beginning of fiscal year 2015
without any justification or authorization from the Department of General
Services (DGS).
 Based on our review of the detail equipment records, as of March 2015,
equipment valued at approximately $3.2 million had not been located for
periods ranging from one to seven years. The Office had not reported this
equipment to DGS and removed the equipment from its records.
 The Office did not properly report disposals of equipment on its fiscal year
2014 annual report of fixed assets. Specifically, the Office reported ITCD
disposals of $2.6 million; however, the Office could not provide
documentation showing DGS approval of items disposed of totaling
approximately $300,000.
The DGS Inventory Control Manual requires that a control account and detail
records be maintained for equipment to properly reflect all transactions and that
the control account be periodically reconciled with the related detail records. The
Manual also requires that, when physical inventories of equipment are taken,
missing items should be investigated, reported, and removed in accordance with
the Manual. Furthermore, missing or stolen items are to be reported to DGS
within 10 working days of the discovery of the loss. Similar deficiencies with the
control and accounting for ITCD equipment were noted in our preceding audit
report on the DPSCS Office of the Secretary.
Recommendation 9
We recommend that the Office comply with the aforementioned
requirements of the Inventory Control Manual (repeat).
23

--- Page 26 ---
24

--- Page 27 ---
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the following units of the
Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services (DPSCS) for the period
beginning December 19, 2011 and ending October 20, 2014:
Office of the Secretary (including the 9-1-1 Trust Fund)
Maryland Parole Commission
Inmate Grievance Office
Police and Correctional Training Commissions
Maryland Commission on Correctional Standards
Because of a departmental reorganization (which is explained on page 7 of this
report), our audit of the Office also included the following DPSCS units for these
periods:
Deputy Secretary for Operations – July 1, 2012 to October 20, 2014
Division of Parole and Probation – March 15, 2012 to June 30, 2012
Division of Corrections – Headquarters – December 19, 2011 to June 30, 2012
The audit was conducted in accordance with generally accepted government
auditing standards. Those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to
obtain sufficient, appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our
findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives. We believe that the
evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions
based on our audit objectives.
As prescribed by State Government Article, Section 2-1221 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, the objectives of this audit were to examine the Office’s
financial transactions, records and internal control, and to evaluate its compliance
with applicable State laws, rules, and regulations.
In planning and conducting our audit, we focused on the major financial-related
areas of operations based on assessments of significance and risk. The areas
addressed by the audit included procurements and disbursements; contracts; cash
receipts; equipment; payroll; collection and disbursement of fines, costs, fees, and
restitution; and information systems security and control. Our audit also included
various support services (such as payroll, purchasing, maintenance of accounting
records and related fiscal functions) provided by the Office on a centralized basis
for the Criminal Injuries Compensation Board, which is audited separately. We
also determined the status of the findings contained in our preceding audit reports
25

--- Page 28 ---
of the DPSCS –Office of the Secretary and the DPSCS – Division of Parole and
Probation.
Our audit did not include the payroll processing of the Office’s Security Unit
under the Deputy Secretary for Operations. These financial activities are
provided by the Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services – South
Region and are included within the scope of that audit. Our audit also did not
include the computer operations of DPSCS’ Information and Technology and
Communications Division, which is audited separately.
To accomplish our audit objectives, our audit procedures included inquiries of
appropriate personnel, inspections of documents and records, observations of the
Office’s operations, and tests of transactions. Generally, transactions were
selected for testing based on auditor judgment, which primarily considers risk.
Unless otherwise specifically indicated, neither statistical nor non-statistical audit
sampling was used to select the transactions tested. Therefore, the results of the
tests cannot be used to project those results to the entire population from which
the test items were selected.
We also performed various data extracts of pertinent information from the State’s
Financial Management Information System (such as revenue and expenditure
data) and the State’s Central Payroll Bureau (payroll data). The extracts are
performed as part of ongoing internal processes established by the Office of
Legislative Audits and were subject to various tests to determine data reliability.
We also extracted data from the Office’s Offender Based State Correctional
Information System II and Offender Case Management System for the purposes
of testing fines, costs, fees, and restitution transactions and system access. We
determined that the data extracted from these various sources were sufficiently
reliable for the purposes the data were used during this audit. Finally, we
performed other auditing procedures that we considered necessary to achieve our
objectives. The reliability of data used in this report for background or
informational purposes was not assessed.
The Office’s management is responsible for establishing and maintaining
effective internal control. Internal control is a process designed to provide
reasonable assurance that objectives pertaining to the reliability of financial
records, effectiveness and efficiency of operations including safeguarding of
assets, and compliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations are achieved.
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
26

--- Page 29 ---
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate.
Our reports are designed to assist the Maryland General Assembly in exercising
its legislative oversight function and to provide constructive recommendations for
improving State operations. As a result, our reports generally do not address
activities we reviewed that are functioning properly.
This report includes findings relating to conditions that we consider to be
significant deficiencies in the design or operation of internal control that could
adversely affect the Office’s ability to maintain reliable financial records, operate
effectively and efficiently, and/or comply with applicable laws, rules, and
regulations. Our report also includes findings regarding significant instances of
noncompliance with applicable laws, rules, or regulations. Other less significant
findings were communicated to the Office that did not warrant inclusion in this
report.
The Office’s response to our findings and recommendations is included as an
appendix to this report. As prescribed in the State Government Article, Section 2-
1224 of the Annotated Code of Maryland, we will advise the Office regarding the
results of our review of its response.
27

--- Page 31 ---
DPSCS Itemized Responses to the November 2015 Legislative Audit
of the Office of the Secretary and Other Units
Inmate Services Procurement
Finding 1:
The Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services – Office of the Secretary
structured an inmate services procurement in a manner that may have limited competition.
The procurement also did not protect the State in the event of contractor nonperformance
and improperly included items which should have been procured from a provider with
procurement preference.
Recommendation 1:
We recommend that the Office
a. ensure that future RFPs are structured to promote maximum competition and to
protect the State’s interests;
b. consult with DoIT on future procurements for the design and implementation of
information technology systems;
c. comply with procurement law regarding purchasing available goods and services from
preferred entities; and
d. provide BPW with clear and accurate cost information when requesting approval for
contract awards.
We agree.
Effective immediately, the Office will:
a. ensure that future RFPs are structured to promote maximum competition and to protect the
State’s interests;
b. consult with DoIT on future procurements regarding the design and implementation of IT
systems;
c. comply with procurement law regarding purchasing available goods and services from
preferred entities; and
d. provide BPW with clear and accurate cost information when requesting approval for future
contract awards.
Interagency Agreement
Finding 2:
The Office entered into interagency agreements with a unit of a State university that enabled
the Office to augment its staff beyond its budgeted positions and enhance related salaries. In
addition, the work performed under the agreement did not appear consistent with the unit’s
mission.
Recommendation 2:
We recommend that the Office
a. refrain from entering into interagency agreements to augment budgetary positions;
and
b. report interagency agreements in excess of $100,000 with public higher institutions to
DBM as required.
Page 1

--- Page 32 ---
DPSCS Itemized Responses to the November 2015 Legislative Audit
of the Office of the Secretary and Other Units
We agree.
Effective immediately, the Office will:
a. refrain from entering into new interagency agreements to augment budgetary positions; and
b. report interagency agreements in excess of $100,000 with public higher education
institutions to DBM as required.
Inmate Mental Healthcare Contract
Finding 3:
The Office did not assess its inmate mental healthcare contractor with liquidated damages,
totaling $840,000, for not meeting required staffing levels. In addition, the Office authorized
an increase in staffing levels for more than a year before modifying the contract and seeking
BPW approval.
Recommendation 3:
We recommend that the Office
a. assess liquidated damages applicable for staffing service level shortages to the extent
permitted by the contract; and
b. comply with State procurement regulations by seeking the required BPW approval
before the related services are initiated.
We agree.
The Department is in the process of finalizing a retroactive modification of the mental health
contract. This modification will change the mental health contract audit methodology and the
assessment of liquidated damages from the individual Service Delivery Area (SDA) staffing to the
statewide staffing provisions similar to the medical services contract. Nevertheless, effective
immediately, the Office will:
a. assess liquidated damages applicable for staffing service level shortages to
the extent permitted by the contract (or any approved retroactive or future contract
modifications); and
b. comply with State procurement regulations by seeking any required BPW approval before
the related services are initiated.
Offender Case Management System
Finding 4:
The Office did not ensure DOC inmate release date information was properly transferred
from OBSCIS I when it implemented OCMS. In addition, noted discrepancies with inmate
release dates were not resolved.
Recommendation 4:
We recommend that the Office
a. investigate the discrepancies noted between the release dates recorded in OBSCIS I
and OCMS and take corrective action to resolve the differences; and
Page 2

--- Page 33 ---
DPSCS Itemized Responses to the November 2015 Legislative Audit
of the Office of the Secretary and Other Units
b. in the future, establish procedures to ensure data transfers between systems are
controlled and documented.
We agree.
a. The Division of Correction Commitment Unit is investigating the discrepancies noted
between the two systems, and taking corrective action to resolve all differences. We will
reconcile all cases identified in the report by July 1, 2016. However, we are concerned
about some statements in the finding analysis. The analysis states that “discrepancies in
inmate release dates that were noted between the two systems after this final transfer were
not resolved.” Actually, discrepancies have been resolved through the standard audit
process for release that resolves cases in release date order, earliest to latest, and daily during
case reviews of routine sentencing transactions. In fact, of the 2,499 cases identified, 981
cases with release dates through September 2016 have been reviewed and corrected. The
analysis also states that “while this manual process may help ensure inmates are released on
the proper date, use of a manual process nevertheless creates inefficiencies that an
automated process would avoid and could be prone to human error.” The Commitment Unit
believes that an automated process cannot be developed that would accurately identify the
reason(s) for the discrepancies in release dates. There could be many reasons for
discrepancies in release dates between the two systems, and only a trained employee can
identify and correct the discrepancies. Finally, release date information is accurate for cases
without discrepancies, and release dates for records established after OCMS was
implemented are also accurate and reliable; and
b. By February 1, 2016, procedures will be established to ensure data transfers between
systems are controlled and documented.
Finding 5:
Sensitive personally identifiable information was not appropriately safeguarded.
Recommendation 5:
We recommend that the Office
a. perform an inventory of its systems and identify all sensitive PII;
b. determine if this sensitive information is properly protected by encryption or other
substantial mitigating controls; and
c. use approved encryption methods to encrypt all sensitive PII not otherwise properly
protected.
We agree.
a. An inventory of systems that contain PII was done before the audit, and will be an ongoing
process;
b. We have determined that DPSCS databases are currently not encrypted because DPSCS has
an acceptable level of security controls in place, such as Data Loss Prevention, Network
Security Event Monitoring and Database Change Monitoring. Real time alerts are sent to
the firewall team, and system log and access activate is reviewed weekly for unusual
activity. The databases are housed in a secure location, firewalls rules and Access Control
Page 3

--- Page 34 ---
DPSCS Itemized Responses to the November 2015 Legislative Audit
of the Office of the Secretary and Other Units
Lists (ACL’s) are in place, and databases that store PII have been identified in Enterprise
Architecture Resource (EAR). Individuals that have access to the data have fingerprint
based background checks. Finally, data is transmitted through encrypted communication
channels in compliance with DoIT and FBI CJIS security policies; and
c. By October 1, 2017, PII data will be moved to an encrypted database, or added software will
be used to encrypt the existing fields for systems that need access to PII data. Encryption
solutions are dependent on the Department’s fiscal ability to acquire the needed software for
encryption.
Finding 6:
Account, password, and monitoring controls over OCMS were not sufficient.
Recommendation 6:
We recommend that the Office
a. establish OCMS account and password settings in accordance with the aforementioned
Information Security Policy; and
b. set the OCMS database to log all critical security-related events, regularly review these
logs, document these reviews, and retain this documentation for future reference.
We agree.
By July 1, 2016, the Office will:
a. establish OCMS account and password settings in accordance with the Information Security
Policy; and
b. set the OCMS database to log all critical security-related events, regularly review these logs,
document these reviews, and retain this documentation for future reference.
Fines, Costs, Fees, and Restitution
Finding 7:
The Office did not adequately reconcile its cash balance of FCFR funds with the
corresponding balance on the State’s accounting records.
Recommendation 7:
We recommend that the Office adequately reconcile the OBSCIS II cash balance with the
balance on the State Comptroller’s records. Specifically, we recommend that the Office
a. complete all reconciliations in a timely manner;
b. investigate and resolve differences identified during the reconciliation process in a
timely manner (repeat); and
c. ensure that a comprehensive supervisory review of the reconciliations is adequately
performed and documented (repeat).
Page 4

--- Page 35 ---
DPSCS Itemized Responses to the November 2015 Legislative Audit
of the Office of the Secretary and Other Units
We agree.
The Department will complete reconciliations of the OBSCIS II cash balance with the balance on
the State Comptroller’s records. Specifically, the Office will, on a monthly basis,
a. complete the reconciliations;
b. investigate and resolve differences identified during the reconciliation process; and
c. ensure that a comprehensive supervisory review of the reconciliations is adequately
performed.
Finding 8:
The Office had not established adequate procedures and controls over certain critical
OBSCIS II transactions, and output reports of certain critical transactions were not
generated and reviewed for propriety.
Recommendation 8:
We recommend that the Office
a. establish a mechanism to separately account for and process offender refunds that
includes a documented supervisory review using output reports; and
b. generate output reports of address changes to restitution recipient addresses and
establish a process for independent verification to supporting documentation, and
document and retain these verifications for future reference.
We agree.
By May 31, 2016, the Office will:
a. establish a mechanism to separately account for and process offender refunds that includes a
documented supervisory review after the update for the refund is entered into OBSCIS II
prior to the disbursement; and
b. work with the Information Technology & Communication Division (ITCD) to generate
output reports that report address changes to restitution recipients and detail offender
refunds. Independent supervisory verification to supporting documentation will be
documented and retained for future reference.
Equipment
Finding 9:
Equipment maintained by the Office’s ITCD was not adequately controlled and accounted
for.
Recommendation 9:
We recommend that the Office comply with the aforementioned requirements of the
Inventory Control Manual (repeat).
Page 5

--- Page 36 ---
DPSCS Itemized Responses to the November 2015 Legislative Audit
of the Office of the Secretary and Other Units
We agree.
a. The Division will submit the annual year report of all fixed assets to the Department of
General Services (DGS) by July 15, 2016;
b. Reconcile the control account to the related detail records on a quarterly basis and
investigate and resolve any identified differences. ITCD has completed a reconciliation and
will continue to do so every quarter. The detail records are being compared to the FMIS T-
100 report to ensure all financial expenditures have been reconciled with the Atrack fixed
asset system. If there are any discrepancies the T-100, fixed asset records, and the receiving
logs are compared electronically to resolve the issue. During our investigation of the $2.6M
control account and detail records discrepancies thus far, ITCD has accounted for
$1,396,968. ITCD will continue to investigate and resolve the remaining $1,203,032;
c. Effective immediately, any missing or stolen items will be reported to DGS within 10
working days of discovery of the loss. As of November 1, 2015, ITCD has reduced the total
of uninventoried assets from $3.2M to $927,580; and
d. Obtain DGS approval for equipment items that cannot be located prior to removing fixed
assets from our records. It should be noted that the $300,000 of disposed assets identified in
the Audit Report has been reactivated in the fixed assets system.
Page 6

--- Page 37 ---
A T
UDIT EAM
Adam J. Westover, CPA
Audit Manager
Richard L. Carter, CISA
Information Systems Audit Manager
David R. Fahnestock
Evan E. Naugle
Senior Auditors
Eric Alexander, CPA, CISA
Information Systems Senior Auditor
Andrew S. Bien
Steven A. Crocker
Wesley M. Elder
Christopher J. Fowler
David O. Mauriello
Daniel P. Nuccio, CPA
Andrea G. Lynch Pyon, CFE
Staff Auditors