Title: Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services - Office of the Secretary and Other Units
Date: 11/07/2012
Type: Fiscal Compliance
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5a9823cf42120619c086e6d4
Extracted: 2025-06-17T20:23:50.958294
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Audit Report
Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services
Office of the Secretary and Other Units
November 2012
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
 This report and any related follow-up correspondence are available to the public through the
Office of Legislative Audits at 301 West Preston Street, Room 1202, Baltimore, Maryland
21201. The Office may be contacted by telephone at 410-946-5900, 301-970-5900, or 1-877-
486-9964.
 Electronic copies of our audit reports can be viewed or downloaded from our website at
http://www.ola.state.md.us.
 Alternate formats may be requested through the Maryland Relay Service at 1-800-735-2258.
 The Department of Legislative Services – Office of the Executive Director, 90 State Circle,
Annapolis, Maryland 21401 can also assist you in obtaining copies of our reports and related
correspondence. The Department may be contacted by telephone at 410-946-5400 or 301-
970-5400.

--- Page 4 ---
2

--- Page 5 ---
Background Information
Agency Responsibilities
The Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services - Office of the
Secretary has statewide responsibility for the control and habilitation of
incarcerated individuals. The Office is also responsible for the maintenance of
the State’s criminal history record information. In addition, the Office is
responsible for administering the 9-1-1 Trust Fund as required by law. According
to the State’s records, during fiscal year 2011, expenditures for the six budgetary
units audited, which are indicated on page 5, totaled approximately $176.4
million.
Reorganization
In fiscal year 2012, the Office initiated a Department-wide reorganization to
establish three regions within the State (North, Central, and South) for the
purposes of creating a regional approach to providing essentially all inmate
related functions, such as incarceration, probation, parole, and reentry into
society. Through the reorganization, the Office is seeking to keep inmates in one
region as they move within the DPSCS system. The reorganization is also meant
to find efficiencies, and to improve inmate reentry into society. While the
reorganization was initiated in fiscal year 2012, the Office anticipates that, for
budgetary purposes, the reorganization will be implemented via budget
amendment in fiscal year 2013.
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report
Our audit included a review to determine the status of the six findings contained
in our preceding audit report dated September 15, 2010. We determined that the
Office satisfactorily addressed all of these findings.
3

--- Page 6 ---
Findings and Recommendations
Equipment
Finding 1
Equipment maintained by the Office’s Information Technology and
Communications Division (ITCD) was not adequately controlled and
accounted for.
Analysis
Controls and record keeping procedures relating to equipment maintained by the
Office’s ITCD (primarily computer-related equipment) were not sufficient.
According to the Office’s detailed equipment records, as of June 21, 2012, ITCD
equipment totaled approximately $40.6 million and constituted the vast majority
of the Office’s total equipment inventory. Our review disclosed the following
conditions:
 The Office did not periodically reconcile its control account balance for ITCD
equipment to the total of the related detail records. As of June 2012, the
ITCD control account balance totaled $38.9 million while the related detail
records totaled $40.6 million, a difference of $1.7 million.
 Based on our review of the detailed inventory records, as of March 2012,
equipment valued at approximately $316,000 had not been accounted for from
21 months to more than 44 months. Accordingly, the Office should attempt to
locate this equipment and write off the equipment if it is missing.
 The Office did not report 15 missing or stolen sensitive equipment items
totaling approximately $22,500 to the Department of General Services (DGS)
as required. The equipment was identified as missing or stolen in fiscal years
2009 and 2010, but as of April 2012, had not been reported to DGS.
The DGS Inventory Control Manual requires that a control account and detail
records be maintained for equipment to properly reflect all transactions and that
the control account be periodically reconciled to the related detail records. The
Manual further requires that when physical inventories of equipment are taken
that records for missing items are investigated, reported and removed in
accordance with this Manual. Furthermore, missing or stolen items are to be
reported to DGS within ten working days of discovery of the loss.
4

--- Page 7 ---
Recommendation 1
We recommend that the Office comply with the aforementioned
requirements of the Inventory Control Manual.
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We have audited the following units of the Department of Public Safety and
Correctional Services for the period beginning July 1, 2009 and ending December
18, 2011:
Office of the Secretary (including the 9-1-1 Trust Fund)
Maryland Parole Commission
Inmate Grievance Office
Police and Correctional Training Commissions
Maryland Commission on Correctional Standards
Division of Corrections - Headquarters
The audit was conducted in accordance with generally accepted government
auditing standards. Those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to
obtain sufficient, appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our
findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives. We believe that the
evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions
based on our audit objectives.
As prescribed by the State Government Article, Section 2-1221 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, the objectives of this audit were to examine the Office’s
financial transactions, records, and internal control, and to evaluate its compliance
with applicable State laws, rules, and regulations. We also determined the status
of the findings contained in our preceding audit report.
In planning and conducting our audit, we focused on the major financial-related
areas of operations based on assessments of materiality and risk. The areas
addressed by the audit included procurements and disbursements, contracts, cash
receipts, accounts receivable, payroll, and equipment. Our audit procedures
included inquiries of appropriate personnel, inspections of documents and
records, and observations of the Office’s operations. We also tested transactions
and performed other auditing procedures that we considered necessary to achieve
our objectives. Data provided in this report for background or informational
purposes were deemed reasonable, but were not independently verified.
5

--- Page 8 ---
Our audit included various support services (such as payroll, purchasing,
maintenance of accounting records and related fiscal functions) provided by the
Office on a centralized basis for two other DPSCS units – the Division of Parole
and Probation and the Criminal Injuries Compensation Board – which are audited
separately. Our audit did not include the computer operations of DPSCS’s
Information and Technology and Communications Division, which is also audited
separately.
The Office’s management is responsible for establishing and maintaining
effective internal control. Internal control is a process designed to provide
reasonable assurance that objectives pertaining to the reliability of financial
records, effectiveness and efficiency of operations including safeguarding of
assets, and compliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations are achieved.
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate.
Our reports are designed to assist the Maryland General Assembly in exercising
its legislative oversight function and to provide constructive recommendations for
improving State operations. As a result, our reports generally do not address
activities we reviewed that are functioning properly.
This report includes a condition that we consider to be a significant deficiency in
the design or operation of internal control that could adversely affect the Office’s
ability to maintain reliable financial records, operate effectively and efficiently,
and/or comply with applicable laws, rules, and regulations. This condition also
represents a significant instance of noncompliance with applicable laws, rules, or
regulations. Other less significant findings were communicated to the Office that
did not warrant inclusion in this report.
The Office’s response to our findings and recommendations is included as an
appendix to this report. As prescribed in the State Government Article, Section 2-
1224 of the Annotated Code of Maryland, we will advise the Office regarding the
results of our review of its response.
6

--- Page 11 ---
AUDIT TEAM
Paul R. Denz, CPA
Audit Manager
Richard L. Carter, CISA
Information Systems Audit Manager
Menachem Katz, CPA
Robert A. Wells, CPA
Senior Auditors
Michael K. Bliss, CISA
Information Systems Senior Auditor
Peter C. Flack
Alexander M. Prodey
Tu N. Vuong
Staff Auditors