Title: Review of a Certain Payment Made by the Department of Information Technology
Date: 02/27/2018
Type: Special Reports and Letters
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5a982ab042120619c08781de
Extracted: 2025-06-18T09:07:06.959423
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 4 ---
4

--- Page 5 ---
Office of Legislative Audits Review
Review of a Retroactive Payment for Certain Services
Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We conducted a review of the $3.68 million payment made by the Department of
Information Technology (DoIT) for services provided by contractors under an
October 2016 work order related to the eMaryland Marketplace (eMM) electronic
procurement system. This review was performed at the request of the Maryland
General Assembly’s Joint Audit Committee (JAC). In accordance with the
request, we reviewed the work order and associated costs to determine whether
those charges submitted by the contractors to the State were proper. Our review
had the following objectives:
1. Review the contents of the October 2016 work order, the related requests,
and the contractor proposal documents to identify relevant requirements
pertaining to the desired services and compensation;
2. Review the documentation supporting the $3.68 million payment to
determine the propriety of the charges; and
3. Determine the extent and value of the work performed under the work
order.
We conducted the review under the authority of the State Government Article,
Section 2-1220(b) of the Annotated Code of Maryland. The scope of our review
was less than that of an audit conducted in accordance with generally accepted
government auditing standards. The scope did not include an evaluation of
internal controls over compliance with State laws, rules and regulations, or an
assessment of DoIT’s compliance with those laws, rules and regulations. We
believe that the work performed, and the related observations made, satisfactorily
fulfilled the JAC’s request.
To accomplish our objectives, we interviewed various personnel including former
and current employees and management at DoIT, the Department of General
Services (DGS), and the Board of Public Works (BPW), as well as management
officials with the contractors.1 In addition, we reviewed numerous records that
related to the work order, such as draft project plans, presentations, and status
reports. We also reviewed available financial records, such as, billing summaries,
procurement records, as well as certain email communications, and a variety of
other pertinent documents made available to us. Additional procedures related to
1 During the period covered by this review, there were significant changes in DoIT management,
including the Secretary, executive management, and project management officials.
5

--- Page 6 ---
each specific objective are included under the Auditor Observations section of
this letter.
The results of this review are presented as detailed observations under each of the
aforementioned objectives. Since there are no recommendations, an agency
response was not warranted.
Background Information
eMaryland Marketplace
The eMaryland Marketplace (eMM) is an internet-based procurement system.
State laws and regulations generally provide that eMM is to be used by State
agencies, counties, municipalities, public institutions of higher education, public
schools, and other entities to publish solicitations and contract awards for goods
and services over a specified value. eMM has other functionality, such as
electronic receipt of bid documentation and bid tabulation; however, use of these
functions is not required by law and varies between State agencies. Since its
inception in March 2000, the Department of General Services (DGS) – Office of
Procurement and Logistics (OPL) and DoIT have contracted with independent
companies to develop, operate, and maintain eMM.
State law initially provided that the costs for the development and operation of
eMM would be covered via subscription fees paid by vendors using the system.
The law was changed in 2005, eliminating the subscription fee, and was replaced
with the current statute which provides that units using electronic means to
conduct procurement may charge bidders a reasonable fee (convenience
processing fee) contingent on BPW approval. In August 2011, BPW approved a
new eMM contract and granted DGS the authority to charge a one percent
convenience fee, assessed on electronic transactions for DGS-controlled
electronically procured contracts. In fiscal year 2016, DGS collected
approximately $2.4 million in convenience fees.
6

--- Page 7 ---
2011 eMM Contract
Upon approval by BPW, DGS – OPL
2011 Contract Monthly Hosting, Maintenance,
entered into a five-year contract with a
and Support Costs
vendor (herein after referred to as the eMM Period Monthly Total
Cost Period Cost
vendor), to develop, operate, and maintain August 15, 2011 –
$73,483 $881,800
August 14, 2012
a new eMM system using the eMM
August 15, 2012 –
$73,483 $881,800
vendor’s software. The contract covered August 14, 2013
August 15, 2013 –
the period from August 15, 2011 through $60,833 $730,000
August 14, 2014
August 14, 2016, and was subsequently August 15, 2014 –
$60,833 $730,000
August 14, 2015
amended to extend the term to October 15,
August 15, 2015 –
$39,625 $554,750
2016.2 The eMM vendor was paid $3.9 October 15, 2016
Total $3,778,350
million of which, according to the amounts
Source – DGS records
established in the price proposal and related
modifications, $3.8 million consisted of monthly fees for hosting, maintenance,
and support of its software, including access to all upgrades at no additional cost
(see table).
The eMM vendor was also to develop an interface between eMM and the State’s
Financial Management Information System (FMIS). However, as noted in our
November 8, 2013 audit report on DGS – OPL, the interface was never
completed. In May 2015, DGS – OPL and the eMM vendor agreed to a contract
modification to eliminate the interface requirement, and DGS – OPL was to
reduce its total payment to the eMM vendor by $39,625.
The 2011 eMM contract also included a five-year extension option at a cost of
approximately $2.4 million. DGS – OPL did not exercise the contract extension
option so the contract expired in October 2016. After the contract expired, the
responsibility for day-to-day operation of eMM shifted to DoIT to help implement
new State procurement initiatives being developed in conjunction with the
Commission to Modernize State Procurements.
Commission to Modernize State Procurements
On February 10, 2016, the Governor issued an Executive Order creating the
Commission to Modernize State Procurements (Commission) tasked with
providing a comprehensive report on the State’s procurement statutes, regulations,
policies, and procedures, and with making recommendations for improvement.
The DoIT Secretary served as the chair of the Commission’s Efficiencies
Workgroup which identified that an upgrade to the eMM software was going to
be available and that there were opportunities for improving eMM including
integration into FMIS. DoIT, in conjunction with the Commission, decided to re-
2 Although the contract ended October 15, 2016, DGS paid for these services through October 31,
2016.
7

--- Page 8 ---
launch eMM to meet the goals and process improvements of this Workgroup and
the Commission. This relaunch was pursued by DoIT using its existing statewide
master contract for self-funded eGovernment services.
Statewide Master Contract for Self-funded eGovernment Services
The statewide master contract, which was executed with a contractor (hereinafter
referred to as the statewide contractor) in August 2011 for a five-year period but
was extended to August 2018, provided for the design, development, hosting,
operation, and maintenance of eGovernment products and services. This was a
work order-based, indefinite quantity, master contract under a self-funded model
leveraging fees for select services managed by DoIT, but available for use by all
State agencies.
The statewide master contract allowed for five different compensation methods.
One such method consisted of a convenience fee whereby the vendors using eMM
were directly charged for the service provided. Another compensation method
provided for either a fixed cost or reimbursement on a time and materials basis,
using DoIT-approved hourly labor rates.
Work Order Request, Proposal, and Execution
In August 2016, DoIT issued a work order request to its statewide contractor for
the replacement of the Advanced Purchasing Inventory Control System
(ADPICS) procurement component of FMIS using upgraded and enhanced eMM
software.3 The work order request also provided for strategic sourcing and
supplier enablement, management of the system, and training. According to the
request, these capabilities would provide several benefits to the State and its
vendors including, providing a one-stop-shop for all procurement functions; re-
engineering procurement processes across all procurement units; improving
transparency and accountability; improving reporting to allow better strategic
sourcing for ongoing savings; and making it easier for vendors to do business
with the State.
On October 14, 2016, the statewide contractor submitted a detailed work order
proposal to provide all the services in DoIT’s work order request whereby the
statewide contractor would meet the goals and process improvements of the
Commission and provide day-to-day project management and oversight. The
proposal also stated that the State’s existing eMM vendor would be a
subcontractor. In this regard, the eMM vendor’s proprietary software was integral
to the proposal.
3 ADPICS is used to record the processing of procurement actions related to competitive sealed
bidding, sole source procurements, small procurements, and contracts.
8

--- Page 9 ---
The proposal provided for four primary services, which are further described in
objective 1 under the Auditor Observations section:
1. Management and Training
2. Upgrade and launch of new version of eMM
3. Strategic Sourcing and Supplier Enablement
4. Procure-to-Pay Implementation
The statewide contractor estimated that the work would be completed and
available in a production environment within 12 to 16 months after the approval
of the project plan. The statewide contractor proposed to collect a one percent
convenience fee charged to certain vendors using eMM.
The resulting work order, which included by reference the tasks outlined in the
statewide contractor’s proposal, was executed on the same date as the proposal
(October 14, 2016). The work order did not have a defined termination date and
only provided that the work order would end when terminated in accordance with
the aforementioned statewide master eGovernment services contract. There were
no limits established or estimates made regarding the total compensation the
statewide contractor would receive under this work order.
Work Order Suspension
On March 3, 2017, DoIT suspended the work order at the request of the
Comptroller of Maryland – Office of the Comptroller (OOC) due to concerns with
the work order. Specifically, the OOC noted the following concerns:
 A system requirement analysis had not been performed, and DoIT failed to
engage necessary agencies and key departments to identify stakeholder
needs;
 The total compensation to the vendor was unknown with no cap
established, and the State would have no control or ability to monitor
convenience fee collection milestones;
 DoIT failed to follow the operating agreement between DoIT and OOC
dated March 8, 2010 that required DoIT to confer with OOC on any
proposed changes that impacted FMIS;
 DoIT did not competitively procure these services although competition
was available; and
 The eMM vendor’s capability to deliver services was questionable based
on its past performance with Maryland.
OOC recommended that DoIT (a) suspend the work order; (b) enter into
negotiations with the eMM vendor with the goal of contracting directly for the
9

--- Page 10 ---
continued operation and hosting eMM; and (c) require the eMM vendor to
upgrade the eMM software to a newer version. We were advised by DoIT
management that it held negotiations with the eMM vendor to address the
aforementioned OOC recommendations. Based on available documentation, it
appears that these negotiations occurred between May and July 2017.
We were also advised that at the time of the suspension, no deliverables had been
accepted by the State, and no payments had been made for these services. In this
regard, DGS collected approximately $526,000 in convenience fees between
November 1, 2016 and February 28, 2017, which should have been paid to the
statewide contractor in accordance with the work order. However, DGS advised
us that it was unable to pay the statewide contractor because it had no formal
contract with the statewide contractor.
During the negotiations, three options were presented. DoIT chose the option to
compensate the statewide contractor and the eMM vendor based on the number of
hours they had worked on the work order using the hourly rates in the statewide
master eGovernment services contract. The eMM vendor was also to be
compensated for subscription fees and hosting of eMM.
According to current DoIT management, it felt compelled to agree with the
vendor’s terms during the negotiations due to the eMM vendor’s stated intention
to discontinue the operation of eMM.
Board of Public Works’ Approval of Payment Related to Work Order
Services
At the July 26, 2017 BPW meeting, DoIT and DGS requested approval for a
retroactive payment to the eMM vendor totaling $3,682,404 for work performed
between October 16, 2016 through July 26, 2017 under the aforementioned work
order.4
DoIT’s Secretary testified that the retroactive payment was for charges related to
eMM enhancements and development from October 2016 through March 2017
(no exact dates were provided), and hosting of eMM through July 26, 2017.
DoIT’s Secretary advised BPW that the compensation was negotiated based on
the eMM vendor’s reported hours worked and the rates from the eGovernment
services master contract under which the work order was established. The
4 At the same time, BPW also approved a two-year, sole source contract award to the eMM
vendor for $150,000 per month ($3.6 million over the course of the contract) for continued use,
hosting and support of its software for the period from July 27, 2017 to July 26, 2019. This was
consistent with the option chosen by DoIT.
10

--- Page 11 ---
retroactive payment was made, in part, for 13,788 labor hours worked by both the
eMM vendor and the statewide contractor. BPW acknowledged that the eMM
vendor should be compensated, but raised concerns with the amount of the
compensation, primarily due to a lack of prior approval and sufficient evidence
(such as invoices) of the hours billed and work performed. However, BPW
approved the payment and on August 2, 2017, DoIT paid the eMM vendor the
$3,682,404 which is further described in Objective 2 under the Auditor
Observations section.
Auditor Observations
Objective 1 – Work Order Content
Objective and Methodology
We reviewed the October 14, 2016 work order and other pertinent documents to
identify significant requirements relevant to our overall review, such as the
primary services, deliverables and milestones, compensation, and other matters
such as administration and oversight.
To accomplish this objective, we performed the following procedures:
1. Interviewed current and former DoIT employees, and statewide contractor and
eMM vendor employees, who were directly involved with the preparation and
review of documents supporting the approved work order.
2. Reviewed the statewide master eGovernment services contract for any
relevant contractual requirements pertaining to the work order.
3. Reviewed the contents of the work order request, proposal, and approved
work order to identify the services originally requested, the proposed terms,
including the primary deliverables, milestones and compensation, and any
other significant provisions that may have been incorporated in the approved
work order. We attempted to correlate the work order to the retroactive
payment.
4. Reviewed the subcontractor agreement with the eMM vendor to determine the
specific roles and terms of this arrangement, and whether additional
information pertaining to the work order was included.
Overall Observations
The work order proposal, which was incorporated by reference into the approved
work order, identified the primary services, milestones, and compensation. Under
11

--- Page 12 ---
the approved work order, the contractors would be compensated for their costs by
charging vendors using eMM and the State would not assume any costs for the
work. Because of this compensation arrangement, the work order did not include
terms and conditions to help the State ensure that payments were only made based
on documented costs and that the work effort and progress on deliverables met
expectations. Specifically, the work order did not include any time keeping and
reporting requirements, nor the anticipated contractor level of effort or monetary
values for each deliverable. These requirements would be necessary for
managing payments under a vendor time and materials payment methodology,
which was ultimately the primary basis for the $3.68 million retroactive payment.
This situation, as well as other matters noted in Objectives 2 and 3, precluded us
from determining whether the statewide contractor’s and eMM vendor’s reported
labor hours and other costs incurred under the work order appeared justified
relative to work progress and expected outcomes.
Detailed Observations
Services
The statewide contractor’s work order proposal, which was incorporated by
reference into the approved work order, included four primary services which
identified various products to be delivered:
1. Management and Training – provide support and management of the
eMM software, administrative/management structure, communication, and
training services specific to the upgrades and enhancements resulting from
this work order. These services had no specific deliverable date as they
were to be provided on an ongoing basis.
2. Upgrade and launch of new version of eMM – upgrade the current eMM
software from version 13 to version 14, and add ten enhancements to the
version 14 software. This would also include hosting of the eMM
software, maintenance and operation, software updates, system security and
disaster recovery, and customer support. These services were to be
provided within three months of the approved project plan.
3. Strategic Sourcing and Supplier Enablement – provide services to
enhance the procurement process including: (1) review State procurement
laws, policies, procedures, contract language, and instructions; (2) conduct
a spend analysis to identify best practices which “may help the State realize
significant efficiency, effectiveness and economy in its sourcing activities;”
(3) promote local cooperative contract participation for development of a
sourcing/contract plan; (4) provide a standardized strategic sourcing
methodology and training for State procurement officials; and, (5) provide
12

--- Page 13 ---
supplier communications and technical support for the establishment of
contract catalogs and contract items for contract ordering. These services
were to be provided within nine months of the approved project plan.
4. Procure-to-Pay Implementation – implementation of an additional eMM
platform that would replace ADPICS and interface directly into the State’s
Relational Standard Accounting and Reporting System (R*STARS)
accounting software component of FMIS. This component would
incorporate all procurement-related processes including sourcing,
receiving, vendor registration and management, solicitation, quotes,
accounts payable, and requisitioning. The system would have the
flexibility to adapt to multiple third-party systems, which would make it
easy to integrate and provide users with broader visibility into their
procurement activity and allow them to make data-driven procurement
decisions. These services were to be provided within 16 months of the
approved project plan.
The aforementioned project plan was to be approved by the statewide contractor
and DoIT. As noted in Objective 3, the project plan was never approved by DoIT,
although work was being performed by the statewide contractor and eMM vendor.
Milestones
The work order proposal established various phases for achieving the desired
outcomes and system functionality, with three key milestones requiring State
approval:
1. Exploration and Design – project planning, design, and configuration.
2. Interface Readiness and Agency User Acceptance Readiness –
implementation of the approved design and configuration in accordance
with the plan, which will include development and testing of the eMM
software and other systems provided for in the work order.
3. User Acceptance Testing – the State conducts testing of the software to
ensure it is functioning as expected. This milestone concludes with the
State deciding whether the system should go live.
Other Provisions and Oversight
The proposal also identified the project scope (such as the proposed functionality
based on DoIT’s work order request) and the roles and responsibilities of the
involved parties for approximately 160 tasks. The statewide contractor was
responsible for monitoring the progress of the work order (which was primarily to
13

--- Page 14 ---
be performed by the eMM vendor as a subcontractor) and was to provide weekly
status reports on implementation progress, including the summary of the project
status, issues/risks, and milestone status. The statewide contractor was also to
participate in regularly scheduled meetings with project stakeholders, and consult
with DoIT’s project manager when deviations occurred.
Compensation
There were no limits established or estimates made regarding the total
compensation to be received under the work order. Rather, the statewide
contractor was to collect a one percent convenience fee charged to vendors (based
on the value of the goods and services purchased by State and other government
entities) using eMM for certain statewide contracts, such as computers, wireless
services, office supplies, audit services, rock salt, and vehicles. The statewide
contractor would retain all the convenience fees up to $15 million from the
vendors and remit 30 percent of any fees above $15 million to DoIT. The eMM
vendor was to be paid by the statewide contractor for its services.
Relationship of Compensation to Contractor Efforts and Work Progress
Under the self-funding model, the State had no direct financial obligation to the
statewide contractor and its subcontractor, the eMM vendor, for their costs
associated with the work order. Under this arrangement, there was no apparent
need and DoIT did not require the statewide contractor or the eMM vendor to
maintain records that are typically necessary under time and material contracts,
which was ultimately the primary basis for the retroactive payment. Furthermore,
other information that could help monitor work efforts and progress relative to
payment was not included. Specifically, we noted the following conditions:
 The work order did not require the statewide contractor or eMM vendor to
maintain or submit detailed time charges specific to the tasks being performed
as part of project management oversight functions. While the eMM vendor
did track its time in an electronic time keeping system, the time charges were
broken down into billing categories that did not coincide to the services or
milestones stated in the work order. The eMM vendor represented that the
time reporting was maintained for its internal use and not for reporting or
supporting invoices. We were advised that this system was used by the eMM
vendor to determine the hours expended under the work order for the
retroactive payment, which is further described in Objective 2.
 While the work order established a baseline staffing plan (that is, a list of the
types of positions that would be needed) by project phase, it did not provide
the anticipated level of effort (such as the number of staff needed, the number
14

--- Page 15 ---
of hours each staff was expected to work, or whether or not certain staff
would perform work in more than one project phase).
 The work order did not establish a specific monetary value associated with
deliverables, milestones, or progress made on the project.
 The work order did not establish a specific monetary value associated with
subscription and hosting software services, which would have continued
throughout the life of the work order.
Consequently, the approved work order was not set up for managing payments
under a time and materials payment methodology. That is, the approved work
order did not provide the necessary information that would allow a direct
correlation of either the statewide contractor’s or eMM vendor’s efforts (in terms
of hours expended or other costs, such as subscription and hosting services) and
work progress and results with the payment made to the vendor for its services
(see additional comments in Objective 2). Periodic status reports in the custody
of the statewide contractor did provide some indication of work progress (see
additional comments in Objective 3) but the status reports could not be used to
substantiate or justify the reported hours spent.
Objective 2 – Labor Charges and Other Costs
Objective and Methodology
We reviewed information and
documentation to determine the propriety of
Breakdown of Retroactive Payment
the $3.68 million payment to the eMM
Direct and Indirect Labor Charges
vendor, which included $500,512 for the
eMM Vendor $2,398,131
statewide contractor. The primary source Statewide contractor 500,512
Total Labor Charges $2,898,643
for this payment was a billing summary
eMM subscription and
provided by the eMM vendor of the hours 783,761
hosting fees
worked by the statewide contractor and Total $3,682,404
Source – Billing Summary
eMM vendor employees each day as well as
the reported costs for eMM subscription and
hosting fees. The accompanying table identifies the components of this payment.
As noted in Objective 1, the work order was not structured for managing
payments under a time and materials payment methodology so we could not
assess the reasonableness of the hours the eMM vendor and statewide contractor
claimed to have worked while performing services under the work order. As
such, our efforts were limited to determining whether the specific items reported
on the billing summary were supported.
15

--- Page 16 ---
To accomplish this objective, we performed the following procedures:
1. Interviewed current and former DoIT employees involved in approving the
compensation and reviewing the billing support provided as well as the
statewide contractor and eMM vendor employees regarding the preparation of
the compensation support submitted to DoIT.
2. Requested all evidence DoIT had available, including email communications,
pertaining to support associated with the compensation.
3. Requested additional evidence from the statewide contractor and eMM vendor
to support the billing summary information.
4. Conducted certain procedures to determine the mathematical accuracy of the
billing summary and the propriety of the labor rates used.
5. Participated in a live web-based demonstration of the eMM vendor’s
electronic time keeping system and requested certain information to confirm
data on the billing summary.
6. Provided the eMM vendor with payroll confirmations to be sent to all
individuals with hourly time charges pertaining to the eMM vendor’s labor
charges.
7. Reviewed the charge for subscription and hosting fees and performed certain
analyses to determine the reasonableness thereof.
Overall Observations
We obtained some evidence and explanation as to how the $3.68 million payment
was calculated, but certain amounts billed could not be substantiated and, in some
cases, raises questions that would require additional follow-up by the State to
resolve.
Although the billing summary was mathematically accurate, we noted that the
eMM vendor and the statewide contractor charged for labor occurring prior to
work order execution ($250,493) and after work order suspension ($522,071).
Whether these charges are appropriate is unclear, given that DoIT was aware that
the eMM vendor and statewide contractor were performing work during those
periods. Current DoIT management advised us that when a project is suspended
or cancelled, the vendor is expected to stop all work immediately and that the
vendor may choose to continue working “at risk” without expectation or
guarantee of compensation.
The billing summary included $243,016 for indirect labor hours. The rates used
to calculate the direct charges for eMM vendor employees, per the statewide
master eGovernment services contract, already incorporate indirect costs.
16

--- Page 17 ---
Although there is still some uncertainty due to the limitations of our work, it
appears that the total direct labor hours included on the billing summary
supporting costs totaling $2,155,115 for the eMM vendor were reasonably
supported by the time charges for the work order as recorded on its timekeeping
system. Also, completed confirmations from most of the eMM vendor employees
generally confirmed their charged hours and positions, the latter of which was
necessary to support the labor rates. Due to the methodology used in determining
the hours worked, the statewide contractor could not sufficiently substantiate its
labor hours and costs totaling $500,512.
The monthly subscription and hosting fee was significantly higher than the
average rate paid under the 2011 eMM Contract. In addition, the subscription and
hosting fees charged by the eMM vendor based on information provided by DoIT
and the eMM vendor appears to be approximately $109,000 higher than they
should have been.
Detailed Observations
Billing Summary
We found that the billing summary for the labor hours was mathematically
accurate (relating to the accumulation of hours and labor costs for each employee)
and the rates for the reported positions were generally consistent with the
statewide master eGovernment services contract rates table. However, the
appropriateness of certain of these charges is unclear because the billing summary
included hours worked before the date the work order was executed and after the
date it was suspended. The billing summary also included certain indirect costs
which appeared duplicative. Specifically, we noted the following conditions:
Hours Charged Prior to Work Order Execution
The billing summary included charges totaling $250,493 for labor hours prior
to the work order being executed on October 14, 2016. Specifically, the eMM
vendor charged $180,128 for work conducted between May 10, 2016 and
October 13, 2016 and the statewide contractor charged $70,365 for work
conducted between January 11, 2016 and October 13, 2016. The eMM
vendor represented that the work during this period related to scoping,
designing, and developing enhancements to the eMM upgraded software in
order to meet the anticipated deadlines of the work order. The statewide
contractor represented that these charges were primarily related to reviewing
the work order request issued on August 10, 2016, and preparation of the
work order proposal which was later executed on October 14, 2016.
17

--- Page 18 ---
The charges for the work performed prior to the work order were clearly
disclosed in the billing summary and were used by DoIT as the basis for
compensation paid. Although there was no explicit authorization by the State
to begin work prior to the work order, there were communications between
DoIT and both the eMM vendor and statewide contractor suggesting that it
was aware the work was occurring. According to DoIT management, the
work performed by the statewide contractor would have generally been
covered under the scope of their master contract.
Hours Charged After Work Order Suspension
The billing summary included charges totaling $522,071 for labor hours after
the work order was suspended on March 3, 2017. Specifically, the eMM
vendor charged $421,141 for work conducted between March 6, 2017 and
May 1, 2017 and the statewide contractor charged $100,930 for work
conducted between March 6, 2017 and April 28, 2017. The eMM vendor
represented to DoIT that its time was used to finish certain development and
strategic sourcing tasks to produce meaningful data to the State and to
expedite the project once it was resumed. The statewide contractor
represented that its time was used to work with DoIT and the eMM vendor
after the suspension to resolve project issues, support the eMM vendor’s
continued activities, and provide support to new DoIT leadership.
The charges for the work performed after the work order was suspended were
clearly disclosed in the billing summary and were used by DoIT as the basis
for compensation paid. Although there was no explicit authorization by the
State to continue work after the work order was suspended, there were
communications between DoIT and both the eMM vendor and statewide
contractor suggesting that it was aware the work was occurring. DoIT current
management advised us that when a project is suspended or cancelled, the
vendor is expected to stop all work immediately and that the vendor may
choose to continue working “at risk” without expectation or guarantee of
compensation.
Indirect Labor Hours
The billing summary included $243,016 for indirect labor hours for the eMM
vendor employees. According to the terms of the statewide master
eGovernment services contract, the hourly rates, which were used to calculate
the direct labor costs for the 52 eMM vendor employees, already included
indirect costs and profit.
18

--- Page 19 ---
Support for eMM Vendor Direct Labor Charges
The billing summary included eMM vendor direct labor charges totaling
$2,155,115 (that is, excluding the aforementioned indirect labor costs of
$243,016) incurred by 52 different individuals. The billing summary separated
these charges into six budget categories, which, according to the eMM vendor,
were intended for its internal use and do not correlate to any specific portion of
the work order (although certain descriptions resemble the services listed in the
work order).
The eMM vendor represented that the reported direct labor hours were compiled
based on information from a May 2017 output report from its electronic time
keeping system with certain manual modifications including: (1) the addition of
indirect labor hours, (2) the addition of 819 hours for certain individuals that were
not utilizing the time keeping system, (3) the position of each individual, and (4)
the rates charged for each employee based on their positions and the rates
established in the statewide master eGovernment services contract.
In an attempt to validate the hours reported on the billing summary, on January 3,
2018, we participated in a web-based demonstration of the eMM vendor’s time
keeping system including its report generating functions. During the
demonstration, we observed the eMM vendor navigate through the system and
demonstrate the detailed level of information available for each employee. For
example, the time record for each employee identified the daily hours charged to
projects, including those charged to the approved work order.
We judgmentally selected several individuals from the billing summary and
observed the eMM vendor generating an output report of the hours charged to the
work order by these employees for selected pay periods. For those individuals
tested, we were able to trace all hours charged per the billing summary directly to
the individual’s time reports generated on our behalf.
The eMM vendor also generated an online report of time charges for all the
employees that worked on the approved work order similar to the one used to
prepare the billing summary. We compared the total time charged to the billing
summary, taking into account the aforementioned manual modifications. Our
comparison showed that the total hours charged by eMM employees to the work
order based on the system generated report exceeded the hours on the billing
summary by 645 hours. That is, the system showed more hours were charged by
eMM employees than were claimed in the billing summary submitted to DoIT.
Finally, we submitted sealed payroll confirmations for all 52 individuals on the
billing summary to the eMM vendor to forward to each of the individuals. The
19

--- Page 20 ---
confirmations requested the individuals to confirm the hours worked, period of
time worked, and position based on the information included in the billing
summary. As of February 12, 2018, we received responses back from 42
individuals generally confirming that the reported information was accurate.
Based on the work we performed and support we obtained from the eMM vendor,
it appears that the total reported hours were reasonable. However, there is still
some uncertainty because our work relied on the eMM vendor’s system without
the benefit of reviewing related processes and the integrity of the aforementioned
reports provided by the eMM vendor. In addition, we did not control the
distribution of the confirmations (we did not have direct access to employee
contact information) and there is a risk that individuals still employed with the
vendor might not be forthright if confirmation information was inaccurate.
Support for eMM Vendor Subscription and Hosting Charge
The billing summary prepared by the eMM vendor included a single charge for
subscription and hosting fees totaling $783,761. There was no detail of the period
covered by the fee or a breakdown of hosting and subscription costs. The eMM
vendor advised us that the charge was based on a rate of $75,000 per month which
was based on certain methodology that we could not substantiate. We did note
that this monthly rate was significantly higher than the average monthly rate paid
under the 2011 eMM Contract (approximately $62,000).
Furthermore the $75,000 monthly rate does not support the $783,761 fee charged
on the billing summary. Specifically, according to DoIT management and
available documentation, the hosting and subscription services were provided for
9 months between November 1, 2016 (after the expiration of the 2011 eMM
Contract under which DGS paid for hosting and subscription services through
October 31, 2016) and July 26, 2017 (when the Board of Public Works approved
the new contract for hosting services). At the $75,000 monthly rate, the total cost
for the nine-month period (November 1, 2016 through July 31, 2017) would have
been $675,000 or approximately $109,000 lower than the amount on the billing
statement.
Support for Statewide Contractor Direct Labor Charges
The billing summary prepared by the statewide contractor included a total of
2,138 hours charged by six different individuals with related compensation
totaling $500,512. The statewide contractor represented that the hours were
estimated since it did not formally track its time spent on the work order on an on-
going basis because its compensation was never intended to be based on the time
directly worked on the work order (that is, time and materials compensation
methodology). At the request of the eMM vendor, the statewide contractor
20

--- Page 21 ---
manually prepared the billing summary which was an approximation of its time
spent on the work order based on the statewide contractor’s review of key
employee emails, calendar records, and unofficial time tracking.
Although the statewide contractor maintained that it had the ability to provide the
support for the calculation of the hours billed, the support was not readily
available as the records used were not maintained in a centralized manner and
would require extensive research. We requested support for certain hours
included on the billing summary. The support evidenced that these individuals
worked on the work order on the dates billed, and the related positions were
consistent with the statewide contractor’s billing summary.
Because the time charges were based on an approximation and approved time
records were not provided, we could not substantiate the accuracy of the number
of hours charged by the statewide contractor or the propriety of the related costs.
Objective 3 – Extent and Value of Work Performed
Objective and Methodology
We reviewed available documentation to determine the extent and value of the
work performed by the statewide contractor and eMM vendor under the work
order. Specifically, on September 11, 2017 DoIT provided us access to a
document repository that maintained all work products turned over by the eMM
vendor after payment was received. In addition, on November 9, 2017 the
statewide contractor provided us with access to a separate document repository it
established to maintain project artifacts while the eMM project was active. In
addition, on January 3, 2018, the eMM vendor provided us with a demonstration
of certain work products.
Because of the impediments noted in Objectives 1 and 2, our work under this
objective was limited to determining what efforts were made during the several
months when the work order was active and the general status of any deliverables.
We attempted to identify the efforts and related deliverables associated with each
of the three categories of expenditures (eMM vendor labor hours, statewide
contractor labor hours, and eMM subscription and hosting fees) supporting the
$3.68 million payment to the eMM vendor.
To accomplish this objective, we performed the following procedures:
1. Interviewed current and former DoIT employees, including management and
project management office personnel, and obtained available documentation
regarding the project status and related oversight.
21

--- Page 22 ---
2. Interviewed statewide contractor employees regarding its project management
oversight services, project status, and work performed under the work order
and obtained access to its project management files.
3. Interviewed eMM vendor employees regarding work performed, participated
in a live web-based demonstration of the upgraded version of eMM software
with Maryland-specific enhancements and obtained documentation pertaining
to the vendor’s work efforts.
4. Interviewed employees from DGS and obtained their assessment of the eMM
vendor’s files for one of the primary deliverables.
Overall Observations
While, according to DoIT, no deliverables were formally accepted by the State,
both the eMM vendor and the statewide contractor were providing resources to
the State in support of the work order. Those efforts were most evident from the
statewide contractor’s project management documentation. The extent of the
work progress relative to each of the four primary services could not be
objectively measured due to the absence of an approved project plan. Also,
DoIT’s stated inability to assess the value and extent of the work, and at times,
seemingly conflicting representations and interpretations between State officials,
the statewide contractor, and the eMM vendor precluded us from rendering a
reliable assessment of the efforts.
Detailed Observations
We were advised by DoIT management that the State had not accepted any of the
work associated with the eMM vendor’s services. DoIT’s assertion is consistent
with the statewide contractor’s status reports and our subsequent inquiries which
indicated that through March 2017 certain work was in progress but no
milestone/services were completed. We asked DoIT to review the documentation
provided by the eMM vendor and statewide contractor to determine the value of
the work performed. DoIT management responded that DoIT lacked the expertise
to assess the value or level of effort of work performed and that none of the work
completed is likely to have any substantive future benefit.
Extent and Value of eMM Vendor Services
On September 7, 2017, the eMM vendor provided DoIT with all of its work on
the project in an effort to support the $3.68 million retroactive payment. We were
advised by the eMM vendor that the products and services it had delivered to the
State constitute its best evidence that all of the hours billed have been expended in
the performance of the work order. The eMM vendor provided DoIT with 202
electronic files containing the support for the work performed, of which we found
47 files were either duplicate files or blank.
22

--- Page 23 ---
Management and Training
None of the files provided by the eMM vendor specifically related to
management services. However, the statewide contractor provided us with
access to the repository used to document project management efforts which
included 78 files prepared by the eMM vendor primarily relating to status
reports, issue tracking, and presentations. We were also provided with several
versions of a draft project plan. The eMM vendor also provided 33 electronic
files pertaining to training material, such as presentations and manuals on how
to use the upgraded eMM software (25 files), and performing strategic
sourcing (8 files). According to available training schedules and status
reports, no training was actually provided to the State because the other
services (detailed below) were not completed and the work order was
suspended.
Enhancement and Upgrade of eMM
As of the date of this letter, the State had not implemented the upgraded
version of eMM software, and currently uses version 13 that was made
available under the prior 2011 eMM Contract. All parties agree that the
enhancements and upgraded eMM were never accepted by the State. In this
regard, the eMM vendor and statewide contractor maintain that the
enhancements and upgrades were presented to the State for testing but current
DoIT management denies that it was provided. Rather, current DoIT
management advised us that it had only seen presentations of the software, but
not an actual demonstration or indication that it was ready to launch.
The eMM vendor provided us with 112 electronic files pertaining to the
coordination, research, planning and design of the upgraded eMM software
and enhancements, and screenshots of the enhancements. On January 3, 2018,
the eMM vendor also provided us with a live demonstration of the enhanced
and upgraded version of the eMM software in its test environment, which
appeared to include the enhancements requested by the State. Because
procurement data had not been loaded into the test environment, the eMM
vendor could not demonstrate the actual functionality of the enhancements.
Furthermore, the eMM vendor could not provide us with a specific date that
each of the enhancements was completed, how much time was spent on each
enhancement, or documentation of the notification to the State that it was
available for testing.
The eMM vendor advised us that the enhanced and upgraded eMM software
was completed and placed in a test environment by the eMM vendor on
September 20, 2016 (prior to the execution of the work order), and was being
reviewed by DoIT and DGS employees during several working sessions in
23

--- Page 24 ---
January and February 2017. We confirmed with certain of these employees
that the enhanced and updated eMM was made available in a test environment
to review the software to provide feedback and answer operational questions
from the eMM vendor. We noted certain DoIT correspondence indicating that
there were many design-related issues identified in the working sessions that
remained unresolved at the time the work order was suspended. We were also
advised that no user acceptance testing had been performed to assess
operational functionality.
Strategic Sourcing and Supplier Enablement
The eMM vendor provided 10 electronic files relating to strategic sourcing,
contract prioritization, and a spend analysis. The strategic sourcing and
contract prioritization work products recommended certain contracts the State
should modify to include the one percent convenience fee. However, we were
advised by DGS management that none of the contracts listed were actually
modified by the State. No files were provided by the eMM vendor that
specifically related to supplier enablement services.
Regarding the spend analysis, at the July 26, 2017 BPW meeting, the eMM
vendor stated that “…we pulled all numbers from the State on your statewide
contracts. We’ve looked at them. We’ve codified them. We benchmarked
them against other states. When we do this deal right here [presumably the
retroactive payment], you will get all that data. It will be your data, data
you’ve never seen before. And we’ve projected over the next three years
possibly $750 million in savings because data you’ve never seen in this State,
we got, we looked at, and we cleaned it.”
The files relating to the spend analysis appeared to provide a summary of the
State’s fiscal year 2016 spending by different methodologies (for example, top
vendors and product categories) and some additional documents that included
observations and preliminary findings. Although there may be other files
available that we never received, based on our review of the files provided, we
could not ascertain what conclusions, if any, were reached by the eMM
vendor.
We requested DGS officials to review the spend analysis files to evaluate the
data and determine whether any of it would be usable in saving money as
represented by the eMM vendor. DGS officials found that the data were not
usable and did not appear to be reliable because it did not represent the State’s
actual spending.
24

--- Page 25 ---
Procure-to-Pay Implementation
No files relating to the procure-to-pay implementation and integration into
FMIS were provided by the eMM vendor. In addition, DoIT and the
statewide contractor documentation of the procure-to-pay implementation was
limited to references in meeting agendas and minutes, and status reports. This
documentation represented that progress in integration design (planning only)
was not made due to a lack of State participation. In addition, based on
numerous interviews with the eMM vendor and State agency personnel, we
were advised that these services never got beyond planning as OOC had
serious concerns over the integration process.
Extent and Value of Subscription and Hosting Services
No files relating to the subscription or hosting services were provided by the
eMM vendor. However, the current version eMM software was operational
during the period of the work order which supports that the State received the
subscription and hosting services it requested.
Although we did not obtain evidence to directly support that eMM was
continuously operational, DoIT represented that the eMM vendor provided
hosting services for the existing eMM software during the work order period for
which compensation was paid. We were further advised by the eMM vendor that
hosting services were provided.
Extent and Value of Statewide Contractor Services
We obtained access to the statewide contractor’s document repository that
included all project management support, such as status reports (294 electronic
files). The statewide contractor provided evidence to support project management
services over the eMM vendor throughout the project. Specifically, the statewide
contractor provided 198 documents primarily consisting of project management
tools used to manage the project. These documents included risk logs, issue logs,
action agendas, and status reports. In addition, the statewide contractor provided
several examples of communications between the statewide contractor, the eMM
vendor, and DoIT addressing ongoing issues, required revisions, and developed
deadlines.
Further, we noted that a project plan had been drafted and, based on status reports,
had been submitted to DoIT for approval. However, we were advised by the
statewide contractor that it was unable to report the exact project status or
progress (such as a percent of completion or estimated date of completion)
without a State approved project plan which could have established schedules,
timelines, and other expectations to better gauge the work performed and
completed. Since the project plan was not approved, and therefore the schedules
25

--- Page 26 ---
and dates were not set, there was no formal way to effectively track or determine
the progress of the project.
26