Title: Presentation to the House Appropriations Subcommittee - Video Lottery Operations Revenue - Small, Minority, and Women-Owned Businesses Account (Performance)

Related Report Dated 10/23/2015
Date: 02/29/2016
Type: Presentations to the Legislature
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5a9daf2fcc9d72387404dcb9
Extracted: 2025-06-18T14:01:36.352488
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Performance Audit
Video Lottery Operations Revenue
Small, Minority, and Women-Owned
Businesses Account
Report Dated October 23, 2015

--- Page 2 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Audit Overview
(cid:190) State Law generally requires that 1.5 percent of
video lottery terminal (VLT) proceeds be paid into
the Small, Minority, and Women-Owned
Businesses Account (the Account).
(cid:190) The purpose of the Account is to provide
investment capital and loans to small, minority,
and women-owned businesses in the State. At
least 50 percent of such activity must be allocated
to eligible businesses in the jurisdictions and
communities surrounding a video lottery facility
(referred to as ‘targeted areas’).
(cid:190) The Board of Public Works (BPW) has authority
over the Account and under State law, BPW was to
develop criteria to define “fund managers”
(managers) to whom BPW would make grants, and
who would use the grant funds to provide
investment capital and loans to businesses.
(cid:190) Current State law requires OLA to annually
evaluate the use of these funds. This report
covers FY 2014.
Small, Minority and Women-Owned Businesses Account Page 2

--- Page 3 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
DBED Responsibility
(cid:190) On August 22, 2012, BPW entered into a
Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) with the
Department of Business and Economic
Development (DBED), for DBED to serve as BPW’s
agent to administer the Program (the awarding of
the grant funds and subsequent loan activity).
(cid:190) The MOU delegated certain responsibilities to
DBED, including the authority to conduct the
procurement of fund managers, recommend
approval of managers to BPW, enter into
agreements with managers on BPW’s behalf and,
pursuant to those agreements, disburse grants in
amounts approved by BPW to the managers.
(cid:190) DBED is also responsible for monitoring fund
manager reporting and submitting an annual
report to BPW that details Program activities,
including an itemized list of businesses receiving
investment capital or loans.
Small, Minority and Women-Owned Businesses Account Page 3

--- Page 4 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Fund Managers
(cid:190)DBED executed similar agreements with 3 fund
managers effective May 1, 2013 describing
manager services and responsibilities, including
loan origination and underwriting, advertising,
identifying potential borrowers, and community
outreach. Each manager was also to establish (and
have custody of) a checking account for all
Program activity in the name of the State of
Maryland and submit to DBED an annual report
detailing its use of the funds during the preceding
calendar year, and annual audited financial
statements for the funds.
(cid:190)A manager may request grant funds from available
VLT proceeds, which with any repaid loan principal,
are available for new investment capital and loans.
(cid:190)Managers were compensated for their Program
costs by origination and transaction fees paid by
the businesses, interest earned on loans, and an
expense fee paid from the Account (which was not
to exceed 8% of their initial first year grant funds).
Small, Minority and Women-Owned Businesses Account Page 4

--- Page 5 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Businesses Targeted by the Program
(cid:190) Managers were required to make loans to
minority businesses and women-owned
businesses certified by the Maryland
Department of Transportation, or small
businesses as defined by the U.S. Small
Business Administration. They were also
encouraged to make loans and investments in
microenterprises, which are businesses that
employ fewer than 10 persons with annual
revenue not exceeding $2 million.
(cid:190) Managers were required to allocate at least 50
percent of their grant funds to businesses in
three targeted areas, which generally consisted
of a ten mile radius surrounding the facilities
operating at that time in Hanover, Berlin, and
Perryville, MD.
(cid:190) There were certain prohibited business types,
loan purposes, and investment transactions.
Small, Minority and Women-Owned Businesses Account Page 5

--- Page 6 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Key Findings
(cid:190) The appropriate amount of VLT proceeds was
distributed to the Account for fiscal year 2014 and
the loans issued by managers we tested appeared
to be made to eligible businesses. Also, fund
managers awarded at least 50 percent of its grants
funds as loans to eligible businesses in targeted
areas in accordance with State law.
(cid:190) Although BPW and DBED had established certain
protocols and processes for awarding grants, and
directing and monitoring manager activities,
oversight and controls could be improved by
establishing Program goals, objectives, and related
measures to direct the lending and investing
activities and to measure and evaluate the success
of the Program and manager performance.
(cid:190) DBED oversight of the managers needs to be
improved in the areas of financial reporting,
contract compliance monitoring, and manager
performance.
Small, Minority and Women-Owned Businesses Account Page 6

--- Page 7 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Summary of Relevant Financial Activity
(cid:190) During this audit (FY 2014) we determined that
the Account has been properly credited with VLT
proceeds as specified by law, which totaled $8.4
million. FY 2014 disbursements to the 3
managers totaled $6.8 million, and a $50,000
transfer was made to DBED for administrative
costs as provided for in the MOU.
(cid:190) In FY 2014, managers provided 66 loans to
eligible businesses totaling $6.4 million and
collected $168,000 in interest and fees on these
loans. DBED reimbursed the managers $744,000
for Program administrative costs.
(cid:190) Subsequent to our audit period, BPW approved 4
new managers and authorized disbursements
totaling approximately $9.1 million to the now 7
managers. During fiscal year 2015, 64 loans
totaling $8.4 million were made by the 7
managers, and this activity will be subject to
review during our next audit of the Account.
Small, Minority and Women-Owned Businesses Account Page 7

--- Page 8 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Projection of Account Revenue
(cid:190)As of June 30, 2014, on a cumulative basis
(since inception), approximately $21 million had
been deposited into the Account from VLT
revenues and the Account balance was
approximately $12.5 million.
(cid:190)Based on DBED reports and the Bureau of
Revenue Estimates, during the next five years,
VLT revenue allocated to the Account is
projected to increase annually, with cumulative
revenues reaching $92.3 million by fiscal year
2019.
(cid:190)The most significant increase in annual VLT
revenue is expected to occur during fiscal 2017,
with the commencement of gaming operations
at the MGM National Harbor Casino in Prince
George’s County.
Small, Minority and Women-Owned Businesses Account Page 8

--- Page 9 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Program Goals and Objectives
(cid:190)Formal goals, objectives, and related measures had
not been established for directing the lending and
investment activities and for evaluating Program and
manager performance (Finding 1).
(cid:131) Neither BPW nor DBED had specified the overall
expectations as to what should be achieved by the
Program and the managers, beyond meeting the
requirements of State law.
(cid:131) Managing For Results performance data had been
established for a number of DBED programs, but
not for the Program.
(cid:131) The establishment of goals, objectives and related
outcome measures could help ensure DBED and
fund managers are working together to achieve the
desired results. For example, goals, objectives, and
measures could be established that address: 1)
desired economic impact, 2) targeted industries
(such as manufacturing and new technologies),
and 3) geographic distribution (for example, 12
counties were not served in FY 2014).
Small, Minority and Women-Owned Businesses Account Page 9

--- Page 10 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Monitoring of Fund Managers
(cid:190)DBED did not establish interim financial reporting
requirements and did not ensure managers
submitted audited financial statements of grant
activity in accordance with the contract
requirements (Finding 2).
(cid:131) Although managers were required annually to
submit audited financial statements by March
31 and an annual report detailing the use of
Program monies by January 31, no formal
interim grant reporting requirement had been
established.
(cid:131) One of the three managers had not met the
audit requirement for calendar year 2013.
Specifically, the manager’s audited financial
statements comingled its Program activity with
its other business operations. Additionally, the
financial statement reporting period for that
manager ended as of September 30, 2013,
instead of December 31, 2013, as required.
Small, Minority and Women-Owned Businesses Account Page 10

--- Page 11 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Monitoring of Fund Managers
(continued)
(cid:190)DBED had not established a formal process to verify
manager compliance with key Program contractual
requirements (Finding 3).
(cid:131) A documented process was not in place to review
manager activity to ensure that loans and
investments were only made to eligible
businesses, as defined in the contract.
(cid:131) DBED did not sufficiently verify that businesses
receiving loans were actually located in the
targeted areas. DBED did determine that
borrowers’ reported zip codes matched the
targeted areas, but did not verify the businesses
were actually located in those zip codes.
(cid:131) Managers’ underwriting processes were not
reviewed and DBED did not ensure that loans were
properly underwritten to reduce the risk of default.
(cid:131) DBED did not verify that managers had met the
insurance requirements established in the
agreements prior to the May 1, 2013 contract
award and commencement of the services.
Small, Minority and Women-Owned Businesses Account Page 11

--- Page 12 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Monitoring of Fund Managers
(continued)
(cid:190)DBED had not established a formal evaluation
process to assess the performance of managers,
including whether desired results were achieved
(Finding 4).
(cid:131) Such evaluations could be used by DBED to
recommend actions to improve manager
performance, and to help make decisions
regarding subsequent year grant fund
distributions and manager retention.
(cid:131) Requirements in manager agreements could be
used to evaluate fund manager performance.
For example, the managers were required to
provide specific plans for assuring geographic
and demographic distribution of the funds.
(cid:131) Other performance attributes could be
evaluated, including operational efficiency (the
percentage of grant funding spent on
administrative expenses) and lending and
collection effectiveness (such as percentage of
loan delinquencies, loan loss ratios).
Small, Minority and Women-Owned Businesses Account Page 12

--- Page 13 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Monitoring of Fund Managers
(continued)
(cid:190)DBED authorized a contract modification for one
manager without the necessary BPW approval
(Finding 5).
(cid:131) The contract modification in question increased
the one-time fund establishment fee from 8
percent of the initial grant funds to 12 percent,
without BPW approval (this fee represented the
amount of grant funds to be used to pay expenses
for administrative, actuarial, legal, and technical
services). Only BPW is authorized by law to set
the maximum amount of grant money that each
fund manager may use to pay expenses.
(cid:131) DBED approved the increase of $145,000 based
on a schedule of budgeted expenses, without any
support to justify the need. DBED did not
question why this one manager required a greater
percentage of grant funds to cover the initial
Program start-up costs than what was needed by
the other two managers. This reduced the amount
of funds available for loans.
Small, Minority and Women-Owned Businesses Account Page 13

--- Page 14 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
State Checking Accounts
(cid:190)DBED had not established effective oversight of the
transactions processed through the State checking
accounts maintained by the managers (Finding 6).
(cid:131) DBED began transferring grant funds to the
managers’ accounts in July 2013, but did not
establish account monitoring procedures until
January 2014 and monthly bank account
reconciliations were not required.
(cid:131) DBED did not obtain copies of cancelled checks
for the managers’ accounts directly from the
issuing bank to verify the reported payees.
(cid:131) One manager paid certain of its expenses from
its account totaling $75,611 without DBED’s
knowledge or required advanced approval.
(cid:131) DBED authorized payments for two managers’
expenses totaling $130,000 even though the
requests were untimely in accordance with the
manager agreements.
Small, Minority and Women-Owned Businesses Account Page 14

--- Page 15 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
State Checking Accounts
(continued)
(cid:190)DBED had not established comprehensive policies
governing the process for managers to request
additional grant funds to replenish their State
checking accounts (Finding 7).
(cid:131) Managers were not required to provide adequate
support to substantiate that they had fulfilled
DBED’s mandate that 80 percent of the funds
previously received had been loaned or
committed. Our test of 4 manager requests
totaling $2.75 million found that lists of closed
and pending loans were included, but not
supporting documents, such as loan closing and
commitment documents and cancelled checks.
(cid:131) DBED had not established a policy stipulating the
period of time within which pending loans had to
be closed before funds can be requested.
Consequently, fund managers could have access
to funds well in advance of actual need.
Small, Minority and Women-Owned Businesses Account Page 15

--- Page 16 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Conclusions
BPW and DBED should
(cid:190) establish comprehensive Program goals,
objectives, and related measures;
(cid:190) enhance manager financial reporting
requirements and enforce compliance;
(cid:190) verify manager compliance with key contractual
requirements;
(cid:190) establish a formal process to annually evaluate
manager performance;
(cid:190) ensure that all manager contract modifications
are submitted to BPW for its review and approval;
(cid:190) establish effective manager checking account
monitoring procedures and controls;
(cid:190) determine the appropriateness of certain DBED
financial transactions with the managers in
accordance with the manager agreements; and
(cid:190) establish comprehensive formal procedures
governing manager requests for grant funds.
Small, Minority and Women-Owned Businesses Account Page 16