Title: Presentation to the Senate Budget and Taxation Subcommittee - Office of Public Defender

Related Report Dated 2/10/2011
Date: 02/25/2011
Type: Presentations to the Legislature
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5a9daf2acc9d72387404dba7
Extracted: 2025-06-18T13:32:47.938558
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Office of Public Defender
Report dated February 10, 2011

--- Page 2 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Audit Overview
(cid:190) The Office of the Public Defender (OPD) provides
legal services to eligible indigent individuals
charged with violating State, county, and/or
municipal laws involving possible incarceration.
(cid:190) OPD services are provided in criminal and juvenile
proceedings, post-conviction proceedings,
probation and parole revocations, involuntary
commitments to public or private institutions, and
termination of parental rights proceedings.
(cid:190) FY 2010 operating expenditures totaled $86
million, primarily for payroll costs. Services are
provided through a central headquarters and 41
field offices (including 12 district offices).
(cid:190) The audit report included seven findings, one of
which was repeated from the preceding audit
report.
Office of the Public Defender
Page 2

--- Page 3 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Audit Overview
Prior Performance Audit
In response to a request included in the 2008 Joint
Chairmen’s Report, on November 19, 2009 OLA
issued a performance audit report on certain aspects
of OPD operations. Due to the short period of time
since we issued our performance audit report, we did
not include an assessment of the status of these
findings in this report.
Recent Court Cases Could Impact OPD Operations
Two recent court cases have and/or could have a
significant impact on the OPD eligibility determination
process and the scope of services for which OPD will
need to provide legal representation.
According to OPD records, there has been a 10%
increase in their caseload as a result of one of these
cases and the other case, which could further
increase OPD caseloads, is currently under appeal.
Office of the Public Defender
Page 3

--- Page 4 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Key Audit Issues
(cid:190) OPD policies and procedures for determining
client financial eligibility were not sufficiently
comprehensive.
(cid:190) OPD lacked adequate procedures to ensure
administrative and court-ordered fees due from
clients were recorded in the accounts receivable
records and were pursued for collection. Certain
internal controls over accounts receivable were
not in place.
(cid:190) OPD spent approximately $1.9 million during FYs
2007 through 2010 for two contractual
employees to perform network and database
management services instead of pursuing less
costly State positions to perform these services.
Office of the Public Defender
Page 4

--- Page 5 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Client Eligibility
OPD district offices determine the financial eligibility of
individuals requesting services. During CY 2009, OPD
opened 216,500 new cases.
(cid:190) Policies and procedures for determining eligibility
were not comprehensive. (Finding 1)
(cid:131) Applicants were not required to submit
documentation to support reported expenses,
which were used to determine whether the client
had the ability to pay for legal representation.
(cid:131) The policies and procedures did not define the
circumstances under which applicants’ reported
income and expenses would be verified with
available third party data as authorized by State
law. According to OPD management, no such
verifications have been conducted.
(cid:190) Eligibility decisions were not always properly
supported, as required by the OPD Intake Manual,
and there was a lack of evidence that such
determinations were subject to independent
supervisory review and approval (Finding 2).
Office of the Public Defender
Page 5

--- Page 6 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Client Billing
Background
State regulations require applicants seeking
representation to enter into an Administrative Fee
Agreement (AFA) at the time of application, which
commits them to pay OPD an administrative fee of $25
for juveniles and $50 for adults. State law also
provides for the applicant to reimburse OPD for the
cost of the legal services in the amount, time, and
method of payment determined by the court.
OPD intake workers enter the applicable fees into
OPD’s case management system and, on a monthly
basis, the fees are electronically interfaced with OPD’s
accounts receivable system.
As of June 30, 2010, accounts receivable related to
these fees and court-determined reimbursements
totaled $19.4 million and $3.9 million, respectively.
Collections on these accounts totaled $1.7 million
during FY 2010, of which $1.1 million was collected
via the State’s Tax Refund Intercept Program (TRIP).
Office of the Public Defender
Page 6

--- Page 7 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Client Billing (continued)
OPD lacked adequate procedures to ensure
administrative fees were recorded in the accounts
receivables records and were pursued for collection.
(Finding 3)
(cid:131) Fees for 40,000 cases opened during FY 2010,
totaling approximately $1.9 million, were not
recorded in the accounts receivable records to
help ensure they are tracked and pursued for
collection.
(cid:131) OPD management advised us that these
accounts were recorded in the case
management system (CMS), but they did not
interface (post ) to the receivable records
because of errors in some of the applicant data
in the CMS.
(cid:131) The failure to record assessed fees in the
accounts receivable records has been
commented upon in our five preceding audit
reports dating back to December 1995.
Office of the Public Defender
Page 7

--- Page 8 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Client Billing (continued)
OPD did not assess administrative fees in certain
instances and did not ensure clients were billed for
court-ordered fees as required by State regulations.
(Finding 4)
(cid:131) According to our estimates, during FY 2010,
administrative fees totaling $330,000 were not
assessed on certain applicants. For example, OPD
did not assess fees totaling $78,400 on
applicants that were denied services. State
regulations require that “an applicant seeking
representation by the office shall be required to
enter into an agreement to pay an administrative
fee at the time of application.”
(cid:131) OPD had not established adequate procedures for
ensuring clients were billed for court-ordered fees.
OPD attorneys were not required to report, for
each case, whether or not a fee was assessed by
the court . Also, there was no independent
verification that amounts assessed were properly
recorded.
Office of the Public Defender
Page 8

--- Page 9 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Client Billing (continued)
OPD did not properly segregate accounts receivable
duties and did not require independent approval for
critical transactions (Finding 5).
(cid:131) One OPD employee had unilateral control over client
accounts receivable records and related activity,
including processing adjustments, deleting client
accounts, and maintaining the related accounts
receivable control account.
(cid:131) There was no documented supervisory review and
approval for accounts receivable transactions or for
any adjustments made to the client accounts during
the audit period.
(cid:131) Other than CCU abatements, non-cash credits did
not require prior supervisory approval, and OPD
could not readily generate a report of all
adjustments or deletions to the client accounts. In
FY 2008, OPD abated 574,563 client accounts,
totaling $28 million and, in FY 2010, processed
$103,000 in credits due to duplicate AFA numbers.
Office of the Public Defender
Page 9

--- Page 10 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Information Technology Services
OPD expended approximately $1.9 million during
fiscal years 2007 through 2010 (average annual cost
of $464,000) for two individuals, under contract, to
perform network and database management,
instead of pursuing State positions to perform these
services. OPD advised that these services would be
needed for the foreseeable future. (Finding 6)
(cid:131) Although the aforementioned contract was
procured with Department of Budget and
Management (DBM) and Department of
Information Technology approvals, OPD should
have worked with DBM to authorize two full-time
State positions to perform the services as
provided for in State law.
(cid:131) The use of State employees for these positions
could result in significant cost savings. For
example, a database specialist supervisor, which
earns a FY 2010 salary of up to $78,173 under
the State’s personnel system, has job
responsibilities similar to one of these contractual
positions.
Office of the Public Defender
Page 10

--- Page 11 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Conclusion
OPD needs to ensure that :
(cid:190) Policies and procedures for determining client
financial eligibility are sufficiently
comprehensive.
(cid:190) Administrative and court-ordered fees due
from clients are recorded in the accounts
receivable records and pursued for collection.
(cid:190) Accounts receivable duties are properly
segregated and critical transactions are
subject to independent review and approval.
(cid:190) It pursues obtaining State positions (when
available and cost beneficial) to perform
ongoing operational functions instead of using
contractors.
Office of the Public Defender
Page 11