Title: Presentation to the Joint Audit Committee - Department of Human Resources - Social Services Administration

Related Report Dated 3/16/2011
Date: 09/20/2011
Type: Presentations to the Legislature
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5a9daf2bcc9d72387404dbd7
Extracted: 2025-06-18T13:39:13.882061
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Department of Human
Resources
Social Services Administration
Report dated March 16, 2011
Presentation to the Joint Audit Committee
Bruce A. Myers, CPA
Joshua S. Adler, CPA, CFE
Elaine D. Portnoy
September 20, 2011

--- Page 2 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Audit Overview
 The Social Services Administration (SSA)
supervises, directs and monitors the social
services programs (including the out-of-home
placement program) conducted by the local
departments of social services (LDSSs), which are
located in each of the State’s 24 local
subdivisions.
 SSA’s programs are designed to prevent or
remedy abuse, neglect and exploitation of
children and families.
 According to SSA’s records, the FY 2010
operating costs of SSA and the applicable
services by the LDSSs, including payments to
group care and foster care providers, totaled
$594 million.
 The audit report included 6 findings, 3 of which
were repeated from the preceding audit report.
DHR - Social Services Administration
Page 2

--- Page 3 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Key Audit Issues
 SSA was unable to effectively monitor the State’s
child welfare activities and the local departments of
social services (LDSSs) since certain information
recorded in the Children’s Electronic Social Services
Information Exchange (CHESSIE) was incomplete
and unreliable. CHESSIE is SSA’s automated child
welfare information system and serves as a
statewide child welfare, foster care, and adoption
case management tool.
 SSA did not establish procedures to effectively
monitor foster and kinship care placements to
ensure that children were not placed with providers
in which there was credible evidence of abuse and
neglect.
 Certain deficiencies were identified regarding
compliance with foster care service requirements
and the receipt of certain reports from group home
providers.
DHR - Social Services Administration
Page 3

--- Page 4 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
CHESSIE
Background:
 CHESSIE serves as the official record for services
administered by SSA and is intended to provide
workers at the LDSSs with a common,
comprehensive information system and provide SSA
management with comprehensive and consistent
monitoring and data reporting capabilities.
 CHESSIE consists of seven modules and includes
such areas as in-home/family preservation, out-of-
home placement, and abuse/neglect investigations.
Certain critical information from CHESSIE is
reported periodically to the Federal government.
 CHESSIE was implemented in all LDSSs between
February 2006 and January 2007. According to
SSA’s records, since CHESSIE’s inception in March
1996 through June 2010, approximately $90
million has been expended for development and
operational purposes.
DHR - Social Services Administration
Page 4

--- Page 5 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
CHESSIE (continued)
Certain CHESSIE modules, including those for
abuse/neglect investigations, contained incomplete
and unreliable data hampering SSA’s ability to
effectively monitor and report child welfare activities
performed by the LDSSs. (Finding 1)
 We compared CHESSIE information to manual LDSS
records from June 2009 and noted material
discrepancies (Exhibit A). For example, CHESSIE’s
records had 1,270 fewer cases of abuse/neglect
allegations than the LDSSs records, which are
deemed more reliable.
 SSA has not been able to use CHESSIE to effectively
monitor the LDSSs’ child welfare activities, such as
the timeliness of investigations of child abuse.
Under State law such investigations must be
conducted by the LDSSs within 24 hours of the
allegation.
 SSA was aware that CHESSIE information was
incomplete, yet it was used as the source for semi-
annual federal reporting.
DHR - Social Services Administration
Page 5

--- Page 6 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Out-of-Home Placements
Background:
 State law requires SSA to establish an out-of-
home placement program for children. Through
this program, SSA primarily places children with
foster care, kinship care and group home
providers.
 The primary distinction between foster and
kinship care is that foster care providers are paid
by SSA and are not related to the child that is
placed while kinship providers are not paid and
are related to the child that is placed.
 As of June 2010, there were 8,013 out-of-home
placements, with 5,894 in foster or kinship care
and 2,119 in other placements (e.g., group
homes). Payments for out-of-home providers
totaled $222 million in FY 2010.
DHR - Social Services Administration
Page 6

--- Page 7 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Out-of-Home Placements (continued)
SSA did not effectively monitor out-of-home
placements to ensure compliance with State
regulations that children not be placed with certain
providers where there was credible evidence of child
abuse or neglect. (Finding 2)
 A query of CHESSIE, which was conducted by SSA at
OLA’s request, identified 6 providers who from April
2008 to June 2010 had cared for 32 children even
though there was credible evidence of abuse or
neglect against those providers prior to or during
these placements.
 One foster care provider had received 23
placements that lasted, on average, 34 days even
though there was credible evidence of neglect by
the provider prior to those placements.
 Due to aforementioned CHESSIE reliability issues,
we confirmed these results with SSA management
and/or LDSS officials.
DHR - Social Services Administration
Page 7

--- Page 8 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Out-of-Home Placements (continued)
SSA had not ensured compliance with State and
federal requirements intended to ensure that all
children in foster care receive vital services necessary
for their emotional, physical, and educational well-
being in a safe environment. (Finding 3)
 SSA did not have a process to ensure that foster
care children received annual medical exams, as
required by State regulations. For 17 foster care
children selected for review, SSA could not provide
any documentation of medical exams for 9 children.
 SSA did not achieve the required 90% success rate
for any of the seven outcome measures (including
safety & child and family well-being) in the January
2010 federal Child and Family Services Review
(CFSR). A comparison of the January 2010 report
and the preceding CFSR report dated May 2007,
showed that SSA’s performance declined in each of
the outcome measures (Exhibit B).
DHR - Social Services Administration
Page 8

--- Page 9 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Out-of-Home Placements (continued)
SSA did not have a process in place to ensure that
reports from foster care group home providers detailing
the disposition of overpayments retained from prior
years were obtained. (Finding 4)
 Contracts with foster care group home providers
stipulate that providers can retain overpayments
totaling up to 10% of the annual payments received,
for certain allowable purposes. The providers are to
annually report the disposition of the overpayments
and remaining overpayments that are not used for
the allowable purposes are to be refunded to SSA. In
FY 2008, overpayments totaled $5.8 million.
 As of May 2010, our review of five providers with
overpayments from FY 2008 totaling $800,000
disclosed that none of the providers submitted the
required report and SSA had not taken any
documented follow-up action. Consequently, SSA
was unable to determine if the funds were properly
expended or should have been refunded to SSA.
DHR - Social Services Administration
Page 9

--- Page 10 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Conclusion
SSA should:
 Ensure the completeness and reliability of
CHESSIE information to enable effective
monitoring and reporting of the State’s child
welfare activities.
 Establish procedures to ensure that children are
not placed with providers when there is credible
evidence of child abuse or neglect.
 Take appropriate action to ensure compliance
with foster care service requirements.
 Establish a process to obtain and review all
required annual provider reports detailing the
disposition of overpayments retained from prior
years.
DHR - Social Services Administration
Page 10

--- Page 11 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Exhibit A (Finding 1)
DHR - Social Services Administration
Page 11

--- Page 12 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Exhibit B (Finding 3)
DHR - Social Services Administration
Page 12