Title: Presentation to the Senate Budget and Taxation Subcommittee - Department of Health and Mental Hygiene - Health Regulatory Commissions

Related Report Dated 1/7/2013
Date: 03/07/2013
Type: Presentations to the Legislature
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5a9daf2ccc9d72387404dc27
Extracted: 2025-06-18T13:46:12.594794
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Department of Health and
Mental Hygiene
Health Regulatory Commissions
Report dated January 7, 2013

--- Page 2 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Audit Overview
The Department of Health and Mental Hygiene - Health
Regulatory Commissions (HRC) consists of three
independent commissions:
Health Services Cost Review Commission (HSCRC).
HSCRC’s responsibilities include establishing,
reviewing, and approving hospital billing rates,
monitoring hospital compliance with approved billing
rates, and collecting data on hospital utilization. As of
September 2011, HSCRC’s rate-setting
authority applied to 53 hospitals, with combined
annual revenues exceeding $13 billion.
Maryland Health Care Commission (MHCC). MHCC’s
responsibilities include administering a program
that provides reimbursements from the Maryland
Trauma Physician Services Fund to trauma
physicians for services rendered to uncompensated
care patients treated at Maryland trauma centers.
Maryland Community Health Resources
Commission (MCHRC). MCHRC is responsible for
providing support to community health resources.
DHMH – Health Regulatory Commissions
Page 2

--- Page 3 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Key Audit Issues
 HSCRC’s projections indicate significant potential
difficulties in the State’s ability to maintain compliance
with its unique Medicare Waiver granted by the federal
government, which allows payments to hospitals to be
based on rates set by HSCRC.
 HSCRC rate-setting computations were not subject to
independent review and HSCRC did not review for
reasonableness certain rates unilaterally set by
hospitals (accounting for 10 to 20% of revenues).
 HSCRC monitoring of hospitals did not include a review
of billing system controls to ensure that hospitals were
billing in accordance with HSCRC rates. Also hospital
billing overcharges identified by the hospitals’ auditors
were not fully investigated. OLA estimated the effect of
overcharges indentified in 2009 audits to be at least
$13.2 million, dating back to 2001.
 MHCC did not verify the propriety of disbursements from
the Maryland Trauma Physician Services Fund, which
awards reimbursements to trauma physicians that
provided uncompensated trauma care.
DHMH – Health Regulatory Commissions
Page 3

--- Page 4 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Medicare Waiver Comp l iance
 The Waiver allows Maryland to establish an all-
payer system (including Medicare, Medicaid, private
insurers, and uninsured individuals) which pays
hospitals based on the rates set by HSCRC, regardless
of the payer. Maryland is the only State that has this
federal Waiver, which was granted in 1977.
 Waiver requirements: 1) The rate of growth in
Medicare payments to Maryland hospitals per inpatient
hospital admission (average cost) from 1981 to the
present must be no greater than the rate of growth in
Medicare payments nationally over the same period.
2) All payers must pay based on the same rates.
 HSCRC tries to maintain a “waiver cushion” (the
amount Medicare payments to Maryland hospitals
could grow before the State failed to meet Waiver
Requirement 1) of 10%, but as of December 2011 it
was 3.08%, with future projected decreases.
 HSCRC has identified reasons for the decrease and
estimated the impact of losing the Waiver to the
State’s hospitals at approximately $1 billion in lost
Medicare reimbursements.
DHMH – Health Regulatory Commissions
Page 4

--- Page 5 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Hospital Monitoring
Background:
 In setting hospital rates, HSCRC’s goal is to assure
that:
 The total costs of all services offered by a hospital
are reasonable.
 Aggregate hospital rates are reasonably related to its
aggregate costs.
 Rates are set equitably among all purchasers of
hospital services.
 HSCRC establishes hospital-specific and service-
specific rates for all inpatient, hospital-based
outpatient, and emergency services resulting in unique
service rates for each hospital.
HSCRC enters into annual written agreements (rate
orders) with each regulated hospital.
HSCRC monitors compliance with rate orders using
hospital-reported data and annual independent
audits and agreed-upon procedure reviews.
DHMH – Health Regulatory Commissions
Page 5

--- Page 6 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Hospital Monitoring (con tinued)
HSCRC did not have a process to determine if
hospitals had established adequate controls over
their billing systems to ensure that they were
properly billing in accordance with the rate orders.
(Finding 1)
 Each regulated hospital uses an electronic billing
system, which effectively stores the HSCRC’s
approved rates, to generate hospital bills.
 OLA discussions with two large payers disclosed
that the payers do not verify the accuracy of
hospital billing rates since they rely on HSCRC for
this purpose.
 Inadequate controls over billing systems could
allow billing errors to occur and remain
undetected (see Finding 2).
DHMH – Health Regulatory Commissions
Page 6

--- Page 7 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Hospital Monitoring (con tinued)
HSCRC did not adequately investigate the impact of
hospital billing overcharges identified through the
required annual agreed-upon procedures reviews nor
expand reviews to determine if overcharges occurred in
other medical procedures. (Finding 2)
HSCRC did not determine:
 how long identified overcharges had been occurring,
 the extent of prior years’ overcharges, and
 the patients and payers who were overcharged.
FY 2009 agreed-upon procedures reviews disclosed
that 4 hospitals charged for certain procedures (one
at each hospital) at rates ranging from 67% to 1,880%
higher than allowed by HSCRC for certain medical
procedures, yet HSCRC took no formal action other
than instructing the hospitals to charge the correct
rates in future billings for those procedures.
As of June 2011, OLA estimated that the related past
overcharges (dating back to 2001) totaled at least
$13.2 million, of which at least $3.7 million was
overcharged to the State’s Medicaid program.
DHMH – Health Regulatory Commissions
Page 7

--- Page 8 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Hospital Rate Setting
 HSCRC did not periodically review documentation to
support the reasonableness of the billing rates for
certain unique inpatient and outpatient medical
procedures (e.g., certain eye exams, specialized
procedures) established by the hospitals. (Finding 3)
 A periodic review of the reasonableness of these
hospital-determined rates is necessary to ensure
the billing rates are consistent with comparable
procedures, as required by HSCRC policies.
 While not specifically tracked, HSCRC estimates
that these account for 10 to 20% of hospital
revenues.
 Although HSCRC’s annual rate order preparation
process involves multiple internal meetings and
reviews by the hospitals, the formal underlying
calculations prepared by HSCRC staff were not
subject to an independent documented supervisory
review. (Finding 4)
DHMH – Health Regulatory Commissions
Page 8

--- Page 9 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Trauma Physician Reim b ursements
MHCC did not require its contractor, which processes
claims from the Maryland Trauma Physician Services
Fund, to confirm that trauma patients on
reimbursement claims were listed on the Maryland
Trauma Registry (MTR), as required by State law.
(Finding 5)
 OLA’s match of the contractor’s approved claims
processed from January 2009 through March 2011
to Registry records identified 1,357 claims totaling
$290,000 for which the patient trauma registry
numbers in the contractor’s claims records did not
exist in the MTR dating back to July 1, 2006, as
required by State law.
 OLA tested 20 claims and found that for 16 claims
totaling $36,000 the related patient was not listed
on the MTR on or after July 1, 2006, including 7 for
which the actual dates of service in the contractor’s
records were prior to July 1, 2006.
 During FYs 2009 to 2011, approved reimbursement
claims from the Fund totaled $16.2 million.
DHMH – Health Regulatory Commissions
Page 9

--- Page 10 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Conclusion
HSCRC needs to:
 Establish procedures to ensure hospitals implement
proper controls over the maintenance, updates, and
management of hospital billing systems.
 Fully investigate overcharges to determine their
extent, impact, and the appropriate action to be
taken, and develop a policy to expand agreed-upon
procedure reviews to include additional medical
procedures, as necessary.
 Establish procedures to review the documentation
supporting the reasonableness of hospital-assigned
billing rates for unique medical procedures.
 Establish procedures to perform a documented
independent supervisory review of hospital rate
orders on a test basis.
MHCC should require its contractor to confirm trauma
patients listed on reimbursement claims to the MTR to
determine eligibility and MHCC should investigate the
1,357 claims noted and take appropriate action.
DHMH – Health Regulatory Commissions
Page 10