Title: Presentation to the House Appropriations Subcommittee - Office of the Public Defender (Performance)

Related Report Dated 11/19/2009
Date: 02/03/2010
Type: Presentations to the Legislature
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5a9daf27cc9d72387404db67
Extracted: 2025-06-18T09:16:52.774948
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Office of the Public Defender
Performance Audit Report
Report Dated November 19, 2009

--- Page 2 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Background - Organization
(cid:190) OPD consists of 7 divisions and 12 district
offices located throughout the State.
(cid:190) Legal services are provided to indigent
persons at all stages of criminal proceedings.
(cid:190) Staffing increased from 763 positions in FY
02 to 1,007 in FY 08. Attorney positions
increased from 420 to 565 over that period.
(cid:190) Due to budgetary cost constraints, the
number of positions was reduced to 928 for
FY 2010 (per the FY 11 budget book).
Office of the Public Defender Performance Audit Page 2

--- Page 3 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Background – Financial
(cid:190) OPD received deficiency appropriations for 12
of the 15 fiscal years from 1995 to 2009
totaling $21.9 million.
(cid:190) For fiscal year 2009, expenditures totaled
$91.1 million, a 56% increase since FY 02.
This increase was primarily due to the increase
in positions.
(cid:190) FY 09 expenditures did not exceed OPD’s
original appropriation plus a $3.5 million
deficiency appropriation.
Office of the Public Defender Performance Audit Page 3

--- Page 4 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Background – Other Information
(cid:190) OPD contracted with National Center for State
Courts to develop caseload standards using 2003
– 2004 data.
(cid:190) Adoption of caseload standards and comparison of
these standards with existing staffing levels and
caseloads indicated a need for substantial
increase in resources to meet standards.
(cid:190) In FY 04, OPD implemented an integrated
automated case management system , at a cost of
$4 million, to track detailed case information and
provide caseload statistics and data for
management oversight.
(cid:190) Based on available data, Maryland costs per case
appear to be lower than other states with a similar
office structure, primarily due to a greater use of
in-house resources by OPD.
Office of the Public Defender Performance Audit Page 4

--- Page 5 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Audit Objectives
1. Assess the effectiveness of OPD’s budgetary
practices and related procedures regarding
funding decisions, including budgeting and
financial operations.
2. Review procedures and controls over case
management and assess the impact of
changes implemented since OLA’s
November 2001 performance audit.
3. Determine the current status of OLA
recommendations contained in that 2001
audit report.
Office of the Public Defender Performance Audit Page 5

--- Page 6 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Audit Methodology
(cid:190) Evaluate the OPD budget process by reviewing
procedures for estimating future costs and
examining documentation to support budget
requests, including requests for funding over the
budget target.
(cid:190) Reviewed controls and processes to control costs
and monitoring spending.
(cid:190) Interviewed district staff for case intake and
reporting procedures.
(cid:190) Tested accuracy of automated case management
records.
(cid:190) Compiled case statistics and analyzed caseloads.
Office of the Public Defender Performance Audit Page 6

--- Page 7 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Key Audit Issues
• OPD frequently required deficiency appropriations
to fund operating expenditures as it was unable to
manage its costs within the allotted budget.
• OPD frequently carried forward unfunded
expenditures into the following fiscal year.
• Funding issues appear to be rooted in difference
between OPD anticipated needs and budget
targets.
• Budgets included some unrealistic assumptions to
meet targets.
• Caseloads per attorney decreased but still often
significantly exceeded recommended caseloads.
• OPD generally made substantial progress in
complying with the recommendations made in the
November 2001 audit report.
Office of the Public Defender Performance Audit Page 7

--- Page 8 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Objective 1 – Budgetary and Funding Issues
(cid:190) OPD received deficiency appropriations for 5 of 8
fiscal years from 2002 to 2009 and has carried
over unfunded expenditures in 3 of the past 5
fiscal years. (Finding 1)
(cid:190) Excluding deficiency appropriations, operating
(non-payroll) expenditures exceeded the related
appropriation each year from 2005 to 2009 and
payroll costs exceeded the related appropriation
4 out of 6 years from FY 04 to 09.
(cid:190) Excess expenditures have a variety of causes
including an increase in panel attorney fee rate
in FY06, lower than expected turnover rate in
FY08 and higher panel attorney costs in FY 09.
Office of the Public Defender Performance Audit Page 8

--- Page 9 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Objective 1 – Budgetary and Funding Issues
(cid:190) 90 percent of expenditures relate to salaries
and benefits and other personnel costs.
Historically, OPD has staggered the hiring of
new staff throughout the fiscal year as a
method to control costs. However, these
actions have not been sufficient in meeting
appropriated amounts for payroll costs.
(cid:190) OPD ‘s position has historically been that the
legal mandate to provide representation to all
eligible clients who request services is more
critical than reducing costs to meet
appropriations.
(cid:190) Due to the high percentage of salary related
costs, OPD has limited ability to influence total
expenditures through cost-cutting in other
areas.
Office of the Public Defender Performance Audit Page 9

--- Page 10 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Objective 1 – Budgetary and Funding Issues
(cid:190) OPD budget submissions sometimes used
unrealistic amounts to meet targets. Budgets
submitted by OPD met DBM established
targets. (Finding 2)
(cid:131) FY 08 – Artificially high turnover of 7%
(DBM budget instructions specify a rate of
2%-4%). Actual turnover was less than 4%
(which is in line with historical averages).
(cid:131) FY 09 – No funds requested for panel
attorney fees (which average $4 to 5
million per year)
(cid:131) FY 10 – Reduced amounts for panel
attorney fees and other costs to meet
budgeted target. Used highest specified
turnover rate.
(cid:190) Financial monitoring could be improved,
including better tracking of certain costs such
as panel attorneys. (Finding 3)
Office of the Public Defender Performance Audit Page 10

--- Page 11 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Objective 2 – Case Management
(cid:190) Overall average caseloads per attorney have
decreased since CY 03 due to additional
positions and a relatively stable caseload.
However, caseloads for a number of specific
districts and types of cases have increased.
(Finding 6)
(cid:190) CY 07 caseloads for many districts exceeded
established standards by 25% or more for at
least one type of case. For example, the Circuit
Court caseload per attorney exceeded
recommended standards by over 25% in 9 of
12 districts. In 2 districts, caseloads for all
types of cases exceeded recommended
standards by more than 25%. OPD did not
routinely reallocate attorney positions to
minimize caseload disparities. (Finding 7)
Office of the Public Defender Performance Audit Page 11

--- Page 12 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Objective 2 – Case Management
(cid:190) OPD calculations for additional attorneys needs
to meet caseload standards understated the
actual number of attorneys needed. OPD
prepared the calculation in a report submitted
to the General Assembly in August 2008.
(Finding 8)
(cid:190) The case management system was not used as
a tool to monitor the efficiency of operations.
(Finding 10)
(cid:190) While the audit disclosed certain issues with
annual reviews of case management system
statistics, our testing found that the
information recorded in the system was
generally accurate. (Findings 11 and 12)
Office of the Public Defender Performance Audit Page 12

--- Page 13 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Objective 3 – Current Status of Prior Report
(cid:190) The audit found that OPD generally made
substantial progress in implementing the
recommendation of our November 2001 audit,
see the Table below.
Table – Current Status of Recommendations Contained in
November 2001 Performance Audit Report
Finding Recommendation Current Status
OPD, in conjunction with DBM, identify the operational and
funding requirements for a comprehensive case management
Substantial
1 system. As part of the process, OPD should conduct research
Progress
to identify and evaluate other states’ systems for use as a
benchmark and to save development time and costs
OPD establish caseload standards for its attorneys and
2 compare its actual experience to these standards. OPD should Completed
present this data in its annual budget requests.
OPD, in conjunction with DBM, identify all inadequacies related
to its budget requests and implement corrective action(s). OPD
should obtain agreement from DBM on interim supporting Substantial
3
documentation that will be acceptable until OPD could fully Progress
comply with DBM’s requirements for reliable caseload
statistics.
Office of the Public Defender Performance Audit Page 13

--- Page 14 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Objective 3 – Current Status of Prior Report
Table – Current Status of Recommendations Contained in
November 2001 Performance Audit Report
Finding Recommendation Current Status
OPD use available information to make reasonable budgetary
4 In Progress
requests.
OPD develop and implement an appropriate system to ensure
compliance with the Managing for Results requirements. OPD
OLA did not follow
5 should ensure that its strategic planning process links MFR
up
goals, objectives and measures with budget requests and
initiatives.
OPD use a reasonable employee turnover rate that is based on
actual experience and include appropriate justifications for Substantial
6
increases to non-payroll budget items when preparing its Progress
budget requests.
OPD implement an appropriate process to improve the
7 timeliness of internal financial reporting and monitoring of No Progress
budgets for the divisions and district offices.
OPD should identify the training needs and develop an
appropriate training programs for managers and other key staff
8 with financial management and budgeting responsibilities. Completed
OPD should include appropriate funding for this fiscal training
in its annual budget requests
Office of the Public Defender Performance Audit Page 14

--- Page 15 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Conclusion
Since 2001, OPD made improvements to its
budgeting, fiscal monitoring and case
management processes. Further actions are
needed to meet budgets, control costs and ensure
efficient operations.
Office of the Public Defender Performance Audit Page 15