Title: Presentation to the Joint Audit Committee - Department of Human Resources - Child Support Enforcement Administration

Related Report Dated 9/1/2011
Date: 09/20/2011
Type: Presentations to the Legislature
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5a9daf2bcc9d72387404dbd5
Extracted: 2025-06-18T13:38:51.496180
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Department of Human
Resources
Child Support Enforcement
Administration
Report dated September 1, 2011
Presentation to the Joint Audit Committee
Bruce A. Myers, CPA
Joshua S. Adler, CPA, CFE
James M. Fowler
Robert A. Wells, CPA
September 20, 2011

--- Page 2 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Audit Overview
 The Child Support Enforcement Administration
(CSEA) is responsible for operating a statewide child
support program and provides services to both the
noncustodial and custodial parents, which include
the establishment of paternity and child support
orders, the collection of support payments, and the
distribution of such funds.
 Local child support offices, other state and local
government agencies and a private contractor
perform various child support services.
 According to CSEA records, during FFY 2010
(October 2009 – September 2010), the Statewide
child support collections totaled $530 million and
the caseload totaled 248,000. As of September 30,
2010, the statewide unpaid child support due from
noncustodial parents totaled $1.72 billion relating
to 165,403 cases.
 The audit report included 11 findings, 5 of which
were repeated from the preceding audit report.
DHR - Child Support Enforcement Administration
Page 2

--- Page 3 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Key Audit Issues
 CSEA was not effectively using certain enforcement
tools to help collect unpaid child support owed by
noncustodial parents, including:
 Wage withholding orders,
 Federal Office of Child Support Enforcement
(OCSE) match results,
 Occupational license suspensions,
 Bank account seizures,
 Driver’s license suspensions, and
 Vendor payment intercepts from the Comptroller
of Maryland
 Local office monitoring needs improvement; CSEA
did not ensure that:
 the Baltimore City contractor complied with all
contract terms,
 a local office adequately and timely reviewed
delinquent accounts, and
 sufficient procedures were established to identify
payments to deceased custodial parents.
DHR - Child Support Enforcement Administration
Page 3

--- Page 4 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Enforcement Procedures
Background:
 Child support services are generally performed in
local offices throughout the State with oversight
provided by CSEA. CSEA has a number of
enforcement tools that it can utilize when
noncustodial parents do not pay child support.
 Wage withholding accounted for $356 million or 67%
of all child support collections in FFY 2010. The
primary sources for identifying wages are the State’s
new hire registry and the National Directory of New
Hires and wage data from the federal OCSE. By
State law, all employers in Maryland are required to
report their newly hired employees within 20 days.
 Other collection tools include seizing funds in
personal bank accounts, suspending driver’s and
occupational licenses and intercepting State vendor
payments.
DHR - Child Support Enforcement Administration
Page 4

--- Page 5 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Enforcement Procedures (continued)
CSEA did not utilize the wage withholding to the
fullest extent possible. (finding 1)
 OLA matched a CSEA file of noncustodial
delinquent parents with a file from the
Department of Labor, Licensing and Regulation
(DLLR) of employees with wages from the 3rd
quarter of CY 2010. The match identified 8,763
individuals with $88 million in child support
arrearages who had $43 million in wages, but
had no wages withheld.
 OLA tested 22 of these cases and found that, for
12 cases with 3rd quarter wages totaling
$191,000 and arrearages totaling $336,000,
wage withholding was appropriate, but was not
used. OLA found that CSEA’s automated system
had prompted these 12 cases for manual review
by local child support offices based on Federal
OCSE notification, but this was not done.
DHR - Child Support Enforcement Administration
Page 5

--- Page 6 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Enforcement Procedures (Finding 1 continued)
 For 8 of the aforementioned 12 cases, the
employers failed to report the hiring of non-
custodial parents via the State’s new hire registry,
as required by State law. These 8 cases had 3rd
quarter wages of $147,000 and arrearages of
$255,000.
 These conditions were the result of CSEA not
effectively monitoring the local offices and the
contractor who maintains the new hire registry.
 A daily report of cases prompted for manual
review is available to each local office, but we
were advised by two jurisdictions that
accounted for 61% of delinquent child support
owed as of September 2010 that this report
was not used.
 Certain information needed from DLLR to
ensure the timely reporting of new hires by
employers was unavailable due to DLLR’s
concerns about providing it to a private vendor.
DHR - Child Support Enforcement Administration
Page 6

--- Page 7 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Enforcement Procedures (continued)
CSEA did not effectively use occupational license
suspension as an enforcement tool. State law permits
CSEA to request 15 State licensing authorities to
suspend applicable licenses of noncustodial parents
who are delinquent in support by >120 days.(Finding 2)
 Although CSEA matched delinquent accounts with
licensee records from 7 authorities, the high
precision level set by CSEA limited the usefulness of
the matches.
 CSEA did not obtain licensing data from 8 licensing
authorities. OLA obtained data from 4 of the 8
authorities, which contained 477,837 licensees.
 OLA’s match of files from 10 authorities to CSEA
records identified 6,966 individuals with
occupational licenses who owed child support
totaling $47 million. OLA tested 25 individuals and
found 17 individuals with delinquent payments
totaling $966,000, were in arrears beyond 120
days and eligible for license suspension, but were
not referred for suspension.
DHR - Child Support Enforcement Administration
Page 7

--- Page 8 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Enforcement Procedures (continued)
CSEA was not identifying or seizing certain obligor
bank account funds to satisfy unpaid child support
balances as permitted by State law. (Finding 3)
 State law allows the seizure of bank account funds
when a noncustodial parent owes more than $500
and has not paid for more than 60 days. Yet
CSEA’s policy was to only pursue individuals owing
more than $2,500. As of 12/2010, there were
25,550 cases with arrearages of $33.6 million in
arrearage that were not subject to bank
garnishment procedures because they owed
between $500 and $2,500. The number of these
cases overdue for more than 60 days was not
readily known.
 Although CSEA seized funds from obligor savings
accounts, funds were not seized from checking
accounts even though such garnishments were
allowed by State law. From July 2009 – October
2010, obligors owned 1,052 checking accounts
with balances totaling $3.8 million.
DHR - Child Support Enforcement Administration
Page 8

--- Page 9 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Enforcement Procedures (continued)
CSEA did not ensure that two large local offices
investigated and resolved inaccurate noncustodial
parent social security numbers (SSNs) recorded in the
automated Child Support Enforcement System (CSES).
Accurate SSNs are key to performing effective
enforcement and collection efforts. (Finding 4)
 Daily reports provided by the federal OCSE of
incorrect SSNs recorded in CSEA’s records were not
used by two large local offices for investigation and
resolution. From 7/2009 to 10/2010, OCSE
reported 875 SSN errors to the State.
 OLA tested 17 noncustodial parents’ SSNs that the
federal OCSE reported to CSEA as being incorrect
and found that the various offices did not take
appropriate action on 16 (arrearages of $292,000).
For 7 of these 16 instances, OCSE had informed
CSEA of the correct SSN, but the local offices only
corrected 2 of these SSNs and this occurred 3 and 7
years later. As of the date of OLA’s test, the other 9
inaccurate SSNs remained uncorrected as well.
DHR - Child Support Enforcement Administration
Page 9

--- Page 10 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Enforcement Procedures (continued)
CSEA did not adequately review and process driver’s
license suspension referrals rejected by the MVA.
When rejected, MVA provides CSEA with information
and possible matches to help resolve the rejected
referrals. OLA tested 20 rejected referrals of
noncustodial parents and found that for 18, CSEA did
not take proper follow-up action. According to MVA
records, 30,361 licenses were suspended in FY 2010
and 7,929 referrals were rejected by MVA. (Finding 5).
 CSEA did not review the possible matches provided
by MVA for 15 of 18 rejections. OLA determined that
for 12 ($780,000 in arrearages), MVA provided
sufficient information for CSEA to correct and
resubmit the suspension referrals.
 There was documentation that CSEA reviewed the
other 3 rejected referrals ($160,000 in arrearages)
and identified the correct individuals for license
suspension purposes; however, CSEA did not report
this information to the MVA. As of April 2011, these
individuals did not have their licenses suspended.
DHR - Child Support Enforcement Administration
Page 10

--- Page 11 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Enforcement Procedures (continued)
Although allowed by State law, CSEA had not
established procedures to intercept payments from
the Comptroller of Maryland to State vendors (e.g.,
sole proprietors) who owed child support. (Finding 6)
 OLA’s match of State vendor payments made
during the period 7/2009 – 2/2011 with child
support obligors as of December 2010 revealed
that payments totaling $493,000 were made to
119 obligors. OLA’s test of 15 of these obligors
disclosed 134 payments totaling $95,000 could
have been intercepted.
 CSEA management advised that it had not
established procedures to implement the law
because CSEA would need to hire at least one
additional employee to dedicate to this project.
Given the potential dollar amount of intercepted
vendor payments and the possible perception that
the State is not sufficiently contributing to the
effort to maximize collections, OLA believes that
CSEA should utilize this enforcement tool.
DHR - Child Support Enforcement Administration
Page 11

--- Page 12 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Local Office Monitoring Issues
 CSEA did not take sufficient actions to ensure that
the contractor hired to provide child support functions
in Baltimore City complied with certain contract
requirements. (Finding 7)
 A comprehensive corrective action plan was not
required for areas of non-compliance identified by
an independent contract monitor, which quarterly
assesses the contractor’s compliance with child
support enforcement procedures through the
evaluation of approximately 900 cases. In one
quarterly report it was noted that all appropriate
enforcement remedies and resources were not used
to enforce delinquent court orders in 42% of the
cases reviewed.
 In September 2010, Baltimore City had
approximately 85,000 child support cases and
accounted for a third of the State’s active caseload.
 The contractor was paid $7,700,000 in FY 2010.
DHR - Child Support Enforcement Administration
Page 12

--- Page 13 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Local Office Monitoring Issues (continued)
 CSEA did not ensure that one large local child
support office performed sufficient and timely
reviews of delinquent accounts to monitor case
activity and caseworker performance. (Finding 8)
 Monthly, CSES generates a report of overdue child
support accounts to monitor case activity and
caseworker performance. OLA’s review of 20
reports from FY 2010 and 2009 found that only
27% of the 13,362 cases reported were reviewed
by caseworkers.
 For the periods tested, only 1% instead of the
required 5% of the reported cases were reviewed
by supervisors.
 Sufficient procedures were not established to
identify payments made to deceased custodial
parents. Although CSEA matches custodial parents
with State death records, OLA’s match to Federal
death records noted numerous payments >30 days
after the payees’ dates of death. (Finding 9)
DHR - Child Support Enforcement Administration
Page 13

--- Page 14 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Conclusion
CSEA should:
Ensure that wage withholding orders are pursued to
the fullest extent possible.
Effectively use occupational license suspension as an
enforcement tool for obligors.
Enhance its use of collection tools such as seizing
delinquent obligors’ bank accounts and intercepting
payments from the Comptroller of Maryland to State
vendors who owe child support.
Investigate and resolve incorrect obligor social security
numbers recorded in its automated records.
Adequately investigate driver’s license suspension
referrals that were rejected by the MVA.
Ensure Baltimore City contractor’s compliance with all
contract terms & implementation of corrective actions.
Ensure local offices timely review delinquency reports.
Expand its efforts to identify payments to deceased
persons.
DHR - Child Support Enforcement Administration
Page 14

--- Page 15 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Exhibit A – Finding 2
DHR - Child Support Enforcement
Page 15
Administration