Title: Presentation to the House Appropriations Subcommittee - Maryland Department of Health - Medical Care Programs Administration

Related Report Dated 8/18/2017
Date: 03/05/2018
Type: Presentations to the Legislature
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5a9daf31cc9d72387404dd17
Extracted: 2025-06-20T00:03:18.173312
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Maryland Department of Health
Medical Care Programs
Administration (MCPA)
Report Dated August 18, 2017

--- Page 2 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Audit Overview
 MCPA expenditures have mirrored the growth in
Medicaid enrollment since FY 2000.
 The report contains 15 findings, including 7
repeats presented in 6 findings.
 OLA determined that MCPA’s accountability and
compliance level was unsatisfactory, in
accordance with the rating system OLA
established in conformity with State law. The
primary factors contributing to the unsatisfactory
rating were the significance of the audit findings
and the number of repeat findings (Findings 2, 4,
5, 6, 7, and 11).
Medical Care Programs Administration
Page 2

--- Page 3 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Key Findings
 Certain new enrollees were not properly processed,
resulting in delays in placing these individuals into
a managed care organization, which can increase
claim costs.
 Agreements with the Department of Human
Services and the Maryland Health Benefit
Exchange (MHBE) for delegated recipient eligibility
services were not sufficiently comprehensive.
 Follow-up of potentially ineligible Medicaid
recipients was untimely.
 MCPA did not take certain actions to maximize
recoveries from other sources, including Medicare,
to reduce Medicaid payments.
 MCPA did not monitor vendors contracted to assist
in its administration of the Medicaid program
including processing claims and/or verifying
billings by hospitals, and behavioral health and
dental providers.
 Certain security measures and controls over IT
systems and data were lacking.
Medical Care Programs Administration
Page 3

--- Page 4 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Recipient Enrollment (Finding 1)
MCPA did not assign a temporary enrollment status to
11,153 new enrollees resulting in delays in placing
individuals in Managed Care Organizations (MCO).
Such delays resulted in certain claims being paid on a
fee-for-service (FFS) basis, which are generally higher
than capitation fees paid to MCOs.
• MCPA became aware of the problem in July 2014
after several new enrollees questioned why they
were not enrolled in an MCO.
• Queries ran by MCPA in October 2014 and
November 2015 identified, in the aggregate,
11,153 new enrollees who remained in a FFS
status.
• MCPA advised that all of these cases were
investigated and the individuals were placed in
MCOs if warranted.
Medical Care Programs Administration
Page 4

--- Page 5 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Recipient Enrollment (Finding 1 cont’d)
• The fiscal impact of these delays (that is, the cost
differential between FFS claims that should have
been covered by an MCO and the related MCO
capitation fees) could not be readily determined.
• After excluding readily identifiable claims that
were appropriately paid as FFS, we identified FFS
claims totaling $13.3 million for 1,571 of the
11,153 new enrollees paid in FY 2015.
• Our test of the 10 highest FFS claims paid during
FY 2015 found that 4, totaling $826,000 were
improperly paid as FFS due to the delay in
enrollment.
• The problem was allegedly due to a computer
compatibility issue between MCPA’s IT system and
the Maryland Health Benefit Exchange’s computer
system (HBX).
Medical Care Programs Administration
Page 5

--- Page 6 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Recipient Enrollment (Finding 2)
MCPA did not have sufficiently comprehensive
Memoranda of Understanding (MOUs) with DHS and
MHBE, outlining responsibilities for ensuring
Medicaid eligibility determinations are performed
timely and properly.
In response to a prior audit report, MDH updated its
MOU with DHS in July 2011. An MOU was also
established with MHBE in September 2013. However,
the MOUs did not adequately address:
 quality control procedures at DHS and MHBE to
ensure the integrity of the eligibility process;
 longstanding deficiencies identified in prior OLA
reports, such as recipients with multiple Medical
Assistance numbers that could result in duplicate
claims paid; and
 resolution of potential fraud or abuse identified,
and the correction of any eligibility process
problems identified by MCPA.
Medical Care Programs Administration
Page 6

--- Page 7 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Recipient Enrollment (Finding 3)
MCPA did not take timely follow-up action on
questionable enrollee eligibility information it
identified nor ensure that critical eligibility
information was recorded in its provider claims
payment system (MMIS II).
• As of June 2015, MCPA reports identified three
large LDSSs that had 2,721 alerts (such as
recipients enrolled in other states), which were
outstanding for 79, 125, and 194 days on
average.
• Efforts to investigate reported discrepancies in
recipient data were not documented, including
instances in which reportedly deceased recipients
were still active on MMIS II.
Medical Care Programs Administration
Page 7

--- Page 8 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Recipient Enrollment (Finding 3 cont’d)
• Changes to critical recipient eligibility information
(such as eligibility information) in MMIS II were not
subject to supervisory review and approval. Nor
was a mechanism in place to ensure DHS timely
processed changes to eligibility information.
Consequently, errors and delays in data entry
resulted in overpayments. Our tests of 22 FFS
claims totaling $6 million identified 7 claims
totaling $2.4 million were improperly paid as FFS
claims rather than by MCOs with capitation fees.
• MCPA did not monitor individuals enrolled in age-
specific coverage groups to ensure that they were
removed in a timely manner when they no longer
met the age requirements. Approximately 1/3 of
the 260,000 recipients in age-based coverage
groups were older than the age range for their
assigned group.
Medical Care Programs Administration
Page 8

--- Page 9 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Recipient Enrollment (Finding 4)
MCPA did not take timely action to ensure recipients
age 65 or older had applied for Medicare, as
required by State regulations, to reduce Medicaid
costs.
• According to MCPA records, during FY 2015
MCPA paid $85.4 million for 4,133 recipients
who were at least 65 years old and were not
enrolled in Medicare.
• In response to our prior audit report, MCPA
initiated an outreach program in 2012 to advise
potentially eligible individuals to apply for
Medicare. But notices sent to individuals were
not timely.
• The eligibility of nonresponsive individuals
(approximately 20 percent of total outreach
participants as of August 2016) was not
terminated.
Medical Care Programs Administration
Page 9

--- Page 10 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Recipient Enrollment (Finding 5)
MCPA did not ensure that all potential third-party
health insurance information for Medicaid
recipients was received and properly investigated in
a timely manner.
• MHBE was not required by the MCPA/MHBE
MOU to submit any reports of potential third
party insurance for Medicaid recipients. One
report received from MHBE in March 2015
included 24,300 recipients with potential
insurance.
• MCPA did not retain documentation of reviews
performed of third-party insurance referrals.
MCPA received 134,000 referrals from DHS and
10,000 referrals from its contractor during CY
2015. Documentation of investigations for 6 of
15 referrals tested was not maintained.
Medical Care Programs Administration
Page 10

--- Page 11 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Program Oversight (Finding 7)
MCPA has not conducted audits of hospital claims
processed since CY 2007. Hospital claims totaled
approximately $900 million in FY 2015.
• MCPA had previously contracted with a vendor for
these audits, with the most recent claims audit
period from CYs 2004 to 2007. The vendor had
identified overpayments of $10.7 million for claims
paid during 2005 and 2006.
• After several unsuccessful attempts to procure
audit services, MCPA received a temporary
exemption from the federal government in February
2014 from conducting recovery audits until
November 2014.
• A new auditor was hired in August 2015, but was
terminated one year later due to performance
issues.
• During the interim, a few audits were conducted by
MDH which identified overpayments of $234,000.
Medical Care Programs Administration
Page 11

--- Page 12 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Program Oversight (Findings 9 and 10)
Background
MCPA became responsible for the Administrative
Service Organization (ASO) providing benefit
management services for the Public Behavioral
Health System effective January 2015. During FY
2015, behavioral health claims totaled $900 million,
$491 million of which occurred after MCPA assumed
responsibility for monitoring the ASO.
 MCPA did not ensure that deficiencies noted
during the ASO’s provider audits were corrected
and related overpayments were recovered. The
ASO is required to audit 300 providers per year to
validate the behavioral health claims and identify
claim deficiencies and provider overpayments.
For 2 of 10 audits we reviewed, improper claims
identified by the audits totaling $21,000 had not
been recovered until we notified MCPA (Finding 9).
Medical Care Programs Administration
Page 12

--- Page 13 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Program Oversight (Findings 9 and 10 cont’d)
 MCPA did not ensure that the ASO resolved
rejected behavioral health claims timely, resulting
in the payment of potentially improper claims and
the loss of federal fund reimbursements (Finding
10).
• In March 2016, the ASO reported claims
totaling $1.5 million paid over a 4½ year
period ended March 2014 that were rejected
for processing by MMIS II, which had not been
resolved. These claims exceeded the two-year
period available to recover federal
participation.
• As a result, the State lost federal fund
reimbursements totaling $768,000, with at
least $237,000 applying to the period after
MCPA assumed responsibility for the ASO.
Medical Care Programs Administration
Page 13

--- Page 14 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Program Oversight (Finding 12)
MCPA did not ensure that the former dental benefits
administrator (DBA) was properly administering the
dental benefits program. Dental providers were paid
$162.5 million during FY 2015.
• Over the 6½ year contract period, MCPA did not
conduct audits of the DBA, even though the
contract required the DBA to submit to a yearly
audit by a firm contracted by MCPA.
• MCPA did not monitor the quantity or quality of
provider audits performed by the DBA. At our
request, MCPA determined that during FY 2015,
the DBA conducted audits of only 32 of the 1,354
participating providers as of August 2014.
• MCPA did not ensure the DBA investigated claims
rejected by MMIS II, which as of June 2015
totaled $800,000.
• MCPA did not ensure that the DBA safeguarded
sensitive data.
Medical Care Programs Administration
Page 14

--- Page 15 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Information Systems Security
 Sensitive enrollee information on an MCPA
database was stored and transmitted without
adequate safeguards. The database contained
1.7 million unique SSNs in clear text.
MCPA did not correct 20 of the 21 security
vulnerabilities identified in a consultant’s report on
this database (Finding 13).
 Access controls over certain critical servers
maintained by the behavioral health ASO were
inadequate and the ASO stored personally
identifiable information relating to over 2.3 million
members in clear text (Finding 11).
 Sensitive Medicaid enrollee information provided
to a contractor was transmitted to an information
management vendor without MCPA approval
(Finding 15).
Medical Care Programs Administration
Page 15

--- Page 16 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Conclusions
MCPA should:
 ensure recipients are enrolled timely in MCOs and
ensure the compatibility of MMIS to HBX;
 modify MOUs with DHS and MHBE to address
longstanding issues;
 take timely actions on potential ineligible
recipients and establish adequate procedures to
maximize recoveries from other sources to reduce
Medicaid payments to providers;
 conduct timely audits of hospital billings;
 ensure vendors contracted to assist in its
administration of the Medicaid program are
adequately monitored; and
 ensure its IT systems, and those used by
contractors, are properly secured and that
sensitive data is safeguarded.
Medical Care Programs Administration
Page 16