Title: Presentation to the Joint Audit Committee - Department of Human Resources - Social Services Administration

Related Report Dated 10/6/2008
Date: 10/21/2008
Type: Presentations to the Legislature
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5a9daf22cc9d72387404dae5
Extracted: 2025-06-18T09:10:53.356006
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Department of Human Resources
Social Services Administration
Report dated October 6, 2008
Presentation to
Joint Audit Committee
Bruce A. Myers, CPA
Timothy R. Brooks, CPA, CFE
Robert A. Wells
October 21, 2008

--- Page 2 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Audit Overview
(cid:190) Audit report included 9 findings, 4 of which were
repeated from the preceding audit report.
(cid:190) Social Services Administration (SSA) supervises,
directs, and monitors the social services
programs conducted by the local departments of
social services in each of the State’s 24
subdivisions.
(cid:190) These programs (including the foster care
program) are intended to prevent or remedy
abuse, neglect, and exploitation of children and
families
(cid:190) SSA’s fiscal year 2007 costs for SSA and local
department operations, including payments to
group care and foster care providers, totaled
approximately $543 million.
DHR – Social Services Administration
Page 2

--- Page 3 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Key Audit Issues
(cid:190) Many of the deficiencies in SSA’s monitoring the
local departments’ delivery of services were
attributed to implementation and functionality
problems with the Children’s Electronic Social
Services Information Exchange (CHESSIE) system,
which cost $67.6 million through June 30, 2007.
(cid:190) Compliance with State and federal foster care
service requirements had not been ensured.
(cid:190) The sufficiency of child welfare caseload ratios had
not been established, as required by State law.
(cid:190) Fiscal monitoring needed improvement in certain
areas to ensure that:
(cid:131) available federal funding is obtained;
(cid:131) local departments are using the most cost-
effective providers; and
(cid:131) payments to group care providers are fully
justified and overpayments are returned to DHR,
as appropriate.
DHR – Social Services Administration
Page 3

--- Page 4 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
CHESSIE Implementation
(cid:190) Critical components of the CHESSIE system had
not been successfully implemented, resulting in
inaccuracies and preventing SSA from effectively
monitoring foster care activities. (Finding 1)
(cid:131) Incomplete and inaccurate case records
were found; for example, > 2,500 foster
care placements were not recorded.
(cid:131) The reasons for federal funding ineligibility
of certain children in foster care were not
documented, hindering the resolution of the
disqualifying factors. (see also Finding 5)
(cid:131) CHESSIE did not interface effectively with
the DHR Client Information System (CIS) to
ensure comprehensive integration of cases
with all DHR programs.
(cid:131) CHESSIE did not interface properly with
FMIS to allow DHR to pay providers directly.
(cid:131) Required federal reporting information could
not be produced with CHESSIE.
DHR – Social Services Administration
Page 4

--- Page 5 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Foster Care Service Requirements
(cid:190) SSA had not ensured compliance with foster care
service requirements established by State and federal
regulations. (Finding 2)
(cid:131) The Child Welfare and Adult Services Performance
Review System (CAPS) that was used to routinely
monitor compliance with critical State regulations
was discontinued after November 2004.
(cid:131) The required success rate was not met for 6 of the
7 outcomes in the federally-mandated Child and
Family Services Review (CFSR) in either the
November 2003 federal review or DHR’s May
2007 self-assessment.
(cid:131) CAPS objectively measured documented
compliance with specific service actions (e.g.,
children attending school within five days of
placement, required dental exams received, and if
caseworkers met with each child every three
months), whereas CFSR subjectively evaluated
outcomes (e.g., children receive services to meet
their educational and physical health needs).
DHR – Social Services Administration
Page 5

--- Page 6 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Child Welfare Caseloads
(cid:190) SSA was unable to adequately monitor the
sufficiency of the child welfare caseload ratios of the
local departments of social services, as required by
State law. (Finding 3)
(cid:131) SSA has not been able to generate competent
and reliable information on local department
caseload ratios from either the long-existing CIS
or the newly-implemented CHESSIE system.
(cid:131) In a February 2007 report, the Child Welfare
League of America (CWLA) recommended an
increase in caseworkers and supervisors, but
cautioned the increases may not be accurate
due to severe shortcomings in DHR’s data
collection process.
(cid:131) CWLA strongly recommended that DHR complete
a Maryland-specific task and workload analysis
to ensure sufficient child welfare staff were
available to meet CWLA caseload standards. As
of March 24, 2008, such a task and workload
analysis had not been completed.
DHR – Social Services Administration
Page 6

--- Page 7 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Central Registry
(cid:190) A reliable and accurate single registry source of
information about individuals known to be guilty of
child abuse or neglect or found responsible for
indicated abuse or neglect did not exist. (Finding 4)
(cid:131) State law allows DHR to retain identifying
information on maltreators, but does not
specify how to maintain that information.
(cid:131) Central registry information is required to be
available to law enforcement personnel who are
investigating a report of suspected abuse or
neglect, as well as to SSA and local department
protective service staff.
(cid:131) Information maintained on maltreators is
fragmented and what is available may be found
in CIS, CHESSIE or paper files.
(cid:131) The current condition of central registry records
could impact the reliability and accuracy of
information needed by investigators, SSA and
local department staff, as well as required
reports to the federal government.
DHR – Social Services Administration
Page 7

--- Page 8 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Financial Monitoring Issues
(cid:190) Procedures were inadequate to ensure that all
available federal funding was obtained for
certain services provided to eligible foster care
children, and inadequate substantiation for
federal funds obtained resulted in $3.7 million
of federal disallowances. (Findings 5 and 8, and
Background)
(cid:190) SSA did not monitor the local departments to
ensure that children were placed with the most
cost-effective group foster care providers.
(Finding 6)
(cid:190) Annual audit reports of expenditures by group
foster care providers were not received and
reviewed timely to ensure that payments to the
providers were used appropriately and to
identify any overpayments for recovery.
(Finding 7)
DHR – Social Services Administration
Page 8

--- Page 9 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Conclusion
SSA should:
(cid:190) Ensure that that essential features of CHESSIE
are fully operational and that all data in CHESSIE
is accurate and complete.
(cid:190) Take appropriate action to ensure compliance
with foster care service requirements established
by State and federal regulations.
(cid:190) Ensure the reliability of staffing caseload data,
complete the task and workload analysis and take
the necessary action to achieve the caseload
requirements of State law.
(cid:190) Pursue the creation of a consolidated,
comprehensive registry of child abuse and neglect
and ensure that all maltreators are identified in
the central registry records.
(cid:190) Enhance its financial monitoring and
documentation practices.
DHR – Social Services Administration
Page 9