Title: Presentation to the Senate Budget and Taxation Subcommittee - Department of State Police

Related Report Dated 11/23/2015
Date: 03/03/2016
Type: Presentations to the Legislature
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5a9daf2ecc9d72387404dcb4
Extracted: 2025-06-20T00:00:51.673036
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Department of State Police
Report dated November 23, 2015

--- Page 2 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Audit Overview
(cid:190)The Department of State Police (DSP) comprises
the Maryland State Police, the Office of the State
Fire Marshal, and the State Fire Prevention
Commission.
(cid:190)DSP is responsible for
(cid:131) safeguarding the lives of all persons within the
State,
(cid:131) protecting property, and
(cid:131) assisting in securing to all persons the equal
protection of the law.
(cid:190)FY 2014 operating expenditures totaled
approximately $319.3 million.
(cid:190)Report included 12 findings, 1 of which was
repeated from the preceding audit report (current
Finding 12).
Department of State Police
Page 2

--- Page 3 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Key Audit Issues
(cid:190)DSP did not properly account for financial activity
pertaining to certain special funds for which the
related year-end balances at June 30, 2014
appeared questionable. DSP could not support
revenues totaling $28.2 million recorded at FYE
2014 to cover expenditures.
(cid:190)For four service contracts totaling $9 million, DSP
either did not include or could not support the
expected levels of service needed in the related
procurement solicitations, which in some cases
raises questions about the award decisions.
(cid:190)DSP procedures over handgun qualification licenses
and registration applications were not sufficiently
comprehensive and DSP did not ensure the
accuracy of handgun serial numbers recorded in its
automated systems.
Department of State Police
Page 3

--- Page 4 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Special Funds
Background
DSP received revenue from various sources (such as
speed camera fees) that was used to support certain
field operations. DSP also received reimbursements
from other governmental units and private entities
for the cost of providing certain services. During FY
2014, DSP billed approximately $50.5 million for
these services, of which $36.7 million was billed to
(cid:190)MDOT for operations of the Commercial Vehicle
Enforcement Division (CVED) and Automotive
Safety Enforcement Division (ASED), and for patrol
and criminal enforcement on the JFK Memorial
Highway,
(cid:190)public and private entities for services such as
police patrols stationed at construction zones
(Reimbursable Overtime), and
(cid:190)local jurisdictions for providing police enforcement
(Resident Trooper Program).
Department of State Police
Page 4

--- Page 5 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Special Funds (continued)
(cid:190)DSP did not properly account for financial activity
pertaining to certain special funds for which the
related year-end balances appeared questionable
(Finding 1).
(cid:131) The financial activity for five different services was
combined and reflected in two special fund
balances, and certain activity was not properly
recorded. DSP was unable to readily determine
whether it recovered all costs charged for these
activities.
(cid:131) Both special fund balances at June 30, 2014
appeared questionable. One fund used to account
for three services had a deficit balance of $44.2
million (an amount that exceeded the FY 2014
DSP costs related to these services) and the other
fund had a positive balance of $34.4 million.
(cid:131) DSP had not identified and investigated the
aforementioned inconsistencies and could not
determine if the positive and negative balances in
these funds were related.
Department of State Police
Page 5

--- Page 6 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Budgetary and Year-End Closing
(cid:190)DSP’s budgetary year-end closing transactions for
FY 2014 were not always adequately supported or
accurately reported (Finding 3).
(cid:131) DSP did not maintain adequate documentation to
support that $28.2 million in revenues recorded
during the FY 2014 budgetary closeout were
available to cover incurred expenditures. For any
revenues that are not available, general fund or
deficiency appropriations may be needed to
eliminate any resulting deficits.
(cid:131) DSP neither accurately reported nor had valid
legal justification for retaining certain special
funds at year-end. DSP reported that it retained
special fund balances as of June 30, 2014 in four
budgetary programs totaling $22.9 million.
However, the legal justification for retaining $15.7
million of these funds did not substantiate that
these funds could be retained.
Department of State Police
Page 6

--- Page 7 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Procurements
OLA tested the procurement of 5 contracts
collectively valued at $16.1 million.
(cid:190)For 4 of the contracts, totaling $9 million, DSP did
not include or could not support the approximate
quantities of services needed in its solicitations,
as required by State regulations, impeding DSP’s
ability to determine whether it received the most
favorable bids, made the appropriate award
decisions, and established reasonable contract
values (Finding 4).
(cid:131) For example, for one contract for transmission
repairs totaling $1.6 million, DSP solicited unit
prices for the repair of 39 different types of DSP
vehicles without providing any estimate of the
expected transmission repair activity for each
vehicle type. The award was made based on
the sum of these unit prices without regard to
the expected activity.
Department of State Police
Page 7

--- Page 8 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Procurements (continued)
(cid:190)Procedural and documentation deficiencies were
noted regarding the evaluation of vendor bids for
certain service contracts (Finding 5).
(cid:131) The technical evaluations were not completed and
adequately documented for 2 of the contracts
totaling $5.4 million. For example, for one
contract, all of the evaluation attributes were not
addressed by the evaluators.
(cid:131) For 2 contracts totaling $6.6 million, the proposals
were evaluated based on a sum of price quotes for
each type of service, without considering the
corresponding estimated quantities needed.
(cid:131) DSP awarded a portion of one contract to a vendor
that did not meet all required specifications.
(cid:131) The award amount for another contract
($400,000) was almost double the value of the
services based on DSP estimated quantities and
the vendor’s bid.
Department of State Police
Page 8

--- Page 9 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Handgun Registration
Background
(cid:190)Obtaining and registering a handgun is a multi-step
process with specific procedural and
documentation requirements for handgun dealers,
DSP, and applicants.
(cid:190)Effective October 1, 2013, a handgun dealer or any
other person may not sell, rent, or transfer a
handgun unless the individual receiving the
handgun first obtains and presents to the dealer or
other person a valid Handgun Qualification License
(HQL) issued by DSP. Certain individuals, such as
former police officers, are exempt from the HQL
requirement.
(cid:190)Once an HQL is obtained (or is exempt as noted
above) the individual may submit a handgun
registration application to the dealer (or individual
if a private sale), which is then forwarded to DSP
for evaluation. If the application is not disapproved
by DSP, the handgun can be transferred.
Department of State Police
Page 9

--- Page 10 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Handgun Registration (continued)
(cid:190)DSP procedures over HQLs and handgun registration
applications lacked certain controls (Findings 6 ).
(cid:131) DSP did not require handgun dealers to submit a
copy of an applicant’s HQL with the handgun
registration application, as required by State law.
(cid:131) DSP did not have a procedure to ensure that
dealers submitted finalized handgun registration
applications within 7 days of delivery of the
handguns to the applicants, as required. Ten of 40
finalized applications tested were received 20 –
201 days after the handguns were transferred.
(cid:131) Numerous individuals had unnecessary system
access allowing them to approve handgun
applications even though they did not require that
capability.
Department of State Police
Page 10

--- Page 11 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Handgun Registration (continued)
(cid:190)Certain quality control procedures were not
comprehensive to ensure the accuracy of handgun
registration information (such as registrant name,
gun make, and serial number). Although quality
control reviews were conducted of selected
registrations, these verification procedures do not
appear to be sufficient (Finding 7).
(cid:131) OLA’s automated comparison of 27,500
applications found different handgun serial
numbers for about 4,000 registered handguns in
the two automated systems used to record the
initial handgun registration application and the
completed registration information.
(cid:131) Certain applications were excluded from DSP’s
independent quality control reviews that are
performed to ensure the proper evaluation and
disposition of HQL and handgun applications.
Department of State Police
Page 11

--- Page 12 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Other Findings
(cid:190)DSP lacked adequate controls over collections and
the related accounts receivable for external
services provided to other governmental units and
private entities, and for handgun registration
application fees (Finding 2 & 8).
(cid:190)Numerous security and control issues were noted
regarding DSP’s information systems and critical
data. Specifically, DSP’s network and numerous
workstations were not properly maintained and
secured, and assurance was lacking that critical
data hosted by a third-party service provider were
adequately safeguarded (Findings 9, 10, & 11).
(cid:190)DSP did not complete annual physical inventories
of its sensitive equipment and did not always
record equipment purchases. Similar conditions
have been commented upon in six preceding audit
reports dating back to January 1998 (Finding 12).
Department of State Police
Page 12

--- Page 13 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Conclusion
DSP should ensure that
(cid:190)all special fund activity is properly accounted for, and
related special fund balances are investigated and the
necessary corrections made;
(cid:190)all revenue transactions recorded to cover
expenditures are accurate and supported, proper legal
justification exists for all funds retained at year-end,
and any deficits are resolved;
(cid:190)procurement solicitations contain supportable
quantity of services needed, evaluation documents
are complete, and the methodologies used to evaluate
vendors’ proposals are reasonable;
(cid:190)procedures are implemented to improve controls over
HQL and handgun registration applications, and all
critical information is recorded accurately in its
automated systems; and
(cid:190)recommended actions are made to improve security
and controls, including for information systems, cash
receipts, accounts receivable, and equipment.
Department of State Police
Page 13