Title: Presentation to the Senate Budget and Taxation Full Committee - Department of Health and Mental Hygiene - Developmental Disabilities Administration

Related Report Dated 10/2/2013
Date: 02/18/2014
Type: Presentations to the Legislature
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5a9daf2ccc9d72387404dc4d
Extracted: 2025-06-18T13:49:53.267427
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Department of Health and
Mental Hygiene
Developmental Disabilities
Administration
Report Dated October 2, 2013

--- Page 2 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Audit Overview
 The Developmental Disabilities Administration
(DDA) plans, develops policies and regulations, and
funds a statewide system of services for individuals
with developmental disabilities and their families.
 Through private contractors, DDA funds services to
the developmentally disabled with various
community-based programs that include community
residential services, day habilitation services, and
vocational training.
 In fiscal 2012, DDA served over 24,000 individuals
with developmental disabilities and its expenditures
totaled $805.5 million, consisting of $445 million
general funds, $360 million federal funds (primarily
Medicaid reimbursements), and $500,000 in special
funds.
 The report included 13 findings, 7 of which were
repeated from the preceding audit report and appear
as 6 findings in this report.
DDA – Developmental Disabilities Administration Page 2

--- Page 3 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Audit Overview
(Cont.)
 The Office of Legislative Audits (OLA) determined
that DDA’s accountability and compliance level was
unsatisfactory, in accordance with the rating system
OLA established in conformity with State law. The
primary factors contributing to the unsatisfactory
rating were the significance of the audit findings and
the number of repeat findings (Findings 1, 3, 4, 5,
12, and 13 are repeated from the last audit).
 DDA has a liability of $20.6 million for which State
general funds will be needed to fund. The liability is
related to DDA federal reimbursement overbillings for
certain residential service costs, as calculated by a
federal audit covering the period from July 2009
through June 2012. Prior to the completion of the
federal audit, in May 2012, DDA implemented
appropriate billing changes.
Update – OLA’s January 2014 Report on its Review
of fiscal 2013 Budget Closeout Transactions noted
that DHMH requested the federal oversight agency to
consider mitigating the liability owed.
DDA – Developmental Disabilities Administration Page 3

--- Page 4 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Key Audit Issues
 Service coordinators were not monitored to ensure
DDA consumers received services in accordance with
their individual service plans and that annual Medicaid
eligibility reassessments were performed.
 Maximization of Federal Funds:
 Methodology for determining certain federal
reimbursement rates did not accurately reflect
incurred costs. Tests of fiscal 2011 and 2012 rates
for one program noted that DDA’s costs were
$2.4 million greater than reimbursements.
 DDA did not ensure that certain provider claims
were submitted for processing (and subsequent
reimbursement). Federal funds totaling as much as
$5.2 million were not obtained.
 $2.2 million in claims rejected due to eligibility edits
were not investigated.
 Inadequate monitoring of provider reported
information and controls over certain accounting
processes/systems need improvement.
DDA – Developmental Disabilities Administration Page 4

--- Page 5 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Consumers’ Service s
DDA did not have procedures to verify consumers
received services from providers as stipulated in
annual service plans and that documentation was
obtained for the consumers’ medical eligibility
assessments (Finding 1 – repeat).
 As of June 30, 2012, DDA had contracts with
15 resource/service coordinators (RSC). These
RSCs were responsible for monitoring 24,092
consumers with service expenditures totaling
$759 million in fiscal 2012.
 DDA did not obtain reports of the RSCs’ monitoring
efforts and did not directly review RSC records to
ensure the delivery of service to consumers. OLA’s
test of 16 consumers monitored by 2 RSCs in 2011
found for 5 consumers that the records lacked
sufficient evidence that the RSC verified the delivery
of all required services.
DDA – Developmental Disabilities Administration Page 5

--- Page 6 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Federal Funds
DDA’s methodology for determining federal
reimbursement rates for contractual payment system
expenditures did not accurately reflect the costs incurred
(Finding 2).
 DDA’s reimbursable costs for the Individual Support
Services (ISS) program exceeded its reimbursements
by $2.4 million in fiscal 2011 and 2012. DDA’s federal
billing rates for ISS program expenditures were
understated because each year’s rates were based on
prior year costs without adjustment for actual costs,
which historically increased every year. Further, DDA
included all consumers in the cost calculation rather
than just Medicaid-eligible consumers.
 DDA could not provide documentation supporting its
ISS rate calculations and substantiating that the
calculations had been reviewed by supervisors.
 Expenditures for the ISS program totaled $109 million
during fiscal 2010 through 2012.
DDA – Developmental Disabilities Administration Page 6

--- Page 7 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Federal Funds
(Cont.)
 DDA did not have adequate procedures in place to
ensure that providers submitted all ISS expenditure
claims for federal reimbursement. DDA prepays ISS
providers and requires them to submit claims for
actual services rendered for federal billing purposes.
OLA’s review of ISS provider prepayments and
federal reimbursements for fiscal 2010 through 2012
found that claim documentation for $10.4 million of the
$32.8 million prepayments were not submitted by
providers. Consequently, DDA may have lost the
opportunity to claim as much as $5.2 million in federal
funds (Finding 3 – repeat).
 Federal fund reimbursement requests were not
always timely, resulting in lost investment income of
$262,000 during the period from July 2009 through
February 2012. OLA’s test of $789 million in
requests found that $89 million were submitted from
1 to 19 months after the claims could have been
submitted (Finding 4 – repeat).
DDA – Developmental Disabilities Administration Page 7

--- Page 8 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Federal Funds
(Cont.)
DDA did not investigate federal fund reimbursement
claims that were rejected by automated department of
Health and Mental Hygiene (DHMH) Medicaid eligibility
edits (Finding 5 – repeat).
When DHMH Medicaid edits rejected claims for various
reasons, such as consumer or provider not eligible on
date of service, DDA advised that it generally did not
determine the cause of the rejection to resolve the issue
and resubmit the claim for reimbursement. OLA’s review
of 17,327 rejected claims found:
 One provider was responsible for 8,587 rejected claims
totaling $536,000 during a 23-day period in
November 2010, due to a temporary loss of Medicaid
eligibility. Upon OLA bringing this matter to DDA’s
attention, the claims were resubmitted and DDA
received reimbursement.
 8,740 claims totaling $284,000 were erroneously
rejected as conflicting with other claims. In 2010, DDA
noted the error and although the edit was corrected,
DDA did not resubmit the claims. At this time, the
period for reimbursement has past.
DDA – Developmental Disabilities Administration Page 8

--- Page 9 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Contribution to Care
DDA did not ensure the accuracy of consumers’
contribution to care (CTC) recorded by providers in its
computer system (PCIS2). Certain consumers
receiving residential services are required to make
financial contributions for the cost of their care. CTC
reduces DDA’s provider payments (Finding 6).
 Although DHMH calculates the CTC during the
consumer’s eligibility determination process,
providers were permitted to record CTC into PCIS2
without any DDA verification. CTC amounts (e.g.,
Social Security payments) are received directly by
the providers.
 OLA’s comparison of DHMH-calculated CTC to
provider-recorded CTC in PCIS2 from January 2009
to February 2012 found that DHMH had calculated
an additional $4.8 million in CTC. Consequently,
DDA could have been paying providers more than it
is responsible for.
DDA – Developmental Disabilities Administration Page 9

--- Page 10 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Provider Payment Re conciliations
DDA did not ensure that annual reports from Fee
Payment System (FPS) providers were submitted within
six months of FYE and that certified attendance reports
included the number of days that consumers obtained
services, which was needed to perform the year-end
payment reconciliation.
DDA also did not adequately monitor the timely
completion of payment reconciliations performed by
DHMH (Finding 8).
 As of May 2012, 17 reports due for fiscal 2010 or
2011 had not been submitted, and DDA had only
followed up with one provider.
 OLA’s test of certified attendance reports from
45 providers found that 24 did not include the
number of attendance days, and DDA had not
initiated any follow-up. Since FPS providers are
prepaid based on certain estimates (e.g.,
attendance), such information is critical to identify
any DDA under or overpayments at year-end.
DDA – Developmental Disabilities Administration Page 10

--- Page 11 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Other Issues
 DDA allowed certain Alcohol Tax funds to be used for
purposes not specified in its policies (Finding 7).
 Accounts receivable processes were inadequate to
ensure that all funds owed DDA were recovered.
 Four local jurisdictions were not billed $1.4 million
for day habilitation and vocational services charges,
as required by law (Finding 9).
 DDA did not recoup at least $390,000 in
overpayments identified by routine audits of
provider records (Finding 10).
 Adjustments to certain expenditures on the State’s
accounting records were unsupported (Finding 11).
 Security access controls over critical PCIS2 data were
not established. For example, terminated employees’
access was not always immediately deactivated
(Finding 12 – repeat).
 Certain security events for the PCIS2 production
database were not logged or subject to a documented
review (Finding 13 – repeat).
DDA – Developmental Disabilities Administration Page 11

--- Page 12 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Conclusions
DDA needs to
 monitor RSC to ensure all required duties are
performed timely and documented;
 maximize the recovery of federal funds by revising its
reimbursement methodology as practicable to better
reflect actual costs, ensuring provider claims and
reimbursement requests are submitted timely, and
promptly investigate and resubmit rejected claims;
 ensure the accuracy of CTC amounts recorded in its
payment system;
 ensure the timely submission and review of
comprehensive annual provider reports; and
 implement appropriate control processes over the use
of funds, accounts receivable, accounting
adjustments, and Information Technology operations.
DDA – Developmental Disabilities Administration Page 12