Title: Presentation to the Joint Audit Committee - Maryland Department of Health - Office of the Secretary and Other Units

Related Report Dated 8/30/2017
Date: 09/13/2017
Type: Presentations to the Legislature
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5a9daf31cc9d72387404dd10
Extracted: 2025-06-20T00:02:39.959525
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Maryland Department of Health
Office of the Secretary
and Other Units
Report dated August 30, 2017
Presentation to the Joint Audit Committee
Thomas J. Barnickel III, CPA
Joshua S. Adler, CPA, CFE
Richard L. Carter, CISA
Stephen P. Jersey, CPA, CISA
Adam M. Auerback
September 13, 2017

--- Page 2 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Audit Overview
 The Maryland Department of Health (MDH) is
responsible for promoting the health of the public
and for strengthening partnerships between State
and local governments, the business community,
and all health care providers in Maryland
regarding health care.
 The report included 17 findings, 6 of which were
repeated from the preceding audit report.
 OLA determined that MDH’s accountability and
compliance level was unsatisfactory, in
accordance with the rating system OLA
established in conformity with State law.
The primary factors contributing to the
unsatisfactory rating were the significance of the
audit findings and the number of repeat findings
(Findings 6, 7, 10, 11, 14, and 17 are repeated
from the last audit).
MDH - Maryland Department of Health Page 2

--- Page 3 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Key Findings
 MDH did not provide adequate oversight of its
administrations’ use of interagency agreements
with State universities.
 MDH did not always comply with State
procurement regulations when awarding sole
source and emergency contracts.
 Supervisory reviews of federal fund
reimbursements requests were not always
effective, as errors went undetected.
 Timely and comprehensive audits were not always
conducted of grantees.
 A number of security and control deficiencies were
noted with MDH’s information systems and
network.
 There were a number of findings in other areas,
such as, receipts, accounts receivable, and payroll.
MDH - Maryland Department of Health Page 3

--- Page 4 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Interagency Agreements (Finding 1)
MDH did not provide adequate guidance and
oversight over 304 interagency agreements valued at
$329.5 million that MDH administrations entered into
with units of State universities. Assurance was
lacking that the services were appropriate and
obtained at the best value.
Cost Effectiveness
MDH lacked a formal process for determining that
obtaining services through the agreements was more
cost-effective than seeking budgeted positions or
using a competitive procurement.
In FY 2017, MDH converted 58 positions from 9
agreements into permanent MDH positions with
estimated savings of $784,000 in general fund
expenditures due to increased federal indirect cost
recoveries.
MDH - Maryland Department of Health Page 4

--- Page 5 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Interagency Agreements (Finding 1 – cont.)
Staff Augmentation
MDH used these agreements to augment their staff
outside of the budgetary process. According to self-
reported data, 102 of the 304 agreements, totaling
$122.7 million, were for general staffing purposes
and increased MDH’s staffing beyond its budgeted
positions.
One agreement allowed an MDH administration to
augment its budgeted staff of 239 positions, by an
additional 56 positions.
Outside of University Mission
The services provided through these agreements were
frequently used to carry out operational functions and
did not always appear to be within the mission of the
university unit under which they were hired.
MDH - Maryland Department of Health Page 5

--- Page 6 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Interagency Agreements (Finding 1 – cont.)
Administrative Rates
MDH did not determine the appropriateness of
administrative fees charged by the State universities
under these agreements.
• Administrative fees with the 304 interagency
agreements totaled $25.6 million (varying from no
fee to 31 percent of each agreement’s value).
• Certain administrative fees appeared excessive as
the State universities’ involvement was limited. For
example, the 14 percent fee for one agreement
appeared excessive because the university’s only
involvement was generally limited to adding
positions to its payroll, paying salaries, and billing
MDH.
MDH was responsible for recruiting and selecting
employee applicants and providing daily supervision
of University employees’ work.
MDH - Maryland Department of Health Page 6

--- Page 7 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Interagency Agreements (Finding 2)
MDH had not established procedures to help ensure
its administrations verified that the appropriate
services were provided at the agreed-upon costs. For
one agreement reviewed, involving the Prevention
and Health Promotion Administration (PHPA), for
which MDH had paid salaries totaling $3.7 million as
of August 2016, we found
• PHPA had not adequately monitored individuals
providing services to ensure that work
assignments were clearly defined and
appropriately evaluated. The agreement provides
only a general description of the duties related to
the 25 different positions.
• PHPA did not verify the rates billed agreed with the
individual contracted rates for each position.
• PHPA’s invoice review did not ensure that hours
billed were supported by approved timesheets, as
required. Our tests disclosed that the required
timesheets were not always on file at PHPA.
MDH - Maryland Department of Health Page 7

--- Page 8 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Procurements (Finding 3)
MDH did not always comply with State procurement
regulations regarding the award of sole source and
emergency contracts. Our tests of 6 sole source
awards ($17.1 million) and 3 emergency
procurements ($3.6 million) disclosed:
• For 3 procurements, totaling $8.7 million, MDH
could not adequately justify the procurements as
sole source awards. Two contracts for medical
services justified a non-competitive procurement to
avoid interrupting the patient’s continuity of care,
but without the required professional support. We
also found that similar services were competitively
procured.
• MDH did not have a procedure to negotiate sole
source procurement pricing and MDH accepted
vendor pricing for the 6 contracts tested.
• A $2.1 million emergency contract for facility
management and staffing was awarded outside
the normal procurement process at higher labor
rates than comparable State positions.
MDH - Maryland Department of Health Page 8

--- Page 9 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Procurements (Finding 4)
MDH did not have a formal monitoring procedure to
ensure that contract awards were consistently
published on eMaryland Marketplace (eMM), as
required by State procurement law and regulations.
Our test of 17 service and IT contracts awarded
during FYs 2013 to 2016 disclosed that 8
contracts, totaling $90 million, were not published
on eMM within 30 days of contract award.
• Seven of the contracts awarded between May
2013 and January 2016, totaling $43 million,
had not been published as of April 2017.
• The eighth contract was published more than 4
months after the contract award date.
MDH - Maryland Department of Health Page 9

--- Page 10 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Procurements (Finding 5)
MDH did not always comply with State regulations
regarding bidding and the retention of critical
procurement documentation. For example, our test
of 8 competitively procured contracts, totaling
$143.5 million disclosed:
• MDH lacked a procedure to record bids when
received and to secure bids upon receipt.
• There was no recordation of bid openings, which
were to be done in the presence of two
employees, for 6 procurements totaling $129.2
million.
• No procurement documentation, such as the
vendor proposals and executed contract, could
be found for a single bid award of $10.1 million.
We were able to verify that the award was
approved by Board of Public Works.
• For 2 contracts, totaling $34.4 million, MDH
could not provide all financial or technical
proposals received.
MDH - Maryland Department of Health Page 10

--- Page 11 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Federal Funds (Finding 6)
Supervisory oversight of federal fund reimbursements,
although performed and documented, was not always
effective and our testing disclosed certain errors that
were not detected.
• Our test of 20 reimbursement requests submitted
during calendar year 2015, noted that 5
reimbursement requests totaling $27.2 million
were incorrect. This was comprised of
underdrawing federal funds by $3.7 million and
overdrawing federal funds by $23.5 million. MDH
was only aware of one of those errors which
totaled $1.3 million.
• We were advised that these types of errors were
routinely corrected through a quarterly
reconciliation process. However, MDH lacked any
evidence that the 4 aforementioned requests were
corrected. Additionally, MDH has previously had
problems in this area and was required to repay
the federal government $115.3 million in 2013 for
similar errors.
MDH - Maryland Department of Health Page 11

--- Page 12 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Inspector General’s Office (Findings 7 and 8)
 The MDH Office of the Inspector General (OIG) had
not audited certain private providers for more than
5 years and did not always conduct comprehensive
private provider audits (Finding 7).
• The OIG had not conducted audits of 22 of the
80 private providers within 5 years. Untimely
audits may have reduced effectiveness,
especially because grantees are not required to
retain the records beyond 5 years.
• The OIG only conducted desk audits for 50
private providers with grant expenditures
totaling $329.4 million. As such, the scope was
reduced as compared to an onsite audit, which
would include determining allowable costs and
control weaknesses.
 The OIG did not have a formal process to oversee
the corrective actions that resulted from findings at
the Local Health Departments (LHDs) and private
providers (Finding 8).
MDH - Maryland Department of Health Page 12

--- Page 13 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Information Systems Security and Control
 Sensitive personally identifiable information
stored in two locations were not adequately
safeguarded. The National Electronic Disease
Surveillance System and the Hospital
Management Information System contained, in
the aggregate, 215,084 social security numbers
stored in clear text along with names, addresses,
and dates of birth (Finding 9).
 Network access to critical MDH network devices,
including internal servers, was not properly
restricted.
Intrusion detection prevention system coverage
was not used for encrypted traffic entering the
network.
Certain wireless connections were not configured
securely. Therefore, sensitive information
transferred over these connections was
susceptible to compromise (Finding 10).
MDH - Maryland Department of Health Page 13

--- Page 14 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Information Systems Security and Control
 Malware protection was not sufficient to provide
adequate assurance that computers were
properly protected (Finding 11).
• For the computers supported by MDH’s Office
of Information Technology (OIT), 1,828
computers had versions of malware protection
that was out-of-date for periods ranging from
10 months to over 4 years.
• For the 8,200 MDH computers not directly
supported by OIT, reports of malware protection
status were not requested from the applicable
MDH units.
 IT contractors had unnecessary access to the
MDH network and a schedule of all contractors
working onsite was not maintained (Finding 12).
MDH - Maryland Department of Health Page 14

--- Page 15 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Examples of Other Findings
 Cash Receipts – Controls were not established to
ensure collections, which totaled $171 million in
FY 2015, were secured, accounted for, and
deposited (Finding 13).
 Accounts Receivable – MDH did not adequately
pursue for collection certain delinquent accounts
receivable for patient costs. As of June 2016,
outstanding accounts totaled $17.9 million of
which $5.9 million had been outstanding for more
than 120 days (Finding 14).
 Payroll – Overtime earned by certain employees
for an extended period appeared questionable and
was not investigated, with one employee during a
2 week period earning 158 hours of overtime (in
excess of their regular 80 hours) (Finding 15).
MDH - Maryland Department of Health Page 15

--- Page 16 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Conclusion
MDH should
 provide guidance and oversight to its
administrations regarding the use and monitoring
of interagency agreements;
 ensure that State procurement laws and
regulations are complied with;
 ensure that federal reimbursement requests are
properly completed;
 ensure that OIG audits are completed timely and
comprehensively, and establish a process to
monitor the corrective actions of audit findings;
and
 implement the recommended actions to improve
controls over information security, cash receipts,
accounts receivable, payroll, and other exception
areas.
MDH - Maryland Department of Health Page 16