Title: Presentation to the Senate Budget and Taxation Subcommittee - Department of Transportation - Maryland Transit Administration

Related Report Dated 2/13/2015
Date: 03/06/2015
Type: Presentations to the Legislature
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5a9daf2dcc9d72387404dc77
Extracted: 2025-06-18T13:53:50.803547
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Department of Transportation
Maryland Transit Administration
Report dated February 13, 2015

--- Page 2 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Overview
The Maryland Transit Administration (MTA) is
responsible for the construction, operation, and
maintenance of the Baltimore metropolitan area
transit system and for commuter services in the
suburban areas of the State.
Transit modes in operation include Metro
subway, bus, light rail and the Maryland Rail
Commuter (MARC) service. MTA also operates
the federally mandated Mobility Paratransit
Program (MPP).
MTA has approximately 3,100 employees and
its fiscal year 2013 operating and capital
expenditures totaled approximately $1.06
billion.
The audit report included 9 findings, 1 of which
was repeated from the preceding audit report
(Finding 9).
MTA - Maryland Transit Administration
Page 2

--- Page 3 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Key Audit Issues
 MTA did not exercise sufficient oversight of the
costs incurred with respect to contractors who are
used to develop the Red and Purple light rail line
projects, operate the Mobility Paratransit Program
(MPP), and provide commuter rail service (MARC).
• Architectural and engineering (A&E) firms’ direct
labor rates were not sufficiently verified.
• MTA overpaid its MPP vendors approximately
$10 million for fuel.
• MTA accepted a $24 million MARC service
contract change order without preparing an
independent cost analysis.
 MTA did not always comply with State procurement
regulations and effective controls were not
established over fare collections, purchases and
disbursements, and equipment inventory.
MTA - Maryland Transit Administration
Page 3

--- Page 4 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Farebox Recovery
Bus, Light Rail, and Metro Fare Recovery
Rates Combined
Actual and Required
40%
30%
20%
10%
0%
2011 2012 2013 2014
Required 35% 35% 35% 35%
Actual 29% 27% 27% 26%
Source: Farebox Recovery Reports
MTA failed to meet legally required farebox
recovery levels. Required levels have not been
attained since fiscal year 2005.
During fiscal year 2014, net passenger fare
revenues totaled $83 million and net operating
expenses totaled $319 million. To have met the
required 35 percent farebox recovery rate, MTA
would have needed to realize additional
passenger fare revenues of $28.6 million or
reduce its system operating costs by $81.6
million (or a combination thereof).
MTA - Maryland Transit Administration
Page 4

--- Page 5 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Light Rail Line Capital Pr o jects - Background
• In 2010, MTA contracted with four architectural
and engineering (A&E) joint venture entities for two
light rail transit capital projects under development
– the Baltimore Red Line and the Washington Area
Purple Line.
• The original maximum not-to-exceed amounts for
the four A&E contracts totaled $280 million. In July
2013 the value of the A&E contracts was increased
to $547.1 million.
• According to MTA’s project reports, as of
September 2014, A&E expenditures totaled
approximately $302.4 million ($170.2 million for
the Red Line and $132.2 million for the Purple
Line).
• Both projects have experienced increases in
estimated A&E and construction costs and changes
to the scope and schedules since the preliminary
engineering phase. Collectively, the total original
estimated cost of both projects has increased from
$4.1 billion to $5.4 billion.
MTA - Maryland Transit Administration
Page 5

--- Page 6 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Light Rail Line Capital Pr o jects (continued)
 MTA did not sufficiently verify the accuracy of
contractor-billed direct labor rates for the Red
and Purple Lines’ four A&E contracts.
Specifically, MTA did not periodically review
contractor payroll records to substantiate those
rates (Finding 1).
Consequently, there was a lack of assurance
that the billed rates agreed with the actual labor
rates the contractors used to pay their
employees. The contractors’ overhead and profit
are determined using a formula based on direct
labor costs. The total potential contract costs
impacted by these direct labor charges were
$232.8 million.
MTA - Maryland Transit Administration
Page 6

--- Page 7 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Mobility Paratransit Prog r am - Background
• MTA operates the federally mandated Mobility
Paratransit Program (MPP) for individuals who
are unable to use the MTA’s fixed route bus,
Metro subway, or light rail services due to a
disability.
• The MPP provides door-to-door service within a
three-quarter mile range from any fixed route
system. Participants must generally pay the
$1.85 fare or provide the driver with an MTA
prepaid fare ticket to obtain a ride. According to
MTA records, there were 24,860 certified
participants as of June 30, 2013.
• MTA contracted with three vendors in February
2013 to provide MPP services for a three-year
period at a total cost of $231.9 million. The
vendors provide services using MTA-owned
vehicles and provide the drivers, fuel, and vehicle
maintenance. As of July 2014, vendor payments
totaled $89.9 million.
MTA - Maryland Transit Administration
Page 7

--- Page 8 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Mobility Paratransit Prog r am (continued)
 MTA’s error in calculating the vendors’ service
hour billing rates resulted in vendors being
overpaid for fuel costs by approximately $10
million during the period from February 2013 to
August 2014 (Finding 2).
Even though MTA separately pays for actual
vehicle fuel costs, MTA incorrectly included
estimated fuel costs in the service hour billing
rate calculations, resulting in the overpayments.
MTA made certain retroactive adjustments for
the July and August 2014 bills which recouped
$1.2 million.
As of November 2014, MTA, in consultation with
its legal counsel, was assessing potential
actions to be taken to pursue recovery of the
remaining $8.8 million it overpaid for fuel during
the months prior to July 2014.
MTA - Maryland Transit Administration
Page 8

--- Page 9 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Mobility Paratransit Prog r am (continued)
 MTA lacked adequate procedures and controls
over the MPP eligibility process (Finding 3). The
eligibility process includes verifying an
application signed by a healthcare professional
documenting the applicant’s disability and the
reason(s) the applicant is unable to use MTA’s
fixed route transportation services. MTA
provides a photo identification (ID) card to each
approved applicant.
• The employee performing the daily
independent reviews to verify that ID cards
were properly issued and accounted for did
not document the completion of the reviews.
• The eligibility database identifying the
population of applicants who received
approval was not used by MTA when
selecting eligibility determinations to review
for propriety.
MTA - Maryland Transit Administration
Page 9

--- Page 10 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Mobility Paratransit Prog r am (continued)
 MTA continued to pay State excise taxes to the
Comptroller of Maryland for fuel used in MPP
service vehicles, although MTA may be tax
exempt. During fiscal year 2012, MTA
reimbursed vendors approximately $498,300
for State excise taxes (Finding 4).
According to State law, with the exception of
water and sewer charges imposed by the State
or any of its agencies or political subdivisions,
MTA (including its activities and the property it
owns or controls) is exempt from all State and
local taxes, assessments, and charges.
MTA’s legal counsel agreed that the law applied
to MPP service vehicles and, as of October
2014, was planning to request a formal legal
opinion from the Office of the Attorney General
to resolve the issue.
MTA - Maryland Transit Administration
Page 10

--- Page 11 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Contract Procurement, M onitoring, and Payments
 MTA accepted a $24 million change order on a
$204.7 million MARC train service contract
without preparing an independent cost analysis
to determine whether the price provided by the
contractor was reasonable. Also, certain billed
charges were not adequately verified to
supporting documentation (Finding 5).
 MTA did not always comply with State
procurement regulations for sole source
contracts, recording bids received on
competitive bid contracts, and publishing
contract awards (Finding 6). For example, MTA
did not record the date of receipt of bid
documents nor publish the award of a $156.5
million contract.
 The security features available on the State’s
Financial Management Information System
were not fully used by MTA to establish proper
internal control over certain purchasing and
disbursement transactions (Finding 7).
MTA - Maryland Transit Administration
Page 11

--- Page 12 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Other Issues
 MTA did not have adequate procedures to ensure
all fare collections were deposited and security
over the collections needs improvement (Finding
8). FY 2013 cash collections totaled
approximately $47.6 million, with an additional
$7.2 million from credit cards. For example, MTA
did not ensure that all recorded fares were
transferred to the money room for deposit or
ensure that all recorded collections and credit
card receipts were deposited to its bank account.
 MTA did not adequately control its equipment and
properly maintain the related records (Finding 9 -
repeat). MTA’s equipment inventory totaled
approximately $1.4 billion as of June 30, 2013,
the majority of which was rolling stock (such as
buses and rail cars). For example, MTA had not
conducted a complete physical inventory of
sensitive equipment items since December 2010
and certain equipment items recorded could not
be located by OLA during testing.
MTA - Maryland Transit Administration
Page 12

--- Page 13 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Conclusions
MTA should
• perform verifications of the billed direct labor
rates with the contractors’ records of rates used
to pay its employees;
• take appropriate action to recover the
overpayments for fuel from the MPP vendors;
• ensure that recommended controls are
established and followed over the MPP eligibility
process;
• obtain a formal legal opinion from the Office of
Attorney General to determine if MTA is exempt
from the payment of State excise taxes for fuel
used in MTA’s MPP service vehicles;
• ensure independent cost estimates are prepared
to support and evaluate change order amounts,
perform a documented review of the supporting
documentation for billed costs, and comply with
State procurement regulations; and
• ensure that appropriate controls are established
and followed over fare collections, purchases and
disbursements, and equipment inventory.
MTA - Maryland Transit Administration
Page 13