Title: Presentation to the Senate Budget and Taxation Subcommittee - Deparment of Juvenile Services

Related Report Dated 9/29/2010
Date: 02/28/2011
Type: Presentations to the Legislature
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5a9daf29cc9d72387404dba3
Extracted: 2025-06-18T13:32:29.273980
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Department of Juvenile Services
Report dated September 29, 2010

--- Page 2 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Audit Overview
(cid:190) The Department of Juvenile Services (DJS) is the
central administrative agency for juvenile intake,
detention authorization, probation, protective
supervision, and aftercare services. In addition,
DJS provides residential care, diagnosis, training,
education, and rehabilitation to juveniles in State
facilities, and supervises community facilities
operated under contractual agreements.
(cid:190) During FY 2009, expenditures totaled $275.4
million and the number of youth placements
under its care (including detention programs,
committed programs, probation, and aftercare)
totaled approximately 33,100. The average daily
population of youths under supervision (in both
State and contractual facilities) totaled 2,055 for
the same period.
(cid:190) The audit report included 14 findings, 5 of which
were repeated from the preceding audit report.
Department of Juvenile Services
Page 2

--- Page 3 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Key Audit Issues
(cid:190) Federal Medicaid funding was not maximized for
eligible youth placed in residential rehabilitation
facilities and adequate controls were not
established to ensure Medicaid claims were
accurately submitted and reimbursed. We
estimated that unreimbursed claims totaled
approximately $3 million for the period from June
2008 to August 2009.
(cid:190) Significant deficiencies were noted with respect to
youth care contract procurement, monitoring and
auditing.
(cid:190) Youth monitoring efforts were not adequately
documented.
(cid:190) Controls were deficient in several areas including
payroll, information system security, and criminal
background checks.
Department of Juvenile Services
Page 3

--- Page 4 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Federal Funds
Background:
(cid:190) DJS’ primary sources of federal fund revenues are
Medicaid and Title IV-E, which during FY 2009
totaled $4.5 million of the $6.9 million federal
fund revenue received by DJS.
(cid:190) DJS obtains Medicaid reimbursement for eligible
youth placed in residential rehabilitation services
and Title IV-E funds for the costs of placing eligible
youths in certain out-of-home settings, such as in
State-licensed foster care homes or group homes.
(cid:190) To claim Medicaid reimbursement, a
Determination of Needs (DoN) assessment must
be prepared, which assesses the presence of
certain behavioral or emotional disorders that
prevent the youth from functioning normally in
community settings.
Department of Juvenile Services
Page 4

--- Page 5 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Federal Funds (continued)
(cid:190) In an August 2010 settlement with the Federal
government, DJS recovered $2.3 million of $4.8
million in Title IV-E FY 2008 and 2009
reimbursement requests processed for DJS by the
Department of Human Resources (DHR) that were
originally disallowed. The Federal government
asserted that DJS and DHR were operating
separate Title IV-E programs contrary to State law,
and the agreement between DHR and DJS
permitting the arrangement was deemed
inconsistent with applicable laws.
(cid:190) DJS has resolved the issue to the Federal
government’s satisfaction and effective July 2009
was allowed to resume requesting reimbursement
for certain costs. (Federal Fund Reimbursement
Disallowance)
Department of Juvenile Services
Page 5

--- Page 6 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Federal Funds (continued)
Medicaid funding was not maximized because DJS
had not obtained a valid DoN assessment prior to
placing the related youths in eligible residential
rehabilitation facilities, as required by federal
regulations. (Finding 1)
(cid:131) The contractor employed by DJS to assist with
Medicaid billings, reported that approximately
87,700 of 151,400 claims submitted by DJS
for reimbursement (during the period from
June 2008 to August 2009) were rejected by
the contractor. The value of these failed claims
was $4.3 million.
(cid:131) The contractor also reported that 90% or
approximately 79,700 of the claims failed
because DJS had not obtained a valid DoN for
the related youths prior to placement.
Department of Juvenile Services
Page 6

--- Page 7 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Federal Funds (continued)
Finding 1 (continued)
(cid:131) Our analysis of those 79,700 failed claims
disclosed that they related to 930 youths, of
whom 490 had been placed in an eligible facility
for at least two months. Although DJS had
successfully resubmitted 19,300 claims, the
remaining 60,400 were not eligible for
reimbursement because DJS had not obtained or
had not provided the contractor with the youth’s
DoN assessment.
(cid:131) We estimated that these unreimbursed claims
totaled approximately $3 million and that DJS will
be unable to recover most, if not all, of these
claims.
Department of Juvenile Services
Page 7

--- Page 8 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Federal Funds (continued)
Adequate procedures and controls were not
established to ensure Medicaid claims were
accurately submitted and reimbursed. (Finding 2)
(cid:190) Medicaid reimbursement claims, manually
compiled by a DJS employee, were not subject to
independent supervisory review and approval
prior to submission for reimbursement.
(cid:190) DJS did not adequately monitor the status of all
requested reimbursement claims submitted to its
Medicaid billing contractor nor reconcile
submission activity to contractor reports.
(cid:190) DJS also did not reconcile its Medicaid billing
contractor’s accepted claims data with Medicaid
funds received from DHMH. During March 2009,
claims totaling $511,600 were processed by the
contractor, but were not reimbursed until
February 2010, when we brought this to DJS’
attention.
Department of Juvenile Services
Page 8

--- Page 9 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Federal Funds (continued)
DJS determined it was unable to claim Title IV-E
funding for many eligible youths in its care because the
related court orders for the removal of the youths from
their homes did not contain specific language that met
federal requirements. Despite DJS’ efforts to work with
the Judiciary, DJS still has a large number of ineligible
cases because court orders did not contain the
required language. (Finding 3)
(cid:190) According to DJS records, in FY 2009, there were
1,554 court determinations, of which 17.8% were
ineligible because of a lack of the required
language. In FY 2007, 20.9% of the 1,040 court
determinations were ineligible.
(cid:190) In May 2009, DJS submitted a revised prototype
court order to the Judiciary; however, as of April
2010, it had not been approved by the Judiciary.
Furthermore, while improvement has been noted in
some jurisdictions throughout the State, other
jurisdictions continue to issue court decisions
without the required federal language.
Department of Juvenile Services
Page 9

--- Page 10 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Youth Care Contracts
Background:
(cid:190) DJS enters into numerous contracts for its
Purchase of Care program to provide services
(such as education, mental health, therapy,
vocational services, and counseling) to juveniles
placed in non-residential or licensed residential
facilities (such as treatment foster care).
(cid:190) Two main types of purchase of care contracts:
(cid:131) Per diem contracts, which represent the
majority of the purchase of care contracts, are
primarily used for residential care providers
who are paid based on predetermined rates.
(cid:131) Fixed rate contracts are primarily used for non-
residential providers who are paid a specified
amount each month to provide certain
services.
(cid:190) From FY 2007 to 2009, DJS paid approximately
$220.5 million to contractors providing youth care
services.
Department of Juvenile Services
Page 10

--- Page 11 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Youth Care Contracts (continued)
Significant deficiencies were noted with respect to the
procurement and monitoring of purchase of care
contracts, including the assessment of liquidated
damages. (Finding 4)
(cid:190) Per diem contracts were not always executed prior to
the contract start date, nor were all such contracts
submitted to Board of Public Works (BPW) for
approval. Upon bringing this to DJS’ attention, DJS
contacted the BPW to seek the retroactive approval
for 52 contracts valued at $148.5 million.
(cid:190) DJS did not monitor or maintain proper cost controls
to ensure that payments to contractors on per diem
contracts did not exceed the total contract values.
For 5 of 10 contracts tested, DJS approved payments
that exceeded the FY 2009 contract maximums by
$2.9 million without modifying the contracts.
(cid:190) DJS lacked adequate procedures to determine
whether liquidated damages should be assessed
when contractors under fixed rate contracts do not
comply with performance requirements.
Department of Juvenile Services
Page 11

--- Page 12 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Youth Care Contracts (continued)
DJS lacked sufficient procedures for monitoring and
performing audits of youth care contract expenditures.
During the period from August 1, 2006 through October
18, 2009, DJS performed 204 contract audits, resulting
in approximately $1.9 million due from contractors for
overpayments. (Finding 5)
(cid:190) DJS did not maintain a complete list of youth care
contracts nor establish a formal policy defining audit
frequency. As of March 2010, DJS records, which
were incomplete, indicated that audits had not been
performed for approximately 300 contracts with FYE
dates of June 30, 2009 or earlier.
(cid:190) DJS did not ensure audited financial statements
were being submitted by residential youth care
services contractors within the required 150 days
after the fiscal year ending date, and did not
adequately follow-up with contractors to obtain the
financial statements. The statements are used in
the audit process to identify overpayments.
Department of Juvenile Services
Page 12

--- Page 13 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Youth Monitoring and Case File Records
DJS did not always timely implement or review youth
treatment service plans (TSP), document supervision
contacts, or assess youth progress through the
Violence Prevention Initiative (VPI). Our review of 25
youth cases under DJS supervision in September
2009 disclosed the following: (Finding 7)
(cid:190) For 17 youths, DJS did not document the
implementation of the TSP within 25 days of the
youth’s court disposition, as required by law.
(cid:190) For 10 youths, DJS had not reviewed the TSP in the
past 90 days, as required by DJS policy.
(cid:190) For 14 youths, DJS did not adequately document
that the required number of case manager
supervision contacts had been conducted;
including 7 youths assigned to the VPI program.
(cid:190) Four youths progressed through the VPI program
levels quicker than the recommended time frame,
without adequate documentation of consistent
compliance with services and supervision.
Department of Juvenile Services
Page 13

--- Page 14 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Other Issues
(cid:190) Pharmaceutical invoices were paid without verifying
the propriety of the costs charged. In addition,
payments on the pharmaceutical contract exceeded
the approved contract amount. (Finding 6)
(cid:190) Proper security was not established over access to
certain computer resources, such as the State’s
FMIS and DJS’ youth case management system.
(Findings 8 and 9)
(cid:190) Certain employees improperly received overtime
compensation or received duplicate salary
payments. (Finding 10)
(cid:190) Employee criminal background checks were not
always conducted in a timely manner. (Finding 11)
(cid:190) Certain controls and procedures were deficient or
had not been established over automated restitution
accounts receivable and equipment. (Findings 12
and 13)
(cid:190) An improper working fund disbursement was made
and employee travel advances were not recovered
timely. (Finding 14)
Department of Juvenile Services
Page 14

--- Page 15 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Conclusion
DJS should:
(cid:190) Take steps to maximize eligible federal funding,
including Medicaid reimbursement for youths in
residential rehabilitation facilities, and continue
efforts to help ensure that court decisions contain
required language for the recovery of Title IV-E funds.
(cid:190) Establish appropriate controls over contracts,
including executing contracts prior to their coverage
periods, obtaining BPW approval for required
contracts and modifications, implementing contract
cost controls, maintaining a complete listing of all
youth care contracts and conducting timely audits.
(cid:190) Require case managers to timely implement and
review treatment plans and properly conduct and
document the required number of youth contacts.
(cid:190) Implement effective controls over pharmacy costs,
payroll, accounts receivable, equipment, working
fund, computer resources, and criminal background
checks.
Department of Juvenile Services
Page 15