Title: Presentation to the Senate Budget and Taxation Subcommittee - Department of Transportation - Motor Vehicle Administration

Related Report Dated 10/13/2010
Date: 02/17/2011
Type: Presentations to the Legislature
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5a9daf2acc9d72387404dbab
Extracted: 2025-06-18T13:33:06.687980
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Department of Transportation
Motor Vehicle Administration
Report dated October 13, 2010

--- Page 2 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Audit Overview
(cid:190) MVA has jurisdiction over a variety of activities related
to the ownership and operation of motor vehicles
such as:
(cid:131) Issuing driver’s licenses
(cid:131) Titling of vehicles
(cid:131) Verifying that vehicles are insured
(cid:190) MVA maintains a headquarters location in Anne
Arundel County and 24 branch offices, with a total
authorized workforce of 1,600 employees. MVA also
manages the eMVA Store, used for online processing
of MVA transactions (e.g., vehicle registration
renewals).
(cid:190) MVA collected $1.2 billion during FY 2009, primarily
motor vehicle excise taxes and registration fees.
(cid:190) The audit report included 13 findings, 2 of which were
repeat findings. MVA corrected 23 of the 25 findings
in the prior audit report, and its accountability and
compliance level is no longer unsatisfactory
Motor Vehicle Administration
Page 2

--- Page 3 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Key Audit Issues
(cid:190) MVA did not verify the completeness of reports used
to identify driving records requiring review to
determine whether administrative actions should be
taken due to traffic-related convictions. As a result,
MVA did not always take appropriate administrative
actions against the drivers, such as license
suspension or revocation.
(cid:190) MVA lacked adequate controls over critical
transactions affecting drivers’ records.
(cid:190) Certain sensitive personal and financial information
of eMVA Store customers was not fully protected.
(cid:190) MVA did not adequately monitor ignition interlock
program cases resulting in individuals being
improperly allowed to resume normal driving
privileges.
(cid:190) Sufficient internal controls were not established in
certain areas.
Motor Vehicle Administration
Page 3

--- Page 4 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
License Suspensions & Revocations
Background:
(cid:190) MVA receives information daily, consisting primarily
of traffic citations and case convictions, which is
electronically transmitted from the State’s district
and circuit courts and from other State and local
entities, that impact driver’s licenses. This
information is converted to “points” and is
accumulated in MVA’s drivers’ license records file.
(cid:190) Generally, an accumulation of 8 points results in a
suspension and 12 points in a revocation of a
driver’s license.
(cid:190) MVA manually analyzes this information to
determine appropriate administrative actions, such
as license suspensions and revocations due to an
accumulation of an excessive number of points.
(cid:190) During CY 2009, according to MVA records, it
processed 232,039 suspensions and 8,531
revocations of drivers’ licenses.
Motor Vehicle Administration
Page 4

--- Page 5 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
License Suspensions & Revocations
(Cont’d)
Reports MVA generated from its drivers’ license data
file used to identify cases requiring the manual
analysis of driving records were incomplete. Due to
MVA’s lack of accountability over these files, MVA was
unaware that some cases were omitted from review.
(Finding 1)
(cid:131) Our limited review of MVA’s court conviction records
for the period of December 2008 to May 2009
identified 139 cases with 12-point violations that
were not listed on the related reports and were not
subject to the manual review process.
(cid:131) We selected 20 of the aforementioned 139 cases
and reviewed the driving records. Our test disclosed
that 16 of the 20 drivers should have had their
licenses revoked.
(cid:131) MVA believes a programming error in 2008 was the
likely reason for the omission of these cases from
the data files used to generate the reports.
Motor Vehicle Administration
Page 5

--- Page 6 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
License Suspensions & Revocations
(cont’d)
Controls over critical transactions impacting
individuals’ driving records were inadequate.
(cid:190)Supervisors are supposed to review the results of the
manual review noted in Finding 1, and record the
penalties in the driving license data file. However, no
system documentation was generated to identify the
supervisor who performed each review and recorded
the penalty. Also, independent verifications were not
performed to ensure that the proper penalties were
recorded in the records. (Finding 2)
(cid:190)Although MVA conducted independent daily reviews,
on a test basis, of the entries made to driving
records (including removal of suspensions and
revocations), formal guidelines were not established
to specify the types of transactions to be included in
the reviews and documentation of the reviews was
not always retained. Also, the employees who
reviewed these transactions could also make
changes to the driving records database thereby
allowing them to review the transactions they
initiated. (Finding 3)
Motor Vehicle Administration
Page 6

--- Page 7 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Information Systems Security & Control
MVA operates and maintains various applications,
servers and local networks and interacts with
contractors to provide some IT-related services to
MVA. An example is the eMVA Store, which enables
individuals to perform various transactions via the
Internet, such as vehicle registration renewals. Online
payments via the eMVA Store website totaled $90
million In FY 2009.
(cid:190) MVA customers’ sensitive personal and financial
information was not adequately protected. While
security has improved since the last audit, further
actions need to be taken to secure certain eMVA
Store customers’ names, bank account
information and credit card numbers on MVA’s
files. (Finding 4)
(cid:190) Proper security controls were not established over
the vehicle registration system files, mainframe
production files, and the virtual server
environment. (Findings 5 & 6)
Motor Vehicle Administration
Page 7

--- Page 8 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Ignition Interlock Program
The Ignition Interlock Program (IIP) is intended to
prevent individuals convicted of alcohol–related driving
violations from driving while intoxicated. Individuals are
enrolled for several reasons, including a court order or
in conjunction with a reduced driver’s license
suspension or revocation. An ignition interlock device is
fitted to the driver’s vehicle that monitors the driver’s
blood alcohol level and violations are reported to the
MVA for monitoring purposes. As of June 2009 there
were 7,124 enrolled individuals.
There were inadequate controls over MVA overrides of
reported IIP violations (Finding 9). For example,
(cid:190) MVA caseworker overrides of IIP violations were
generally not reviewed by supervisory personnel.
(cid:190) For 2 of 20 IIP cases tested, IIP violations were over-
ridden by MVA without sufficient justification,
permitting these two individuals to complete the IIP
despite lack of compliance with applicable State
laws and IIP program requirements.
Motor Vehicle Administration
Page 8

--- Page 9 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Other Issues
(cid:190) MVA had not established adequate accountability
or controls over its license plate and registration
sticker inventories. (Findings 7 and 8)
(cid:190) MVA had not properly secured checks received in
one location. (Finding 10)
(cid:190) MVA insurance compliance staff employees had the
authority to close certain cases (for example, if the
lapse was less than five days) without conducting
an investigation and without obtaining supervisory
approval. (Finding 11)
(cid:190) MVA had not established adequate controls to
prevent unauthorized disbursement transactions
and to ensure that payments were only made for
actual goods received. (Finding 12)
(cid:190) MVA did not always expand testing for additional
transactions during its internal investigations of
potentially fraudulent activities when evidence of
possible criminal or unethical conduct by MVA
employees was identified. (Finding 13)
Motor Vehicle Administration
Page 9

--- Page 10 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Conclusion
MVA needs to ensure that:
(cid:190)All traffic conviction cases affected by the
programming error are investigated and appropriate
corrective action is taken; and procedures are
established to verify the completeness of MVA’s
computer-generated reports.
(cid:190)Penalty determinations are properly approved and
accurately recorded on driving records.
(cid:190)Critical adjustments to driving records, IIP overrides,
and insurance lapses are subject to appropriate
supervisory review and approval.
(cid:190)eMVA Store applications and customer data are
properly secured.
(cid:190)Adequate accountability is established over license
plate and registration sticker inventories, and
sufficient controls are implemented over cash
receipts and disbursements.
(cid:190)Testing is expanded if fraud is suspected.
Motor Vehicle Administration
Page 10