Title: Presentation to the Senate Budget and Taxation Subcommittee - Department of Human Resources - Family Investment Administration

Related Report Dated 2/9/2011
Date: 02/24/2011
Type: Presentations to the Legislature
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5a9daf29cc9d72387404db9f
Extracted: 2025-06-18T13:32:06.868348
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Department of Human Resources
Family Investment Administration
Report dated February 9, 2011

--- Page 2 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Audit Overview
(cid:190) The Family Investment Administration (FIA)
oversees a number of public assistance programs
administered by the 24 local departments of
social services (LDSS). The three major
assistance programs are:
(cid:131) Temporary Cash Assistance (TCA)
(cid:131) Home energy assistance programs
(cid:131) Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program
(SNAP, formerly the food stamp program)
(cid:190) TCA and the home energy programs are State and
federally funded, while SNAP is entirely federally
funded. FY 2010 payments for these three
programs totaled $141 million, $150 million, and
$837 million, respectively.
(cid:190) Our report included 8 findings, 2 of which were
repeated from our preceding audit report.
Department of Human Resources -
Page 2
Family Investment Administration

--- Page 3 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Key Audit Issues
(cid:190) The results of computer matches and data
verification procedures used to identify
potentially ineligible benefit recipients were not
investigated and resolved in a timely and
adequate manner.
(cid:190) FIA reduced its efforts to monitor LDSS
compliance with established quality assurance
program requirements.
(cid:190) Several verification, documentation, and
internal control deficiencies existed within the
home energy assistance programs.
(cid:190) Steps were not always taken to verify the
propriety of certain temporary disability
assistance program benefits.
Department of Human Resources -
Page 3
Family Investment Administration

--- Page 4 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Computer Matches
The results of FIA’s computer matches of recipient data
to independent sources, such as Social Security
Administration (SSA) records and State prisoner
records, were not always investigated and resolved in a
timely and adequate manner by the LDSS. (Finding 1)
(cid:131) A review of 28,700 automated alerts signifying that a
recipient’s SSA number either had not been verified
to federal records or was missing from the case
record, disclosed that 2,600 had been outstanding
for over a year without resolution. FIA estimated that
FY 2010 DHR benefit payments to the related
individuals totaled $3.4 million. Alerts should be
timely addressed to ensure that recipients are eligible
and payments are correct.
(cid:131) Recoupment of overpayments was not always
initiated for cases in which FIA matches disclosed
benefit payments made for recipients while
incarcerated. OLA’s review of 11 such cases
disclosed overpayments of $14,400, of which
$9,300 had been cashed, but not recouped, and one
recipient was recertified while incarcerated.
Department of Human Resources -
Page 4
Family Investment Administration

--- Page 5 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Quality Assurance Programs
FIA’s monitoring efforts to ensure LDSS compliance
with quality assurance programs were insufficient.
These programs were established to assess case
worker performance and to identify and reduce or
eliminate case errors, such as incorrect eligibility
determinations. (Finding 2)
(cid:131) Certain longstanding follow-up processes were
discontinued by FIA, such as requiring corrective
action plans from the LDSS when there was
continued noncompliance with program
requirements.
(cid:131) Delays in the resolution of case errors by LDSS
were not promptly investigated by FIA. In 37 of
150 SNAP (food stamp) cases with errors
identified by FIA, it took the LDSS between 107 to
256 days to correct them. In 2010, Maryland was
sanctioned $423,563 by the federal government
because its SNAP error rate exceeded certain
national performance measures.
Department of Human Resources -
Page 5
Family Investment Administration

--- Page 6 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Energy Assistance Programs
Verification, documentation and internal control
deficiencies were found over procedures relating to the
Electric Universal Service Program and the Maryland
Energy Assistance Program. These programs provided
assistance totaling $150 million in FY 2010 to eligible
recipients to pay for home energy costs. The
assistance payments are disbursed directly to utility
companies on behalf of approved applicants.
(cid:131) Matching procedures, such as those used for other
assistance programs, were not employed to help
ensure recipient eligibility and the validity of benefit
amounts. (Finding 3)
(cid:131) Local Administering Agencies (LAA) responsible for
processing applications for assistance did not
always obtain documentation to support required
application data. A review of 25 cases at one LAA
disclosed a lack of documentation, such as utility
bills, to support payments of $20,900 on behalf of
12 recipients. (Finding 4)
Department of Human Resources -
Page 6
Family Investment Administration

--- Page 7 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Energy Assistance Programs
(continued)
(cid:131) Controls over access to the data management
system used to process program applications and
calculate benefit amounts due were not adequate.
For example, 117 individuals at LAAs and DHR
headquarters had access that allowed them to
modify applications and certify the adjusted
applications for payment without independent
review and approval. (Finding 5)
(cid:131) FIA lacked adequate controls over collections,
consisting primarily of refunds for overpayments of
assistance benefits. For example, independent
reports of refunds issued were not received from the
utility companies for comparison to collections
actually received. FY 2010 refunds totaled
approximately $5 million. Also, these collections
were first received and recorded by FIA, but during
the period of May 2008 to December 2009, there
was no verification of the disposition of collections.
(Finding 6)
Department of Human Resources -
Page 7
Family Investment Administration

--- Page 8 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Temporary Disability Assistance Program
FIA lacked assurance that extended Temporary
Disability Assistance Program (TDAP) benefits were
paid only to qualified recipients. (Finding 7)
(cid:131) TDAP benefits, which are State funded and totaled
approximately $41.6 million in FY 2010, are paid to
eligible recipients (low-income disabled adults) on a
temporary basis, generally not more than 9 months.
Benefits may be extended when the individual is
actively applying to the SSA for federal benefits.
(cid:131) A review of 20 cases (out of 4,600 recipients who
had been receiving benefits for over one year)
disclosed 2 in which benefits of $22,000 were paid
even though FIA lacked documentation that federal
benefits were being pursued. In one of those cases,
benefits should have stopped in June 2003, but
continued until we brought this to FIA’s attention in
August 2010. In a third case, $4,200 in benefits
were issued (but not cashed by the recipient) for 2
years after the recipient was approved for federal
benefits and TDAP benefits should have stopped.
Department of Human Resources -
Page 8
Family Investment Administration

--- Page 9 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Conclusion
FIA needs to:
(cid:190) Ensure that the results of computer matches are
investigated and resolved in a timely and adequate
manner.
(cid:190) Ensure that LDSS complete required quality
assurance reviews and effectively address errors
identified within required timeframes.
(cid:190) Use available matching procedures to
independently verify critical data, such as income
and social security numbers, submitted by
applicants for energy assistance program benefits,
and maintain all critical supporting documentation.
(cid:190) Take steps to adequately control access to the
automated system used to process energy
assistance applications and benefits, and improve
controls over collections received.
(cid:190) Verify the continued eligibility of individuals
receiving TDAP benefits for extended periods.
Department of Human Resources -
Page 9
Family Investment Administration