Title: Presentation to the Joint Audit Committee - Maryland State Department of Education

Related Report Dated 6/22/2016
Date: 08/03/2016
Type: Presentations to the Legislature
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5a9daf30cc9d72387404dce8
Extracted: 2025-06-18T14:06:26.838362
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Maryland State
Department of Education
Report dated June 22, 2016
Presentation to the Joint Audit Committee
Thomas J. Barnickel III, CPA
Brian S. Tanen, CPA, CFE
August 3, 2016

--- Page 2 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Report Overview
The report contained 11 findings, including 3 repeat
findings from the prior report.
Key Findings
Cost Recoveries - Statewide indirect cost recoveries
were not reverted to the General Fund, as required.
Interagency Agreements - Interagency agreements
with a State university were used improperly to staff
a technology position, monitoring was inadequate,
and certain costs were not supported.
Contract Procurement - State procurement
regulations were not always followed and sufficient
procedures for monitoring contractor performance
were lacking.
Child Care Oversight – Procedures were not
sufficient to ensure required criminal background
checks were obtained and pursued for child care
employees, and user access to the automated Child
Care Subsidy Program was not properly restricted.
Maryland State Department of Education
Page 2

--- Page 3 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Statewide Indirect Costs (Finding 1)
Statewide indirect cost recoveries from the federal
government for FYs 2012 - 14 totaling $12.3 million
were not reverted to the State’s General Fund as
required by State law.
• The recoveries represent reimbursement for
the costs of other State agencies in support
of MSDE federal grant activities.
• $27 million of indirect costs recoveries for
MSDE’s own costs were recovered and
appropriately retained for the same period.
• MSDE advised us that these recoveries were
insufficient for its needs and that it retained
the statewide indirect costs recovered to help
fund its own central service functions.
Maryland State Department of Education
Page 3

--- Page 4 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Interagency Agreements (Finding 3)
MSDE entered into three consecutive interagency
agreements with Towson University to provide a Chief
Information Officer (CIO), rather than use an existing
budgeted position.
FY 2014 payments under the agreements exceeded the
budgeted CIO position’s salary and fringes by $58,000.
Maryland State Department of Education
Page 4

--- Page 5 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Interagency Agreements (Finding 3)
• MSDE controlled the selection of the individual
hired under the third agreement (its involvement in
the hiring under the other two agreements was
unknown). MSDE was solely responsible for the
daily supervision and monitoring.
• The University’s involvement was generally limited
to hiring the CIO (who was not a university
employee), paying the salary, and invoicing MSDE
for reimbursement.
• The agreements lacked sufficient details to
facilitate effective monitoring of the deliverables.
• MSDE could not explain or provide documentation
as to how the agreed-upon costs were developed,
nor could it provide any independent analysis to
determine whether the administrative fees, which
ranged from 15 to 28 percent of total costs billed,
were reasonable.
Maryland State Department of Education
Page 5

--- Page 6 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Contracts (Finding 4)
Various contract procurement and monitoring issues
were found based on our tests of nine service
contracts procured during the period from July 2011
through May 2014 totaling $20.3 million.
• Three contracts totaling $18.1 million did not
have adequate documentation of the procurement
and contractor selection processes.
• One contract valued at $1.2 million did not
include specific deliverables or task orders to
direct the vendor’s work and to enable effective
monitoring of performance and verification of
invoices.
• Four contracts totaling $1.1 million did not have
the minimum 20-day bid solicitation time (the
period between the date of publication of the
invitation for bid and the due date for the bids).
• Two contract awards totaling $2 million were not
published on eMaryland Marketplace as required.
Maryland State Department of Education
Page 6

--- Page 7 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Child Care Programs (Finding 6)
MSDE is responsible for State child care programs,
including licensing about 9,800 facilities to serve
219,000 children, monitoring compliance with
regulations, and taking enforcement actions.
Finding 6 – Criminal Background Checks
Procedures were not sufficient to ensure that criminal
background checks were obtained for all individuals
employed at child care facilities and that the results
of background checks and subsequent alerts were
adequately pursued.
• No process was established requiring verification
that facility employees were recorded in CCATS, a
system used for child care licensing and
monitoring. There was no record of initial
background checks for 2 of 9 individuals tested.
• MSDE staff did not fully investigate alerts of
subsequent criminal activity, such as by
substantiating the individuals were no longer
associated with the facilities.
Maryland State Department of Education
Page 7

--- Page 8 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Child Care Programs (Finding 7)
Finding 7 – Child Care System Access
User access to the Child Care Subsidy Program
features on CCATS was not restricted to those
individuals requiring access to perform their jobs
and to prevent the recording of improper
transactions.
• Our review of critical system access assigned to
681 users disclosed numerous users who were
assigned unnecessary or inappropriate system
access, including 68 ex-employees.
• MSDE did not periodically generate reports for its
review that identified all users and their
accesses.
• Subsidies paid during FY 2014 using the System
totaled $81 million.
Maryland State Department of Education
Page 8

--- Page 9 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Other Findings
Finding 2 – Untimely Drawdowns
Expenditures associated with a federal grant were not
recovered in a timely manner, resulting in lost interest
income of $140,000.
Finding 5 – Cash Receipts
Collections received in the business office, which
totaled approximately $47.4 million during FY 2014,
were not adequately controlled.
Findings 8 to 10 – Information Technology (IT)
Critical IT operations, including sensitive personally
identifiable information, were not properly
safeguarded. Disaster recovery plans and procedures
for backing up critical databases were not
comprehensive.
Finding 11 – Questionable Activity
Certain questionable payroll and personnel activity
was not disclosed to the appropriate legal authorities.
Maryland State Department of Education
Page 9

--- Page 10 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Conclusion
MSDE should
• revert future statewide indirect cost recoveries to
the State’s General Fund;
• discontinue its practice of using interagency
agreements to hire individuals, adhere to State
regulations when procuring contracts, and
monitor related contractor performance;
• enhance its procedures to ensure that criminal
background checks are obtained for all child care
employees and related results and subsequent
alerts are adequately pursued, and restrict
access to Child Care Subsidy Program features;
and
• implement recommended actions to recover
federal funds timely, improve security and
controls over collections and information
systems, and report questionable activity as
required.
Maryland State Department of Education
Page 10