Title: Presentation to the Senate Judicial Proceedings Full Committee - Office of the Public Defender

Related Report Dated 8/21/2014
Date: 01/28/2015
Type: Presentations to the Legislature
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5a9daf2dcc9d72387404dc87
Extracted: 2025-06-18T13:55:27.719417
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Presentation to Senate
Judicial Proceedings Committee
Office of the Public Defender
Report dated August 21, 2014
Joshua S. Adler, CPA, CFE
Sandra C. Medeiros

--- Page 2 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Audit Overview
 The Office of the Public Defender (OPD) provides
legal services to eligible indigent individuals
charged with violating State, county, and/or
municipal laws involving possible incarceration.
 OPD services are provided in criminal and juvenile
proceedings, probation and parole revocations,
involuntary commitments to institutions, and
termination of parental right proceedings.
 FY 2013 operating expenditures totaled $93
million, primarily for payroll costs. According to
OPD, in CY 2012, 241,000 new cases were
opened.
 The August 2014 audit report included 3 findings.
Additionally, 3 findings from the preceding report
(dated February 10, 2011) were repeated. We
also determined the current status of certain
findings from our November 2009 performance
audit report on OPD’s budgeting and financial
management practices.
Office of the Public Defender
Page 2

--- Page 3 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Key Audit Issues
 An April 2010 court decision regarding the OPD
client eligibility determination process has
impacted client services.
 OPD did not ensure that applications for
representation were supported with income and
expense documentation, as required by State
regulations, so there was a lack of assurance that
certain clients were eligible for services.
 OPD did not ensure that administrative fees were
assessed to all applicable clients.
 Follow-up of findings from our 2009 performance
audit report noted similar concerns with the need
to improve OPD’s financial budgeting and its
efforts to meet attorney caseload standards.
Office of the Public Defender
Page 3

--- Page 4 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Significant Court Decisio n s
Client Eligibility
As disclosed in our February 2011 report, the Court of
Appeals decided in April 2010 that OPD had been
erroneously rejecting potential clients when
determining the client’s financial ability to pay
representation costs. Specifically, its eligibility criteria
solely considered income and assets, without
considering expenses. In May 2010, OPD changed its
eligibility criteria to consider expenses and its records
indicated that there was a 10% increase in cases.
Right to Counsel at Initial Bail Hearings
In September 2013, the Court of Appeals issued a
decision that an indigent defendant is entitled to
State-furnished counsel at the defendant’s initial
appearance before a District Court Commissioner.
Chapter 462, Laws of MD 2014, restricted $10 million
in the Judiciary’s FY 2015 budget to be used to
provide such counsel. We were advised that OPD
would not have an official role in the implementation
of this decision.
Office of the Public Defender
Page 4

--- Page 5 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Client Eligibility
Background
 State law generally provides that client eligibility
shall be determined by the need of the applicant
and specifies certain financial factors to be
considered.
 According to State regulations, an applicant
seeking OPD’s services is required to complete a
form disclosing all assets, income, and expenses
and provide documentary evidence of all financial
information, such as pay stubs, reported on the
form.
 OPD’s Intake Manual states that, in instances
where the applicant claims to have no income or
expenses, the applicant shall complete a form
documenting the individual’s financial support
was provided by another person. This would also
include the other person’s contact information for
verification purposes.
Office of the Public Defender
Page 5

--- Page 6 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Client Eligibility (continue d)
OPD did not ensure that applications for services were
supported and subject to supervisory review.
Consequently, there was a lack of assurance that
certain clients were eligible to receive services
(Finding 1). Our test of 40 cases disclosed:
 OPD could not find the applications for 4 cases
and for 32 cases there was no documentation to
support the income and expenses reported by the
clients on the applications.
 For all 40 cases there was no evidence of
independent supervisory reviews of the eligibility
determinations completed by intake workers.
 OPD’s Intake Manual did not require supporting
documentation of client information or
independent supervisory reviews.
 In the prior audit report we noted that OPD did not
verify certain client-reported information, and that
eligibility determinations were not always properly
supported nor subject to a documented
independent review and approval.
Office of the Public Defender
Page 6

--- Page 7 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Client Eligibility (continue d)
Finding 1 Recommendation and Response
OLA’s Finding 1 recommendations were that OPD
ensure that
 eligibility determinations are properly supported
and reviewed and approved by supervisory
personnel (repeat), and
 the Intake Manual is revised to require supporting
documentation from applicants for reported
financial information and the aforementioned
documented supervisory review (repeat).
OPD responded that it
 was planning to seek a change in regulations so
that it would no longer be required to obtain
documentary evidence of financial information;
although, until the regulations were changed, OPD
would strive to obtain such documentation, and
 it would perform supervisory reviews of eligibility
determinations and would modify its policies to
require such reviews.
Office of the Public Defender
Page 7

--- Page 8 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Client Billings
Background
 State regulations require applicants seeking
representation, except for unaccompanied
juveniles and clients confined to a mental
institution, to pay an administrative fee of $50
for adults and $25 for juveniles.
 According to OPD’s records for FY 2013,
administrative fee billings totaled $6.9 million,
collections totaled $2 million and the accounts
receivable balance totaled $24.3 million, as of
June 30, 2013.
Office of the Public Defender
Page 8

--- Page 9 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Client Billings (continued )
OPD did not ensure that administrative fees were
properly assessed to all applicable clients (Finding 2).
 Our comparison of new cases recorded in OPD’s
case management system in CY 2012 with the
related accounts receivable (AR) records of cases
charged administrative fees disclosed
approximately 12,200 cases for which
administrative fees were not assessed.
 Our test of 20 of these cases disclosed 8 cases that
were not properly assessed fees. OPD
acknowledged that fees should have been charged
in 3 of these cases, but asserted that for the other
5 cases, OPD had not charged the fees because the
client had a previous, unrelated case. However,
there is no provision exempting a client from the fee
in such an instance.
 In the prior audit report we noted OPD did not
ensure that all fees were recorded in the AR system
and pursued for collection. Our comparison of FY
2010 new cases found 40,000 cases were not
posted to AR records due to interface problems.
Office of the Public Defender
Page 9

--- Page 10 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Client Billings (continued )
Finding 2 Recommendation and Response
OLA’s Finding 2 recommendation was that OPD
assess administrative fees to applicants, as
required by State regulations (repeat).
OPD responded that it would review and amend
State regulations, as necessary, to reflect its policy
for assessing administrative fees, and assess fees,
accordingly.
Office of the Public Defender
Page 10

--- Page 11 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Performance Audit Follow -Up
Background
 In response to a request in the April 2008 Joint
Chairmen’s Report, OLA conducted a performance
audit, dated November 19, 2009, addressing
certain aspects of OPD’s operations. In November
2001 OLA issued an earlier performance audit
report on the OPD’s budgetary and financial
management practices.
 The 2009 performance audit focused on
assessing the effectiveness of OPD’s budgetary
practices and the related procedures regarding
funding decisions. Additionally, we reviewed the
procedures and controls over case management.
 The 2009 performance audit report included 8
detailed recommendations. During our most
recent fiscal/compliance audit, we conducted a
follow-up review of the actions taken by OPD to
address certain recommendations.
Office of the Public Defender
Page 11

--- Page 12 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Performance Audit Follow -Up (continued)
Follow-Up Analysis
OPD still needs to improve its financial budgeting and
its efforts to meet attorney caseload standards. For
example, we noted the following:
 OPD had held discussions with the Department of
Budget and Management (DBM) to resolve
budgeting concerns, but OPD still required
deficiency appropriations for FY 2011, 2012 and
2013. Additionally, since OPD lacked sufficient
appropriations to fund its expenses at year-end, it
paid certain expenses from the subsequent year’s
appropriation (Prior Objective 1).
 We were advised by OPD management that it could
not meet its current caseload standards with
existing staffing levels. Furthermore, due to
funding considerations, OPD had not implemented
a process to determine whether caseload
standards needed to be updated nor had it
developed case management tools to more
efficiently manage its caseload (Prior Objective 2).
Office of the Public Defender
Page 12

--- Page 13 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Performance Audit Follow -up (continued)
Follow-up Recommendation 1 and Response
 OLA recommended that OPD continue to work with
DBM to resolve budgeting issues, identify ways to
meet its budgeted appropriation, and improve
financial reporting and expenditure monitoring.
 OPD responded that it was in regular contact with
DBM re: budget issues and reducing costs, and that it
would evaluate the feasibility of (implementing )
reporting and monitoring systems for certain costs.
Follow-up Recommendation 2 and Response
 OLA recommended that OPD develop and implement
the most appropriate strategy for meeting its
caseload standards, periodically determine if those
standards need to be modified, and as practicable,
either develop case management tools or work with
DBM to obtain funding for such tools.
 OPD responded that it regularly considers standards
when allocating attorney resources, routinely
monitors actual caseloads and comparative statistics,
and that DBM denied funding for a new case
management system in FY 2015 budget submission.
Office of the Public Defender
Page 13