Title: Presentation to the Senate Budget and Taxation Subcommittee - Department of Human Resources - Social Services Administration

Related Report Dated 10/6/2008
Date: 02/09/2009
Type: Presentations to the Legislature
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5a9daf24cc9d72387404db0b
Extracted: 2025-06-18T09:12:21.296768
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Department of Human Resources
Social Services Administration
Report dated October 6, 2008

--- Page 2 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Audit Overview
(cid:190) Audit report, which covered the period from
May 2004 through June 2007, included 9
findings, with 4 of those repeated from the
preceding audit report.
(cid:190) Social Services Administration (SSA)
supervises, directs, and monitors the social
services programs conducted by the local
departments of social services in each of the
State’s 24 subdivisions.
(cid:190) These programs (including the foster care
program) are intended to prevent or remedy
abuse, neglect, and exploitation of children
and families.
(cid:190) SSA’s fiscal year 2007 costs for SSA and local
department operations, including payments to
group care and foster care providers, totaled
approximately $543 million.
DHR – Social Services Administration
Page 2

--- Page 3 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Key Audit Issues
(cid:190) Many of the deficiencies in SSA’s monitoring the
local departments’ delivery of services were
attributed to implementation and functionality
problems with the Children’s Electronic Social
Services Information Exchange (CHESSIE) system,
which cost $67.6 million through June 30, 2007.
(cid:190) Compliance with State and federal foster care
service requirements had not been ensured.
(cid:190) The sufficiency of child welfare caseload ratios had
not been established, as required by State law.
(cid:190) Fiscal monitoring needed improvement in certain
areas to ensure that:
(cid:131) local departments are using the most cost-
effective providers;
(cid:131) payments to group care providers are fully
justified and overpayments are returned to DHR,
as appropriate; and
(cid:131) certain contract costs are documented.
DHR – Social Services Administration
Page 3

--- Page 4 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
CHESSIE Implementation
Critical components of the CHESSIE system had not
been successfully implemented, resulting in
inaccuracies and preventing SSA from effectively
monitoring foster care activities. (Finding 1)
(cid:131) Incomplete and inaccurate case records were
found; for example, > 2,500 foster care
placements were not recorded.
(cid:131) The reasons for Federal funding ineligibility of
certain children in foster care were not
documented, hindering the resolution of the
disqualifying factors. (see also Finding 5)
(cid:131) CHESSIE did not interface effectively with the
DHR Client Information System (CIS) to ensure
comprehensive integration of cases with all
DHR programs.
(cid:131) CHESSIE did not interface properly with FMIS to
allow DHR to pay providers directly.
(cid:131) Required Federal reporting information could
not be produced with CHESSIE.
DHR – Social Services Administration
Page 4

--- Page 5 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Foster Care Service Requirements
SSA had not ensured compliance with foster care service
requirements established by State and federal regulations.
(Finding 2)
(cid:131) The Child Welfare and Adult Services Performance
Review System (CAPS) that was used to routinely
monitor compliance with critical State regulations was
discontinued after November 2004.
(cid:131) The required success rate was not met for 6 of the 7
outcomes in the federally-mandated Child and Family
Services Review (CFSR) in either the November 2003
federal review or DHR’s May 2007 self-assessment.
(cid:131) CAPS versus CFSR:
o CAPS objectively measured documented compliance
with specific service actions (e.g., children attending
school within five days of placement, required dental
exams received, and if caseworkers met with each
child every three months).
o CFSR subjectively evaluated outcomes (e.g., children
receive services to meet their educational and
physical health needs).
DHR – Social Services Administration
Page 5

--- Page 6 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Child Welfare Caseloads
SSA was unable to adequately monitor the sufficiency
of the child welfare caseload ratios of the local
departments of social services, as required by State
law. (Finding 3)
(cid:131) SSA has not been able to generate competent
and reliable information on local department
caseload ratios from either the long-existing CIS
or the newly-implemented CHESSIE system.
(cid:131) In a February 2007 report, the Child Welfare
League of America (CWLA) recommended an
increase in caseworkers and supervisors, but
cautioned the increases may not be accurate
due to severe shortcomings in DHR’s data
collection process.
(cid:131) CWLA strongly recommended that DHR complete
a Maryland-specific task and workload analysis
to ensure sufficient child welfare staff were
available to meet CWLA caseload standards. As
of March 24, 2008, such a task and workload
analysis had not been completed.
DHR – Social Services Administration
Page 6

--- Page 7 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Financial Monitoring Issues
(cid:190) SSA did not monitor the local departments’ to
ensure that children were placed with the most
cost-effective group foster care providers. Non-
preferred providers were paid at least $33
million in FY 06. (Finding 6)
(cid:190) All group foster care provider annual audit
reports were not received and reviewed timely
to ensure that payments to the providers were
fully justified and overpayments recovered as
appropriate. Such providers were paid $185
million in FY 07. (Finding 7)
(cid:190) Certain documentation was not obtained to
support contract costs. Inadequate
substantiation of similar costs for federal funds
obtained resulted in a $3.2 million federal
disallowance. (Finding 8)
DHR – Social Services Administration
Page 7

--- Page 8 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Conclusion
(cid:190) SSA should ensure that that essential
features of CHESSIE are fully operational
and that all data in CHESSIE are accurate
and complete.
(cid:190) SSA should take appropriate action to
ensure compliance with foster care service
requirements established by State and
federal regulations.
(cid:190) SSA should take appropriate action to
ensure the reliability of local department
caseload data, complete the task and
workload analysis , and ensure that the
caseload ratios are achieved.
(cid:190) SSA should enhance its financial monitoring
and documentation practices.
DHR – Social Services Administration
Page 8