Title: Presentation to the Senate Budget and Taxation Subcommittee - Department of Transportation - State Highway Administration

Related Report Dated 11/15/2012
Date: 02/28/2013
Type: Presentations to the Legislature
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5a9daf2ccc9d72387404dc2b
Extracted: 2025-06-18T13:46:31.848249
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Department of Transportation
State Highway Administration
Report dated November 15, 2012

--- Page 2 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Audit Overview
 The State Highway Administration (SHA) is
responsible for planning, construction,
improvement, and maintenance and operations
of the State highway system. SHA operates
numerous facilities throughout the State,
including a headquarters in Baltimore City and
seven district offices.
 According to the State’s accounting records,
SHA’s fiscal year 2011 expenditures totaled
approximately $1.1 billion.
 The audit report, which covered the period from
August 1, 2008 to June 30, 2011, included 10
findings, one of which was repeated from the
preceding audit report.
 In November 2011 and June 2011, OLA issued
two special reports on SHA in which were noted a
number of contract-related issues. OLA’s current
audit identified certain similar findings.
State Highway Administration
Page 2

--- Page 3 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Key Audit Issues
 SHA’s policies and procedures for architectural
and engineering (A&E) contracts did not provide
the necessary safeguards to ensure compliance
with certain State procurement regulations and
Maryland Department of Transportation (MDOT)
guidelines. These included the lack of
documentation for the basis of the maximum value
of contracts, the use of contract funds to pay for
work outside the contract’s scope and the
extension of contract expiration dates without
proper approval.
 Contract procurement and monitoring deficiencies
were noted with respect to SHA’s Maryland
SafeZones Program (that is, the automated speed
monitoring program for highway work zones).
 Proper procedures and/or controls were deficient
in several areas including information systems and
compliance with State ethics law and MDOT
administrative leave policy.
State Highway Administration
Page 3

--- Page 4 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Architectural and Engin e ering (A&E) Contracts
Background:
 SHA contracted with multiple A&E firms to provide
consultant services for SHA projects.
 According to SHA records, during the period August
2008 through June 2011, there were approximately
152 awarded contracts with 73 firms and contract
awards totaled approximately $503 million. During
the same period, payments to A&E contractors
totaled approximately $431 million.
 In November 2011 and June 2011, OLA issued two
special review reports on SHA in which OLA noted a
number of A&E contract issues; specifically, those
related to construction inspection services, which is
a type of A&E contract. OLA’s current audit covered
all types of A&E contracts and identified some
similar findings among a broader range of A&E
contract types. During this audit’s fieldwork, OLA
noted that although SHA, in response to those
reports, agreed to implement necessary corrective
actions, such actions had not been completed.
State Highway Administration
Page 4

--- Page 5 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
A&E Contracts (continu e d)
SHA had not documented the basis for the maximum
values of A&E contracts submitted to the Board of
Public Works (BPW) for approval, as required by MDOT
guidelines. (Finding 1)
 SHA management advised us that the value of these
contracts were estimates based on the amounts
expended in prior contracts and an increase in firm
labor costs. SHA also advised that it did not have
support for the projected labor costs and OLA testing
of 4 contracts totaling $17.5 million confirmed this.
 The lack of documentation is important because as
noted in Finding 2, SHA used available funding
authorizations in certain A&E contracts to cover over-
expenditures in other contracts.
 A similar comment was included in our Special
Review of Construction Inspection Services Contracts
report dated November 2011, where OLA’s review of
several contracts disclosed no consistent,
discernible basis for estimating contract values.
State Highway Administration
Page 5

--- Page 6 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
A&E Contracts (continu e d)
SHA used unexpended balances from various A&E
contracts to pay for work that was outside the scope
of those contracts. This process circumvented State
procurement regulations that require a formal
contract modification and BPW approval for
significant changes in contract scope. (Finding 2)
 In response to a similar finding in our November
2011 special review report, SHA performed a
survey to identify all A&E contract costs incurred
for unrelated work. As of August 2012, the survey
had not been completed; however, the preliminary
results identified services costing $21.7 million
charged to 105 contracts that were for purposes
outside the scope of those contracts.
 For example, OLA noted SHA, without obtaining
required BPW approval, used $1.3 million of a
$14 million pre-construction services contract on
post-construction services that were outside the
scope of the contract, because SHA had depleted
its post-construction services funds.
State Highway Administration
Page 6

--- Page 7 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
A&E Contracts (continu e d)
SHA extended contract expiration dates without BPW
approval, enabling SHA to retain unspent contract
authorizations on contracts that otherwise would have
expired. (Finding 3)
 According to a report produced by SHA, during the
period August 2008 through June 2011, SHA
processed 291 contract extensions, related to 204
contracts totaling approximately $449 million.
 OLA’s review of 10 extensions for contracts
originally valued at $136 million found extension
periods from a year to 18 months, with a total
$14.5 million unexpended balance at the time of
their extensions.
 A similar condition was noted in OLA’s November
2011 special report. In May 2012, SHA submitted
contract extensions for 391 A&E contracts
(including the aforementioned 204 contracts)
totaling $783 million to BPW for retroactive
approval, which was granted on May 23, 2012.
State Highway Administration
Page 7

--- Page 8 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
A&E Contracts (continu ed)
Although SHA had established a post-audit process
for determining the propriety of A&E contractor
billings for direct labor costs, which accounted for
the majority of A&E contractual payments, only a
limited number of contractors were selected for
audit. (Finding 4)
 Since SHA was responsible for reimbursing the
firm’s actual labor costs, these audits provide a
control to detect whether the labor charges
billed to SHA corresponded to the firm’s payroll
records, in terms of labor rates and hours of
services provided.
 During FY 2011, SHA made payments to
approximately 150 A&E firms totaling $134
million (primarily for labor and associated
overhead); however, only 5 of these firms had
been audited during FY 2011.
 A similar condition was commented upon in
OLA’s preceding audit report.
State Highway Administration
Page 8

--- Page 9 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Maryland SafeZones P r ogram
Background
 The 2009 General Assembly Session authorized the
use of automated speed monitoring systems in
highway work zones, effective October 1, 2009.
 In August 2009, SHA established the Maryland
SafeZones pilot program through an
intergovernmental cooperative purchasing
agreement with a local jurisdiction. SHA agreed to
pay the contractor a monthly rate of $112,221 to
operate 2 mobile speed cameras for the period
October 2009 through June 2010.
 In October 2009, SHA issued a Request for Proposal
(RFP) to operate the Program after the end of the
pilot period. SHA awarded a contract in June 2010
for the period of July 2010 through June 2012, with
a not to exceed cost of $8.1 million. The contract
provided for 3 additional one-year renewal periods
which, if executed, would bring the total contract
cost to approximately $21 million.
State Highway Administration
Page 9

--- Page 10 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Maryland SafeZones Pr o gram (continued)
SHA did not ensure that contractor performance
benchmarks were established for the SafeZones pilot
program. (Finding 5)
 SHA’s contract for the pilot program called for
benchmarks to be established to evaluate
contractor performance; however, no benchmarks
were established even though the contract required
the contractor to provide a system capable of
accurately measuring speeds and collecting
readable license plates under various conditions.
 An example of a useful benchmark that was not
established was the reliability and readability of the
photographed violations. OLA’s review of the pilot
program records disclosed that the contractor’s
cameras captured 133,620 speed violations from
October 2009 through June 2010; however, only
44% of those photographed were actually issued a
citation because the remaining 56% were deemed
unacceptable by SHA due to reliability and
readability issues.
State Highway Administration
Page 10

--- Page 11 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Maryland SafeZones Pr o gram (continued)
SHA awarded a contract for operating the current
SafeZones program even though the contractor’s
proposal, which was the sole bid, did not comply with
certain requirements. (Finding 6)
 The specific speed detection equipment listed in the
contractor’s proposal, and ultimately used, did not
conform to certain industry standards, as required.
 The RFP required a legible image of a violator’s
license plate 95% of the time, but this was reduced to
90% during the bid evaluation, because per SHA the
contractor asserted it could not meet the 95%
measure.
 A consultant hired to conduct tests of the contractor’s
equipment prior to the award did not conduct the tests
in accordance with SHA’s requirements.
SHA did not consider these issues major deviations from
the RFP. There is a question, however, as to whether
these factors could have impacted the lack of other bids,
thus possibly justifying the need for a new solicitation.
State Highway Administration
Page 11

--- Page 12 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Maryland SafeZones Pr o gram (continued)
SHA did not have procedures to verify that the
SafeZones contractor met a key performance measure
and that the equipment’s independent calibration was
checked timely. (Finding 7)
 SHA did not verify that the contractor accurately
reported instances of speed violations that did not
result in the issuance of a citation. As noted there
was a requirement that citations be issued for at
least 90% of the violations captured, after excluding
rejections resulting from uncontrollable events (e.g.,
a speeding vehicle’s tag obstructed by another
vehicle). In FY 2011, the contractor reported it had
achieved a 93% performance rate; however, this
was after excluding 20% of the violations captured
(or 152,800) because of uncontrollable events. SHA
did not conduct a formal review of the related
images to verify the propriety of excluding them.
 The system equipment did not undergo a calibration
check by an independent laboratory until 9 months
after implementation.
State Highway Administration
Page 12

--- Page 13 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Other Findings
 Certain monitoring controls over computer
mainframe production files needed improvement.
(Finding 8)
 A management employee and the employee’s
subordinates participated in the monitoring of a
consulting services contract totaling $5 million
with a firm where the employee’s spouse was a
senior executive, which is a potential violation of
State ethics laws. (Finding 9)
 SHA did not adhere to MDOT’s policy for
administrative leave that was granted to two
employees. Specifically, the policy provides for
administrative leave while investigating allegations
that may result in employee termination. However,
our review disclosed that two SHA employees
remained on administrative leave for extended
periods of time (approximately a year or longer)
and SHA paid the employees $215,000 after the
investigations were completed and the allegations
were substantiated. (Finding 10)
State Highway Administration
Page 13

--- Page 14 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Conclusion
SHA should:
 Establish procedures to ensure compliance with
State procurement regulations and MDOT policies,
such as ensuring contracts are only used as
authorized and submitting contract modifications
and extensions for BPW approval.
 Increase the number of A&E contracts subject to
audit.
 Improve its contract monitoring by ensuring that
procurement and contract terms are complied
with.
 Activate certain information system security
settings and perform documented reviews of
certain file accesses.
 Refer the aforementioned issue to the State Ethics
Commission and establish procedures to address
potential conflicts of interest.
 Comply with MDOT policy when granting
administrative leave to employees.
State Highway Administration
Page 14