Title: Presentation to the Commission on Cybersecurity Innovation and Excellence - Department of Information Technology and Selected State Agencies - Information System Data Security

Related Report Dated 9/27/2012
Date: 01/29/2013
Type: Presentations to the Legislature
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5a9daf2ccc9d72387404dc39
Extracted: 2025-06-18T13:47:12.530570
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Department of Information
Technology (DoIT)
and
Selected State Agencies
Information System Data Security
Report Dated September 27, 2012
Presentation to the Commission on Cybersecurity
Innovation and Excellence
Thomas J. Barnickel III, CPA
Timothy R. Brooks, CPA, CFE
Edward L. Shulder, CPA
January 29, 2013

--- Page 2 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Audit Overview
 DoIT was established July 1, 2008 by law with
specified responsibilities which include:
 Developing, maintaining, revising, and
enforcing information technology (IT)
policies, procedures, and standards for
Executive Branch agencies.
 Providing technical assistance, advice, and
recommendations about IT matters to any
State government unit.
 DoIT developed and issued an Information
Security Policy (Policy) that sets the minimum
standard requirements that agencies must meet
to protect the confidentiality, integrity and
availability of State-owned information. DoIT’s
practice has been to update the Policy on an
annual basis.
Information System Data Security
Page 2
Performance Audit

--- Page 3 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Audit Overview (continue d)
 DoIT has 119 positions organized into eight
divisions with fiscal year 2011 expenditures
totaling $55.8 million ($16.4 million for major
information technology projects).
 The audit had two objectives:
 To evaluate State law and DoIT’s September
2010 Policy against industry information
security best practices and federal and
other states’ practices.
 To assess compliance with certain aspects
of DoIT’s Policy by selected State agencies
with automated systems containing
confidential information and to determine
the extent of the agencies’ implementation
of recognized security best practices that
were not addresses by DoIT requirements.
Information System Data Security
Page 3
Performance Audit

--- Page 4 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Audit Overview (continue d)
 The State agencies reviewed for this audit were:
 Comptroller of Maryland (Comptroller)
 Department of Health and Mental Hygiene
(DHMH)
 Department of Public Safety and
Correctional Services (DPSCS)
 Department of Human Resources (DHR)
 Department of Transportation – Motor
Vehicles Administration (MVA)
 State agencies maintain significant volumes of
personally identifiable information (PII), such as
social security numbers, that relate to income
taxes, medical assistance program claims
histories, criminal backgrounds, public
assistance, and driver’s licenses. PII is often
sought for identity-theft crimes.
Information System Data Security
Page 4
Performance Audit

--- Page 5 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Audit Overview (continue d)
 External security risks have significantly
increased due to states offering additional
services online, and collecting, storing, and
sharing information across public networks.
 Breaches of that information could harm
citizens, businesses, and the State’s public
image and could result in significant expense to
remediate the situation.
 Breaches to either obtain PII or disrupt
government services could be attributable to
parties external to the organization or to its own
employees.
 Individual employee negligence is a significant
threat to data security and contributed to 41%
of the breaches reviewed in one study.
Information System Data Security
Page 5
Performance Audit

--- Page 6 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Audit Overview (continue d)
 Performance audit results in brief:
 We developed five recommendations for
DoIT to improve the Policy requirements and
guidance it provides to State agencies,
including enforcement of its Policy.
 We also developed seven recommendations
applicable to all State agencies that could
improve their data security practices to
better protect the confidentiality, integrity,
and availability of State-owned data,
including PII.
 DoIT and the State agencies reviewed generally
agreed with the recommendations.
Information System Data Security
Page 6
Performance Audit

--- Page 7 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Key Audit Issues
 State law governing protections for PII did not
apply to State agencies. State law notification
requirements about data breaches applicable to
businesses were not addressed in DoIT Policy.
 Although State law assigns to DoIT the
responsibility for enforcing information security,
DoIT had not developed a process to monitor and
enforce its Information Security Policy and
instead delegated this responsibility to the
individual agencies.
 Certain enhancements to DoIT Policy could be
made, such as providing complete guidance to
State agencies for handling and reporting
computer security incidents.
 None of the five State agencies we examined had
implemented all seven of the DoIT Policy
requirements selected for review; all 5 agencies
could improve their data security practices.
Information System Data Security
Page 7
Performance Audit

--- Page 8 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Protections for Personally Identifiable Information
 Current State law governing certain protections
for PII did not apply to State agencies, nor were
certain of these protections addressed in the
DoIT Policy. (Finding 1)
 The Maryland Personal Information Protection
Act requires business to protect PII and outlines
the actions to be taken in the event of a breach,
such as investigating if the breach resulted in
the misuse of PII, and notification of affected
individuals, credit reporting agencies, and the
Office of the Attorney General.
 No State law or statewide policy existed that
requires State agencies to be held to similar
standards.
 46 states have security breach notification laws
involving personal information. 34 of these
specifically include government as an entity
subject to the laws’ investigation and
notification provisions that are similar to those
applicable to Maryland businesses.
Information System Data Security
Page 8
Performance Audit

--- Page 9 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Information Security Poli c y Enforcement
 Although State law includes enforcement of
information technology polices, procedures, and
standards as one of DolT's responsibilities, DoIT
had not developed any formal mechanism to
monitor and enforce its Policy. (Finding 2)
 For example, DoIT did not determine whether
State agencies performed risk assessments,
developed appropriate security protocols,
conducted vulnerability assessments, or
performed other actions called for by its Policy
to protect confidential data maintained on
agencies IT systems.
 We were advised that DoIT delegated the
enforcement responsibilities to the individual
agencies due to its lack of available resources
for review and enforcement.
Information System Data Security
Page 9
Performance Audit

--- Page 10 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Handling and Reporting o f Security Incidents
 The DoIT 2010 Policy did not provide complete
guidance for handling and reporting computer
security incidents. (Finding 3) Specifically it,
 did not provide guidance for developing an
incident response policy and plan, selecting
an incident response team, and staffing and
training the team, and
 did not require agencies to report IT
incidents to DoIT, until the 2012 Policy
revision.
 Between June 2009 and June 2011, DoIT
received only five IT incident reports from State
agencies although agencies advised us that
they had more incidents.
 Based on our regular audits, State agencies
may not be aware of all security incidents. In 34
OLA audit reports issued from 7/2008 to
1/2012, we identified agency deficiencies in
generating or reviewing security logs.
Information System Data Security
Page 10
Performance Audit

--- Page 11 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
DoIT Guidance to Agenci e s
 DoIT had not provided complete or timely
guidance to State agencies in other areas
(Findings 3, 4 & 5) such as:
 security for mobile devices
 emerging technologies such as cloud
computing
 vulnerability scanning and penetration
testing which can disclose system and
software weaknesses and inadequate
security awareness of individuals for
remediation, and
 data loss prevention software that can
detect and restrict the unauthorized
transmission or disclosure of confidential
information.
Information System Data Security
Page 11
Performance Audit

--- Page 12 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Selected State Agency S e curity Practices
 None of the five agencies had implemented all
seven of the DoIT Policy requirements selected
for review:
Security Categorization of IT Systems (Finding 6)
 Only one agency (Comptroller) had determined and
documented the security levels for all of its
information systems as required by DoIT, which
is integral for assessing the risks associated
with data confidentiality, integrity, and
availability.
 Three agencies (DHMH, DHR, MVA) had not
assigned security categories for any of their
systems.
 Another agency (DPSCS) assigned security
categories only for certain of its systems.
Information System Data Security
Page 12
Performance Audit

--- Page 13 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Selected State Agency S e curity Practices (cont’d)
Agency Specific Information Security Policy
(Finding 7)
 Only 3 agencies (Comptroller, DHMH, MVA) had
developed agency specific security policies that
met DoIT requirements for their particular
security environments, agency missions, and
operational requirements.
 One agency’s (DPSCS) policy did not address the
specific aspects of its systems but merely
copied DoIT policy without any guidance on how
the agency implemented the related
requirements.
 Another agency’s (DHR) policy did not address
security certification and accreditation for its
systems.
Information System Data Security
Page 13
Performance Audit

--- Page 14 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Selected State Agency S e curity Practices (cont’d)
Risk Management Process (Finding 8)
 None of the 5 agencies had fully implemented a
risk management process for all of its systems
nor established a frequency for conducting
reassessments.
 The risk management process identifies the
risks, assesses the risk levels, and implements
steps to mitigate risks to an acceptable level
and continuously monitors the security state of
each system.
Information System Data Security
Page 14
Performance Audit

--- Page 15 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Selected State Agency S e curity Practices (cont’d)
Security Awareness Program (Finding 9)
 All 5 agencies had developed security
awareness programs for their employees with
appropriate content for protecting systems and
data security. However,
 Three agencies (Comptroller, DHMH, DHR) did not
ensure or document that employees
received the required training.
 One agency (MVA) had numerous employees
who had never received the agency required
security training.
 Only one agency (DPSCS) had documented
that initial and periodic retraining was
provided to all employees as required.
Information System Data Security
Page 15
Performance Audit

--- Page 16 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Selected State Agency S e curity Practices (cont’d)
Confidential Information on Portable Devices
(Finding 10)
 Two agencies (DHMH, DHR) had not taken adequate
steps to protect confidential information stored on
portable devices to ensure such information was
protected from disclosure in the event the device
was lost or stolen.
 The other three agencies (Comptroller, DPSCS, MVA)
implemented procedures to encrypt confidential
information on portable devices.
Inventory of Information Systems (Page 30)
 All 5 agencies maintained an adequate inventory
of their IT systems and applications.
Information System Data Security
Page 16
Performance Audit

--- Page 17 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Selected State Agency S e curity Practices (cont’d)
Incident response Process (Page 35)
 All 5 agencies had developed a process for
responding to potential information security
incidents that met DoIT’s Policy requirements at
the time of the audit. (Although, as noted in Finding
3, DoIT needs to enhance policy guidance in this
area.)
Use of Certain Information Security Best Practices
 Two agencies (Comptroller, DHR) had implemented
data loss prevention tools to monitor email activity
for certain patterns (such as social security
numbers) and flag such activity for further review.
(Finding 11)
 Three agencies routinely performed vulnerability
scanning and two of these agencies also
performed penetration testing . (Finding 12)
Information System Data Security
Page 17
Performance Audit

--- Page 18 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Conclusions
DoIT needs to:
 address the protection of PII in the custody of
State agencies via legislation or policy, and the
notification of affected individuals and other
appropriate parties in the event of a breach.
 implement a process to monitor and enforce
State agencies’ compliance with its Information
Security Policy.
 establish more thorough security incident
response guidance in its Policy.
 enhance its security polices and guidance in
other areas identified in the audit report,
including emerging technologies.
Information System Data Security
Page 18
Performance Audit

--- Page 19 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Conclusions (continued)
State agencies need to ensure that they:
 comply with DoIT policies for evaluating and
documenting the security categories for their
systems and establish security measures
commensurate with data sensitivity and risk.
 develop agency-specific information security
policies that address DoIT’s required
components of an information security program.
 develop and implement a risk management
process for all critical systems and periodically
update or re-evaluate the risk assessments.
 provide security awareness training timely to all
employees,
 ensure that confidential information on portable
devices is encrypted, and that data loss
prevention, vulnerability scanning and
penetration testing tools are used as feasible.
Information System Data Security
Page 19
Performance Audit