Title: Presentation to the House Appropriations Subcommittee - Uninsured Employers' Fund

Related Report Dated 1/3/2018
Date: 01/31/2018
Type: Presentations to the Legislature
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5a9daf31cc9d72387404dd27
Extracted: 2025-06-20T00:05:20.620906
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Uninsured Employers’ Fund
Report Dated January 3, 2018

--- Page 2 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Report Overview
 The Uninsured Employers’ Fund (UEF) is
responsible for paying workers’ compensation
awards to claimants who failed to receive
payments from their employers that did not have
workers’ compensation insurance, as required.
 The report included 8 findings, 7 of which were
repeated from the preceding audit report.
 OLA determined that UEF’s accountability and
compliance level was unsatisfactory, in
accordance with the rating system OLA
established in conformity with State law.
 The primary factors contributing to the
unsatisfactory rating were the significance of the
audit findings and the number of repeat findings,
including all 7 findings from the preceding audit
report. Some of the current findings have been
commented upon in preceding reports dating
back to May 2009.
UEF – Uninsured Employers’ Fund Page 2

--- Page 3 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Key Findings
 UEF did not conduct independent reviews to ensure
the accuracy of accounts receivable transactions.
 UEF did not adequately monitor and pursue the
collection of delinquent accounts nor establish a
process to refer delinquent employers to State
licensing authorities for license suspension.
 UEF did not adequately review indemnity and
medical claims payments for propriety.
 UEF violated State procurement regulations to
obtain claims processing and related services from
11 vendors, did not have written agreements, and
did not verify their billings.
 UEF did not have adequate procedures and controls
to ensure that all collections, totaling $9.5 million
during FY 2016, were deposited.
 A number of security and control deficiencies were
noted with UEF’s information systems, including the
storage of sensitive personally identifiable
information in clear text.
UEF – Uninsured Employers’ Fund Page 3

--- Page 4 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Accounts Receivable (Finding 1)
UEF did not conduct independent reviews of accounts
receivable (A/R) transactions.
• UEF did not independently verify the accuracy of
Workers’ Compensation Commission (WCC) awards
entered in its A/R system, which is used to
automatically calculate assessments and billings to
employers and insurance companies. Our test of
10 awards disclosed that the assessments for 6
awards were improperly calculated because the
awards were not entered accurately.
• The three employees who processed adjustments
to the A/R records could do so without independent
review and approval.
UEF maintains A/R records for billings to insurance
companies and employers for assessments (2% on
certain WCC awards), WCC assessed fines and
penalties, and reimbursements due from uninsured
employers for claimant awards and medical payments
made on their behalf.
UEF – Uninsured Employers’ Fund Page 4

--- Page 5 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Accounts Receivable (Finding 2)
UEF did not adequately monitor and pursue collection
of delinquent accounts.
• UEF’s automated A/R system did not generate
dunning notices and it produced inaccurate and
unreliable account aging reports for use in
monitoring UEF’s A/R.
• UEF did not refer delinquent accounts to the
Department of Budget and Management’s Central
Collection Unit (CCU) as required. As of January
2017, there were 3,980 delinquent accounts
totaling $5.2 million that should have been
referred to CCU. This included 31 delinquent
accounts totaling approximately $1.7 million that
had been delinquent for periods ranging from 187
days to more than 9 years. There was a $35,300
account delinquent for more than 25 years.
• UEF had not established a process to identify and
refer delinquent employers to State licensing
authorities for license suspension.
UEF – Uninsured Employers’ Fund Page 5

--- Page 6 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Claims Processing (Finding 3)
UEF did not adequately review indemnity and medical
claim payments for propriety.
• UEF did not conduct independent supervisory
reviews of indemnity payments for propriety. During
the period from January 2014 to April 2017,
indemnification payments totaled $12.1 million.
• Payments to medical providers were made without
obtaining and reviewing any documentation to
support the claims. During the period from January
2014 to April 2017, medical provider payments
totaled $13.5 million.
UEF’s payments to claimants are based on awards
determined by the WCC. These awards include funds
for the indemnification of injuries and for future
medical claims. Indemnification payments are made to
the claimants in biweekly installments or as a lump
sum. Medical claim payments are made as incurred
directly to medical providers for services provided to
claimants.
UEF – Uninsured Employers’ Fund Page 6

--- Page 7 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Claims Processing (Finding 4)
UEF violated numerous State procurement regulations
to obtain claims processing and related services
costing $3.5 million over 3.25 years.
• UEF’s agreement with its former claims processing
vendor (with payments totaling $1.3 million) was
not competitively procured. Also, the agreement did
not include critical provisions, including the term
and maximum contract value, and was not
submitted for control agency review and approval,
including by the Board of Public Works (BPW).
• UEF did not have written agreements for the 10
other vendors (payments totaling $2.2 million) that
the claims processing vendor used to assist in
verifying claims. These vendors were also not
competitively procured.
• UEF did not submit to BPW an emergency contract
entered into with another vendor to perform
services beginning in September 2017 that were
previously rendered by the former claims
processing vendor and its 10 vendors.
UEF – Uninsured Employers’ Fund Page 7

--- Page 8 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Claims Processing (Finding 4 - cont.)
UEF did not verify the propriety of amounts paid to
the former claims processing vendor and the
additional 10 vendors nor ensure appropriate
services were provided.
Claims Processing Vendor
• UEF paid for individuals not in the agreement and
invoices did not consistently report hours worked
for each individual that was billed.
• UEF paid for alleged cost savings without
reviewing medical bills submitted by providers to
verify the savings were achieved. For one provider
billing, UEF paid the vendor $26,419 for vendor-
claimed cost savings totaling $94,326 without
confirming that savings were actually achieved.
• UEF paid an administrative fee that had not been
negotiated nor included in the agreement.
Other 10 Vendors
• UEF paid these vendors directly without verifying
the propriety of the charges or assessing if
appropriate services were performed.
UEF – Uninsured Employers’ Fund Page 8

--- Page 9 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Cash Receipts (Finding 5)
UEF had not established adequate controls over
collections from employers and insurance companies,
which totaled $9.5 million during FY 2016. For example,
• Collections were not properly verified as being
deposited. We identified 4 checks totaling $2,655
that were not actually deposited until 14 to 21 days
after the deposit dates recorded on UEF records.
• UEF routinely stored collections in an unlocked desk
drawer that was accessible to numerous employees
throughout the day prior to deposit. Additionally,
deposits were not made timely.
• A temporary employee took collections home
overnight to allow for deposit on the way to work the
next business day. According to UEF’s records, 31
deposits totaling $1.2 million were taken home by
this individual.
• Three employees involved in the collection process
were also responsible for updating the A/R records.
UEF – Uninsured Employers’ Fund Page 9

--- Page 10 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Information Systems Security and Control
 Sensitive personally identifiable information was
stored in clear text on the server that hosted
accounts receivable and claims processing
software applications. We determined that one file
contained 676,727 unique social security numbers
in clear text and was not protected by other
substantial mitigating controls (Finding 6).
 Security event monitoring, access controls, and
user access monitoring were not sufficient for the
server that hosts UEF’s accounts receivable and
accounts payable applications. We also found that
security reports were not periodically generated
and reviewed to ensure assigned user capabilities
were proper, numerous users had unnecessary
modification access to files and programs, and UEF
permitted one employee to use another
employee’s userid to process certain transactions
(Finding 7).
 UEF did not have a disaster recovery plan for
recovering from disaster scenarios (Finding 8).
UEF – Uninsured Employers’ Fund Page 10

--- Page 11 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Conclusion
UEF should:
• conduct independent reviews to ensure awards
and adjustments are accurately recorded in the
A/R system;
• correct deficiencies with its A/R system and refer
delinquent accounts to CCU for collection and to
State licensing authorities for license suspension;
• conduct independent reviews of indemnity
payments and establish a procedure to ensure
that medical claims payments are proper;
• comply with State procurement regulations and
ensure that invoices are supported and agree to
contract-approved rates and level of services; and
• implement recommended actions to provide
appropriate controls over collections and
information systems security (including the
development of a disaster recovery plan).
UEF – Uninsured Employers’ Fund Page 11