Title: Presentation to the Joint Audit Committee - Department of Human Resources - Local Department Operations

Related Report Dated 7/24/2015
Date: 11/03/2015
Type: Presentations to the Legislature
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5a9daf2ecc9d72387404dca7
Extracted: 2025-06-20T00:00:13.920961
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Department of Human Resources –
Local Department Operations (LDO)
Report Dated July 24, 2015
Presentation to the Joint Audit Committee
Thomas J. Barnickel III, CPA
Joshua S. Adler, CPA, CFE
November 3, 2015

--- Page 2 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Audit Overview
 Local Department Operations (LDO) is one of seven
budgetary units in the Department of Human
Resources (DHR). It consists of funds for activities
(e.g., Temporary Cash Assistance) administered by
the 24 local departments of social services (LDSS).
 The LDO’s fiscal year 2014 expenditures totaled
approximately $2.2 billion, which included $1.7
billion in assistance program expenditures and
$500 million in operating expenditures (primarily
employee salaries and benefits).
 State law requires DHR to audit each LDSS every
three years. Audits are performed by DHR’s Office
of the Inspector General (OIG). OLA reviewed this
work and concluded that it could be relied upon,
and thus we did not conduct audits of the LDSSs.
 The prior OLA audit report contained 6 findings, and
our current audit disclosed that 1 was satisfactorily
addressed by DHR. The remaining 5 findings, are
repeated in this report as Findings 1, 4, 5, 7 and 8,
based on our review of OIG’s LDSS audits.
DHR - Local Department Operations
Page 2

--- Page 3 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Key Audit Issues
 The audit reports issued by the OIG indicated that
the LDSSs continued to have a significant
number of audit deficiencies in critical areas of
operations, including a number of repeat
findings.
 DHR’s executive management had not
established a formal process to provide oversight
and monitoring to help ensure that the findings
were corrected.
 The OIG’s corrective action monitoring process
was not effectively followed to help ensure that
findings were corrected.
 The OIG did not distribute its LDSS reports to all
appropriate governing authorities and to local
oversight boards, as required by State law.
DHR - Local Department Operations
Page 3

--- Page 4 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
OIG Audit Findings and Oversight
DHR executive management had not established a
formal process to provide oversight and monitoring of
LDSS corrective actions, which if in place, could help
ensure that audit findings are addressed. (Finding 1)
The 24 LDSSs OIG audit reports issued as of
December 2014 contained a significant number of
deficiencies in five critical areas (see Page 5),
including a number of repeat findings.
 OIG audit reports collectively contained 299
findings, including 89 deemed to be repeat
conditions from the preceding OIG reports. The
number of findings in each report ranged from 5
(two LDSS) to 30 (one LDSS), with five reports
containing at least 20 findings.
 While the number of findings has decreased (from
373) since our preceding audit report, the
number deemed by the OIG to be repeated has
increased (from 77).
DHR - Local Department Operations
Page 4

--- Page 5 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
OIG’s Corrective Action Monitoring Process
The OIG had a corrective action monitoring process
for the LDSS findings, but it was not effectively
followed to help ensure that corrective actions were
taken and that DHR executive management was
provided periodic LDSS progress reports, as
required. (Finding 2)
Our review of the actions taken by 5 LDSSs to
address 106 findings in the related OIG audit
reports disclosed that for 36 findings the OIG
either determined that the finding had been
resolved based on insufficient evidence or did
not adequately follow-up to obtain information
when not provided by the LDSS.
DHR - Local Department Operations
Page 5

--- Page 6 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
LDSS Audit Report Dist r ibution
The OIG did not distribute the LDSS audit reports to all
appropriate parties. (Finding 3)
The OIG generally distributed its audit reports within
DHR and to the applicable LDSS directors; however,
the reports were not distributed to the members of
the applicable City or county council and to the
LDSS oversight boards, as required by State law.
Although the LDSSs administer programs that
provide essential services using considerable public
funding, the OIG’s audit reports were not available
to the public through DHR’s website. Public
issuance is not required nor precluded by law and
OLA believes that public reporting would provide
greater transparency, potentially resulting in
increased accountability by the LDSSs.
DHR management advised that providing public
reports would result in additional resources and
increased costs, such as to enhance a quality
review process.
DHR - Local Department Operations
Page 6

--- Page 7 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Overview of OIG Audit F indings
Overview of the 299 OIG Findings by
Functional Area
(Reports Issued as of December 2014)
DHR - Local Department Operations
Page 7

--- Page 8 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
LDSS Audit Findings by Critical Area
Fiscal Management
The OIG reports for 23 LDSSs contained 97 findings
pertaining to fiscal management such as bank
accounts, procurement and prepaid gift cards.
(Finding 4) For example:
Bank accounts maintained by the LDSSs to pay
for certain administrative and program
expenditures were not reconciled timely and had
outstanding checks for extended periods.
State procurement regulations were not always
followed. For example, payments were made to
vendors without written contracts and formal
procurement processes were circumvented.
Accountability of prepaid gift cards (provided to
recipients in urgent need of support) was not
established, as physical inventories of gift cards
were not documented.
DHR - Local Department Operations
Page 8

--- Page 9 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
LDSS Audit Findings by Critical Area (continued)
Family Investment Administration (FIA)
The OIG reports for 22 LDSSs contained 70 findings
related to FIA programs including the Supplemental
Nutrition Assistance Program (SNAP) and Temporary
Cash Assistance (TCA). (Finding 5) For example:
Critical duties were not properly segregated for the
electronic debit cards used by recipients to access
SNAP and TCA benefits. As a result, there was a
lack of assurance that the benefits were being
used by the intended recipient(s).
The required number of public assistance case files
were not subject to supervisory review, in
accordance with FIA quality assurance policies.
These reviews help ensure the accuracy and the
propriety of assistance payments and reduce
errors.
FY 2014 SNAP disbursements were $1.2 billion
(federal) and TCA payments were $203 million
(federal and State).
DHR - Local Department Operations
Page 9

--- Page 10 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
LDSS Audit Findings by Critical Area (continued)
Social Services Administration (SSA)
The OIG reports for 19 LDSSs contained 63 findings
related to SSA activities, primarily related to the out-
home-placement and adoption programs. (Finding 6)
For example:
Out-of-home placement program case files did not
always have documentation that a caseworker had
monthly contact with the child, as required, so
there was a lack of assurance that all services were
provided. The program provides short-term care
and support to children who are unable to live at
home because of abuse/neglect.
Adoptions expenses were paid without any
documented support justifying the expenditure and
without obtaining partial reimbursement from
federal funding.
As of June 2014, there were 5,339 children in the
out-of-home placement program and 337 adoption
cases, and FY 2014 expenditures totaled $303
million.
DHR - Local Department Operations
Page 10

--- Page 11 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
LDSS Audit Findings by Critical Area (continued)
Computer Systems Security
OIG reports for 21 LDSSs contained 40 findings
related to computer systems security for critical
systems, such as the system used to record,
authorize, and disburse SNAP and TCA benefits.
(Finding 7) For example:
Controls over granting of user access to critical
systems needed improvement, as documents
authorizing employee access were missing or not
completed, and certain employees had access
capabilities that were not required for their duties.
Employees’ assigned access capabilities were not
properly monitored. Logonids of certain former
employees were not deleted and employee access
was not periodically reviewed for appropriateness.
Based on these conditions, assurance was lacking
that employee access was necessary and appropriate
and unnecessary system access could result in
unauthorized changes to data without detection.
DHR - Local Department Operations
Page 11

--- Page 12 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Medicaid Eligibility Dete rminations
Medicaid eligibility determinations for long-term care
recipients were not always proper. (Finding 8)
Through an interagency agreement between DHR
and the Department of Health and Mental Hygiene,
the LDSSs perform the eligibility determination for
the majority of Medicaid recipients.
The OIG conducted a review of the Medicaid long-
term care eligibility determinations at the Anne
Arundel County, Baltimore City, Baltimore County,
and Prince George’s County LDSSs.
In its July 2014 report, the OIG noted that cases
could not be located, eligibility documentation was
missing, and real property searches were not
conducted to assist in determining whether
financial resources were within the limits
established by State regulations. For example,
OIG’s review of 42 case files disclosed 12 cases
with inadequate eligibility determinations or lien
documentation.
DHR - Local Department Operations
Page 12

--- Page 13 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Conclusions
DHR, including the Office of the Secretary and the
management of the DHR administrations, as
applicable, should:
 establish a process to actively monitor
corrective actions taken to address OIG audit
findings;
 ensure that the OIG’s corrective action
monitoring process is effectively followed;
 distribute the OIG audit reports to all
appropriate parties;
 ensure that the LDSSs establish appropriate
accountability and controls over their financial
processes and information systems;
 ensure that the LDSSs comply with all FIA and
SSA program requirements; and
 ensure that the LDSSs properly perform
Medicaid long-term care eligibility
determinations.
DHR - Local Department Operations
Page 13