Title: Presentation to the House Appropriations Subcommittee - Department of Health and Mental Hygiene - Spring Grove Hospital Center (Special Review)

Related Report Dated 11/10/2008
Date: 02/18/2009
Type: Presentations to the Legislature
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5a9daf23cc9d72387404daff
Extracted: 2025-06-18T09:11:51.458660
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Department of Health
and Mental Hygiene –
Spring Grove Hospital Center
Special Review
(based on allegations
received by OLA Fraud Hotline)
Report dated November 10, 2008

--- Page 2 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Background Information
(cid:190) The special review was conducted as a result of
allegations received through our fraud hotline
relating to the procurement of maintenance
projects that were individually less than $25,000.
(cid:190) The Center’s Maintenance Department has a
staff of 47 employees with related salary and
fringe benefit expenditures of $2.4 million during
fiscal year 2008. An additional $581,000 was
spent on maintenance equipment, supplies and
contractual services.
(cid:190) Procurement deficiencies relating to construction
and maintenance projects have previously been
commented on in our April 2001 and April 2007
fiscal/compliance audit reports.
Spring Grove Hospital Center - Special Review
Page 2

--- Page 3 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Summary of Key Issues
(cid:190) Questionable Transactions: The bidding
process for a number of procurements of
maintenance-related goods and services
totaling $167,000, which were individually
below the $25,000 threshold requiring
Department of General Services approval,
appeared to have been compromised.
(cid:190) Work Directed to Certain Contractors: Projects
totaling $232,000 were directed to three
contractors during periods when each
employed a certain individual, due to the
Center’s favorable opinion of the individual.
Competitive bids were often not obtained.
(cid:190) Personal Relationships: Personal relationships
and related transactions between certain SGHC
employees and contractors may have violated
State Ethics Laws and a related Governor’s
Executive Order.
Spring Grove Hospital Center - Special Review
Page 3

--- Page 4 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Questionable Transactions (Finding 1)
(cid:190) The bidding process used by the Center’s
Maintenance Department to award projects to
one in-state contractor appeared to be
significantly compromised.
(cid:190) The losing bids for 12 projects totaling $43,700
were purportedly submitted by two out-of-state
contractors. However, the losing bids were all
faxed to the Department by an in-state contractor
who, in all 12 cases, was awarded the projects as
the low bidder.
(cid:190) For 21 other projects totaling $87,500, the top
portion of the bid documents were tampered with
(such as torn-off), thereby eliminating references
as to the originating location of the faxed bids.
The in-state contractor was awarded all 21
projects as the low bidder.
Spring Grove Hospital Center - Special Review
Page 4

--- Page 5 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Questionable Transactions
(continued)
(cid:190) A number of other “red flags” relating to projects
awarded to this one in-state contractor were
noted. For example:
• purchased equipment items could not
always be located,
• sole source procurements were awarded for
HVAC repairs that appeared to be routine in
nature, and
• $26,800 in premiums were paid to vendors
to expedite the fabrication of HVAC
equipment even though the equipment was
not manufactured within the specified
timeframe.
Spring Grove Hospital Center - Special Review
Page 5

--- Page 6 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Work Directed to Other Contractors (Finding 2)
(cid:190) The Center’s Maintenance Department directed
work totaling $232,000 to three other
contractors while they employed a specific
individual.
(cid:190) These contractors were not awarded any
projects prior to, or subsequent to, the time
periods that they employed this one individual.
(cid:190) Maintenance Department management
advised us that they directed work to these
contractors without utilizing any type of
competitive process because they liked the
work performed by this individual.
Spring Grove Hospital Center - Special Review
Page 6

--- Page 7 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Work Directed to Other Contractors
(continued)
(cid:190) A number of other “red flags” relating to
projects awarded to these contractors were
noted. For example:
• sole source procurement justifications
were inadequate, and
• for one project, the losing bid was
submitted via fax by the aforementioned
individual even though at that time, this
individual worked for the contractor that
was the winning bidder on the project.
Spring Grove Hospital Center - Special Review
Page 7

--- Page 8 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Personal Relationships (Finding 3)
(cid:190) Contractors that had personal relationships with
two Maintenance Department employees and a
senior management employee outside the
Maintenance Department were awarded projects
totaling $76,000. No projects had been awarded
to these contractors prior to employment by the
Center of these employees.
(cid:190) For example, a Maintenance Department
supervisory employee used a contractor as a
reference when applying for a position with the
Center. Eight days after being hired, the employee
began awarding projects to that contractor.
Subsequent to the hiring, projects totaling $40,000
were awarded to the contractor during fiscal year
2008, including projects awarded as no-bid
emergency procurements.
Spring Grove Hospital Center - Special Review
Page 8

--- Page 9 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Conclusion
(cid:190) The Center should strictly comply with the
requirements of the State Procurement
Regulations.
(cid:190) The Center should consult with the Office of
the Attorney General – Criminal Division
regarding any further action to be taken on
certain matters.
(cid:190) Information concerning the personal
relationships between Center personnel and
contractors should be referred to the State
Ethics Commission.
Spring Grove Hospital Center - Special Review
Page 9