Title: Presentation to the Joint Audit Committee - Maryland Insurance Administration

Related Report Dated 11/20/2014
Date: 12/09/2014
Type: Presentations to the Legislature
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5a9daf2dcc9d72387404dc5d
Extracted: 2025-06-18T13:51:55.326754
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Maryland Insurance Administration
Report Dated November 20, 2014
Presentation to the Joint Audit Committee
Thomas J. Barnickel III, CPA
Robert C. Koslowski, CPA
Heather A. Warriner, CPA
December 9, 2014

--- Page 2 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Audit Overview
 MIA licenses and regulates insurers, insurance
agents, and brokers who conduct business in the
State, and monitors the financial solvency of
licensed insurers. As of June 30, 2014, 1,723
insurers were authorized to conduct business in the
State.
 MIA also collects taxes levied on all premiums
collected by insurance companies within the State.
 In FY 2014, MIA revenues totaled $489 million,
including $458 million of premium taxes and
transferred $338 million to the General Fund, $123
million to the Health Care Rate Stabilization Fund,
and $28 million to the Insurance Regulation Fund.
 The report included 14 findings, 4 of which were
repeated from the preceding audit report. OLA
determined that MIA’s accountability and
compliance level was unsatisfactory, in accordance
with the rating system OLA established in
conformity with State law.
MIA - Maryland Insurance Administration
Page 2

--- Page 3 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Key Audit Issues
 A new automated premium tax system was installed
without being competitively procured or properly
planned.
• Certain capabilities available under the old system
were lost, adversely impacting the administration
of premium tax filings.
• One employee exercised excessive control over
the procurement, system implementation, and
invoice payment.
• Security over the new system was inadequate.
 Proper controls were not established over desk
audits of premium tax filings and resulting tax
refunds.
• Tax audits were not always performed properly.
• Penalties and interest were not always properly
assessed.
• Duplicate account credit and tax refunds were
issued.
MIA - Maryland Insurance Administration
Page 3

--- Page 4 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Premium Tax System
MIA’s procurement of a new automated premium tax
system did not comply with State procurement
regulations and was implemented without adequate
planning (Finding 1).
• MIA’s request for proposals to create an online
payment feature for a new premium tax system
that MIA was developing did not identify the
technical requirements and their relative
importance for bid evaluation purposes, as
required by regulations. The basis for the contract
award decision and amount was not documented.
• MIA decided to significantly change the contract
scope for the contractor hired to develop the online
payment feature, instead of soliciting a new
procurement. The contractor was directed to
implement a new premium tax system using an
insurance tax program developed and owned by
the contractor and implemented in one other state.
Total system cost at April 2014 was $210,300.
MIA - Maryland Insurance Administration
Page 4

--- Page 5 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Premium Tax System ( c ont’d)
• A comprehensive development and implementation
plan was not prepared for this new premium tax
system, which became operational in February
2012 with basic functionality. Consequently, MIA
lacked assurance that the product would meet
functionality requirements, including DoIT security
requirements, and would facilitate its existing
business operations.
While the new system provided certain new
capabilities, other capabilities that were available
in the former system were lost, which had adversely
impacted operations, including premium tax
auditing and refunds.
• MIA did not always justify and/or obtain
appropriate approvals for related contract
modifications. For example, three subsequent
modifications totaling $73,040 were executed
without justification and/or seeking required DoIT
approval.
MIA - Maryland Insurance Administration
Page 5

--- Page 6 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Premium Tax System (c ont’d)
An MIA management employee exercised excessive
control over virtually all aspects of the procurement
and implementation of the new premium tax system.
Due to past familiarity with the successful bidder, a
potential conflict of interest was created (Finding 2).
This employee
• communicated with the eventual successful bidder
to obtain rates, prior to MIA’s decision to solicit for
services to create an online payment feature;
• served on a 3-member evaluation committee and
although no bidders were deemed qualified by the
other members, recommended to the procurement
officer (a subordinate) that the contract be awarded
to the aforementioned contractor;
• recommended that the contractor install its
proprietary premium tax system after the internal
system development was abandoned; and
• monitored the contractor’s work, approved invoices
for payment, and initiated modifications to the
scope of work.
MIA - Maryland Insurance Administration
Page 6

--- Page 7 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Premium Tax System (c ont’d)
The premium tax system was not properly secured to
restrict and control access and the system
contractor had complete control over the system and
unnecessary access to the remainder of the MIA
network (Finding 3). The contractor was
• responsible for program code development and
placing code into production without independent
review or testing,
• defined as the primary administrator for a 3rd party
online payment system, and,
• improperly granted unrestricted access to the
entire MIA internal network.
MIA lacked assurance that the premium tax system
was properly secured and configured to protect it
from external threats and unauthorized changes. For
example, certain vulnerability assessments had not
been performed and the tax system database and
host server had not been updated for numerous
security-related patches (Finding 4).
MIA - Maryland Insurance Administration
Page 7

--- Page 8 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Premium Tax Filings
MIA had not established proper controls over audits
of premium tax filings, and test results disclosed a
number of errors (Finding 5).
• Audit results were not always subject to
independent review.
• OLA tests of premium tax audits found a duplicate
account credit of $403,000, the failure to assess
penalties and interest of $283,000, and tax
underpayments by two companies of $70,200.
MIA had not established procedures to ensure
certain premium tax payments were received by the
dues dates established in law (Finding 6).
• Tax payments are to be postmarked by the
required filing dates, but MIA did not have a
process for recording the postmark date of
payments received in the mail. FY 2013 mail
payments totaled $154 million.
• Based on available records, OLA tests identified
$156,000 of penalties and interest that could
have been assessed.
MIA - Maryland Insurance Administration
Page 8

--- Page 9 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Premium Tax Filings (co nt’d)
MIA had not established proper controls over
premium tax refunds (Finding 7).
• Certain refunds were approved and released for
payment by the same supervisory employee.
• MIA procedures did not ensure that all refund
requests were subject to an independent review
and approval.
• Five refunds totaling $146,000 appeared to be
duplicates of previously issued refunds.
MIA did not reconcile its records of premium tax
payments with the corresponding revenues in the
State’s accounting records (Finding 8).
• OLA tests found 33 tax payments totaling $15.7
million received between June 2012 and July
2013 per the State’s records that were not
recorded in MIA’s premium tax system.
• MIA also did not reconcile the receipt of electronic
checks from its online payment system to State
records.
MIA - Maryland Insurance Administration
Page 9

--- Page 10 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Cash Receipts
MIA lacked accountability and control over cash
receipts received at its office that totaled $154 million
during fiscal year 2013 (Finding 10).
• Checks received in the mail were not always
immediately recorded by the individual opening the
mail, but forwarded to a second individual to be
logged. Furthermore, OLA tests disclosed that not
all checks were logged.
• Checks were not always deposited timely.
• Independent deposit verifications were not
performed and alternate procedures subsequently
developed by MIA were not adequate for this
purpose.
MIA - Maryland Insurance Administration
Page 10

--- Page 11 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Producer Licensing
MIA issues licenses to qualified resident and
nonresident individuals and business entities to act as
insurance producers, who sell, solicit, or negotiate
insurance contracts and contract renewals for
persons issuing such contracts for compensation.
Sufficient controls were not established for the
issuance of producer licenses (Finding 11).
• An independent reconciliation of receipts posted
to State accounting records with transactions
posted in the MIA producer licensing system was
not performed.
• Five employees could process and approve
certain on-line license applications without
supervisory review.
MIA lacked assurance that 3rd party producer
licensing and pre-licensing services systems were
protected against operational and security risks
(Finding 12). For example, MIA had not performed
security reviews of the service providers’ operations.
MIA - Maryland Insurance Administration
Page 11

--- Page 12 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Other Issues
 The MIA project manager who monitored financial
examination services’ contract activity and
authorized vendor payments exercised excessive
control over these processes. The manager was
primarily responsible for evaluating vendor
proposals, compiling the related evaluation results,
recommending awards to vendors, and requesting
any subsequent contract modifications. Vendor
payments from September 2011 to April 2014,
totaled $4.7 million (Finding 9).
 Proper internal controls were not established over
purchases and disbursement transactions and did
not always comply with State procurement
regulations (Finding 13). For example, certain
purchases could be processed without supervisory
approval and temporary personnel services totaling
$390,000 were not competitively procured.
 Administrative access to MIA’s network was
excessive as six accounts were improperly classified
as domain administrators (Finding 14).
MIA - Maryland Insurance Administration
Page 12

--- Page 13 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Conclusions
MIA should ensure that
 future procurements comply with State
procurement regulations; a comprehensive plan is
developed prior to system development; and the
procurement, contract monitoring, and invoice
approval functions are separated;
 access to the premium tax system, including
contractor access, is restricted and that its servers
and applications are securely configured;
 premium tax audits are properly completed and
that penalties and interest are assessed, as
applicable;
 independent supervisory personnel are responsible
for approving refunds and that premium tax
records are reconciled with the corresponding
State records;
 transactions recorded in the producer licensing
system are proper and that third-party systems and
internal networks are properly secured; and,
 appropriate controls are established and in effect.
MIA - Maryland Insurance Administration
Page 13