Title: Presentation to the Senate Budget and Taxation Subcommittee - Department of General Services - Office of Procurement and Logistics

Related Report Dated 11/8/2013
Date: 02/27/2014
Type: Presentations to the Legislature
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5a9daf2dcc9d72387404dc55
Extracted: 2025-06-18T13:50:54.447846
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Department of General Services
Office of Procurement and
Logistics
Report dated November 8, 2013

--- Page 2 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Audit Overview
 The Department of General Services (DGS) –
Office of Procurement and Logistics (OPL)
manages the centralized procurement of certain
goods and services for State agencies, manages
State records and surplus property, oversees
State property management and the State’s
Automated Fuel Management Program, and is
responsible for DGS property control.
 During fiscal 2012, the value of statewide
procurements awarded by OPL totaled
$563 million, and OPL’s operating expenditures
totaled $7.7 million.
 The audit report contained 13 findings. Four of
the findings are repeats, including one equipment
finding contained in our January 6, 2011 DGS –
Office of the Secretary audit report. DGS has
designated OPL as the unit responsible for State
agency property oversight. (Findings 5, 8, 11,
and 13 are repeated from last audit.)
OPL – Office of Procurement and Logistics Page 2

--- Page 3 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Key Audit Issues
 OPL could not demonstrate that certain
procurements made on a centralized basis for
State agencies represented the best value.
 State fuel contract valued at $305 million
 Intergovernmental Cooperative Purchasing
Agreements valued at $41.5 million
 Procurements through providers receiving
preferences as authorized by State law
 The contract with a vendor maintaining eMaryland
Marketplace (eMM) was not modified for a
deliverable that was not implemented. OPL
assessed eMM fees on certain contracts without
authorization.
 Oversight of State agency procurements and
property management need improvement.
OPL – Office of Procurement and Logistics Page 3

--- Page 4 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
State Fuel Contract
Background
OPL procured a new statewide fuel contract effective
August 1, 2012. The total value of the five-year
contract was $305 million and included provisions for
two additional two-year extensions.
The new contract included (1) replacement of the fuel
card readers and the fuel management information
system; (2) maintenance of the State’s fuel pumps;
(3) providing motor fuel (diesel and unleaded) to the
State’s fuel pumps; and (4) providing bulk motor and
heating fuel across the State.
Previously, the maintenance of the State’s fuel pumps,
including supplying motor fuel for the pumps, was
provided by one vendor. The bulk motor and heating
fuel services were provided by 7 vendors under
13 contracts based on the type of fuel and the
geographic region.
OPL – Office of Procurement and Logistics Page 4

--- Page 5 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
State Fuel Contract ( Cont.)
The structure of the current fuel contract procurement may
have limited competition and resulted in only one eligible
bidder (Finding 1).
 The Request for Proposals (RFP) allowed vendors to
bid on some or all of the tasks in the RFP, but
indicated a preference to use one vendor.
 According to OPL, 113 vendors were notified of the
solicitation, but only 7 submitted a bid, of which
4 were deemed acceptable. Only 1 vendor’s bid
covered all tasks, while the other 3 bid on selected
tasks, which collectively did not cover all RFP tasks.
 The only option available was to select the 1 vendor
that bid on all the tasks, essentially making this a
single bid procurement. Given its value, we believe
OPL should have considered rebidding the contract.
 OPL did not clearly advise the Board of Public Works
(BPW) of the bid results. OPL used certain
assumptions and combined information from the
3 losing bids to create an artificial second bid, to
show the winning bid was lower.
OPL – Office of Procurement and Logistics Page 5

--- Page 6 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
State Fuel Contract ( Cont.)
OPL did not timely obtain certain contract
deliverables and did not follow its procedures
designed to ensure State agencies were billed the
proper fuel rates (Finding 2).
Until our inquiries, OPL had not obtained from the
vendor, as required by contract:
 fuel variance reports that could readily identify
possible misuse of fuel purchases (including
potential billing or usage irregularities); and
 proof of the required comprehensive third-party
legal liability insurance from the vendor.
OPL had not provided State agency personnel with
the daily motor fuel rates to enable them to verify the
vendor’s billings for the first 4 months of the contract.
OPL also did not perform random verifications of fuel
rates invoiced, as required by its policies.
OPL – Office of Procurement and Logistics Page 6

--- Page 7 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Intergovernmental Cooperative Purchasing
Agreements
Background
 State law defines an Intergovernmental
Cooperative Purchasing Agreement (ICPA) as a
contract that is intended to promote efficiency and
savings that can result from intergovernmental
cooperative purchasing.
 ICPAs are procured by one or more federal, state,
or local government agencies (lead entities) and
consolidate the procurement of specified goods
and services on behalf of multiple users (such as
Maryland State agencies).
 OPL participated in 26 ICPA contracts during the
period from July 1, 2009 through
August 19, 2012, from which OPL issued
44 related blanket purchase orders (BPO), with a
total estimated value of $68.0 million, for use by
State agencies.
 The Office of Legislative Audits (OLA) reviewed
OPL’s participation in 4 ICPAs for which the
related BPOs had an estimated value of
$41.5 million.
OPL – Office of Procurement and Logistics Page 7

--- Page 8 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Intergovernmental Cooperative Purchasing
Agreements (Cont.)
 OPL could not document that it was in the best
interest of the State to participate in the four ICPAs
tested, valued at $41.5 million (Finding 5).
 OPL could not provide documentation that the
ICPAs were competitively procured by the lead
entities.
 OPL either could not provide the procurement
officer’s written determination that the ICPA
would provide cost benefits to the State,
promote administrative efficiencies, or promote
intergovernmental cooperation as required by
State law, or when written determinations were
prepared by the procurement officer, could not
substantiate the cost benefit and efficiency
assertions.
 OPL did not ensure that one ICPA vendor was
pricing its products in accordance with the ICPA
contract, resulting in certain undetected pricing
discrepancies (Finding 6).
OPL – Office of Procurement and Logistics Page 8

--- Page 9 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Providers with Procu rement Preferences
Background
 State laws and regulations provide for
procurement preferences to benefit
disadvantaged individuals or representative
organizations.
 When goods or services can be supplied at prices
that do not exceed the prevailing market prices,
State aided or controlled entities shall give
procurement preferences to entities such as
Maryland Correctional Enterprises (MCE) and
Blind Industry and Services of Maryland (BISM),
and nonprofit entities serving disabled individuals
under the Employment Works Program (EWP).
OPL – Office of Procurement and Logistics Page 9

--- Page 10 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Providers with Procurement Preferences
(Cont.)
 OPL did not independently determine and publish
the fair market prices of MCE goods and services
and did not publish the fair market prices of BISM
goods and services as required.
State agencies could be paying more than the fair
market prices for these goods and services.
State purchases from these entities totaled
$14.6 million in fiscal 2012 (Finding 8).
 OPL lacked adequate procedures and controls
over the EWP. For example, OPL did not have
procedures for selecting and monitoring the third
party contractor that was responsible for
identifying potential contracts and distributing
them to nonprofit entities serving disabled
individuals, which paid fees to the contractor for
these services.
Based on most recent available information, these
fees totaled $881,000 in fiscal 2011. OLA
estimated the associated EWP sales totaled
$27.5 million (Finding 9).
OPL – Office of Procurement and Logistics Page 10

--- Page 11 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
eMaryland Marketpl a ce
Background
 eMM is an Internet-based, interactive
procurement system managed by OPL.
 In August 2011, OPL entered into a five-year
$3.7 million contract with a new vendor to
develop, operate, and maintain a new eMM
system; the contract included a provision for a
five-year extension option at a cost of
approximately $2.4 million.
 eMM has the ability to handle all aspects of the
procurement process including issuing
solicitations, receiving vendor bids, tabulating
bids, and issuing contract award notifications.
OPL – Office of Procurement and Logistics Page 11

--- Page 12 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
eMaryland Marketpl a ce (Cont.)
A planned deliverable under the eMM contract was not
implemented as intended and OPL did not seek to
modify the related contract price (Finding 3).
 OPL did not reduce the contract price for a
deliverable to develop an interface between eMM
and State’s accounting system (FMIS) that had
not been implemented.
OPL management advised us that the task may
be implemented in the future, although the
contractor’s technical proposal indicated that it
was to be completed by October 2011.
Department of Information Technology
management advised us that the interface was
impractical.
 OPL could not readily determine the value of the
interface or the amount to recover because it did
not require the vendor to provide pricing for each
contract task. The contract provided for a
monthly fee for all tasks of $73,483.
OPL – Office of Procurement and Logistics Page 12

--- Page 13 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Contract Fees
OPL assessed fees on certain contracts without
statutory authority, disclosing the fees to appropriate
control agencies, or ensuring vendors subsequently
remitted the fees (Finding 7).
 OPL assessed a 1% eMM fee on certain contracts
that were not authorized for such fees. For
example, $242,000 of the $580,000 in fees collected
during the period from July 1, 2012 through
January 31, 2013, was from the statewide fuel
contract that was solicited via eMM, but not
procured via eMM as specified by law.
 OPL assessed an additional $0.01 per gallon fee on
the State’s fuel vendor (in addition to the eMM fee
noted above), which was then included in the prices
charged to State agencies and other entities
purchasing fuel under the contract. The full extent
of the fees was not disclosed to the Department of
Budget and Management.
 OPL did not ensure that the vendors remitted all of
the aforementioned contract fees.
OPL – Office of Procurement and Logistics Page 13

--- Page 14 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Statewide Procurement and Property
Oversight
OPL did not exercise appropriate oversight over
statewide procurement and property.
 OPL did not conduct any audits of State agencies’
delegated procurement activity during fiscal 2012
and 2013 and only conducted audits of four
agencies during fiscal 2011 and three agencies
during fiscal 2010 (Finding 10 ).
 OPL did not adequately monitor State agency
compliance with State property inventory
standards and did not take corrective action when
deficiencies were identified. We were advised
that OPL’s oversight was generally limited to
following up with State agencies to address
property deficiencies disclosed in OLA audit
reports. However, these reviews were not always
performed nor comprehensive (Finding 12).
OPL – Office of Procurement and Logistics Page 14

--- Page 15 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Conclusion
OPL should
 ensure that future procurements are structured to
promote maximum competition and consider
rebidding large value contract procurements
when sufficient competition is not obtained;
 ensure that ICPAs are competitively procured
and that written determinations are prepared and
properly substantiated;
 take the specific recommended actions related to
the preferred providers;
 seek to modify the eMM contract and adjust the
related payments;
 ensure that only properly authorized fees are
assessed, obtain control agency approval for
those fees, and ensure that all contract fees are
remitted by the vendors; and
 improve its monitoring of State agencies’
delegated procurements and compliance with
State property inventory standards.
OPL – Office of Procurement and Logistics Page 15