Title: Presentation to the Joint Audit Committee - Fraud Hotline Activity - OLA Results from Pursuing Allegations


The reports referenced in this presentation are listed below.

Department of Transportation - State Highway Administration (11/15/2012)

Office of the Register of Wills - Baltimore City (10/12/2012)

University System of Maryland - University of Maryland, Baltimore County (5/8/2012)

Department of Transportation - Maryland Transit Administration (2/17/2012)
Date: 12/05/2012
Type: Presentations to the Legislature
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5a9daf2ccc9d72387404dc08
Extracted: 2025-06-18T13:44:13.981033
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Fraud Hotline Activity
OLA Results from Pursuing
Allegations
Presentation to
Maryland General Assembly
Joint Audit Committee
Thomas J. Barnickel III, CPA
Brian S. Tanen, CPA, CFE
Edward J. Welsh, CFE
December 5, 2012

--- Page 2 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Hotline History
 August 2002 – JAC instructed OLA to
implement a hotline and web referral
process for the reporting of allegations
of fraud, waste, and abuse in State
government operations.
 February 2003 – OLA’s hotline and web
referral process were launched with an
expected call volume of 200 calls per
year.
 November 2012 - OLA hotline webpage
updated to include links to hotlines of
other Maryland state agencies and the
federal government.
Fraud Hotline Activity
Page 2

--- Page 3 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Hotline Marketing
OLA’s hotline and web
referral process are
marketed to State
employees through a
variety of methods
including:
 Fraud Posters
in State Offices
 Biennial message
on State employee
payroll notices
 Annual email
reminders to
State employees
Fraud Hotline Activity
Page 3

--- Page 4 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Hotline Activity
Call Volume
(Calendar Year Basis)
• Volume has consistently exceeded expectations
• Spike in CY 2012 related to increase in public
assistance benefit fraud allegations
Fraud Hotline Activity
Page 4

--- Page 5 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Hotline Operations
 Allegations are received by phone, web referral,
mail, and from OLA staff auditors in the field.
 Callers are assured that the information
provided is considered confidential and are
provided with information about the State’s
“whistleblower” laws, if reassurance is needed.
 Audit professionals (certified fraud examiners)
handle calls during business hours in
accordance with established procedures.
 All allegations are assessed for credibility and
due diligence is performed before field
investigations are initiated.
 Allegations are either investigated by OLA,
referred to the applicable State agencies, or not
pursued.
Fraud Hotline Activity
Page 5

--- Page 6 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Hotline Allegation Dispos ition
Hotline Allegation Disposition
(February 2003 through September 2012)
Investigations in Process or
20%
Completed by OLA
Referred to Future OLA Audit or
3%
Investigation
Referred to State Agencies 46%
Not Pursued 31%
Fraud Hotline Activity
Page 6

--- Page 7 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Allegation Findings
OLA will highlight the following report findings
related to fraud, waste, abuse, and conflict of
interest allegations:
 State Highway Administration (Report Dated
November 15, 2012) – Possible employee
ethics violation
 Office of Register of Wills – Baltimore City
(Report Dated October 12, 2012) – An Office
employee with supervisory duties potentially
failed to report a prior felony conviction when
hired
 University of Maryland Baltimore County (Report
dated May 8, 2012) – Possible corporate
purchasing card misuse
 Maryland Transit Administration (Report Dated
February 17, 2012) – Possible questionable
practices with Mobility Paratransit Program
Fraud Hotline Activity
Page 7

--- Page 8 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
State Highway Administration (SHA)
(November 15, 2012)
OLA confirmed the allegation and reported that an
SHA management employee and the employee’s
subordinates participated in the monitoring of a $5
million consulting services contract with a firm
where the employee’s spouse was a senior
executive, which is a potential violation of State
ethics laws. (Finding 9)
Disposition:
OLA recommended SHA refer the potential ethics
violation to the State Ethics Commission.
Subsequent to OLA disclosing this finding to SHA,
public documents from the Commission indicated
that the Commission recently determined a violation
had occurred.
Fraud Hotline Activity
Page 8

--- Page 9 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Office of Register of Wills -Baltimore City
(October 12, 2012)
 An Office employee with supervisory
responsibilities did not disclose on their State
employment application, as required, that they
were previously convicted of a felony. The
individual was convicted of felony theft and was
ordered to pay restitution totaling more than
$100,000.
 The employee’s social security number on the
application did not agree to the number on file with
the U.S. Social Security Administration or the one
on file with the State agency responsible for
collecting the delinquent court-ordered restitution.
Disposition
This matter was referred to the Register for
appropriate corrective action and to the Office of the
Attorney General.
Fraud Hotline
Page 9

--- Page 10 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
University of Maryland - Baltimore County (UMBC)
(May 8, 2012)
During the audit we had identified questionable
corporate purchasing card (CPC) purchases by one
employee. A referral from another OLA audit identified
a second employee making questionable CPC
purchases. (Finding 6)
 For example, the employee identified in the
referral, was found to have purchased gift cards
totaling approximately $4,400 which were not
supported.
 After we brought these issues to UMBC’s attention,
UMBC initiated an investigation of the employees’
CPC transactions and identified additional
questionable purchases made by both employees.
Disposition
This matter was referred to the Office of the Attorney
General for further investigation. Furthermore, UMBC
management advised us that the two employees
identified as making questionable purchases had
either resigned or been terminated.
Fraud Hotline
Page 10

--- Page 11 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Maryland Transit Administration (MTA)
(February 17, 2012)
During the regularly scheduled MTA audit, we pursued
a referral received alleging non-specific questionable
practices in the MTA mobility paratransit program
(MPP). OLA’s subsequent work disclosed a number of
reportable conditions. Specifically,
 MTA lacked sufficient procedures and controls over
the MPP rider eligibility process (finding 5).
 MTA did not adequately monitor one MPP contract
and related payments (finding 6).
 MTA did not attempt to obtain refunds of fuel excise
taxes paid to the MPP vendors for fuel used in State
vehicles, which during FY 2011 totaled
approximately $740,000 (finding7).
Disposition
OLA recommended appropriate corrective actions to
address the above conditions, which MTA agreed to
implement, including the recovery of the
aforementioned excise taxes.
Fraud Hotline
Page 11

--- Page 12 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Conclusion
Efforts Devoted to OLA’s Hotline Have Been
Worthwhile
 Significant efforts have been made to build
awareness of the hotline.
 Hotline activity has continued to exceed initial
expectations.
 OLA continues to identify and report on
significant findings, in both fiscal compliance
audit reports and reports of special reviews
based on hotline allegations.
Fraud Hotline Activity
Page 12