Title: Presentation to the Joint Audit Committee - Department of Health and Mental Hygiene - Processing of Certain Medicaid Claims

Related Report Dated 11/23/2009
Date: 12/08/2009
Type: Presentations to the Legislature
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5a9daf25cc9d72387404db2d
Extracted: 2025-06-18T09:14:17.692761
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Department of Health and Mental
Hygiene
Processing of Certain
Medicaid Claims
Report dated November 23, 2009
Presentation to Joint Audit Committee
Stephen C. Pease, CPA
Mark S. Hagenbuch, CPA
December 8, 2009

--- Page 2 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Background
(cid:190) Medicaid is joint federal and state program that
provides medical care to low-income citizens.
(cid:190) The DHMH’s Medical Care Program Administration
primarily administers the program. The Federal
government generally funds 50% of program costs.
(cid:190) During FY 2009, Medicaid claims totaling $6.28
billion were processed. As of June 30, 2009,
802,000 individuals were enrolled in the program.
(cid:190) The audit focused on claims totaling $2.68 billion
during FY 2009 consisting of fee-for-service
payments and eligible claims for DDA and MHA
services.
(cid:190) Under the fee-for-service system, providers (e.g.,
hospitals, physicians) are paid for each service or
supply provided.
DHMH - Processing of Medicaid Claims
Page 2

--- Page 3 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Audit Objectives
1. To evaluate the effectiveness of the claims edit
process, particularly the appropriateness of
disabling edits.
2. To assess the effectiveness of DHMH’s
procedures performed to review the propriety of
claims after payment.
3. To evaluate the effectiveness of the voucher
claim processes to obtain federal Medicaid
reimbursements for services provided through
the Mental Hygiene Administration (MHA) and the
Developmental Disabilities Administration (DDA).
DHMH - Processing of Medicaid Claims
Page 3

--- Page 4 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Audit Methodology
Our work included:
(cid:190) Obtaining a computer file of all fee-for-service
claims paid between July 1, 2007 and March 31,
2008. From this file, we isolated the $978 million
of claims that were flagged as having not been
processed through one or more of the 81 disabled
system edits.
(cid:190) Evaluating the propriety of disabling 55 of the 81
edits that accounted for 99% of the transactions
that bypassed disabled edits during the period.
(cid:190) Reviewing procedures over the post-payment
review processes, including certain hospital
claims.
(cid:190) Evaluating the processes used by MHA and DDA to
obtain federal Medicaid funds for their previously
paid claims.
DHMH - Processing of Medicaid Claims
Page 4

--- Page 5 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Key Audit Issues
(cid:190) Nine automated edits should not have been
disabled; consequently, claims valued at $98
million, which should have been suspended and
subject to manual reviews, were allowed to be
processed for payment during the nine-month
period tested.
(cid:190) Certain employees could change edit settings
without independent authorization, and certain
claims were improperly paid due to a programming
error involving one system edit.
(cid:190) The post-payment review processes used to
identify improperly paid claims needed more
structure and formal procedures to help ensure
that the reviews were effective, efficient, fully
carried out, and fully documented.
(cid:190) There was no systematic process to analyze the
causes of rejected federal fund reimbursement
claims submitted by DDA and MHA.
DHMH - Processing of Medicaid Claims
Page 5

--- Page 6 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Objective 1 –System Edit Process
(cid:190) There were valid reasons for not using most MMIS
edits that were disabled, but 9 of the 51 edits we
tested should not have been disabled. These 9
edits applied to claims totaling in excess of $98
million during the nine-month period ended March
31, 2008. Had these edits been used, the claims
would have been suspended and subject to
further review before being paid. (Finding 1)
(cid:190) Controls over changes to edit settings were
inadequate. Four employees could deactivate
edits without any approvals. A record of setting
changes and written justifications as to why edit
settings were changed were not maintained.
(Finding 2)
(cid:190) Detailed written descriptions of the various
automated edits were often brief and vague.
MCPA staff did not always have a clear
understanding of the purpose of certain edits.
(Finding 3)
DHMH - Processing of Medicaid Claims
Page 6

--- Page 7 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Objective 1 – System Edit Process
(cont’d)
(cid:190) During our testing of claims, we determined that
certain claims were improperly processed for
payment due to a temporary change in edit
settings. (Finding 4)
o These claims were paid rather than
suspended for subsequent manual review.
After we advised MCPA about these claims,
its research disclosed that claims totaling
$5.3 million should have been manually
reviewed before payment.
o MCPA also determined that $1.4 million of
these claims were paid in error and should be
recovered from the providers.
DHMH - Processing of Medicaid Claims
Page 7

--- Page 8 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Objective 1 – System Edit Process
(cont’d)
(cid:190) Excessive MMIS system access capabilities were
inadvertently granted to allow 532 users to pay
claims that were suspended due to edits.
(Finding 5)
(cid:190) Although certain claim processing functions had
backlogs, no formal studies of staffing
requirements had been performed to determine
if its existing resources should be reallocated.
Approximately 60 of the over 600 MCPA
employees are responsible for claims processing.
(Finding 6)
(cid:190) MCPA does not have a training program for
employees performing critical claims processing
functions, including those responsible for
evaluating claims suspended due to edits.
(Finding 7)
DHMH - Processing of Medicaid Claims
Page 8

--- Page 9 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Objective 2 – Post Payment Review
(cid:190) The post-payment review process is vital for
helping to ensure that payments to providers
were for necessary services that were rendered.
A critical component is the use of computer
data analysis (Surveillance and Utilization
Review – SURS).
o DHMH’s post payment review process was
not formally structured or adequately
documented. There were no specific
requirements as to the type and frequency
of computer analyses of claims data to
identify potentially improper paid claims.
o Comprehensive records of data analysis
reports, specific claims reviewed, and any
related recoveries were not maintained.
This information could be used to more
effectively direct future data analyses.
(Finding 8)
DHMH - Processing of Medicaid Claims
Page 9

--- Page 10 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Objective 2 – Post Payment Review
(cont’d)
(cid:190) Certain data analysis reports deemed to be
useful by the federal government and other
states designed to identify potentially
improper payment patterns were not routinely
produced. (Finding 9)
For example, there were no comprehensive
reports to identify:
o payments made for deceased persons.
o providers performing services outside of
their specialties.
o spike payments made to providers that
submitted large amounts of claims over a
short period.
DHMH - Processing of Medicaid Claims
Page 10

--- Page 11 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Objective 2 – Post Payment Review
(cont’d)
(cid:190) The vendor MCPA hired to audit in-state paid
hospital claims did not complete audits timely.
(Finding 12)
o As of December 31, 2008, no claims paid
since January 1, 2004 had been subject
to audit by the vendor.
o MCPA advised that certain claims for
services provided during calendar year
2003 can no longer be audited since the
period hospitals are required to maintain
records has lapsed.
(cid:190) Rates paid for services rendered by out-of-
state hospitals were not always verified. Such
payments totaled $21 million over a three-
year period. (Finding 13)
DHMH - Processing of Medicaid Claims
Page 11

--- Page 12 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Objective 3 – DDA and MHA Claims
DDA and MHA providers are paid outside of the
computer system (MMIS II) used to process
Medicaid claims. To obtain federal funds for clients
enrolled in Medicaid, paid DDA and MHA claims are
subsequently processed through MMIS and are
submitted to the federal government.
(cid:190) There was no systematic process among DDA,
MHA, and MCPA to determine the causes for the
rejected claims so that procedures and
processes could be modified to minimize future
rejected claims. (Finding 15)
(cid:190) The difficulties of MHA and DDA in obtaining
federal Medicaid funds for their previously paid
claims has been a longstanding issue, for at
least 10 years.
DHMH - Processing of Medicaid Claims
Page 12

--- Page 13 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Objective 3 – DDA and MHA Claims
(cont’d)
(cid:190) Numerous claims for federal reimbursement
from DDA and MHA were rejected by MMIS II.
For example, 116,000 DDA claims submitted
during August 2008 totaling $12.2 million were
rejected by MMIS II.
(cid:190) As of January 2009, outstanding MHA rejected
claims for federal reimbursement totaled $14.5
million, including $6.3 million of rejected claims
that had been outstanding for more than 1 year.
(cid:190) Since these claims were previously determined
to be legitimate and were paid by these
Administrations, the amount of claims rejected
by MMIS II for federal reimbursement purposes
should be minimal.
DHMH - Processing of Medicaid Claims
Page 13

--- Page 14 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Objective 3 – DDA and MHA Claims
(cont’d)
(cid:190) Rejected claims for federal reimbursement were
not investigated and resolved promptly. (Finding
16)
o For example, as of December 2008, DDA
claims paid for services provided in
calendar year 2006, totaling approximately
$8.4 million, were submitted and denied
for federal reimbursement and remained
outstanding.
o If these claims were not successfully
processed through MMIS II, federal fund
reimbursements of up to $4.2 million (50
percent of $8.4 million) may have been
lost.
(cid:190) Records for rejected DDA claims were not
maintained in a manner that facilitated a
complete and timely resolution of the claims.
DHMH - Processing of Medicaid Claims
Page 14

--- Page 15 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Conclusion
DHMH needs to:
(cid:190) Process claims through all appropriate edits,
improve controls over changes to edit settings,
and develop clear descriptions of edits;
(cid:190) Recover identified improper payments;
(cid:190) Periodically review MMIS access, and study
staffing needs and develop training for claims
processing;
(cid:190) Develop comprehensive procedures for the
post-payment review process and use a risk-
based approach to select areas for review;
(cid:190) Ensure that hospital claims are audited timely
and verify that payments to out-of-state
hospitals are based on appropriate rates; and
(cid:190) Improve the process for obtaining federal funds
for DDA and MHA Medicaid claims and ensure
that all rejected claims are promptly pursued.
DHMH - Processing of Medicaid Claims
Page 15