Title: Combined Presentation to the House Appropriations Subcommittee - Department of Information Technology (Fiscal Compliance Audit) and Resource Sharing Lease Agreements (Special Review)


Related Report Dated 11/18/2016

Related Report Dated 9/12/2016
Date: 02/08/2017
Type: Presentations to the Legislature
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5a9daf30cc9d72387404dcf5
Extracted: 2025-06-18T22:09:00.390495
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Department of Information
Technology
Combined Presentation on
Fiscal Compliance Audit
Report Dated September 12, 2016
and
Resource Sharing Lease Agreements
Special Review
Report Dated November 18, 2016

--- Page 2 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Overview
 DoIT is responsible for the State’s information
technology policies, procedures, and standards,
and for overseeing the implementation of major
information technology (IT) projects for the State’s
Executive Branch agencies and commissions.
 DoIT develops the Statewide Information
Technology Master Plan; manages the Major
Information Technology Development Project
(MITDP) Fund; and coordinates, purchases, and
manages IT and telecommunications services to
State agencies under its authority.
 DolT is responsible for reviewing, valuating, and
approving IT resource sharing agreements
entered into by State agencies under its authority.
 DoIT’s FY 2015 operating expenditures totaled
$99.2 million.
Department of Information Technology Page 2

--- Page 3 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Fiscal Compliance Audit Overview
Our fiscal compliance (FC) report included 7 findings,
2 of which (Findings 1 and 6) were repeated from the
prior audit report. Key findings were:
 DoIT lacked documentation that it effectively
monitored Major Information Technology
Development Projects (MITDPs).
 DoIT had not established a process to
independently evaluate the performance of
contractual project managers overseeing MITDPs.
 DoIT had not established comprehensive policies
for changes to MITDP scope, schedule, or costs
(rebaselining) and for the use of independent
assessments as a means to assess their health
and areas for improvement to help them succeed.
 There were certain security control deficiencies
relating to the networks and computer resources
under DoIT’s responsibility.
Department of Information Technology Page 3

--- Page 4 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Oversight of MITDPs (FC Finding 1)
DoIT lacked sufficient documentation supporting its
reviews of annual MITDP status reports and system
development documents, and that quarterly portfolio
reviews were conducted.
Information Technology Project Requests (ITPRs)
DoIT did not ensure that agencies’ annual project
status reports, known as ITPRs and required by State
law, were current prior to approving them.
ITPRs include a summary of the project scope, the
needs addressed, potential risks, possible
alternatives, estimated costs, and funding sources.
ITPRs also describe how a project meets the goals of
the Statewide Information Technology Master Plan.
 Our test of the FY 2015 ITPRs submitted for 5
projects valued at $355.5 million disclosed that
DoIT approved the ITPRs even though certain
ITPR information for 3 projects valued at $163.6
million had not been updated from the prior year.
Department of Information Technology Page 4

--- Page 5 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Oversight of MITDPs (FC Finding 1 cont.)
System Development Life Cycle (SDLC)
DoIT did not document its approval when agencies
completed each SDLC phase of the MITDP, which is
intended to reduce project failure risk.
 Although not required by State law, approval of
each SDLC phase of the MITDP is critical
because these projects are often large and
complicated, involve high costs, and support a
critical business function for the State.
Quarterly Portfolio Review Meetings
Specific documentation requirements were not
established for DoIT’s quarterly portfolio review
meetings with agencies to discuss MITDP status.
 DoIT frequently did not document significant
matters discussed during these meetings,
including any required corrective actions.
 DoIT did not document that it verified the agency
self-assessment of MITDP status, which were
prepared for these meetings.
Department of Information Technology Page 5

--- Page 6 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Oversight of MITDPs (FC Finding 2)
DoIT had not established a process to independently
evaluate oversight project managers (OPMs) hired
through a vendor to monitor the development and
implementation of the 33 MITDPs valued at $850
million as of June 2015.
 DoIT had not established a formal process to
independently assess whether OPMs were properly
performing their duties and meeting expectations.
 DoIT did not specify the types of documentation that
OPMs should gather while overseeing the MITDPs.
We found that the OPMs’ activity reports varied in
content and specificity, thus impeding DoIT’s ability
to determine the effectiveness of project monitoring.
 DoIT did not measure the workload of each OPM and
determine if an appropriate number were assigned to
effectively monitor all projects. The vendor contract
terms provided for up to 20 OPMs and DoIT could not
explain why only 6 were assigned as of June 2015.
Department of Information Technology Page 6

--- Page 7 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Oversight of MITDPs (FC Finding 3)
DoIT had not established comprehensive policies for
changes to a project’s original (or baseline) scope,
schedule, or costs established during the SDLC
planning phases and for the use of Independent
Verification and Validation (IV&V) assessments.
Rebaselining
 DoIT did not maintain records to readily identify all
rebaselining occurrences (such as changes in
scope, schedule, and costs) during the life of each
project, including the reasons and project impact.
 Rebaselining can occur for valid reasons or can
be used to mask cost overruns or schedule
delays.
 According to DoIT’s records, 12 of the 42 projects
it monitored in 2014 (29%) were rebaselined for
one or more reasons, such as changes in project
scope, schedule, and/or budget.
Department of Information Technology Page 7

--- Page 8 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Oversight of MITDPs (FC Finding 3 cont.)
IV&V Assessments
DoIT lacked a policy defining risk factors and other
considerations to trigger an IV&V.
IV&Vs provide an independent means to determine
whether a system is being built using practices that
lead to a successful implementation (verification), and
whether the completed system will provide the needed
functionality to satisfy the intended business purpose
(validation).
 As of November 2015, DoIT had only initiated one
IV&V for one of the 33 MITDPs.
 As of June 30, 2015, DoIT had not documented a
determination as to whether to initiate an IV&V for
any of the projects being monitored at that time,
including 19 projects that were in the more critical
implementation/development phases.
 DoIT could not document how IV&V results should
be considered during its project oversight.
Department of Information Technology Page 8

--- Page 9 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Other Findings
Findings 4 and 5 – Information Systems
 Critical or sensitive networks (including DoIT’s, the
Department of Budget and Management’s, and
the Office of the Governor’s) were not properly
secured in that certain contractors had been
granted unnecessary access and certain security
capabilities were not fully used.
 Computers covered by DoIT’s managed desktop
services were not properly maintained and
secured with current malware protection.
Finding 6 – Statewide Contract Procurements
DoIT did not properly instruct State agencies procuring
services from DoIT’s statewide contract to secure
competitive bids received electronically and DoIT did
not always properly secure its own bids.
Finding 7 – Universal Service Trust Fund
DoIT did not recommend an appropriate reduction in
the Universal Service Fee in recognition of excess
funds in the Fund and projected expenditures.
Department of Information Technology Page 9

--- Page 10 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Fiscal Compliance Audit Conclusions
DoIT should
• ensure annual MITDP status reports are current
and complete;
• document approvals of project phases and the
results of quarterly review meetings;
• evaluate project managers, specify project
monitoring documentation and reporting
requirements, and ensure adequate resources
are devoted to project monitoring efforts;
• establish comprehensive policies for project
rebaselining and the use of IV&Vs; and,
• implement recommended actions to provide
appropriate network and computer security,
secure electronic bid documents, and closely
monitor Universal Service Trust Fund activity.
Department of Information Technology Page 10

--- Page 11 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Resource Sharing Special Overview
We conducted a special review of 10 resource
sharing lease agreements (RSAs) between 2
telecommunications (telecom) companies and the
Department of State Police (DSP), Natural Resources
(DNR), or DoIT. Our findings related to DoIT oversight
of the RSAs were:
 DoIT did not maintain comprehensive records of
the RSAs nor effectively monitor the RSAs
executed primarily by DSP and DNR.
 DoIT did not take timely action to address the
lease payment arrangements. For about 15 years,
RSA payments of $4.4 million were deposited into
escrow accounts maintained by a law firm (which
were used by DSP and DNR to acquire goods and
services). DoIT believes RSA payments should
have been deposited into the MITDP Fund.
 DoIT did not ensure that all compensation due
from RSAs was received.
Department of Information Technology Page 11

--- Page 12 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Resource Sharing Special (Findings 1 and 2)
Recordkeeping
DoIT did not maintain comprehensive records of all
telecommunications resource sharing agreements
(RSA) maintained by Executive Branch agencies
under its authority, including its own.
 DoIT did not maintain a complete list of existing
RSAs, including the value of the agreements
and renewal periods.
 At the start of our review, DoIT had a listing of
RSAs, but it only included 5 of the 10 RSAs in
our review, and no related agreements were on
file.
 DoIT also did not have a complete listing of its
own RSAs (2 of the 10 RSAs were DoIT’s) or a
record of equipment attached to its towers.
Consequently, DoIT could not monitor each
agreement’s terms to ensure that renewal options
were properly exercised and that all compensation
due was received and accounted for.
Department of Information Technology Page 12

--- Page 13 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Resource Sharing Special (Finding 1)
Lease Payment Arrangements
DoIT did not take timely action when certain RSA
payment arrangements were inconsistent with DoIT’s
understanding of the related requirements of State
law.
 Beginning in 2001, lease payments from 2
telecom companies were deposited into interest-
bearing escrow accounts maintained by a law
firm.
 Based on our review of available records, from
2001 to June 30, 2016, deposits into these
escrow accounts totaled $4.4 million.
 Account withdrawals of $3.8 million were used by
DNR and DSP to purchase goods and services;
controls over this activity were lacking, resulting
in certain questionable activity.
 DoIT believed these funds should have been
deposited into the MITDP.
Department of Information Technology Page 13

--- Page 14 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Resource Sharing Special (Finding 1)
Lease Payment Arrangements (continued)
 DoIT was aware of the escrow accounts since at
least April 2011, but did not initiate any action
to limit or stop their use until July 2015.
Since then -
The law firm was directed to cease making
o
payments from the escrow accounts.
A DNR internal audit concluded the accounts
o
effectively created an “off-budget” pool of
funds without regard to the State budget or
procurement requirements.
DoIT provided direction for future RSAs.
o
At the time of our report, the closure of escrow
o
accounts with balances of $536,700 was
pending until the disposition of the funds is
determined.
Department of Information Technology Page 14

--- Page 15 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Resource Sharing Special (Finding 3)
The financial transactions pertaining to the escrow
accounts were not recorded in the State’s accounting
records and were not monitored by State officials,
and the related interest was retained by the law firm.
 Neither DoIT, nor DSP and DNR, had obtained
escrow account bank statements to monitor the
deposit and disbursement activity and did not
ensure the law firm performed monthly bank
reconciliations.
 Law firm personnel advised us that the firm did
not maintain formal accounting records for the
accounts (such as a check register) and did not
complete monthly bank reconciliations.
 Interest earned on the escrow accounts ($90,900)
was not paid to the State, but was retained by the
law firm.
Department of Information Technology Page 15

--- Page 16 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Resource Sharing Special (Finding 4)
 DoIT (as well as DSP and DNR) did not ensure that
all compensation due from telecom companies
under the RSAs was collected. For eight RSAs,
compensation totaling $342,000 was not
received, some of which dated back to 2009.
 An initial DoIT (and DSP) RSA had lapsed and
provisions were not made for compensation after
they expired even though the telecom companies
continued using the towers. DoIT advised us that
compensation totaling approximately $575,000
should have been received on these agreements
through June 2016 (including $200,000 for
DoIT’s Germantown tower RSA since it expired in
October 2012).
Department of Information Technology Page 16

--- Page 17 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Resource Sharing Special Conclusions
DoIT should
• maintain a comprehensive record of all telecom
RSAs and tower-installed equipment;
• determine if existing RSAs should be
renegotiated, and ensure that all existing
arrangements and renewals are supported and
approved;
• determine the disposition of the remaining
escrow account funds and future RSA payments;
and
• establish procedures to ensure that all RSA
payments due from telecom companies are
received and take necessary actions to collect
unpaid compensation.
Department of Information Technology Page 17