Title: Presentation to the House Appropriations Full Committee - Department of Health and Mental Hygiene - Developmental Disabilities Administration

Related Report Dated 11/20/2009
Date: 01/17/2012
Type: Presentations to the Legislature
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5a9daf2ccc9d72387404dbfb
Extracted: 2025-06-18T13:42:53.244791
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Department of Legislative Services
OOffffiiccee ooff LLeeggiissllaattiivvee AAuuddiittss
Department of Health and
MMenttall HHygiiene
Developmental Disabilities
AAddmiiniistratiion ((DDDDAA))
Report dated November 20, 2009

--- Page 2 ---
Department of Legislative Services
OOffffiiccee ooff LLeeggiissllaattiivvee AAuuddiittss
Audit Overview
 DDA plans, develops policies and regulations, and
funds a statewide system of services for individuals
with developmental disabilities and their families.
 Through private contractors, DDA funds services to
the developmentally disabled, various community-
based programs that include community residential
sseerrvviicceess, ddaayy hhaabbiilliittaattiioonn sseerrvviicceess, aanndd vvooccaattiioonnaall
training.
 The report included 14 findings, 4 of which were
reppeated from the pprecedingg audit repport. These
four repeated findings appear as five findings in
this report.
DDA - Developmental Disabilities Administration
Page 2

--- Page 3 ---
Department of Legislative Services
OOffffiiccee ooff LLeeggiissllaattiivvee AAuuddiittss
Key Audit Issues
 DDA did not maximize its ability to obtain federal
funds. For example, the opportunity was lost to obtain
$3 million in federal funds due to the failure to submit
rejected claims identified during the prior audit.
 DDA lacked documentation supporting the waiting list
information reported to the General Assembly.
 Inadequate monitoring of contractors/providers
resulted in certain clients losing Medicaid eligibility
(resulting in the State paying all service costs) and in
payments for services provided after certain clients’
ddattes off ddeatthh.
 DDA did not take timely collection action to recover
funds totaling $3.6 million related to the Wage
Dispparityy Initiative.
DDA - Developmental Disabilities Administration
Page 3

--- Page 4 ---
Department of Legislative Services
OOffffiiccee ooff LLeeggiissllaattiivvee AAuuddiittss
Federal Funds
 DDA lost the opportunity to obtain federal funds
totaling approximately $3 million, because claims
identified in our prior audit were not corrected and
rreessuubbmmiitttteedd wwiitthhiinn rreeqquuiirreedd ffeeddeerraall ttiimmeeffrraammeess.
(Finding 1).
 DDA did not investigate the cause of claims
rejected ffor eligibility reasons (e.g., a client not
eligible on the date of service). During December
2008, such rejected claims totaled $1.5 million.
(Finding 2)
 Federal funds totaling $433,000 were not
recovered due to the improper application of a
DHMH Medicaid edit to DDA claims. (Finding 2)
 DDA did not have adequate processes to ensure
that certain provider claims were submitted for
FFeeddeerraall rreeiimmbbuurrsseemmeenntt pprroocceessssiinngg.. ((FFiinnddiinngg 33))
DDA - Developmental Disabilities Administration
Page 4

--- Page 5 ---
Department of Legislative Services
OOffffiiccee ooff LLeeggiissllaattiivvee AAuuddiittss
Waiting List Initiative
DDA did not maintain adequate documentation
supporting waiting list information reported to the
General Assembly in January 2009 and a December
22000088 wwaaiittiinngg lliisstt ccoonnttaaiinneedd iinnaaccccuurraacciieess. ((FFiinnddiinngg 44))
 DDA could not provide detail for the reported
17,250 individuals waiting for one or more
services, as of January 2008.
 DDA did not perform a review of the waiting list
dduurriinngg oouurr aauuddiitt ppeerriioodd ttoo eennssuurree tthhaatt tthhee
individual's needs and priority categories reflect
current health and home conditions. Beginning
in December 2008, DDA initiated such a review
and it noted that 250 individuals who had been
on the waiting list were actually deceased and
should have been removed from the list.
DDA - Developmental Disabilities Administration
Page 5

--- Page 6 ---
Department of Legislative Services
OOffffiiccee ooff LLeeggiissllaattiivvee AAuuddiittss
Client Resource Coordinators (CRCs)
DDA did not ensure that CRCs performed required
eligibility assessments for certain clients, resulting in
lost federal Medicaid eligibility and in certain instances
ppaayymmeennttss ffoorr ddeecceeaasseedd cclliieennttss. ((FFiinnddiinngg 66))
 An OLA test of a DDA report of clients, who lost their
Medicaid eligibility found 72 clients who lost
eligibility because the CRCs did not perform the
required reassessment. These clients were
subsequently funded solely with State funds.
 DDA also did not monitor the CRCs to ensure that
tthheeyy mmeett wwiitthh cclliieennttss, aass rreeqquuiirreedd bbyy SSttaattee
regulations. Had DDA ensured that such meetings
occurred, it would have been alerted to certain
improper provider billings and payments. For
eexxaammppllee,, ((aass nnootteedd iinn FFiinnddiinngg 77)) wwee iiddeennttiiffiieedd 77
providers that received $235,000 for 8 clients who
were deceased on the dates services were
reportedly provided.
DDA - Developmental Disabilities Administration
Page 6

--- Page 7 ---
Department of Legislative Services
OOffffiiccee ooff LLeeggiissllaattiivvee AAuuddiittss
Wage Disparity Initiative
DDA did not take timely action to recover $3.6
million from providers for its Wage Disparity Initiative.
(Finding 10)
 For fiscal years 2005 – 2007, DDA annually
obtained reports of the amount spent to increase
wages of direct service workers for private
pprroovviiddeerrss ttoo ddeetteerrmmiinnee wwhheetthheerr tthhee ffuunnddiinngg wwaass
used for its intended purpose. However, DDA did
not take any action to recover funds not used for
the Initiative’s purpose until December 2008. At
ssuucchh ttiimmee,, DDDDAA bbiilllleedd pprroovviiddeerrss ffoorr $$33..66 mmiilllliioonn..
 Legislation passed in 2001 required DDA to
increase private provider rates to reduce the
ddiissppaarriittyy bbeettwweeeenn ddiirreecctt sseerrvviiccee wwoorrkkeerrss ffoorr
private providers compared to similar employees
in State institutions. The increased funds were to
be used exclusively for this purpose.
DDA - Developmental Disabilities Administration
Page 7

--- Page 8 ---
Department of Legislative Services
OOffffiiccee ooff LLeeggiissllaattiivvee AAuuddiittss
Other Issues
A DDA report to the General Assembly did not
disclose that, after completing the Transitioning
YYoouutthh PPrrooggrraamm,, cclliieennttss rreecceeiivveedd ffuullll DDDDAA sseerrvviicceess,,
bypassing individuals that had been on the
waiting list for longer periods of time (e.g., over 20
years) and with potentially more severe needs.
((Findingg 5))
DDA did not have adequate procedures to verify
that clients in the Family and Support Services
and the Individual Family Care programs received
rreeqquuiirreedd sseerrvviicceess. PPrrooggrraammss ffoorr tthheessee pprrooggrraammss
during FY 2009 totaled $41 million, primarily from
general funds. (Finding 8)
Proper security had not been established to
control access to DDA’s provider consumer
information system (PCIS2) as well as to restrict
the capabilities of users. (Findings 11 – 12)
DDA - Developmental Disabilities Administration
Page 8

--- Page 9 ---
Department of Legislative Services
OOffffiiccee ooff LLeeggiissllaattiivvee AAuuddiittss
Conclusion
DDA needs to:
maximize the recovery of federal funds, promptly
investigate and resubmit rejected claims, and
ensure that assessments of client Medicaid
eligibility are conducted, as appropriate.
mmaaiinnttaaiinn ddooccuummeennttaattiioonn ttoo ssuuppppoorrtt iinnffoorrmmaattiioonn
reported to the General Assembly and ensure the
accuracy of the reported information.
monitor the work of contractors and the services
ppeerrffoorrmmeedd bbyy pprroovviiddeerrss ffoorr ccoommpplliiaannccee wwiitthh
related legal requirements.
collect amounts due from providers and establish
proper controls over its automated provider
consumer information system (PCIS2).
DDA - Developmental Disabilities Administration
Page 9