Title: Presentation to the Joint Audit Committee - Morgan State University - Update on Capital Improvement Project Audit Issues

Related Report Dated 2/8/2008
Date: 12/09/2008
Type: Presentations to the Legislature
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5a9daf22cc9d72387404dad4
Extracted: 2025-06-18T09:09:51.563239
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Morgan State University
Update on Capital Improvement
Project Audit Issues
Presentation to
Maryland General Assembly
Joint Audit Committee
Bruce A. Myers, CPA
December 9, 2008

--- Page 2 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Overview – Report and Legislative Action
(cid:190) MSU Fiscal Compliance Audit Report issued
February 8, 2008
(cid:190) Report included 17 findings:
• Five findings - Telecommunications Hub
Relocation Capital Improvement Project
• Four findings - General Practices for
Capital Improvement Projects
• Eight findings – Fiscal Operations
(cid:190) Audit findings were reviewed in detail by
Legislative Budget Committees during 2008
Session.
(cid:190) Joint Chairmen’s Report – Capital Budget, April
2008 restricted a portion of project funds and
required the MSU capital project management
and internal controls to be revised.
Update on MSU Capital Improvement
Page 2
Project Audit Issues

--- Page 3 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Overview - Capital Improvement Project Issues
(cid:190) MSU did not disclose to the Board of Public
works that $3.1 million of its $4.3 million
telecommunications hub relocation project
contract represented undefined allowance
funds that lacked specific deliverables and were
not subject to competitive bidding. MSU
primarily used these funds to pay for work on
other unrelated construction projects awarded
to the same contractor.
(cid:190) Procedures for reviewing telecommunications
hub relocation project invoices were
inadequate. As a result, questionable payments
of up to $2.4 million were made for charges that
were not verified or supported. These payments
require further investigation and resolution.
Update on MSU Capital Improvement
Page 3
Project Audit Issues

--- Page 4 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Overview - Capital Improvement Project Issues
(cid:190) Rather than initiate a new procurement, MSU
processed $2.3 million in change orders to the
hub relocation project to purchase upgraded
equipment and services, which was outside the
scope of the original project.
(cid:190) Change orders totaling $4.1 million, relating to
three MSU construction projects, were often
approved after the related work had been
completed and paid for.
(cid:190) Liquidated damages totaling $3.1 million were
not assessed for three construction projects
that were significantly past their scheduled
completion dates.
(cid:190) MSU did not always meet its minority business
enterprise goals, and did not document that all
construction project inspections were
completed.
Update on MSU Capital Improvement
Page 4
Project Audit Issues

--- Page 5 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Overview – Current Status
(cid:190) Audit findings on Telecommunications Hub
Relocation Project were referred to the Criminal
Division of the Office of the Attorney General.
Investigation is ongoing
(cid:190) OLA has not yet received the MSU report on the
revised capital project management and
internal controls required by Joint Chairmen’s
Report.
Update on MSU Capital Improvement
Page 5
Project Audit Issues