Title: Presentation to the House Appropriations Subcommittee - Department of Health and Mental Hygiene - Mental Hygiene Administration

Related Report Dated 7/12/2011
Date: 02/13/2012
Type: Presentations to the Legislature
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5a9daf2bcc9d72387404dbef
Extracted: 2025-06-18T13:41:25.965980
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Department of Health and Mental Hygiene
Mental Hygiene Administration
Report dated July 12, 2011

--- Page 2 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Audit Overview
 The Mental Hygiene Administration (MHA) is primarily
responsible for:
 Developing comprehensive treatment and
rehabilitation services for individuals with mental
illness
 Overseeing the provision of publicly-funded
services that provide for the care and treatment of
individuals who have mental disorders
 Supervising State mental health facilities
 Approving local government plans for treatment of
the mentally ill
 To assist MHA in providing mental health services to
eligible individuals, MHA contracts with a private
Administrative Service Organization (ASO) to provide
benefit management services, such as ensuring
consumer eligibility, authorizing consumer services,
and paying provider claims for services rendered.
 Our report included 8 findings, 2 of which were
repeated from our preceding audit report (which
included 11 findings).
DHMH – Mental Hygiene Administration
Page 2

--- Page 3 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Key Audit Issues
 MHA lacked procedures for ensuring that
documentation of patient eligibility was obtained by
the ASO for services paid entirely with State funds
and certain critical reviews of claims processed by
the ASO were discontinued.
 A comparison of claim payment data to Social
Security Administration death records disclosed
questionable payments (services rendered after the
date of death).
 Critical access and monitoring controls over the
ASO’s automated system used to compile patient
and provider data, as well as to process provider
claim payments were inadequate, and key security
provisions were not included in MHA’s contract with
the vendor that operated the system.
 Contracts for mental health services established by
local entities were not adequately monitored. During
FY 2010, $63.8 million was paid to such entities.
DHMH – Mental Hygiene Administration
Page 3

--- Page 4 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Administrative Service O r ganization
Between 9/2009 and 6/2010, claim payments totaled
$472 million and contract fees paid to the ASO totaled
$8.3 million.
 MHA lacked adequate procedures to ensure that
required documentation supporting patient eligibility for
certain State-funded services was obtained and verified
by MHA or the ASO. (Finding 1)
 Individuals who are not automatically eligible for
Medicaid may still qualify for mental health services
under a State-funded program, if they meet certain
criteria.
 A review of 16 such patients with claims totaling
$48,000 disclosed 10 cases with no documentation of
a verifiable social security number (an eligibility
requirement), and 5 cases with no documentation of
the provider’s assertion that the patient had received
public mental health services within the last 2 years (a
qualifying condition).
 Between 9/2009 and 6/2010, the ASO paid $20
million in claims entirely funded with State general
funds.
DHMH – Mental Hygiene Administration
Page 4

--- Page 5 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Administrative Service O r ganization (continued)
 An automated data match performed by OLA between
Social Security Administration (SSA) death records and
the ASO’s paid claims records for the 12-month period
ended 10/31/11 disclosed questionable payments
totaling $207,000 for 106 individuals paid for services
rendered after the SSA-recorded date of death. MHA and
the ASO investigated 5 of these cases (during the course
of the audit) and confirmed the date of death for two of
these individuals with payments totaling $5,500. Claims
for the remaining 3 individuals were found to be valid
(e.g., SSA data was incorrect). (Finding 2)
 As of January 2011, independent reviews of claims paid
by the ASO had not been performed since March 2009.
Consequently, no such reviews of MHA’s current ASO,
whose contract was effective September 1, 2009, had
been conducted. These quarterly reviews, previously
conducted by a private firm hired by MHA, served to test
the accuracy and propriety of claims processed by the
ASO, and included, for example, steps to ensure proper
claim authorization and record keeping, and submission
of eligible claims for federal reimbursement. (Finding 3)
DHMH – Mental Hygiene Administration
Page 5

--- Page 6 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Information Systems Sec urity and Control
The A SO’s automated system maintains and processes
critical information and data related to the provision of
mental health services and the payment of provider claims,
including demographic (name, address, DOB) and other
sensitive medical data, such as diagnosis codes, prescribed
medications, and physician assessments of patient risks and
impairments. The system was hosted at the ASO’s national
data center facility.
 MHA’s contract with the ASO did not contain specific
provisions obligating the ASO to address certain
significant security and operational risks, such as data
segregation and restoration. MHA did not ensure that the
ASO had established proper controls to ensure security
over critical data. (Finding 4)
 Access and monitoring controls over the ASO’s servers,
which hosted certain software critical to the ASO’s data
processing functions, were not adequate. (Finding 5)
 The ASO’s account and password controls were not
sufficient to effectively protect sensitive data in the
system. These conditions increased the risk of
unauthorized access to sensitive MHA data. (Finding 6)
DHMH – Mental Hygiene Administration
Page 6

--- Page 7 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Core Service Agencies
MHA did not adequately monitor contracts established by
local Core Service Agencies (CSA) with private vendors. In
FY 2010, MHA awarded $63.8 million to 20 CSAs to provide
mental health services in local jurisdictions throughout the
State. CSAs often subcontracted the required services to
other vendors. (Finding 7)
A review of 26 subcontracts awarded by 3 CSAs for FY 2010
totaling $3.2 million disclosed that 4 subcontracts totaling
$787,000 did not contain all of the original conditions of
award contained in the corresponding agreement between
MHA and the CSA.
 For example, although MHA provided $346,000 to one
CSA to provide 15 consumer beds and 5,037 bed days
for transitional sheltered housing for homeless men, the
CSA’s subcontract with a vendor to provide these
services did not include requirements regarding the
number of beds or bed days to be provided.
 Documentation completed by MHA as part of its review of
that CSA’s activity erroneously indicated that the contract
did in fact include all of the original conditions of award.
DHMH – Mental Hygiene Administration
Page 7

--- Page 8 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Conclusion
MH A needs to:
 Establish procedures to ensure that required
documentation supporting eligibility for individuals
whose services are paid for entirely with general funds
is obtained in all cases, and verified.
 In coordination with DHMH’s Medical Care Programs
Administration, conduct matching procedures to help
detect invalid or inaccurate recipient data and invalid
claim payments.
 Ensure that all claims processed by the ASO are
subject to an independent systematic review and
evaluation on a regular basis.
 Ensure that future information technology contracts
include provisions for addressing critical security and
operational risks.
 Improve automated system access, monitoring, and
password controls.
 Establish adequate procedures to ensure that CSA
subcontracts include all required provisions and
conditions.
DHMH – Mental Hygiene Administration
Page 8