Title: Presentation to the Joint Audit Committee - Department of Health and Mental Hygiene - Department of Human Resources - Medical Assistance Program - Using the Federal Death Master File to Detect and Prevent Improper Payments

Related Report Dated 12/2/2011
Date: 12/31/2011
Type: Presentations to the Legislature
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5a9daf2bcc9d72387404dbc1
Extracted: 2025-06-18T13:35:57.860083
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Department of Health and Mental
Hygiene
and
Department of Human Resources
U sing the Federal Death Master File to
Detect and Prevent Improper Payments
Report dated December 2, 2011
Presentation to the Joint Audit Committee
Bruce A. Myers, CPA
Timothy R. Brooks, CPA, CFE
Stephen C. Pease, CPA
Raymond G. Burton, CPA
December 13, 2011

--- Page 2 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Audit Scope, Objective and Methodology
 We conducted a performance audit to evaluate
whether the Social Security Administration’s
Death Master File (DMF) was an efficient and
effective tool for detecting and preventing
Medicaid payments made to service providers for
deceased persons.
 We matched the February 2011 DMF to Medical
Care Programs Administration’s file of eligible
Medicaid recipients as of March 2011 based on
matches of three data fields (SSN, DOB, last
name). We then identified Medicaid payments
made from January 1, 2008 to August 31, 2011
attributable to these persons after their reported
dates of death. This extraction identified 323
individuals with payments of $2.5 million.
 Of the 323 individuals, we reviewed in detail 20
individuals for whom the largest amount of
payments were made after their reported dates of
death.
Using the Death Master File to Detect
Page 2
and Prevent Improper Medicaid Claims

--- Page 3 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Background
 Medicaid is a joint federal and state program that
provides medical care to low-income citizens.
 The DHMH’s Medical Care Program Administration
primarily administers the program. Applicant
eligibility is primarily determined by DHR’s local
departments of social services. The federal
government generally funds 50% of program costs.
 During FY 2011, Medicaid expenditures totaled
$7.7 billion and services were provided to 959,000
individuals.
 Most Medicaid recipients are required to enroll in a
managed care organization (MCO). The MCOs
receive a monthly capitation payment from MCPA
for each enrolled recipient regardless of whether
any services were provided to the recipient during
any particular month.
Using the Death Master File to Detect
Page 3
and Prevent Improper Medicaid Claims

--- Page 4 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Death Master File
 The Death Master File (DMF) is maintained by the
Social Security Administration (SSA). It contains
information on over 89 million decedents, such as
their social security number, name, date of birth,
date of death, and location of last known
residence.
 SSA authorizes the use of the DMF as a death
verification tool. The DMF is widely used by many
federal and state agencies and private entities to
assist in detecting improper payments.
Using the Death Master File to Detect
Page 4
and Prevent Improper Medicaid Claims

--- Page 5 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Finding 1
Medicaid eligibility files should be periodically
matched to a national death database to identify
payments attributable to deceased individuals.
 Our review of payments attributable to 20
individuals after their dates of death in the DMF
disclosed improper payments in 10 cases totaling
$426,000. Nine of the ten cases in which
improper payments occurred were monthly
capitation payments to MCOs. (For the other 10
cases, the individuals were not deceased.)
 Although DHMH performs certain matches with
Md. death files, neither DHMH or DHR used any
national listing of deaths to prevent Medicaid
payments for individuals who had died outside of
the State.
 DHMH should recover all improper payments
attributable to the 10 individuals and investigate
the other 303 individuals with Medicaid payments
after their reported dates of death.
Using the Death Master File to Detect
Page 5
and Prevent Improper Medicaid Claims

--- Page 6 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Finding 2
Other cases identified by match results should be
investigated and any overpayments should be
recovered.
 Our match, based on SSN only, disclosed 1,582
individuals reflected as eligible for Medicaid
services that were listed as deceased on the
DMF. Medicaid payments totaling $7.5 million
were attributable to 532 of these individuals
from January, 1, 2008 to March 10, 2011 for
services rendered after their dates of death
reported on the DMF (532 includes the previous
323 individuals ).
 The match results suggest there could be other
data inaccuracies involving SSN, DOB, and
names within DHR and DHMH computer systems.
For example individuals could have used the
identity of others to inappropriately obtain
Medicaid benefits since 184 of the matched
SSN’s did not agree for both DOB and last name.
Using the Death Master File to Detect
Page 6
and Prevent Improper Medicaid Claims

--- Page 7 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Finding 3
DHR and DHMH should evaluate the factors that
contributed to the overpayments and make any
necessary system or process changes.
 Medicaid eligibility was not always cancelled
when an event occurred that should have
changed a recipient’s eligibility status. In one
case, DHR’s records indicated that a recipient
was deceased but eligibility for Medicaid benefits
was not canceled.
 For one case payments to a nursing home began
11 months after the individual’s death and
continued for 28 months. The circumstances of
this case raise questions regarding the billings
and the adequacy of related verification
procedures.
Using the Death Master File to Detect
Page 7
and Prevent Improper Medicaid Claims

--- Page 8 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Finding 3 – (continued)
 DHR did not verify the continued eligibility of
individuals who obtained Medicaid eligibility
because they received federal Supplemental
Security Income (SSI) payments.
 Unlike other Medicaid recipients, periodic
redeterminations of eligibility are not
performed for those who are SSI eligible.
 During FY 2011, MCPA’s records indicated
that medical providers were paid $1.7
billion attributable to 115,000 individuals
who received Medicaid eligibility because
of their eligibility for SSI benefits.
 Furthermore, 8 of the 10 cases that had
improper payments involved individuals
who received Medicaid eligibility because
of their eligibility for SSI.
 DHR did not always verify that individuals
approved for Medicaid benefits were Maryland
residents.
Using the Death Master File to Detect
Page 8
and Prevent Improper Medicaid Claims

--- Page 9 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Conclusion
DHMH and DHR need to:
 Develop a process for using the Social Security
Administration’s DMF to detect deceased
individuals who are eligible for Medicaid
 Recover identified improper payments and
further investigate payments for deceased
individuals identified by our match
 Evaluate the factors contributing to the
overpayments, such as those described above,
and institute necessary process and system
changes or other actions to prevent recurrence
and to detect improper payments sooner
 Periodically verify the continued eligibility of
individuals who were approved for Medicaid
benefits because of their approval for SSI
benefits
Using the Death Master File to Detect
Page 9
and Prevent Improper Medicaid Claims