Title: Presentation to the House Health and Government Operations Committee - Certain Operational Aspects of the Blind Industries and Services of Maryland (Performance)

Related Report Dated 2/1/2016
Date: 02/10/2016
Type: Presentations to the Legislature
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5a9daf2fcc9d72387404dcc2
Extracted: 2025-06-18T14:02:12.437549
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Performance Audit
Certain Operational Aspects of the
Blind Industries and Services of
Maryland
Report dated February 1, 2016

--- Page 2 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Audit Request
(cid:190)The Joint Audit Committee directed the Office of
Legislative Audits (OLA) to conduct an audit of
certain operational aspects of the Blind
Industries and Services of Maryland (BISM).
(cid:190)The audit objectives included an evaluation of
BISM’s
(cid:131) employment and training policies and
practices,
(cid:131) State vendor preference, and
(cid:131) executive compensation.
Blind Industries and Services of Maryland
Page 2

--- Page 3 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
BISM - Background
(cid:190)BISM was established in 1908 as Maryland
Workshop for the Blind by the General Assembly
to provide vocational rehabilitation, employment,
and other resources to blind adults of Maryland.
(cid:190)BISM is a nonprofit organization that conducts
manufacturing and retail operations and provides
employment for blind persons in Maryland and
other states, and provides rehabilitation and
training programs primarily to blind adults of
Maryland.
(cid:190)BISM’s mission is to “provide stable career
opportunities, innovative rehabilitation programs,
quality products and services, and to develop
resources for training and education.”
Blind Industries and Services of Maryland
Page 3

--- Page 4 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
BISM - Business Operations
(cid:190)BISM ‘s revenue is primarily derived from product
sales, which totaled $84 million during FY 2015.
(cid:131) $47.1 million textile sales to the federal
government
(cid:131) $20.4 million retail sales at federal installations
(cid:131) $10.5 million sales to State agencies
(cid:131) $6.0 million sales to private entities
(cid:190)To help support rehabilitation and training services
costing $1.58 million during FY 2015, BISM also
received funding from the State consisting of:
(cid:131) $581,000 in grants, and
(cid:131) $295,000 in fee-for-service payments.
(cid:190)As of June 30, 2015, BISM employed 578
associates (216 blind and 362 sighted) working at
locations within and outside of Maryland.
Blind Industries and Services of Maryland
Page 4

--- Page 5 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
BISM – Rehabilitation and Training
(cid:190)The Rehabilitation Division provides rehabilitation
and life skills training throughout Maryland to the
blind and visually-impaired that leads to self-
reliance and independence.
(cid:190)As of June 30, 2015, the Division had a staff of
27 persons.
(cid:190)During FY 2015, BISM provided a total of 71,462
hours of education and training to 768 persons.
(cid:190)Most BISM clients are referred by the Maryland
State Department of Education – Division of
Rehabilitation Services.
Blind Industries and Services of Maryland
Page 5

--- Page 6 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
BISM – State Procurement Preferences
(cid:190)BISM has two procurement preferences
established by State law.
(cid:131) A State or State aided or State controlled entity
shall buy supplies and services available from
BISM, unless they are available from the
Maryland Correctional Enterprises.
(cid:131) To the extent practicable, for State contracts
that include housekeeping or janitorial services,
the prime contractor and its subcontractors
must procure janitorial products from BISM,
when available.
(cid:190)Current State law further requires that the prices
to be charged under the preferences shall be set
by a committee consisting of five State officials,
and should reflect fair market prices, which by
regulation is defined as the current average
market prices.
Blind Industries and Services of Maryland
Page 6

--- Page 7 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Advice of Counsel
We sought formal advice from counsel to the General
Assembly regarding the applicability and intent of
certain laws, including those governing BISM and its
operations. The advice concluded:
(cid:131) BISM has broad authority under the law to further
its mission of providing training and employment
opportunities for the blind.
Previous legal opinions had concluded that BISM
was a quasi-governmental entity that could
operate like a private entity, and could purchase
and own investments and properties regardless of
where located and could legally operate
businesses outside of Maryland and employ and
train blind persons who were not Maryland
residents.
Blind Industries and Services of Maryland
Page 7

--- Page 8 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Advice of Counsel (continued)
(cid:131) In order for BISM to receive the State procurement
preference, the products must be manufactured
or assembled using 75 percent blind direct labor.
The requirement does not apply to janitorial
products sold to State contractors performing
housekeeping or janitorial services.
BISM disagrees that it must meet the blind direct
labor threshold requirement based on a 1995
Baltimore City Circuit Court ruling. The court ruled
BISM was a State agency and therefore exempt.
Absent other court action or legislation to clarify
the matter, no further action to resolve the legal
disagreement is likely (See Finding 2.3).
(cid:131) The existing laws pertaining to BISM business
practices, such as the types of work that would
qualify for the direct labor hours requirement, are
open to interpretation (See Finding 2.3).
Blind Industries and Services of Maryland
Page 8

--- Page 9 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Employment and Training Strategies
(cid:190)Objective 1
To determine whether BISM has established
employment and training strategies that promote
work, career and training opportunities, and services
for blind and visually-impaired persons in Maryland.
Findings:
(cid:131) BISM had established organizational goals in
2013 to be accomplished by 2020 but only
recently set strategies and had not developed
action plans or measures to assess its efforts.
Action plans are essential if BISM hopes to
achieve its 2020 goals, including almost tripling
sales and increasing employment by 67 percent
(Finding 1.1).
(cid:131) BISM conducts outreach programs to inform
Maryland residents throughout the State of its
rehabilitation and training programs and services.
OLA contacted several State and local officials and
found that the needs of blind persons requesting
services appear to be met (Finding 1.2).
Blind Industries and Services of Maryland
Page 9

--- Page 10 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Employment and Training Strategies (cont’d)
(cid:131) Since FY 2000, BISM has assumed more financial
responsibility for funding its rehabilitation and
training programs. FY 2015 State grant funds
were used for the benefit of blind Maryland
residents (Finding 1.3).
(cid:131) Many former BISM students completing its
Comprehensive Orientation, Rehabilitation, and
Empowerment (CORE) program have reported
successful post-training outcomes, such as
obtaining employment, enrolling in college, or
being able to live independently. However, BISM
had not established mechanisms to evaluate the
success of some of its rehabilitation and training
programs (Finding 1.4).
Recommendations
(cid:131) Develop action plans and performance measures
related to its strategic initiatives.
(cid:131) Establish a formal process for tracking
student/client satisfaction for all of its training
and rehabilitation services.
Blind Industries and Services of Maryland
Page 10

--- Page 11 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Pricing Policies for BISM Products
(cid:190)Objective 2
To determine whether pricing policies and practices
provide assurance that Maryland State agencies are
paying the fair market value for BISM-produced
supplies and services.
Findings
(cid:131) The pricing committees established by law to set
the fair market prices for BISM supplies
(products) and services offered for sale to State
agencies under the State procurement preference
have not performed a comprehensive review of
the prices for all such products and services
(Finding 2.1).
Due to the lack of documentation, the extent to
which the prices for 415 products sold to the
State had been approved is undeterminable.
If a price review had been performed for
individual products, the committees relied on
BISM pricing information.
Blind Industries and Services of Maryland
Page 11

--- Page 12 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Pricing Policies for BISM Products (cont’d)
(cid:131) Based on Internet price surveys we conducted, we
concluded that on an overall basis, BISM prices for
14 products typically purchased by the State during
FY 2015 were competitive with the prices of similar
competitor products offered for sale (Finding 2.2).
For example, our comparison of the average BISM
unit prices paid by the State during FY 2015 (after
discounts from BISM list prices) to the average
Internet prices offered by vendors disclosed that 12
of 14 items were priced lower by BISM, translating
to a State savings of $1.05 million based on FY
2015 quantity purchases.
Such pricing comparisons have limitations.
Reliable price comparisons are difficult to perform
due to timing, methodology, and unknown factors
such as shipping costs, product quality, and
potential volume discounts from vendors.
Blind Industries and Services of Maryland
Page 12

--- Page 13 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Pricing Policies for BISM Products (cont’d)
(cid:131) Differing legal opinions and a court ruling, call into
question the applicability of statutory direct blind
labor requirements for certain BISM products sold
under the procurement preference (Finding 2.3).
Counsel to the General Assembly reaffirmed a
1993 Attorney General’s Opinion that only
products meeting the blind 75 percent direct labor
hour threshold qualify for the State non-janitorial
procurement preference. A 1995 Baltimore City
Circuit Court ruling concluded the threshold did
not apply because, unlike the Opinion which
deemed BISM a quasi-public corporation, the court
ruled BISM was a State agency within the context
of the applicable law.
As a result, BISM does not maintain records that
would be needed to demonstrate that direct blind
labor hours constituted at least 75 percent of the
total manufacturing and assembling hours for
each product.
Blind Industries and Services of Maryland
Page 13

--- Page 14 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Pricing Policies for BISM Products (cont’d)
Recommendations
(cid:131) The State Pricing and Selection Committee should
set the fair market value prices of all BISM
products and services for sale to the State,
maintain a current list of those products and
services, and make timely revisions to the list as
necessary. The Committee should also send the
list to the Department of General Services (DGS).
(cid:131) DGS should make the Committee approved list,
with prices, available to State agencies.
(cid:131) BISM should retain documentation of initial
product pricing and maintain complete records of
items submitted for pricing to the Committee.
(cid:131) BISM take necessary actions to ensure
compliance with provisions in State law
concerning direct blind labor requirements.
Blind Industries and Services of Maryland
Page 14

--- Page 15 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Executive Compensation Processes
(cid:190)Objective 3
To determine whether BISM has established
reasonable processes and standards for setting
executive compensation and appropriate ethics
requirements for BISM management and its board.
Findings
(cid:131) The annual performance evaluation of the chief
executive officer (CEO), which is an important
aspect in setting compensation, was not directly
linked to specific measurable BISM goals (Finding
3.1).
The CEO performance bonus program was not
defined or documented, even though the bonus for
FY 2016 was approximately one-half of the CEO’s
salary and bonus compensation of $472,500.
Nevertheless, based on a survey of CEO
compensation, the BISM CEO’s total compensation
was comparable to that of the CEOs of three other
similarly-sized blind industries organizations.
Blind Industries and Services of Maryland
Page 15

--- Page 16 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Executive Compensation Processes (cont’d)
(cid:131) BISM has not established a formal compensation
review policy for its non-CEO executive-level
positions to ensure that they are evaluated based
on measurable goals and objectives and to
demonstrate the reasonableness of those
positions’ salaries (Finding 3.2).
BISM could not demonstrate that these
individuals’ salaries were reasonable based on
market surveys and analyses. However, OLA’s
comparison of 2013 salaries paid to three BISM
non–CEO executives to individuals in similar
positions in like entities, suggests the BISM
salaries for those employees are comparable.
(cid:131) BISM had established a comprehensive code of
ethics and appropriate financial disclosure
requirements that were found to be comparable
with a certain published guide for non-profits and
the Maryland Public Ethics law. Also, compliance
with the policy was monitored (Finding 3.3).
Blind Industries and Services of Maryland
Page 16

--- Page 17 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Executive Compensation Processes (cont’d)
Recommendations
(cid:131) Enhance the CEO annual evaluation process by
incorporating attributes pertaining to achieving
specific measurable goals.
(cid:131) Develop a Board approved written performance
bonus plan that includes a description of the
purpose and methodology for determining the
CEO’s bonus and retain documentation
supporting all compensation determinations.
(cid:131) Develop a formal Board approved compensation
review policy for non-CEO executive staff that
includes measurable goals tailored for those
positions.
(cid:131) Ensure compensation for non-CEO executive staff
is reasonable based on market surveys and
analysis.
Blind Industries and Services of Maryland
Page 17