Title: Presentation to the Joint Audit Committee - Proposed Changes to Laws Impacting the Office of Legislative Audits - Performance Audits or Special Reviews
Date: 12/08/2015
Type: Presentations to the Legislature
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5a9daf2dcc9d72387404dc91
Extracted: 2025-06-18T13:57:02.947789
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Proposed Changes to Laws Impacting the Office of Legislative Audits
Performance Audits or Special Reviews (5 proposed changes)
Title Subtitle Agency or Audit Audit Language - Original Audit Language – Revision
1P Business 11-313 Financial Racing Commission (d) Audit. -- The Office of Legislative Audits shall audit each (Delete in its entirety, can cover important aspects
Regulation disclosure by licensee at least once every 2 years in accordance with the during regular Fiscal Compliance audit of the
licensees provisions of §§ 2-1217 through 2-1227 of the State Department of Labor, Licensing and Regulation -
Government Article. Division of Racing.)
2P Public Safety 2-514 Annual Statewide DNA (b) Compilation and evaluation of information reported; (b) Compilation and evaluation of information reported;
report – Status of Report annual summary report. -- annual summary report. --
crime scene DNA
collection and (1) The Governor's Office of Crime Control and Prevention (1)The Governor's Office of Crime Control and
analysis shall compile the information reported by the local law Prevention shall compile the information reported by the
enforcement units and the Department under subsection (a) of local law enforcement units and the Department under
this section and submit the information to the Office of subsection (a) of this section and submit the information
Legislative Audits. to the Office of Legislative Audits.
(2) The Office of Legislative Audits shall evaluate the (2) The Office of Legislative Audits shall evaluate the
information received under paragraph (1) of this subsection information received under paragraph (1) of this
and submit an annual summary report to the Governor and, in subsection and submit an annual summary report to the
accordance with § 2-1246 of the State Government Article, Governor and, in accordance with § 2-1246 of the State
the General Assembly. Government Article, the General Assembly.
3P State Government 9-1A-35 Small, Separate Performance (f) Audits. -- Each fiscal year the Legislative Auditor shall (f) Audits. -- Each fiscal year t The Legislative Auditor
Minority, and Audit audit and evaluate the utilization of the funds that are shall audit and evaluate the utilization of the funds that
Women-Owned allocated to small, minority, and women-owned businesses are allocated to small, minority, and women-owned
Businesses by eligible fund managers under subsection (c)(3) of this businesses by eligible fund managers under subsection
Account section. (c)(3) of this section during an audit of the applicable
State unit as provided in §2-1220 of this Article.
4P State Government 9-1A-34 Reports Separate Performance (b) Annual audit. -- Each fiscal year the Legislative Auditor (Delete in its entirety. Applicable provisions due to
and audits Audit (VLT Minority shall audit and evaluate the information submitted to the sunset in 2018.)
Contractor) Commission by licensees under subsection (a)(3) of this
section, with special emphasis on the licensee's utilization of
contractors across a broad spectrum of its business activities,
including those that are functionally related to the gaming
industry.
Page 1 of 2

--- Page 2 ---
5P State Government 2-1220 Required Office of Legislative (f) Board of Liquor License Commissioners for Baltimore (f) Board of Liquor License Commissioners for
and authorized Audits City. -- Baltimore City. --
audits
(1) At least once every 3 years, the Office of Legislative (1) At least once every 3 4 years, the Office of
Audits shall conduct a performance audit of the Board of Legislative Audits shall conduct a performance audit of
Liquor License Commissioners for Baltimore City to the Board of Liquor License Commissioners for
evaluate the effectiveness and efficiency of the management Baltimore City to evaluate the effectiveness and
practices of the Board and of the economy with which the efficiency of the management practices of the Board and
Board uses resources. of the economy with which the Board uses resources.
(2) The performance audit shall focus on operations relating (2) The performance audit shall focus on operations
to liquor inspections, licensing, disciplinary procedures, and relating to liquor inspections, licensing, disciplinary
management oversight. procedures, and management oversight.
Page 2 of 2