Title: Presentation to the Joint Committee on the Management of Public Funds - Monitoring of Local Government Audits

Related Report Dated 9/15/2010
Date: 11/17/2010
Type: Presentations to the Legislature
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5a9daf28cc9d72387404db81
Extracted: 2025-06-18T13:29:05.479333
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
PRESENTATION TO
THE JOINT COMMITTEE ON THE MANAGEMENT OF PUBLIC FUNDS
Monitoring of Local Government Audits
Office of Legislative Audits
Robert A. Garman, Assistant Director, Quality Assurance
November 17, 2010

--- Page 2 ---
INTRODUCTION
Ladies and Gentlemen:
As requested by this Committee, I am here today to make a presentation regarding the
Office of Legislative Audits’ responsibilities applicable to audits of local governments within the
State of Maryland. My Office performs desk reviews of the audit reports submitted by each
local government. Our review of the reports for the fiscal year ending June 30, 2009 disclosed
that the local governments have generally complied with generally accepted accounting
principles and auditing standards. Additionally, our review disclosed that local governments
generally appeared to be in good financial condition at that time. When areas of noncompliance
or potential financial problems were noted, we sent letters describing the conditions to the
governments and, when appropriate, to their auditors in an effort to ensure the conditions do not
recur. My presentation will address the following areas:
1. Overview of the local government auditing process
2. Problems disclosed by our review of local government audits
3. Follow-up action taken on problems
4. Concluding comments
OVERVIEW
Generally, each county, incorporated city or town, and taxing district located in Maryland
is required by law to have an annual audit. Based on the provisions of Article 19, Section 40 of
the Annotated Code of Maryland, each local government is required to have its financial
statements audited by an independent certified public accountant in accordance with generally
accepted auditing standards. This law also requires that the financial statements be presented in
accordance with generally accepted accounting principles and that the results of the audits be
submitted to the Office of Legislative Audits.
1

--- Page 3 ---
Most local governments must file their reports by November 1, for the proceeding fiscal
year ended June 30; however, local governments whose populations exceed 400,000 must file by
January 1 of each year. In addition, extensions may be granted to local governments for valid
reasons. By law, certain small governments may request a waiver of the annual filing
requirement and instead only have an audit once every four years. Twelve local governments
requested, and were granted, waivers of the annual filing requirement under this law.
As provided for under the law, we have issued audit guidelines that address the basic
requirements that must be met by the local governments and their independent auditors. While
the independent auditors determine the specific procedures necessary in each audit, the
guidelines are intended to help ensure that a minimum acceptable level of quality is maintained
for audits and financial reports of local governments.
The Office of Legislative Audits performs a desk review of each audit report to determine
areas of noncompliance by using a checklist for government audits published by the American
Institute of Certified Public Accountants. For example, we determine whether the auditor’s
report was presented in accordance with generally accepted auditing standards, whether the local
government’s financial statements were presented in accordance with generally accepted
accounting principles, and whether financial statement disclosures were adequate.
Our desk review also includes a review to determine certain areas of noncompliance with
State laws. In this regard, Article 95 Section 22 of the Annotated Code of Maryland requires all
deposits held in banks by local governments be insured or otherwise collateralized.
Additionally, our desk review includes a basic financial analysis of each local government. This
analysis includes a review of various financial trends and ratios (for example, ratio of general
fund balance to annual expenditures) to provide some insight regarding potential financial
problems at the local government level.
2

--- Page 4 ---
Upon completion of each year’s review, we prepare a report summarizing the areas of
noncompliance with the audit guidelines (for example, departures from generally accepted
accounting principles) or with State law (for example, uncollateralized cash deposits). In
addition, our report discloses potential financial problems at the local government level such as
deficit fund balances and unfavorable financial trends and ratios. This summary report is
submitted to the State Comptroller and the Executive Director of the Department of Legislative
Services, as required by law, as well as other interested parties.
Finally, the law requires applicable counties to file reports with our Office on their
reviews of financial reports and audits of special taxing districts created by the counties. Our
annual summary reports also include the results of our reviews of such financial information on
county created special taxing districts.
PROBLEMS DISCLOSED:
As reflected on Exhibit A, page 1, most local governments have substantially complied
with standards over the past several years. However, for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2009, 46
out of the 192 local government reports due contained areas of noncompliance with the audit
guidelines. During our fiscal year 2009 review, the number of local governments with areas of
noncompliance with the audit guidelines decreased in comparison to the preceding year, and has
decreased significantly over the last several years.
In addition, our review disclosed areas of noncompliance with State law for 11 local
governments (local governments with unsecured cash deposits) and potential financial problems
for 9 local governments. See Exhibit A, page 2 for a summary of these areas and problems over
the past several years. Some local governments had more than one area of noncompliance with
the guidelines or State law and/or potential financial problem.
The most significant and frequent problems disclosed by our review were as follows:
3

--- Page 5 ---
1. Local governments failed to file an audit report as required. Nine local governments
(Capitol Heights, Eagle Harbor, Fairmount Heights, Forest Heights, Hyattsville,
Lonaconing, Sharptown, Westernport, Mount Savage Special Taxing Area) had not
filed an audit report for fiscal year 2009.
2. Auditor’s reports were not presented in accordance with generally accepted auditing
standards.
3. Reports that did not present all required financial statements or presentation was
inappropriate.
4. Reports that lacked adequate disclosures in the financial statements and/or
accompanying notes.
5. Local governments with uninsured/uncollateralized cash deposits. Eleven local
governments had unsecured cash deposits. In all cases, the amount of cash not
secured was small in relation to the local governments’ total assets and, in some
cases, it was indicated that the local government had taken corrective action.
6. Local governments with unreserved general fund deficit balances. Six local
governments (Anne Arundel County, Cambridge, Cumberland, Fruitland, Princess
Anne, Ridgely) had deficit fund balances at June 30, 2009.
7. Three local governments (Caroline County, District Heights, Riverdale Park) had
unfavorable financial trends/ratios at June 30, 2009.
8. One report (Sykesville) contained an adverse opinion on one opinion unit and a
qualified opinion on another opinion unit. An adverse opinion states that the
financial statements do not present fairly the financial position, changes in financial
position or, where applicable, cash flows in conformity with generally accepted
accounting principles. This Town’s audit report contained an adverse opinion on
4

--- Page 6 ---
the Town’s discretely presented component unit opinion unit because of the
omission of financial data for the Town’s legally separate component unit. A
qualified opinion is issued when the auditor states that, “except for” the effects of
the matter to which the qualification relates, the financial statements are presented
fairly. The Town’s audit report also contained a qualified opinion on the
governmental activities opinion unit because the Town had not measured the effect
of Governmental Accounting Standards Board Statement No. 49 entitled
“Accounting and Financial Reporting for Pollution Remediation Obligations.”
9. One other report (Westminster) contained a qualified opinion on the business-type
activities and Water Fund opinion units because City management had not measured
the effect of the Governmental Accounting Standards Board Statement No. 42
entitled “Accounting and Financial Reporting for Impairment of Capital Assets and
for Insurance Recoveries.”
FOLLOW-UP ACTIONS:
A letter describing the areas of noncompliance with the audit guidelines noted during our
review was sent to each local government and its independent auditor. The letters requested that
the matters be examined to avoid a recurrence in subsequent audits.
For areas of noncompliance with State laws and potential financial problems (for
example, deficit fund balances), our Office requests the applicable local governments to provide
written descriptions of the actions to be taken to eliminate the conditions, when appropriate. We
then review and evaluate the responses to these requests. Additionally, as requested by the
Committee, when letters were sent to local governments regarding noncompliance with State
laws and potential financial problems, copies of the letters were also sent to the appropriate
members of the Maryland General Assembly.
5

--- Page 7 ---
CONCLUSION:
In summary, the Office of Legislative Audits functions in an oversight capacity by
issuing audit guidelines, reviewing local government audit reports for compliance with standards
and regulations, and notifying the local governments and their auditors of any deficiencies noted.
We believe that these efforts have helped improve the quality of audits and have promoted fiscal
accountability among local governments in Maryland.
To further improve the quality of local government audits, we participate in various
efforts to make technical information available to local governments. For example, we routinely
respond to technical inquiries from local governments and their auditors and participate in the
Maryland Association of Certified Public Accountants’ Members in Government committee.
I will be happy to answer any questions you may have on this presentation.
6