Title: Presentation to the Senate Budget and Taxation Subcommittee - Maryland Health Benefit Exchange

Related Report Dated 10/2/2015
Date: 02/08/2016
Type: Presentations to the Legislature
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5a9daf2fcc9d72387404dcc4
Extracted: 2025-06-18T14:02:31.951325
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Maryland Health Benefit Exchange
Fiscal Compliance Audit
Report Dated October 2, 2015

--- Page 2 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Audit Overview
(cid:190)The Maryland Health Benefit Exchange (MHBE) was
created by the Maryland Health Benefit Exchange
Act of 2011 as a public corporation and
independent unit of state government to implement
certain federal legislation. The primary purpose of
MHBE is to reduce the number of Maryland
residents who have no health insurance.
(cid:190)The Act mandated a 9-member board be
responsible for governing and managing MHBE.
Board members include the Secretary of the
Department of Health and Mental Hygiene (DHMH),
the Maryland Insurance Commissioner, the
Executive Director of Maryland Health Care
Commission, and 6 persons appointed by the
Governor.
(cid:190)MHBE is exempt from a number of State rules and
regulations, including procurement and inventory
control. The Board is responsible for establishing
various policies and procedures governing MHBE
operations.
MD Health Benefit Exchange Fiscal Compliance Audit
Page 2

--- Page 3 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Audit Overview (continued)
(cid:190)MHBE worked with DHMH, the Department of
Human Resources, and the Maryland Insurance
Administration to establish Maryland’s state-based
health insurance exchange. The original exchange
system launched October 1, 2013 and after a
troubled launch was replaced with the State of
Connecticut's system retrofitted for Maryland
needs. The replacement exchange system was
implemented in November 2014.
(cid:190)MHBE’s expenditures from July 1, 2011 to June 30,
2014 totaled approximately $264.3 million (State
funds $29.0 million and federal funds
$235.3million). Expenditures during the period
related primarily to Information Technology
development, outreach and consumer assistance,
and agency operations necessary to implement the
state-based health insurance exchange.
(cid:190)This is OLA’s first audit of MHBE (for the period
beginning June 1, 2011 and ending July 23, 2014)
and the audit report included 10 findings.
MD Health Benefit Exchange Fiscal Compliance Audit
Page 3

--- Page 4 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
MHBE Performance Audit
(cid:190)The fiscal compliance audit was conducted
concurrently with an Office of Legislative Audits
performance audit of the troubled launch of the
original Exchange System at the direction of the
Maryland General Assembly’s Joint Audit
Committee to address concerns of the Joint
Oversight Committee on the Maryland Health
Benefit Exchange.
(cid:190)The audit report on the results of the performance
audit has not yet been issued due to concerns
raised by the Office of the Attorney General.
(cid:190)Although during the fiscal compliance audit we
reviewed and tested MHBE contracts for
procurement and monitoring, we specifically
excluded 13 contract awards totaling $209.0
million that pertained exclusively to the
development of the original Exchange System.
Those results are not included in these findings or
presentation.
MD Health Benefit Exchange Fiscal Compliance Audit
Page 4

--- Page 5 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Key Fiscal Compliance Audit Issues
(cid:190)MHBE did not comply with its procurement policy
when purchasing certain goods and services under
the sole source and emergency procurement
methods.
(cid:190)MHBE made certain payments for contractual
services without routinely obtaining or evidencing its
review of documentation supporting vendor billings.
(cid:190)MHBE did not verify that 6 entities receiving grants
totaling $23.4 million during FY 2014 had spent the
funds for appropriate purposes.
(cid:190)Several security and control issues were noted
regarding MHBE’s information systems.
MD Health Benefit Exchange Fiscal Compliance Audit
Page 5

--- Page 6 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Federal Audit of MHBE
(cid:190)Federal Audit on Establishment Grant Funds
(cid:131) A federal Department of Health and Human
Services Inspector General’s audit report issued
in March 2015, concluded that DMHM, which
processes grant allocation and reimbursements
for MHBE, did not allocate $28.4 million in costs
to establishment grants and Medicaid funding in
accordance with federal requirements and its
cost allocation plan.
(cid:131) The audit recommended MHBE refund the
$28.4 million, however with federal approval,
MHBE would be allowed to claim a portion of
costs through the Medicaid program.
(cid:131) MHBE disagreed with the finding. As of our
report date, the issue, including MHBE
reimbursement to the federal government was
unresolved. Depending upon how it is resolved,
additional State funds may be needed to cover
past costs.
MD Health Benefit Exchange Fiscal Compliance Audit
Page 6

--- Page 7 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Procurement
(cid:190)MHBE did not comply with its procurement policy
when purchasing certain goods and services under
the emergency and sole source methods. Also,
MHBE did not always retain relevant procurement
documentation (Finding 1).
(cid:131) For two sole source contracts, totaling $5.9 million,
the sole source justification did not substantiate
that only one vendor was available to provide
services as required by MHBE policy.
(cid:131) Another contract totaling $1.6 million and a task
order under another contract for $1.2 million
included five and four-year terms, respectively,
even though they were made under the emergency
procurement method, which MHBE policy states
shall not be used to meet long-term requirements.
(cid:131) For all 5 contracts tested, sufficient documentation
relating to the MHBE Board’s approval process was
lacking and MHBE could not provide certain
relevant documentation such as documentation to
support negotiation of pricing and contract terms.
MD Health Benefit Exchange Fiscal Compliance Audit
Page 7

--- Page 8 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Disbursements and Grants
(cid:190)MHBE made certain payments for contractual
services without routinely obtaining or evidencing
its review of documentation supporting vendor
billings (Finding 2). For example, our test of 15
payments totaling $18.1 million to 5 vendors
between November 2013 and August 2014 found
MHBE did not receive adequate documentation,
such as time records, to support 8 payments made
to 3 vendors totaling $8.2 million.
(cid:190)MHBE had not verified the propriety of grant
expenditures for 6 entities related to the
Connector Program, which totaled $23.4 million in
FY 2014 ($9 million in general funds and $14.4
million in federal funds) (Finding 3). Although the
entities submitted quarterly expenditure reports,
MHBE did not have a process in place to verify the
propriety of expenditures being reported.
Specifically, detailed support for expenditures was
not obtained and reviewed.
MD Health Benefit Exchange Fiscal Compliance Audit
Page 8

--- Page 9 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Information Systems (IS) Security & Control
(cid:190)MHBE inappropriately stored sensitive personally
identifiable information (PII) and federal tax
information (FTI) in clear text (Finding 7). For
example, as of April 28, 2015, the replacement
Exchange System database contained sensitive
PII and FTI for 591,858 individuals in clear text.
This included, but was not limited to, full name,
date of birth, social security number, and
household income.
(cid:190)Administrative access to the MHBE network was
excessive and access to critical replacement
Exchange System files was not properly restricted
(Finding 8). For example, many users could
perform critical functions that were not needed to
perform their job duties, including 55 accounts
assigned to 50 unique users that were improperly
classified as domain administrators. Also, access
to certain enrollment and report files, containing
unencrypted sensitive PII, was not properly
restricted.
MD Health Benefit Exchange Fiscal Compliance Audit
Page 9

--- Page 10 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
IS Security & Control (continued)
(cid:190)MHBE lacked assurance as to the security over
critical data on servers hosted by contractors
(Finding 9).
(cid:131) MHBE lacked assurance that the original
Exchange System servers still in the custody of the
parent company of the primary contractor were
properly secured. These servers hosted
enrollment data containing sensitive PII and FTI.
(cid:131) The contract between MHBE and the contractor
responsible for hosting the network and servers
for the replacement Exchange System did not
provide adequate assurances that the network
and servers were properly secured. The contract
did not require that the independent security
review be structured to provide proper assurances
with respect to controls addressing for example,
security, availability, and confidentiality.
(cid:190)The MHBE network was not properly secured at the
hosting datacenter for the replacement Exchange
System (Finding 10) as required by the State’s
Information Security Policy.
MD Health Benefit Exchange Fiscal Compliance Audit
Page 10

--- Page 11 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Other Findings
(cid:190)Federal fund reimbursements requests were not
made timely resulting in a loss of interest income of
$199,000 (Finding 4).
(cid:190)MHBE did not maintain adequate inventory records
nor properly account for its equipment (Finding 5).
(cid:131) An equipment inventory control account was not
maintained as required by MHBE policy.
(cid:131) MHBE could not provide complete detailed records
for its equipment at locations other than its
headquarters and could not provide a total value of
all equipment owned. We reviewed four major
contracts that included purchase of approximately
$48.4 million in equipment by MHBE.
(cid:131) MHBE did not establish a process to ensure
hardware purchases from April 2012 to December
2013 totaling $33 million were actually provided by
the vendor prior to payment.
(cid:190)The MHBE Board was found to have violated the
State’s Open Meetings Act (Finding 6).
MD Health Benefit Exchange Fiscal Compliance Audit
Page 11

--- Page 12 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Conclusions
MHBE should
(cid:190) ensure its procurement policies and requirements
are followed for sole source and emergency
purchases and retain relevant documentation;
(cid:190) obtain and review documentation to support
vendor billings for labor hours;
(cid:190) establish procedures to verify grant expenditures
were proper;
(cid:190) take the recommended actions to improve
security and controls over its information system;
(cid:190) ensure future requests for federal fund
reimbursements are made in a timely manner;
(cid:190) establish procedures and properly maintain its
equipment records, to account for and control its
equipment inventory; and
(cid:190) ensure future compliance with the Open Meetings
Act.
MD Health Benefit Exchange Fiscal Compliance Audit
Page 12