Title: Presentation to the Joint Audit Committee - Department of Transportation - Maryland Aviation Administration

Related Report Dated 11/16/2012
Date: 12/05/2012
Type: Presentations to the Legislature
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5a9daf2ccc9d72387404dbff
Extracted: 2025-06-18T13:43:14.053420
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Department of Transportation
Maryland Aviation
Administration
Report dated November 16, 2012
Presentation to the Joint Audit Committee
Thomas J. Barnickel III, CPA
Joshua S. Adler, CPA, CFE
Alexandra E. Zouras, CPA
December 5, 2012

--- Page 2 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Audit Overview
 The Maryland Aviation Administration (MAA) is
responsible for the operation, maintenance,
protection, and development of the
Baltimore/Washington International (BWI)
Thurgood Marshall Airport and the Martin State
Airport, and operates a program to foster,
develop, and regulate aviation within the State.
 According to the State’s records, MAA’s fiscal
year 2011 expenditures totaled approximately
$214 million (special funds of $202 million and
federal funds of $12 million).
 The audit report, which covered the period from
November 19, 2008 to July 31, 2011, included
8 findings.
 Our prior audit report, dated December 29,
2009 had 8 findings and we determined that all
8 findings were adequately addressed by MAA.
Maryland Aviation Administration
Page 2

--- Page 3 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Key Audit Issues
MAA did not establish adequate monitoring controls
over Architectural and Engineering (A&E) contracts
and expenditures.
 Financial records were not maintained identifying
disbursement details and the unspent balances
for individual A&E contracts.
 For two A&E contracts, MAA did not provide the
Board of Public Works (BPW) with complete and
accurate information when requesting certain
contract approvals.
 MAA did not ensure that overhead rates billed by
A&E firms were proper.
 MAA did not review and approve all
subcontractors hired by A&E firms, as required.
 Comprehensive task orders were not established
for certain A&E contracts, as certain required
project information was omitted.
Maryland Aviation Administration
Page 3

--- Page 4 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Architectural and Engin e ering (A&E) Contracts
Background
 MAA enters into multi-year contracts with A&E
firms to provide consultant services for current
and future capital projects. The scope of the
services included planning, design, and/or
construction management and inspection (CMI).
 MAA assigns projects to A&E firms based on a
firm’s expertise and availability, using a task order
process.
 A&E contracts have multiple funding sources,
including special funds, federal funds, and
passenger facility charges (PFCs). PFCs are based
on the number of boarded passengers at
commercial airports and are remitted to a non-
State trustee account for related payments.
 According to MAA records, during the period from
November 2008 through June 2011, MAA had
A&E contracts with 21 firms and expended $38.3
million on A&E services.
Maryland Aviation Administration
Page 4

--- Page 5 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
A&E Contracts (continu e d)
MAA did not establish adequate monitoring controls
over costs incurred for individual A&E contracts, which
precluded MAA from effectively monitoring contract
expenditures and remaining balances. (Finding 1)
 Although MAA maintained records reflecting the
total amount of A&E contract expenditures from
each funding source (such as special funds and
PFC funds); it did not track total expenditures in
relation to each contract award amount.
 Furthermore, MAA was unable to use the State’s
Financial Management Information System (FMIS)
to monitor A&E contract activity, because FMIS did
not reflect expenditure information pertaining to
PFC funds, which were maintained in a non-State
trustee account. During the audit period, PFC
accounted for 30 percent of the A&E contract
funding sources. We were advised that MAA is
pursuing a solution this issue.
Maryland Aviation Administration
Page 5

--- Page 6 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
A&E Contracts (continu e d)
For certain contracts, MAA did not provide the Board
of Public Works (BPW) with complete and accurate
information when it requested contract approvals.
(Finding 2) For example:
 In July 2011, MAA requested a 2-year extension
for a $21.4 million contract and informed BPW
that, if not extended, ongoing tasks assigned to
the current A&E firm may have to be cancelled or
reassigned to another firm. However, this was
inaccurate since MAA had awarded a 5-year $10
million contract to that current firm 4 months
earlier, for the same services. Therefore, had the
contract not been extended, the same services
could have been provided under the new contract.
Maryland Aviation Administration
Page 6

--- Page 7 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
A&E Contracts (continu e d)
MAA lacked procedures to ensure the propriety of
overhead rates billed by A&E firms. (Finding 3)
 A&E contracts provide for compensation consisting of
primarily direct labor and overhead costs (based on
direct labor costs) for prime and subcontractors.
 MAA did not ensure A&E firms obtained annual
independent audits of actual overhead rates, as
required by the contracts. Rather, MAA routinely paid
overhead fees based on the A&E firms’ invoiced rates.
 When questioned, MAA advised that it relied on SHA
to verify overhead rates as both used many of the
same firms; however, MAA could not document that it
had received any results from SHA.
 We identified 7 firms with open multi-year contracts
valued at $29.8 million, with maximum overhead
rates ranging from 161 to 200 percent of direct labor
costs, for which audits had not been received since
the inception of the contracts (ranging from 4 to 7
years).
Maryland Aviation Administration
Page 7

--- Page 8 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
A&E Contracts (continu ed)
MAA did not review and approve subcontractors
hired by A&E firms after the initial contracts were
procured. (Finding 4)
 Six A&E contracts with payments totaling $6.3
million as of June 2011 included payments
totaling $1.6 million that were for the work of 21
unapproved subcontractors.
 A&E contracts permit firms to hire additional
subcontractors (other than those specified in the
original contract), but require the firms to obtain
MAA approval by submitting written justification,
including the subcontractor’s qualifications and
costs (including direct labor rates and overhead).
Maryland Aviation Administration
Page 8

--- Page 9 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
A&E Contracts (continu ed)
MAA did not ensure that comprehensive task orders
were established for A&E construction management
and inspection services (CMI). (Finding 5)
 As of June 2011, MAA had four active CMI contracts
valued at $43 million. Our test of 17 task orders
totaling $10 million from one CMI contract (for
which MAA had issued a total of 84 task orders)
disclosed that none of the 17 task orders included
all required information.
 For example, one $2 million task order did not
include project goals, needs, and a list of proposed
personnel, as required by the contract.
 Comprehensive task orders are a means to ensure
both parties have a common understanding of the
work to be performed, the anticipated level of effort
and personnel assignments. Additionally, they help
ensure that billings are commensurate with the
services needed and rendered.
Maryland Aviation Administration
Page 9

--- Page 10 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Other Issues
 MAA did not adequately restrict access and
prevent unauthorized purchasing, disbursement,
and adjustment transactions in the Financial
Management Information System (FMIS).
Numerous employees could process critical
transactions without independent approval.
(Finding 6)
 MAA equipment items purchased were not always
accurately recorded in the inventory records and
were not identified timely as State property.
(Finding 7)
 MAA’s records for snow removal chemicals did not
include information necessary to effectively
manage and control inventories, as required by
State policies. (Finding 8)
Maryland Aviation Administration
Page 10

--- Page 11 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Conclusion
MAA should:
 Establish a means to readily monitor contract costs
by establishing records to track A&E expenditures
relative to individual contract awards.
 Provide the BPW with complete and accurate
information and comply with BPW policies
concerning contract extensions.
 Obtain audited annual overhead rates to ensure the
consulting firms’ overhead fees paid are proper.
 Ensure that subcontractors added by consultants
after initial contracts are procured are reviewed and
approved to perform the services.
 Ensure detailed task orders are established for A&E
CMI contracts in accordance with the contract
terms.
 Implement adequate procedures and controls to
address the deficiencies noted with respect to FMIS,
equipment and materials inventories.
Maryland Aviation Administration
Page 11