Title: Presentation to the Senate Budget and Taxation Subcommittee - University System of Maryland - University of Maryland Eastern Shore

Related Report Dated 11/7/2014
Date: 03/05/2015
Type: Presentations to the Legislature
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5a9daf2dcc9d72387404dc7f
Extracted: 2025-06-18T13:54:49.278282
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
University System of Maryland
University of Maryland Eastern Shore
(UMES)
Report Dated November 7, 2014

--- Page 2 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Audit Overview
 UMES is a comprehensive public institution of the
University System of Maryland (USM) and
operates under the jurisdiction of the USM’s
Board of Regents.
 UMES offers an array of baccalaureate programs
in both traditional arts and sciences, and in
applied professional fields, as well as select
professionally oriented graduate programs and
doctoral programs.
 Student enrollment for the Spring 2013 semester
totaled 4,130, including 3,469 undergraduate
students and 661 graduate students. UMES’
revenues for fiscal year 2013 totaled
approximately $125 million, which included a
State general fund appropriation of approximately
$30 million.
 The report included 13 findings, only 1 of which
was repeated from the preceding audit report.
UMES - University of Maryland Eastern Shore
Page 2

--- Page 3 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Key Audit Issues
 UMES did not exercise effective oversight over its
activities with its affiliated foundation. For example,
University employees, who served as the Foundation
Executive Director, were allowed to exercise virtually
complete control over $640,000 in UMES grants
awarded to the Foundation. The scope of the grant
agreements was vague and immeasurable, and the
benefits to UMES were not evident.
 UMES had not established adequate controls over
several financial functions including certain aspects
of its student accounts receivable.
 Numerous security and control issues were noted
regarding UMES’ information systems, including
storing personally identifiable information in clear
text.
UMES - University of Maryland Eastern Shore
Page 3

--- Page 4 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
University Affiliated Fou ndation
UMES did not exercise effective oversight of grants
awarded to its affiliated Foundation. (Finding 1)
• Foundations are typically created to provide
financial support to their affiliated University.
Since fiscal year 2011, UMES received support
from its Foundation totaling approximately
$30,000. During the period from January 2011
through January 2014, UMES provided grant
awards to its Foundation totaling $640,000 for
certain economic development projects. The
Foundation was approved as a business entity.
• UMES allowed the two UMES management
employees who, at different times during the
audit period, also served as the Foundation
Executive Director, to exercise virtually complete
control over the grant agreements and related
transactions for both entities. For example, these
employees managed the same grant projects on
behalf of both the Foundation and UMES.
UMES - University of Maryland Eastern Shore
Page 4

--- Page 5 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
University Affiliated Fou ndation (cont’d)
• The grant agreements between UMES and its
Foundation were not complete as they did not
include a time period for the performance of the
grant projects or require documentation of the
Foundation’s activities and achievements. The
scope of the agreements was vague and
immeasurable, and the benefits to UMES were not
evident in the agreements.
• Grant funding was provided in advance of the
expenditures being incurred, but UMES did not
obtain documentation from the Foundation, such as
invoices, to account for the use of the grant funds.
Certain expenditures appeared questionable.
• Because of UMES’ lack of accountability over the
grant funds, we were unable to account for a
$25,000 grant payment made by UMES to its
Foundation in March 2011. This matter was
referred to the Office of the Attorney General –
Criminal Division.
UMES - University of Maryland Eastern Shore
Page 5

--- Page 6 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
University Affiliated Fou ndation (cont’d)
A UMES management employee who became the
Foundation Executive Director in January 2013 was
involved in Foundation business activities that were
not formally disclosed to UMES and which also
created a potential conflict of interest. (Finding 2)
• The employee was the controlling member of an
LLC that owned the property where four
greenhouses, owned by the Foundation, were
located for an agricultural development project
funded in part by UMES. The individual was not
employed by UMES at the time of construction.
• Under a memo of understanding between the LLC
and the Foundation, certain project costs incurred
by the LLC to administer the project were
reimbursed or paid on its behalf by the Foundation.
Based upon our review of Foundation records,
these costs totaled $380,000 for the period from
January 2012 to March 2014, with a significant
portion appearing to be funded by UMES.
UMES - University of Maryland Eastern Shore
Page 6

--- Page 7 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
University Affiliated Fou ndation (cont’d)
• On behalf of the Foundation, this employee
authorized payments totaling approximately
$115,000 to an entity owned by a relative of the
employee for construction services related to the
UMES/Foundation funded agricultural development
project.
• The employee violated UMES procedures by not
submitting an annual report of potential conflicts of
interest for calendar years 2012 and 2013, as
required.
• UMES did not notify the State Ethics Commission
that this employee met the criteria for filing the
annual financial disclosure statements. The
employee did not file a disclosure statement with
the Commission for calendar year 2012. The
statement filed for 2013 appeared incomplete
because the employee’s interest in the LLC was not
disclosed.
UMES - University of Maryland Eastern Shore
Page 7

--- Page 8 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
University Affiliated Fou ndation (cont’d)
UMES disbursed federal funds totaling $385,000 to
its affiliated Foundation as grants for purposes
inconsistent with applicable federal regulations.
(Finding 3)
• At the management employee’s request, UMES
used Revolving Loan Fund (RLF) revenue to fund 2
of 15 grant payments to the Foundation during the
period from January 2011 through January 2014.
• The RLF was established by UMES with federal
funds to provide loans to local business for
development and growth.
• The funds were not used for future loans or RLF
administrative costs as required by federal
regulations.
• UMES’ use of these funds as grants for the
Foundation could result in federal fiscal sanctions.
UMES - University of Maryland Eastern Shore
Page 8

--- Page 9 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
University Affiliated Fou ndation (cont’d)
UMES and its affiliated Foundation did not comply
with USM Board of Regents’ Policy on Affiliated
Foundations and the Policy on Business Entities, as
required. (Finding 4)
• Resources provided to the Foundation by UMES
were not accurately disclosed in the annual
UMES/Foundation agreements. OLA’s review found
that annual UMES staff resources provided were
underreported by $60,000 and non-staff resources
(e.g., office space) were not quantified, as required.
• The Foundation engaged in activities, including the
administration of research grants, that were in
potential conflict with the role and mission of USM
and its institutions, without obtaining UMES
approval.
• UMES did not obtain certain required reports from
the Foundation for fiscal year 2013 until OLA
requested them in February 2014 and certain other
reports had not been obtained.
UMES - University of Maryland Eastern Shore
Page 9

--- Page 10 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Student Accounts Rece i vable
 UMES did not establish proper controls over
financial aid awards, certain non-cash credits, and
changes to student residency status. (Finding 5)
• UMES did not independently verify certain
financial aid awards and related adjustments
posted to student accounts for propriety. Fiscal
year 2013 aid awarded totaled $60.9 million.
• Certain non-cash credit adjustments posted to
student accounts, which totaled $2.8 million in
fiscal year 2013, were not adequately reviewed
to ensure their propriety.
• Reclassifications of student residency status
were not always supported and approved.
 UMES had not established proper controls to
ensure the timely referral of all delinquent student
accounts to the Department of Budget and
Management – Central Collection Unit. (Finding 6)
UMES - University of Maryland Eastern Shore
Page 10

--- Page 11 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Information Systems Se curity & Control
UMES’ Administrative Computing and Information
Technology units manage the development,
maintenance, and support of UMES’ information
technology infrastructure including all related
networking, telecommunications, and business
information systems, used for administrative and
academic operations.
 UMES did not ensure that capabilities assigned to
individuals on the financial management systems
were adequately restricted. OLA’s review of 84
active users found some users were assigned
unnecessary or inappropriate access to perform
critical functions for cash receipts, student
accounts, and/or student financial aid. (Finding 7)
 Access was not properly restricted over certain
UMES files containing user accounts and related
passwords to protect this confidential information.
(Finding 8)
UMES - University of Maryland Eastern Shore
Page 11

--- Page 12 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Information Systems Se curity & Control(cont’d)
 UMES inappropriately stored sensitive personally
identifiable information in clear text. For example,
full social security numbers, names, and
addresses of current and former students and
employees were unencrypted (117,510 SSNs).
(Finding 9)
 The UMES internal network was not adequately
secured. For example, numerous computer labs
had unnecessary network access to critical UMES
administrative resources. (Finding 10)
 Procedures for installing and monitoring anti-
malware software on network computers need
improvement. UMES personnel advised that such
software was not installed on approximately 100
computers due to operating system performance
issues and the anti-malware software itself
reported approximately 350 additional computers
without protection. (Finding 11)
UMES - University of Maryland Eastern Shore
Page 12

--- Page 13 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Other Issues
 UMES did not establish sufficient accountability and
control over its collections and had not reconciled
certain student spending account balances. (Finding
12)
• One employee in the Bursar’s office, who was
responsible for processing voids on the cash
register system, also had access to the related
cash receipts and had the ability to process non-
cash credit adjustments to student accounts
receivable records.
• Two employees had improper access to an
online banking system for credit card collections.
• The aggregate balance student spending
accounts had not been reconciled with the fund
balance in UMES records.
 UMES did not obtain USM approval for leases of
student housing facilities; used a fuel contractor
without obtaining competitive bids; and did not
verify certain reports used to calculate bookstore
commission payments. (Finding 13)
UMES - University of Maryland Eastern Shore
Page 13

--- Page 14 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Conclusions
UMES needs to:
 preclude employees who perform managerial
functions on behalf of its affiliated Foundation
from representing both parties when conducting
business.
 ensure that the scope of grant agreements
include specific deliverables or accomplishments,
funds are used for purposes specified, and that
these activities are adequately monitored.
 ensure that employees properly disclose potential
conflicts of interest to UMES as required and file
financial disclosure statements.
 comply with the USM Board of Regents’ policies.
 take the recommended actions to improve
controls over student accounts receivable,
information systems, cash receipts, student funds,
and contract and procurement monitoring.
UMES - University of Maryland Eastern Shore
Page 14