Title: Presentation to the Joint Audit Committee - Proposed Changes to Laws Impacting the Office of Legislative Audits - Various Changes Not Significantly Impacting Current Resources
Date: 12/08/2015
Type: Presentations to the Legislature
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5a9daf2dcc9d72387404dc93
Extracted: 2025-06-18T13:57:21.665700
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Proposed Changes to Laws Impacting the Office of Legislative Audits
Various Changes Not Significantly Impacting Current Resources (25 proposed changes)
Title Subtitle Agency or Audit Audit Language - Original Audit Language – Revision
1M Economic 10-414 Audit Maryland Technology The books and records of the Corporation are subject to The books and records of the Corporation are subject to
Development Development audit: audit :
Corporation
(1) at any time by the State; and (1) at any time by the State; and
(2) each year by an independent auditor that the Office (2) each year by an independent auditor that the Office
of Legislative Audits approves. of Legislative Audits approves.
2M Economic 10-526 Audit Maryland Agricultural The books and records of the Corporation are subject to The books and records of the Corporation are subject to
Development and Resource-Based audit: audit:
Industry Development
Corporation (1) by the State at its discretion; and (1) by the State at its discretion; and
(2) each year by an independent auditor approved by the (2) each year by an independent auditor approved by
Office of Legislative Audits. the Office of Legislative Audits.
3M Economic 10-825 Audit Maryland Clean Energy The books and records of the Center are subject to audit: The books and records of the Center are subject to audit:
Development Center
(1) at any time by the State; and (1) at any time by the State; and
(2) each year by an independent auditor that the Office (2) each year by an independent auditor that the Office
of Legislative Audits approves. of Legislative Audits approves.
4M Economic 10-911 Audits Maryland Public-Private The books and records of the Corporation are subject to The books and records of the Corporation are subject to
Development Partnership Marketing audit: audit:
Corporation
(1) at any time by the State; and (1) at any time by the State; and
(2) each year by an independent auditor that the Office (2) each year by an independent auditor that the Office
of Legislative Audits approves. of Legislative Audits approves.
5M Environment 9-1605 Maryland Water Quality (6) The Water Quality Fund shall be subject to biennial (6) The Water Quality Fund shall be subject to biennial
Revolving Loan Fund – audit by the Office of Legislative Audits as provided for in audit by the Office of Legislative Audits as provided for
Department of the § 2-1220 of the State Government Article. in § 2-1220 of the State Government Article.
Environment
Page 1 of 6

--- Page 2 ---
6M Environment 9-1605.1 Maryland Drinking (6) The Drinking Water Loan Fund shall be subject to (6) The Drinking Water Loan Fund shall be subject to
Water Revolving Loan biennial audit by the Office of Legislative Audits as biennial audit by the Office of Legislative Audits as
Fund – Department of provided for in § 2-1220 of the State Government Article. provided for in § 2-1220 of the State Government
the Environment Article.
7M Health – General 13-1303 Governor’s Wellmobile The Office of Legislative Audits shall audit the accounts The Office of Legislative Audits shall audit the accounts
Program – University of and transactions of the Governor's Wellmobile Program in and transactions of the Governor’s Wellmobile Program
Maryland, Baltimore accordance with §§ 2-1220 through 2-1227 of the State shall be subject to audit by the Legislative Auditor in
Government Article. accordance with §§ 2-1220 through 2-1227 of the State
Government Article.
8M Health – General 13-2206 Child Abuse Medical (c) Audits. -- The Office of Legislative Audits shall audit (c) Audits. -- The Office of Legislative Audits shall
Appropriations Providers (Maryland the accounts and transactions of the Child Abuse Medical audit the accounts and transactions of the Child Abuse
CHAMP) Providers (Maryland CHAMP) Initiative in accordance Medical Providers (Maryland CHAMP) Initiative shall
with §§ 2-1220 through 2-1227 of the State Government be subject to audit by the Legislative Auditor in
Article. accordance with §§ 2-1220 through 2-1227 of the State
Government Article.
9M Human Services 11-408 Audits by Maryland Legal Services (a) (2) For any fiscal year during which State funds are (a) (2) For any fiscal year during which State funds are
Legislative Auditor Corporation available to finance any portion of the operations of the available to finance any portion of the operations of the
Corporation, the Legislative Auditor may audit the Corporation, the Legislative Auditor may audit the
financial transactions of the Corporation. financial transactions of the Corporation.
(b) (4) Unless the Legislative Auditor requires a longer (b) (4) Unless the Legislative Auditor requires a longer
period of retention, the items listed in paragraph (2) of this period of retention, the items listed in paragraph (2) of
subsection shall remain in the possession and custody of this subsection shall remain in the possession and
the Corporation for 3 years. custody of the Corporation for 4 3 years.
10M Public Utilities 7-512.1 Universal Department of Human (c) Report. -- (c) Report. --
service program Resources – Family
Investment (4) The Office of Legislative Audits shall conduct an audit (4) The Office of Legislative Audits shall conduct an
Administration (and of the electric universal service program at least once audit of the electric universal service program shall be
Department of Housing every 3 years and shall report the results of the audit in subject to audit by the Office of Legislative Audits at
and Community accordance with § 2-1224 of the State Government least once every 3 years and shall report the results of
Development) Article. the audit in accordance with § 2-1224 §§ 2-1220
through 2-1227 of the State Government Article.
11M Business 4.5-203 Home Office of the Attorney (c) Audit. -- The Office of Legislative Audits shall audit (c) Audit. -- The Office of Legislative Audits shall audit
Regulation Builder General the accounts and transactions of the Registration Fund the accounts and transactions of the Registration Fund
Registration Fund under § 2-1220 of the State Government Article. shall be subject to audit by the Legislative Auditor in
accordance with §§ 2-1220 through 2-1227 under § 2-
1220 of the State Government Article.
Page 2 of 6

--- Page 3 ---
12M Business 4.5-703 Home Office of the Attorney (e) Audits. -- The Office of Legislative Audits shall audit (e) Audits. -- The Office of Legislative Audits shall
Regulation Builder Guaranty General the accounts and transactions of the Guaranty Fund under audit the accounts and transactions of the Guaranty
Fund § 2-1220 of the State Government Article. Fund shall be subject to audit by the Legislative Auditor
in accordance with §§ 2-1220 through 2-1227 under § 2-
1220 of the State Government Article.
13M Transportation 7-211.1 Post Maryland Transit At his discretion, the Legislative Auditor may conduct an Delete in its entirety
compliance audits Administration annual audit of a fiscal and compliance nature of the
accounts and transactions of the Administration in place of
conducting these audits on a biennial basis. Officials of
the Administration shall be advised whether annual or
biennial audits will be conducted. The cost of the fiscal
portion of the post audit examinations shall be borne by
the Administration.
14M Transportation 6-212.1 Post Maryland Port At his discretion, the Legislative Auditor may conduct an Delete in its entirety
compliance audits Commission and annual audit of a fiscal and compliance nature of the
Maryland Port accounts and transactions of the Administration in place of
Administration conducting these audits on a biennial basis. Officials of
the Administration shall be advised whether annual or
biennial audits will be conducted. The cost of the fiscal
portion of the post audit examinations shall be borne by
the Administration.
15M Transportation 5-215.1 Post Maryland Aviation At his discretion, the Legislative Auditor may conduct an Delete in its entirety
compliance audits Commission and annual audit of a fiscal and compliance nature of the
Maryland Aviation accounts and transactions of the Administration in place of
Administration conducting these audits on a biennial basis. Officials of
the Administration shall be advised whether annual or
biennial audits will be conducted. The cost of the fiscal
portion of the post audit examinations shall be borne by
the Administration.
16M State Personnel 21-127 Legislative State Retirement and The Legislative Auditor: Delete in its entirety
and Pensions Auditor Pension System – State
Retirement Agency (1) may conduct an annual or biennial fiscal and
compliance audit of the accounts and transactions of the
several systems; and
(2) shall advise officials of the several systems whether
the audit will be annual or biennial.
Page 3 of 6

--- Page 4 ---
17M State 9-121 Legislative State Lottery and (a) Required. -- Delete in its entirety (OLA does not need any unique
Government audits Gaming Control Agency (1) The Legislative Auditor shall audit the accounts and permission to audit SLA and has never billed for the
(SLGCA) transactions of the Agency as provided in § 2-1220 of this audit costs, as far as we can tell)
article.
(2) If the Legislative Auditor gives the Agency advance
notice, the Legislative Auditor may conduct annually a
fiscal and compliance audit of the accounts and
transactions of the Agency.
(b) Cost. -- The Agency shall pay the cost of the fiscal part
of each audit.
18M State Finance and 2-702 Funding Ethnic Affairs Unit – (b) Annual fiscal audit. -- An ethnic affairs unit receiving (b) Annualf Fiscal audit. -- An ethnic affairs unit
Procurement likely Executive Boards funds under this section shall be subject to an annual fiscal receiving funds under this section shall be subject to an
and Commissions Audit audit by the Legislative Auditor. annual fiscal audit by the Legislative Auditor as
provided in § 2-1220 of the State Government Article.
19M Public Safety 1-309 Department of Public (f) Audits. -- (f) Audits. --
Appropriations and Safety and Correctional
disbursements from Services – Office of the (1) The Legislative Auditor shall conduct (1) The Legislative Auditor shall may conduct
9-1-1 Trust Fund Secretary fiscal/compliance audits of the 9-1-1 Trust Fund and of fiscal/compliance audits of the 9-1-1 Trust Fund and of
the appropriations and disbursements made for purposes the appropriations and disbursements made for purposes
of this subtitle. of this subtitle.
(2) The cost of the fiscal portion of the audits shall be (2) The cost of the fiscal portion of the audits shall be
paid from the 9-1-1 Trust Fund as an administrative cost. paid from the 9-1-1 Trust Fund as an administrative
cost.
20M Natural 3-302 Department of Natural (e) Post audits. -- The Legislative Auditor shall conduct (e) Post audits. -- The Legislative Auditor shall may
Resources Environmental Resources post audits of a fiscal and compliance nature of the Fund conduct post audits of a fiscal and compliance nature of
Trust Fund and of the appropriations and expenditures made for the the Fund and of the appropriations and expenditures
purposes of this subtitle. The cost of the fiscal portion of made for the purposes of this subtitle. The cost of the
the post audit examinations shall be an operating cost of fiscal portion of the post audit examinations shall be an
the Fund. operating cost of the Fund.
Page 4 of 6

--- Page 5 ---
21M Health 14-402 Physician Rehabilitation (f) Physician Rehabilitation Program -- Audits. -- The (f) Physician Rehabilitation Program -- Audits. -- The
Occupations Examination of Program (Department of Legislative Auditor shall every 2 years audit the accounts Physician Rehabilitation Program is subject to audit by
licensed physician Health and Mental and transactions of the Physician Rehabilitation Program the Legislative Auditor shall every 2 years audit the
or other regulated Hygiene – Regulatory as provided in § 2-1220 of the State Government Article. accounts and transactions of the Physician
health professional; Services) Rehabilitation Program as provided in § 2-1220 of the
Physician State Government Article.
Rehabilitation
Program
22M Health – General 19-216 Required Health Services Cost (b) Form. -- (b) Form. --
reports of facilities Review Commission – (1) A report under this section shall: (1) A report under this section shall:
Health Regulatory
Commissions (i) Be in the form that the Commission requires; (i) Be in the form that the Commission requires;
(ii) Conform to the uniform accounting and financial (ii) Conform to the uniform accounting and financial
reporting system adopted under this subtitle; and reporting system adopted under this subtitle; and
(iii) Be certified as follows: (iii) Be certified as follows:
1. For the University of Maryland Hospital, by the 1. For the University of Maryland Hospital and, by
Legislative Auditor; or the Legislative Auditor; or
2. For any other facility, by its certified public 2. For any other facility, by it’s the Facility’s
accountant. certified public accountant.
23M Education 16-315 Audits Higher Education OLA is mentioned extensively (too lengthy to include (f) Local government auditors. -- An audit performed by
Community Colleges here), but seems to have no significant routine audit an official auditor of any county or Baltimore City
involvement. approved by the Commission with the concurrence of
the Legislative Auditor shall satisfy the annual audit
requirement if it otherwise meets the requirements of
this section.
Page 5 of 6

--- Page 6 ---
24M Economic 10-227 Audits Maryland Food Center (a) Required. -- The Legislative Auditor: (a) Required. -- The Legislative Auditor:
Development Authority
(1) may conduct a fiscal and compliance audit of the (1) may conduct a fiscal and compliance audit of the
accounts and transactions of the Authority yearly or every accounts and transactions of the Authority as provided
2 years; and in § 2-1220 of the State Government Article yearly or
every 2 years; and
(2) shall advise officials of the Authority whether the
audit will be yearly or every 2 years. (2) shall advise officials of the Authority whether the
audit will be yearly or every 2 years.
(b) Cost. -- The Authority shall pay the cost of the fiscal
part of the post audit examination. (b) Cost. -- The Authority shall pay the cost of the fiscal
part of the post audit examination.
25M Correctional 3-510 Audit Maryland Correctional (a) In general. -- The Legislative Auditor shall conduct Delete in its entirety, as unnecessary.
Services Enterprises audits of Maryland Correctional Enterprises in accordance
with Title 2, Subtitle 12, Part IV of the State Government
Article.
(b) Frequency of audits. -- The Legislative Auditor shall
advise officials of Maryland Correctional Enterprises of
the frequency of audits to be conducted.
(c) Costs. -- Maryland Correctional Enterprises shall bear
the cost of the fiscal portion of a post audit examination.
Page 6 of 6