Title: Presentation to the Joint Audit Committee - Department of Information Technology - Department of State Police - Department of Natural Resources - Resource Sharing Lease Agreements (Special Review)

Related Report Dated 11/18/2016
Date: 12/06/2016
Type: Presentations to the Legislature
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5a9daf30cc9d72387404dcd4
Extracted: 2025-06-18T14:04:06.334267
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Department of Information Technology (DoIT)
Department of State Police (DSP)
Department of Natural Resources (DNR)
Resource Sharing Lease Agreements
Special Review
Report dated November 18, 2016
Presentation to the Joint Audit Committee
Thomas J. Barnickel III, CPA
Matthew L. Streett, CPA, CFE
December 6, 2016

--- Page 2 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Overview
• We conducted a review of an allegation we received
related to resource sharing lease agreements (RSA)
between 2 telecom companies and the
Departments of Information Technology (DoIT),
State Police (DSP), or Natural Resources (DNR).
• The 10 RSAs reviewed by OLA, dating back to 1996,
allowed the companies, in exchange for
compensation to the State, to use 6 State telecom
towers for the installation and operation of their
communications systems.
• The total value of compensation for these 10 RSAs
was $5.9 million.
• RSA payments from the companies were deposited
into escrow accounts maintained by a law firm and
subsequently used to acquire goods and services.
• During the period from February 2001 through June
30, 2016, escrow account deposits and
withdrawals totaled approximately $4.4 million and
$3.8 million, respectively.
Special Review – Resource Sharing Lease Agreements Page 2

--- Page 3 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Report Overview
Key Findings
Oversight of Resource Sharing Agreements -
DoIT did not maintain comprehensive records of
the RSAs nor effectively monitor the RSAs
executed primarily by DSP and DNR with two
telecom firms.
DSP and DNR did not establish effective oversight
of escrow accounts where RSA payments were
deposited and from which telecom equipment and
services were purchased.
Questionable Activities – Certain procurements were
authorized by the DNR employee who directed
escrow account purchases without adhering to
State procurement regulations and laws or
obtaining required DNR or DoIT approvals.
Accountability over Equipment Purchases - DSP and
DNR did not record, tag, and inventory equipment
purchased with escrow funds, and could not
locate all equipment purchased.
Special Review – Resource Sharing Lease Agreements Page 3

--- Page 4 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Oversight of RSAs (Finding 1)
DoIT Oversight
DoIT, as the State’s RSA oversight agency, did not
maintain a complete list of existing Executive Branch
agency RSAs or copies of the related agreements
executed by Executive Branch agencies under its
authority.
• DoIT had no process in place to ensure it was
aware of all RSAs between State agencies and
telecom companies, and only had a record of 5 of
the 10 RSAs reviewed by OLA.
• From February 2001 to June 2016, $4.4 million in
RSA payments were deposited into 6 escrow
accounts maintained by a law firm. DoIT believes
these funds should have been deposited into the
Major Information Technology Development Project
(MITDP) Fund.
Special Review – Resource Sharing Lease Agreements Page 4

--- Page 5 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Oversight of RSAs (Finding 1)
DoIT Oversight (cont’d)
• DoIT generally became aware of these accounts in
April 2011, but did not take any substantive action
to investigate this matter until July 2015. Since
then -
 The law firm was directed to cease making
payments from the escrow accounts.
 An internal audit concluded the accounts
effectively created an “off-budget” pool of
funds without regard to the State budget or
procurement requirements.
 DoIT provided direction for future RSAs.
 The closure of escrow accounts with balances
of $536,700 is pending until the disposition of
the funds is determined.
Special Review – Resource Sharing Lease Agreements Page 5

--- Page 6 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Oversight of RSAs (Finding 2)
Agreement Recordkeeping
DoIT, DSP, and DNR did not maintain a complete list
of their RSAs, obtain appropriate approvals (when
required), or maintain inventories of telecom
equipment on their towers.
• No lists of the RSAs or mechanisms to monitor the
RSA terms to ensure that renewal options were
properly exercised and that all vendor
compensation was received.
• RSAs were allowed to continue beyond their initial
terms without formal notification and agreement
to exercise renewal options. Nineteen of 22
renewals, spanning 15 years, were informally
exercised, including 9 renewals (for 5 year
periods) that should have been submitted to BPW
for approval.
• Inventory lists detailing the type and ownership of
telecom equipment attached to State towers were
not maintained.
Special Review – Resource Sharing Lease Agreements Page 6

--- Page 7 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Oversight of RSAs (Finding 3)
Escrow Account Transactions
Escrow account financial transactions were not
accounted for on State records and the law firm
retained related interest earnings.
• Escrow account deposits and disbursements were
not recorded in the State’s accounting records and
were not subject to any State budgetary or fiscal
oversight.
• The law firm did not maintain formal accounting
records for the escrow accounts. DoIT, DSP, and
DNR did not obtain related bank statements to
monitor the deposit and disbursement activity.
• Escrow account interest and investment income
estimated at $90,900 was retained by the law firm.
• No official record was maintained by DSP and DNR
to ensure that escrow account disbursements
agreed in amount with the corresponding
purchases. The purchases OLA reviewed appeared
to be consistent with DSP and DNR requests.
Special Review – Resource Sharing Lease Agreements Page 7

--- Page 8 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Oversight of RSAs (Finding 4)
Collection of Lease Payments
DoIT, DSP, and DNR did not ensure that all
compensation due from the RSAs was received.
• For 8 of the 10 RSAs, compensation provided in
the RSAs totaling approximately $342,000 was
not received from February 2001 through June
2016.
• No compensation required under one DSP RSA for
the period from May 2003 to June 2016 and for
one DoIT RSA from October 2012 to June 2016.
DoIT estimated that value of lost compensation
totaled $575,000 for those periods.
This condition was caused by the mistaken belief by
all State parties that the law firm was monitoring the
amounts owed by the telecom companies.
Special Review – Resource Sharing Lease Agreements Page 8

--- Page 9 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Oversight of RSAs (Finding 5)
Purchases from Escrow Accounts
DSP and DNR purchases of equipment and services
were not subject to any independent supervisory
review and approval and were not made in
accordance with State procurement regulations. OLA
reviewed $1.5 million in purchases.
• One employee at DSP and one employee at DNR
unilaterally decided what equipment and services
would be purchased and directed the law firm to
make payment to vendors using escrow funds.
• No documentation to substantiate that efforts
were made to ensure the best value was received.
 The DSP employee directed the law firm to
purchase specific equipment from a vendor
at a cost of $258,800, even though the items
could have been purchased under a
Statewide contract, which the employee was
aware of, at a cost of $184,700.
Special Review – Resource Sharing Lease Agreements Page 9

--- Page 10 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Questionable Activities
Finding 6 – Tower Installation
A DNR employee authorized the law firm to pay an
out-of-State vendor to install a telecom tower without
formal approval of DNR or DoIT officials and without
conducting a proper procurement or executing a
written contract. OLA determined that the selection
of the vendor and certain of the payments appeared
questionable. The vendor was paid $88,500.
Finding 7 – Arrangement with a Telecom Company
In September 2008, a DNR employee processed a
unique arrangement whereby DNR vacated its license
to operate certain radio frequencies without review
and approval from either DNR management or DoIT.
Payments to DNR of $162,000 were deposited into
the escrow account instead of the State’s MITDP
Fund. Instead, replacement equipment was bought.
Because of concerns regarding the nature of the
above findings, we referred both matters to the
Criminal Division of the Office of the Attorney General.
Special Review – Resource Sharing Lease Agreements Page 10

--- Page 11 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Equipment Purchases (Finding 8)
DSP and DNR did not record, tag, and inventory
equipment purchased with escrow account funds
and could not provide a listing or identify the location
of equipment purchased.
Prior to OLA’s review, both DSP and DNR attempted
to identify equipment purchased with escrow funds
but these efforts were incomplete or were not
comprehensive.
 As of June 30, 2016, DSP had not completed
its review of purchases made with escrow
funds totaling approximately $625,600.
 In December 2015, DNR performed a
physical inventory of installed equipment to
ensure it was recorded and tagged, but did
not compare these results to escrow
purchases. Based on OLA tests, it appears
escrow purchases totaling $337,500 made
during a certain period had been inventoried.
Special Review – Resource Sharing Lease Agreements Page 11

--- Page 12 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Conclusions
As appropriate, DoIT, DSP, and/or DNR should
• maintain a comprehensive record of all telecom
RSAs and tower-installed equipment;
• determine if existing RSAs should be renegotiated,
and that all existing arrangements and renewals
are supported and approved;
• discontinue use of the escrow accounts and
determine the disposition of the remaining escrow
account funds, record escrow account transactions
in the State’s accounting records;
• establish procedures to ensure that all RSA
payments due are received and take necessary
actions to collect unpaid compensation;
• obtain retroactive approval for the DNR tower
installation award; and
• identify and establish accountability over all State
equipment purchased with escrow funds.
Special Review – Resource Sharing Lease Agreements Page 12