Title: Presentation to the Senate Budget and Taxation Subcommittee - Department of Human Resources - Social Services Administration

Related Report Dated 3/16/2011
Date: 02/02/2012
Type: Presentations to the Legislature
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5a9daf2bcc9d72387404dbf3
Extracted: 2025-06-18T13:42:09.363540
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Department of Human
Resources - Social Services
Administration (SSA)
Report dated March 16, 2011

--- Page 2 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Audit Overview
 The Social Services Administration (SSA) supervises,
directs and monitors the social services programs
(including the out-of-home placement program)
conducted by the local departments of social
services (LDSSs), which are located in each of the
State’s 24 local subdivisions.
 SSA’s programs are designed to prevent or remedy
abuse, neglect and exploitation of children and
families.
 The Children’s Electronic Social Services Information
Exchange (CHESSIE) is SSA’s automated child
welfare system, which provides SSA and LDSSs with
a common comprehensive information system with
monitoring and data reporting capabilities. Since its
inception in March 1996 to June 30, 2010, about
$90 million has been spent for development and
operational purposes.
 The audit report included 6 findings, 3 of which were
repeated from the preceding audit report.
DHR - Social Services Administration
Page 2

--- Page 3 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Key Audit Issues
 SSA was unable to effectively monitor the State’s
child welfare activities and the local departments
of social services (LDSSs) since certain
information recorded in the CHESSIE, such as the
number of resolved child abuse/neglect
allegations, was incomplete and unreliable.
 SSA did not establish procedures to effectively
monitor foster and kinship care placements to
ensure that children were not placed with
providers in which there was credible evidence of
abuse and neglect.
 Certain deficiencies were identified regarding
compliance with foster care service requirements
(including annual medical exams for foster care
children) and the receipt of annual reports from
group home providers accounting for the
disposition of SSA overpayments.
DHR - Social Services Administration
Page 3

--- Page 4 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
CHESSIE
Certain of CHESSIE’s 7 modules, including those for
abuse/neglect investigations, contained incomplete
and unreliable data hampering SSA’s ability to
effectively monitor and report child welfare activities
performed by the LDSSs. (Finding 1)
 We compared CHESSIE information to manual LDSS
records from June 2009 and noted material
discrepancies (Exhibit A). For example, CHESSIE’s
records had 1,270 less cases of abuse/neglect
allegations than the LDSSs records, which are
deemed more reliable.
 SSA has not been able to use CHESSIE to effectively
monitor the LDSSs’ child welfare activities, such as
the timeliness of investigations of child abuse.
Under State law such investigations must be
conducted by the LDSSs within 24 hours of the
allegation.
 SSA was aware that CHESSIE information was
incomplete, yet it was used as the source for semi-
annual federal reporting.
DHR - Social Services Administration
Page 4

--- Page 5 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Out-of-Home Placemen ts
SSA did not effectively monitor foster care and kinship
care placements to ensure compliance with State
regulations that children not be placed with certain
providers where there was credible evidence of child
abuse or neglect. (Finding 2) As of June 2010, there
were 8,013 out-of-home placements, with 5,894
children placed in foster care and kinship care.
 A query of CHESSIE, which was conducted at OLA’s
request, identified 6 providers who from April 2008
to June 2010 had cared for 32 children even
though there was credible evidence of abuse or
neglect against those providers prior to or during
these placements.
 One foster care provider had received 23
placements that lasted, on average, 34 days even
though there was credible evidence of neglect by
the provider prior to those placements.
 Due to aforementioned CHESSIE reliability issues,
we confirmed these results with SSA management
and/or LDSS officials.
DHR - Social Services Administration
Page 5

--- Page 6 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Out-of-Home Placemen ts (continued)
SSA had not ensured compliance with State and
federal requirements intended to ensure that all
children in foster care receive vital services necessary
for their emotional, physical, and educational well-
being in a safe environment. (Finding 3)
 SSA did not have a process to ensure that foster
care children received annual medical exams, as
required by State regulations. For 17 foster care
children selected for review, SSA could not provide
any documentation of medical exams for 9 children.
 SSA did not achieve the required 90% success rate
for any of the seven outcome measures (including
safety & child and family well-being) in the January
2010 federal Child and Family Services Review
(CFSR). A comparison of the January 2010 report
and the preceding CFSR report dated May 2007,
showed that SSA’s performance declined in each of
the outcome measures (Exhibit B).
DHR - Social Services Administration
Page 6

--- Page 7 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Out-of-Home Placemen ts (continued)
SSA did not have a process in place to ensure that
reports from foster care group home providers detailing
the disposition of overpayments retained from prior
years were obtained. (Finding 4)
 Contracts with foster care group home providers
stipulate that providers can retain overpayments
totaling up to 10% of the annual payments received,
for certain allowable purposes. The providers are to
annually report the disposition of the overpayments
and remaining overpayments that are not used for
the allowable purposes are to be refunded to SSA. In
FY 2008, overpayments totaled $5.8 million.
 As of May 2010, our review of five providers with
overpayments from FY 2008 totaling $800,000
disclosed that none of the providers submitted the
required report and SSA had not taken any
documented follow-up action. Consequently, SSA
was unable to determine if the funds were properly
expended or should have been refunded to SSA.
DHR - Social Services Administration
Page 7

--- Page 8 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Conclusion
SSA should:
 Ensure the completeness and reliability of
CHESSIE information to enable effective
monitoring and reporting of the State’s child
welfare activities.
 Establish procedures to ensure that children are
not placed with providers when there is credible
evidence of child abuse or neglect.
 Take appropriate action to ensure compliance
with foster care service requirements.
 Establish a process to obtain and review all
required annual provider reports detailing the
disposition of overpayments retained from prior
years.
DHR - Social Services Administration
Page 8

--- Page 9 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Exhibit A (Finding 1)
DHR - Social Services Administration
Page 9

--- Page 10 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Exhibit B (Finding 3)
DHR - Social Services Administration
Page 10