Title: Presentation to the Senate Budget and Taxation Subcommittee - University System of Maryland - Coppin State University

Related Report Dated 11/18/2013
Date: 02/27/2014
Type: Presentations to the Legislature
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5a9daf2dcc9d72387404dc59
Extracted: 2025-06-18T13:51:35.517118
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
University System of Maryland
Coppin State University
Report Dated November 18, 2013

--- Page 2 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Audit Overview
 Coppin State University (CSU) offers a range of
baccalaureate programs in both traditional arts and
sciences, teacher education and nursing, as well as
selected professionally oriented graduate programs.
 During the spring 2012 semester, a total of
3,534 students, consisting of 3,001 undergraduate
and 533 graduate students, were enrolled in CSU.
Approximately 89% of the enrollment was classified
as in-state.
 CSU’s budget is funded by unrestricted revenues,
such as tuition and a State general fund
appropriation, and restricted revenues, such as
federal grants. During fiscal 2012, CSU’s revenues
totaled approximately $104.0 million, including a
State general fund appropriation of approximately
$37.9 million.
 The report included 12 findings, 6 of which were
repeated from the preceding audit report and appear
as 5 findings (Findings 1, 2, 3, 9, and 10).
CSU – Coppin State University Page 2

--- Page 3 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Key Audit Issues
 Our audit disclosed a number of internal control
deficiencies related to CSU’s student accounts
receivable procedures as well as the failure to take
appropriate and timely actions to collect outstanding
student accounts.
 CSU’s contract monitoring procedures were not
comprehensive to ensure vendors complied with
contract requirements.
 Finally, a number of internal control and record
keeping deficiencies were noted in other areas
including student financial aid, cash receipts,
information systems, and equipment inventory.
CSU – Coppin State University Page 3

--- Page 4 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Student Accounts Re ceivable
CSU did not always take appropriate and timely action to
collect outstanding student account balances (A/R), and
did not have procedures in place required by the
University System of Maryland (USM) policies to prevent
students with unpaid balances from registering for
classes (Finding 1 – repeat).
 As of March 2012, student A/R totaled $3.0 million
and $2.3 million was outstanding > 120 days.
 Our test of 10 delinquent student accounts from
March 2012 totaling $137,000 disclosed:
• 7 accounts totaling $66,000 had not been transferred
to the Central Collection Unit (CCU) for collection
within required timeframes with delays of 6 to
31 months.
• 9 students were permitted to register for classes, even
though they had outstanding student account
balances from one or more prior semesters, in
violation of CSU policy.
 500 students registered for the spring 2012 semester
had outstanding balances totaling $1.1 million from
previous semesters.
CSU – Coppin State University Page 4

--- Page 5 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Student Accounts Re ceivable (Cont.)
CSU lacked controls to ensure the propriety of non-cash
credit adjustments, student refunds, and tuition waivers
recorded in the student accounts receivable system
(Finding 2 – repeat).
 Five employees had capabilities to record
adjustments to student accounts (such as non-cash
credits for tuition waivers), process refunds, and had
access to cash receipts. During fiscal 2012, CSU
processed approximately $9.8 million in student
refunds.
utput reports of non-cash credits to student A/R, that
 O
were used to identify transactions for supervisory
review, did not include all such credit adjustments.
Reports did identify $2.8 million in non-cash credits
from July 1, 2009 to March 26, 2012.
 One employee was solely responsible for determining
certain student tuition waivers (e.g., CSU employees
and their spouses and dependents). From
July 1, 2011 to June 13, 2012, CSU granted
$528,000 in tuition waivers.
CSU – Coppin State University Page 5

--- Page 6 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Student Accounts Re ceivable (Cont.)
CSU lacked controls to ensure the propriety of
third-party billings (such as to private organizations
awarding scholarships) and of receipts related to student
accounts totaling approximately $1.2 million during
fiscal 2012 (Finding 3 – repeat).
 One employee maintained the detail records,
prepared third party billings, had access to related
payments, and could record payments to student
accounts. The recordation of the payments was not
reviewed for propriety by an independent employee.
 CSU did not maintain an independent control
account from the original billings and receipts.
Instead, CSU used a summary report generated
from the third-party billing detail records as the
control account. Consequently, third party tuition
payments could be misappropriated without
detection.
CSU – Coppin State University Page 6

--- Page 7 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Contract Monitoring
 CSU modified its contract to decrease
calendar 2012 commission payments by
$100,000 due from its food service vendor without
validating certain vendor assertions of financial
losses. Under the contract, commissions were
based on revenues, not the vendor’s profit or loss.
Also, CSU did not require the vendor to make
certain capital improvements (e.g., dining area
improvements) as stated in the contract
(Finding 6).
 CSU did not verify sales reports used to calculate
monthly commission payments payable by the
operator of its bookstore. The contract requires
the vendor to pay commissions to CSU totaling
9.5% of annual gross sales up to $2.0 million and
11.0% of gross sales over $2.0 million. The
vendor reported sales during calendar 2011
totaling $1.9 million, and paid commissions
totaling approximately $181,000 (Finding 7).
CSU – Coppin State University Page 7

--- Page 8 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Lack of Various Con t rols
Adequate internal controls were lacking over:
 Wire transfers of federal student loans (Finding 4) and
financial aid awards posted to student accounts
totaling $30.2 million during fiscal 2012 (Finding 5).
 Equipment inventory, which totaled approximately
$16.2 million as of December 31, 2011. For example,
CSU did not maintain a control account or always
record purchases in the records (Finding 8).
 Collections received at the Bursar’s Office. For
example, deposit verifications for collections received
in the mail were not performed (Finding 9 – repeat).
 The recordation of student account and purchasing
transactions, with certain system users having
unnecessary or inappropriate capabilities (Finding 10
– repeat) and certain critical information technology
application’s accounts, database monitoring, and
passwords (Finding 11).
 Salary payments to an individual using methods that
circumvented processes designed to enforce the
earnings limitations for retirees established by State
law (Finding 12).
CSU – Coppin State University Page 8

--- Page 9 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Conclusions
CSU needs to
 ensure compliance with CCU and USM policies on
delinquent student accounts;
 ensure reports of non-cash credit adjustments
posted to student accounts are complete and
subject to independent review;
 separate employee duties to ensure only proper
student refunds are issued;
 ensure that contract modifications are adequately
supported and justified;
 implement procedures to ensure compliance with
all contractual terms; and
 take the recommended actions to improve controls
and recordkeeping systems.
CSU – Coppin State University Page 9