Title: Presentation to the Senate Budget and Taxation Subcommittee - Department of Transportation - Motor Vehicle Administration

Related Report Dated 10/19/2007
Date: 02/14/2008
Type: Presentations to the Legislature
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5a9daf21cc9d72387404dabe
Extracted: 2025-06-18T09:08:02.163007
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Department of Transportation
Motor Vehicle Administration
Report dated October 19, 2007
Presentation to
Senate Budget and Taxation Committee
Public Safety, Transportation, and Environment
Subcommittee
Brian S. Tanen, CPA, CFE
Joshua S. Adler, CPA, CFE
Stephen P. Jersey, CPA, CISA
February 14, 2008

--- Page 2 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Audit Overview
(cid:190) MVA maintains a headquarters and 24 branch
offices throughout the State and manages the
eMVA store, used for online processing of MVA
transactions. MVA collected $1.3 billion during
FY 2006, primarily consisting of motor vehicle
excise taxes and registration fees.
(cid:190) Current audit report included 25 findings.
Twelve findings from our preceding audit report
were repeated (as eleven findings) in our
current report.
(cid:190) We determined that MVA’s accountability and
compliance level was unsatisfactory.
Motor Vehicle Administration
Page 2

--- Page 3 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Key Audit Issues
(cid:190) MVA policies and procedures were not sufficient
to address Ignition Interlock Program (IIP)
violations. As a result, MVA failed to take
appropriate follow-up action for certain
individuals who violated the terms of the
program.
(cid:190) Procedures and controls over driver licensing
transactions were not sufficient to ensure that
only proper licenses were issued.
(cid:190) MVA did not process license suspensions and
revocations, or ensure that related appeals were
conducted, timely. In addition, adequate steps
were not always taken to suspend the driver’s
licenses of individuals repeatedly in arrears in
making child support payments.
Motor Vehicle Administration
Page 3

--- Page 4 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Key Audit Issues (continued)
(cid:190) Titling and registration late payment fines
totaling $824,000 due from dealerships were
waived without a review of the related
documentation, and audits of vehicle titling and
registration transactions processed by
dealerships were not comprehensive.
(cid:190) Vehicle registrations were not suspended timely
when lapses in insurance coverage were
identified and the related penalties were not
assessed and recovered timely in accordance
with State regulations.
(cid:190) Numerous security and control deficiencies
were noted with the eMVA Store, which provides
online services to the public, resulting in the
vulnerability of certain sensitive personal and
financial information of eMVA Store customers.
Motor Vehicle Administration
Page 4

--- Page 5 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Ignition Interlock Program
(cid:190) Since 1988, State law provided for an ignition
interlock device to help prevent individuals
convicted of alcohol-related driving violations
from driving while intoxicated. In 1996, the
Maryland Ignition Interlock Program (IIP) was
established to formalize the monitoring process.
(cid:190) Drivers are enrolled in the IIP as a result of a
court order, administrative hearing order, MVA
Medical Advisory Board recommendation, or
may voluntarily enroll in lieu of and/or in
conjunction with a reduced driver’s license
suspension or revocation.
(cid:190) State law and MVA policies and procedures
generally provide for MVA to administer the
program.
(cid:190) As of March 2007, there were 4,336 individuals
actively enrolled in the IIP.
Motor Vehicle Administration
Page 5

--- Page 6 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Ignition Interlock Program (continued)
(cid:190)MVA policies and procedures were not sufficient
to address IIP violations (Findings # 1 & 2). For
example, the policies and procedures did not:
(cid:190) Adequately specify the progressive corrective
actions to be taken against IIP violators or
require supervisory review of decisions made
by caseworkers.
(cid:190) Require the IIP unit to be notified of pertinent
license activity that was recorded in the MVA
driving records of IIP enrollees.
(cid:190) Include any review of violation reports for
court-ordered IIP participants even though
State law provides for MVA to monitor.
(cid:190) Adequately ensure that individuals assigned
to the IIP had the interlock devices installed
on their vehicles and adequately account for
IIP violation reports received from vendors.
Motor Vehicle Administration
Page 6

--- Page 7 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Ignition Interlock Program (continued)
(cid:190)Our review of 20 individuals enrolled in the IIP,
as of May 2005, disclosed that:
(cid:190) 11 had between 5 and 43 significant
violations, including failing blood alcohol
tests and refusing mandatory rolling retests.
(cid:190) MVA did not take sufficient follow-up actions
(such as reinstating the license suspension
or revocation) for any of the aforementioned
individuals. Rather, those who had
completed the term of the IIP, were notified
that they had “successfully completed” the
program and were returned to a normal
driving status.
(cid:190) 2 had speeding violations while on the
program in vehicles that did not have ignition
interlock devices installed; however, the IIP
unit was not aware of these violations, and
both of these individuals continued in the IIP.
Motor Vehicle Administration
Page 7

--- Page 8 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Driver Licensing
(cid:190) Required documentation (such as proof of
identity and residency) was not always obtained
to support the propriety of the licenses issued
and daily supervisory reviews of licensing
transactions were not always being performed,
in accordance with MVA policy. (Finding #3)
(cid:190) MVA’s driver’s license database included
approximately 280 driving records with SSNs
recorded on at least one other driving record.
(Finding #4)
(cid:190) MVA did not adequately analyze available data
to identify possible errors or fraudulent licenses
and personal identification cards (ID cards):
(cid:190) 130 licenses and ID cards were issued to
individuals with ages ranging from 102 to
348 years.
(cid:190) 16 licenses were issued using the SSNs of
deceased individuals.
Motor Vehicle Administration
Page 8

--- Page 9 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
License Suspensions & Revocations
(cid:190) License suspensions and revocations were not
always imposed in a timely manner and
procedures were not adequate to help ensure
that hearings related to appeals of suspension
and revocation decisions were conducted by the
Office of Administrative Hearings in a timely
manner. (Finding #5)
(cid:190) MVA did not take adequate steps to suspend
the driver’s licenses of certain individuals
repeatedly in arrears in making child support
payments. (Finding #6)
Motor Vehicle Administration
Page 9

--- Page 10 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Vehicle Titling & Registration
(cid:190) MVA allowed vehicle dealerships to issue
temporary vehicle registrations to ineligible
individuals, in violation of State laws. (Finding #8)
(cid:190) MVA waived late payment fines for excise taxes
and fees totaling $824,000 due from dealerships
without reviewing the related documentation.
Automated reports used to identify late payments
and assess related fines did not include out-of-
state dealerships. (Finding #9)
(cid:190) Audits of licensed vehicle dealerships were not
comprehensive. For example, approximately 700
licensed dealers were not on MVA’s audit
schedule, including 312 out-of-state dealerships.
(Finding #10)
Motor Vehicle Administration
Page 10

--- Page 11 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Insurance Compliance
(cid:190) Although State law requires immediate
suspension of vehicle registrations when
insurance is terminated or lapses, MVA waited 70
to 115 days. (Finding #11)
(cid:190) MVA did not recover most license plates from
uninsured vehicles when the vehicle owners failed
to respond to related notifications.
(cid:190) Up to two years could pass after an insurance
lapse before MVA assessed the related penalties.
Delinquent assessments were not forwarded to
CCU in a timely manner. (Finding #12)
(cid:190) Waivers of insurance penalties were not always
issued in accordance with State regulations.
Motor Vehicle Administration
Page 11

--- Page 12 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
eMVA Store
(cid:190) eMVA Store enables citizens to renew a vehicle
registration and order replacement titles,
duplicate registration cards, and copies of
driving records over the Internet.
(cid:190) eMVA Store authenticates users by prompting
for data such as a driver’s license number, date
of birth or vehicle title and tag numbers.
(cid:190) Transactions are paid for by credit card or
electronic check (allowing for a withdrawal from
a customer’s bank account).
(cid:190) A contractor maintained the eMVA website
application and supporting infrastructure.
(cid:190) Online payments via the eMVA Store website
totaled $62 million in FY 2006.
Motor Vehicle Administration
Page 12

--- Page 13 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
eMVA Store (continued)
(cid:190) eMVA Store customers’ sensitive personal and
financial data was unnecessarily stored in plain
text on eMVA Store related servers, including
269,000 customer credit card transactions,
42,500 bank account records and 468,000
drivers license records. (Finding # 16)
(cid:190) eMVA Store web application software had
numerous vulnerabilities and commercial
security tools were not used to improve security.
(Finding # 17)
(cid:190) eMVA Store was exposed to additional security
risks due to outdated software on several
critical devices. (Finding # 18)
(cid:190) Various users had unnecessary access to the
critical eMVA Store database and servers.
(Finding # 20)
Motor Vehicle Administration
Page 13

--- Page 14 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Conclusion
MVA should establish procedures to ensure that:
(cid:190) Proper identification and follow-up of Ignition
Interlock Program violations.
(cid:190) Driver’s licensing transactions are properly
processed and licenses are properly issued.
(cid:190) License suspensions and revocations and related
appeals are processed timely.
(cid:190) Dealers discontinue issuing temporary tags to
ineligible individuals, dealer titling and registration
late payments are properly identified and dealer
audits are more comprehensive.
(cid:190) When lapses of insurance coverage are identified,
vehicle registrations are suspended and related
penalties are assessed and recovered in a timely
manner.
(cid:190) eMVA Store applications and customer data is
properly secured.
Motor Vehicle Administration
Page 14