Title: Presentation to the House Appropriations Subcommittee - Department of Human Resources - Local Department Operations

Related Report Dated 5/16/2012
Date: 01/30/2013
Type: Presentations to the Legislature
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5a9daf2ccc9d72387404dc2f
Extracted: 2025-06-18T13:46:53.047164
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Department of Human
Resources
Local Department Operations
Report dated May 16, 2012

--- Page 2 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Audit Overview
 The Local Department Operations (LDO) is one of
seven budgetary units of the Department of Human
Resources (DHR). It consists of the funds for
activities (e.g., Temporary Cash Assistance)
administered by the State’s 24 local departments
of social services (LDSS).
 The LDO’s fiscal year 2011 expenditures totaled
approximately $2 billion, which included $1.5
billion in assistance program expenditures and
$500 million in operating expenditures (primarily
employee salaries and benefits).
 State law requires DHR to audit each LDSS every
three years. Audits are performed by DHR’s Office
of the Inspector General (OIG).
 During the prior OLA audit, we determined that the
OIG audits were not conducted timely or in
accordance with applicable audit standards, and
the audits did not fully address significant LDSS
operational risks.
DHR - Local Department Operations
Page 2

--- Page 3 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Audit Overview (continu e d)
 During the current OLA audit, we concluded that
the OIG’s audit coverage of the LDSSs provided a
sufficient basis for us to rely on its work.
 Consequently, OLA did not conduct audits of the
LDSSs, which differed from our preceding audit,
where we made field visits to three LDSSs and
audited LDSS operations in a number of areas,
including those overseen by the Family
Investment Administration and the Social
Services Administration.
 The prior OLA audit report contained 13 findings,
including 3 specific to OIG operations and 10
related to the LDSSs visited.
 Our current audit disclosed that DHR
satisfactorily addressed the findings related to
OIG operations along with 7 of the 10 LDSS
specific findings. Therefore, 3 of the 6 findings
contained in the current OLA audit report were
repeated based on our review of the results of the
OIG’s LDSS audits.
DHR - Local Department Operations
Page 3

--- Page 4 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Key Audit Issues
 The individual LDSSs continued to have a
significant number of deficiencies and repeat
findings based on the results of the last OIG audit
cycle.
 We summarized the findings contained in the
most recently issued OIG audit report for each of
the 24 LDSSs as of June 30, 2011. For our
report, we grouped the findings by critical
functional areas relating to LDSSs’ administration
of:
 Programs and policies of the Social Services
Administration
 Programs and policies of the Family
Investment Administration
 Budget and finance operations
 Information system security
DHR - Local Department Operations
Page 4

--- Page 5 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Key Audit Issues (contin ued)
Overview of the 373 LDSS Findings
Number of
Functional Area
LDSSs Findings
Social Services Administration 23 101
(e.g., fost er care)
Family In vestment Administration 20 79
(e.g., tem porary cash assistance,
federal fo od supplement program)
Budget & Finance 22 114
(e.g., bank accounts, credit & gift cards)
Information Systems 17 36
(e.g., acc ess to benefit systems)
Other 20 43
(e.g., MSDE child care activities)
 Exhibits 1 and 2 in the OLA audit report present
summaries of the number of OIG findings for
each LDSS, as well as selected audit findings by
functional area.
DHR - Local Department Operations
Page 5

--- Page 6 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Findings from the OIG A udit Reports
The Office of the Inspector General’s (OIG) audits of
the 24 LDSSs contain a significant number of
reportable conditions, including many repeat
findings. (Finding 1)
 Those reports collectively contained 373 findings,
including 77 findings deemed to be repeat
conditions from the preceding OIG report.
 The number of findings resulting from each LDSS
audit ranged from 3 (one LDSS) to 40 (two
LDSSs).
 The percentage of all findings deemed by the OIG
to be repeated from the preceding OIG audit was
21%, although nine had no repeats. For those
with repeats, the range was from 7% (three
LDSSs) to 45% (one LDSS).
DHR - Local Department Operations
Page 6

--- Page 7 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
LDSS Audit Findings
The OIG reports for 23 LDSSs had 101 findings relating
to activities subject to the Social Services
Administration’s (SSA) oversight. (Finding 2) These
findings were primarily related to foster care, which
provides short-term care and supportive services to
children who are unable to live at home because of
abuse/neglect.
 Certain foster care case files were missing
documentation that required services including
monthly caseworker contact with the child and the
delivery of medical and educational services were
provided.
 Initial eligibility for federal funding was not timely
determined for certain children in a State-funded
foster care program. This could prevent the child
being moved into a program that is funded jointly
with federal and State funds. (Repeat OLA Finding)
During FY 2011, the average monthly foster care and
adoption caseload was 6,860 & 7,800, respectively.
Related expenditures totaled $299 million.
DHR - Local Department Operations
Page 7

--- Page 8 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
LDSS Audit Findings (co n tinued)
The OIG reports for 20 LDSSs contained 79 findings
related to programs of the Family Investment
Administration (FIA), including the Temporary Cash
Assistance (TCA) and the federal Food Supplement
Program (FSP). (Finding 3)
 Critical duties were not properly segregated for
the electronic debit cards used by recipients to
access TCA and FSP benefits. As a result, there
was a lack of assurance that the benefits were
being used by the intended recipient(s).
 The required number of public assistance case
files were not subject to supervisory review, in
accordance with FIA quality assurance policies.
The reviews help ensure the accuracy and
propriety of assistance payments and to help
reduce and eliminate program errors.
During FY 2011, total FSP payments were $993
million (federally funded) and TCA payments were
$152 million (joint federal & State funding).
DHR - Local Department Operations
Page 8

--- Page 9 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
LDSS Audit Findings (continued)
The OIG reports for 22 LDSSs contained114 findings
pertaining to budget and finance-related areas such
as bank accounts, corporate purchasing cards (CPC),
and prepaid gift cards. (Finding 4)
 Bank accounts maintained by certain LDSSs to
pay for certain expenditures were not reconciled
timely.
 Accountability and approval of certain CPC
transactions was not established or documented.
 Accountability of prepaid gift cards was not
established. For example, physical inventories of
prepaid gift cards were not documented.
As a result of these conditions, unauthorized
disbursements may not be detected or detected
timely.
DHR - Local Department Operations
Page 9

--- Page 10 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
LDSS Audit Findings (continued)
OIG reports for 17 LDSSs contained 36 findings related
to information system security controls for critical
systems, such as the system used to record, authorize
and disburse TCA and FSP benefits. (Finding 5)
 Controls over the granting of user access to critical
systems need improvement. For example,
authorization documents for employee access were
missing or were not completed, and certain
employees were granted access capabilities that
were not required for their duties.
 Employees’ assigned access capabilities were not
properly monitored. For example, the logonids of
certain former employees were not deleted and
employee access was not periodically reviewed for
continued appropriateness.
Based on these conditions, assurance was lacking that
employee access was necessary and appropriate and
could result in unauthorized changes to critical data
without detection.
DHR - Local Department Operations
Page 10

--- Page 11 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
LDSS Audit Finding s (continued)
Medicaid eligibility determinations for long-term care
recipients were not always proper. Through an
interagency memorandum of understanding between
DHR and the Department of Health and Mental
Hygiene, the LDSSs perform the eligibility
determination for the majority of Medicaid recipients.
(Finding 6)
The OIG conducted a targeted review to follow-up
on a finding in our preceding audit report which
noted that one LDSS did not always properly
perform or document the eligibility determinations
for Medicaid long-term care recipients.
The OIG’s review noted that the finding had not
been resolved in that certain case records could
not be located, certain eligibility documentation
was missing and real property searches were
generally not conducted to assist in determining if
financial resources were within the limit
established by State regulation.
DHR - Local Department Operations
Page 11

--- Page 12 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Conclusion
DHR, including the Office of the Secretary and the
management of the relevant administrations within
the Department, should actively monitor OIG audit
findings and LDSSs’ actions taken to ensure that
deficiencies are corrected and recommendations are
implemented. Specifically, DHR should
 Ensure that LDSSs comply with all SSA program
requirements, such as, maintaining complete and
accurate foster care case files.
 Ensure that LDSSs comply with all FIA program
requirements, such as establishing appropriate
controls over electronic debit cards.
 Establish appropriate accountability and control
over fiscal operations and information system
access.
 Ensure that LDSSs properly perform Medicaid
eligibility determinations.
DHR - Local Department Operations
Page 12