Title: Presentation to the Joint Audit Committee - Department of Transportation - Motor Vehicle Administration

Related Report Dated 10/13/2010
Date: 11/09/2010
Type: Presentations to the Legislature
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5a9daf28cc9d72387404db87
Extracted: 2025-06-18T13:30:00.290406
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Department of Transportation
Motor Vehicle Administration
Report dated October 13, 2010
Presentation to Joint Audit Committee
Bruce A. Myers, CPA
William R. Smith, CPA
Jonathan H. Finglass, CPA
November 9, 2010

--- Page 2 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Audit Overview
(cid:190) MVA has jurisdiction over a variety of activities related
to the ownership and operation of motor vehicles
such as:
(cid:131) Issuing driver’s licenses
(cid:131) Titling of vehicles
(cid:131) Verifying that vehicles are insured
(cid:190) MVA maintains a headquarters location in Anne
Arundel County and 24 branch offices, with a total
authorized workforce of 1,600 employees. MVA also
manages the eMVA Store, used for online processing
of MVA transactions (e.g., vehicle registration
renewals).
(cid:190) MVA collected $1.2 billion during FY 2009, primarily
motor vehicle excise taxes and registration fees.
(cid:190) The audit report included 13 findings, 2 of which were
repeat findings. MVA corrected 23 of the 25 findings
in the prior audit report, and its accountability and
compliance level is no longer unsatisfactory
Motor Vehicle Administration
Page 2

--- Page 3 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Key Audit Issues
(cid:190) MVA did not verify the completeness of reports used
to identify driving records requiring review to
determine whether administrative actions should be
taken due to traffic-related convictions. As a result,
MVA did not always take appropriate administrative
actions against the drivers, such as license
suspension or revocation.
(cid:190) MVA lacked adequate controls over critical
transactions affecting driving records.
(cid:190) Certain sensitive personal and financial information
of eMVA Store customers was not fully protected.
(cid:190) MVA had not established adequate controls over the
license plate and registration sticker inventories.
(cid:190) The ignition interlock program was not adequately
monitored resulting in individuals being improperly
allowed to resume normal driving privileges.
(cid:190) Independent supervisory reviews were not always
performed to ensure the proper processing of
insurance lapse information.
Motor Vehicle Administration
Page 3

--- Page 4 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
License Suspensions & Registrations
Background:
(cid:190) MVA receives information daily, consisting primarily
of traffic citations and case convictions, which is
electronically transmitted from the State’s district
and circuit courts and from other State and local
entities, that impact driver’s licenses. This
information is converted to “points” and is
accumulated in MVA’s drivers’ license records file.
(cid:190) Generally, an accumulation of 8 points results in a
suspension and 12 points in a revocation of a
driver’s license.
(cid:190) MVA manually analyzes this information to
determine appropriate administrative actions, such
as license suspensions and revocations due to an
accumulation of an excessive number of points.
(cid:190) During CY 2009, according to MVA records, it
processed 232,039 suspensions and 8,531
revocations of drivers’ licenses.
Motor Vehicle Administration
Page 4

--- Page 5 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
License Suspensions & Registrations
(Cont’d)
Our audit found that the reports MVA generated from
its drivers’ license data file used to identify cases
requiring the manual analysis of driving records were
incomplete. Due to MVA’s lack of accountability over
these files, MVA was unaware that some cases were
omitted from review. (Finding 1)
(cid:131) Our limited review of MVA’s court conviction records
for the period of December 2008 to May 2009
identified 139 cases with 12-point violations that
were not listed on the related reports and were not
subject to the manual review process.
(cid:131) We selected 20 of the aforementioned 139 cases
and reviewed the driving records. Our test disclosed
that 16 of the 20 drivers should have had their
licenses revoked.
(cid:131) MVA believes a programming error in 2008 was the
likely reason for the omission of these cases from
the data files used to generate the reports.
Motor Vehicle Administration
Page 5

--- Page 6 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
License Suspensions & Registrations
(cont’d)
Controls over the review of driving records were
inadequate to ensure that the proper penalties, such
as suspensions & revocations of drivers’ licenses, were
imposed. (Finding 2)
(cid:190) Supervisors are supposed to review the results of
the manual review described in Finding 1, and
record the penalties in the driving license data file.
However, no system documentation was generated
to identify the specific supervisor who performed
each review and recorded the related penalty.
(cid:190) Independent verifications were not performed to
ensure that the proper penalty determinations were
recorded in the electronic driving records.
(cid:190) Our test of 20 traffic violations disclosed 2
instances in which the initial penalty determinations
were proper; however, the records did not reflect the
required revocation for one driver and for the other,
the posted revocation period was erroneously
reduced by 6 months.
Motor Vehicle Administration
Page 6

--- Page 7 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
License Suspensions & Registrations
(cont’d)
Controls over critical transactions impacting
individuals’ driving records, such as the removal of
suspensions and revocations from drivers’ records,
were inadequate. (Finding 3) Although MVA conducted
independent daily reviews of entries made to driving
records on a test basis, we found that:
(cid:131) Formal guidelines were not established to specify
the types of critical transactions to be included in
daily reviews. Additionally, the employees who
reviewed these transactions could also make
changes in the electronic driving records database
thereby allowing them to review the transactions
they initiated.
(cid:131) Documentation of these daily reviews was not always
retained.
(cid:131) 13 of the 136 employees who had the ability to
remove license suspensions and revocations from
the electronic driving records database, according to
a March 2010 MVA system access report, did not
require such capabilities to perform their job duties.
Motor Vehicle Administration
Page 7

--- Page 8 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Information Systems Security & Control
MVA operates and maintains various applications,
servers and local networks and interacts with
contractors to provide some IT-related services to MVA.
An example is the eMVA Store, which enables
individuals to perform various transactions via the
Internet, such as vehicle registration renewals.
(cid:190) MVA customers’ sensitive personal and financial
information was not adequately protected. While
security has improved since the last audit, further
actions need to be taken to secure certain eMVA
Store customers’ names, bank account information
and credit card numbers on MVA’s files. (Finding 4)
(cid:190) Proper security controls were not established over
the vehicle registration system files, mainframe
production files, and the virtual server environment.
(Findings 5 & 6)
Motor Vehicle Administration
Page 8

--- Page 9 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Vehicle Titling & Registration
(cid:190) MVA had not established adequate controls over
its license plate and registration sticker
inventories at its central warehouse. For
example, four warehouse custodians (with
access to the physical inventories) also had
access to the related inventory records. These
employees also routinely posted adjustments for
the returned plates and stickers. (Finding 7)
(cid:190) MVA did not periodically account for the license
plates and registration stickers issued to
dealerships in the electronic registration and
titling program (ERT) through a third-party
contractor. According to contractor records,
during our audit period, approximately 1.1
million license plates and 3.6 million registration
stickers were issued to the third-party contractor
for distribution to dealers. Consequently, there
was a lack of assurance that plates and stickers
were issued for authorized purposes. (Finding 8)
Motor Vehicle Administration
Page 9

--- Page 10 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Ignition Interlock Program
The Ignition Interlock Program (IIP) is intended to
prevent individuals convicted of alcohol–related driving
violations from driving while intoxicated. Individuals are
enrolled for several reasons, including a court order or
in conjunction with a reduced driver’s license
suspension or revocation. An ignition interlock device is
fitted to the driver’s vehicle that monitors the driver’s
blood alcohol level and violations are reported to the
MVA for monitoring purposes. As of June 2009 there
were 7,124 enrolled individuals.
There were inadequate controls over MVA overrides of
reported IIP violations (Finding 9). For example,
(cid:190) MVA caseworker overrides of IIP violations were
generally not reviewed by supervisory personnel.
(cid:190) For 2 of 20 IIP cases tested, IIP violations were over-
ridden by MVA without sufficient justification,
permitting these two individuals to complete the IIP
despite lack of compliance with applicable State
laws and IIP program requirements.
Motor Vehicle Administration
Page 10

--- Page 11 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Other Issues
(cid:190) MVA had not properly secured checks received in
one location. (Finding 10)
(cid:190) MVA insurance compliance staff employees had the
authority to close certain cases (for example, if the
lapse was less than five days) without conducting
an investigation and without obtaining supervisory
approval. (Finding 11)
(cid:190) MVA had not established adequate controls to
prevent unauthorized disbursement transactions
and to ensure that payments were only made for
actual goods received. (Finding 12)
(cid:190) MVA did not always expand testing for additional
transactions during its internal investigations of
potentially fraudulent activities when evidence of
possible criminal or unethical conduct by MVA
employees was identified. (Finding 13)
Motor Vehicle Administration
Page 11

--- Page 12 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Conclusion
MVA needs to ensure that:
(cid:190)All traffic conviction cases affected by the
programming error are investigated and appropriate
corrective action is taken; and procedures are
established to verify the completeness of MVA’s
computer-generated reports.
(cid:190)Penalty determinations are properly approved and
accurately recorded on driving records.
(cid:190)Critical adjustments to driving records, IIP overrides,
and insurance lapses are subject to appropriate
supervisory review and approval.
(cid:190)eMVA Store applications and customer data are
properly secured.
(cid:190)Adequate accountability is established over license
plate and registration sticker inventories, and
sufficient controls are implemented over cash
receipts and disbursements.
(cid:190)Expand testing for investigations if fraud is suspected.
Motor Vehicle Administration
Page 12