Title: Presentation to the House Appropriations Subcommittee - Department of Human Services - Social Services Administration


Related Report Dated (6/3/2021)
Date: 02/07/2018
Type: Presentations to the Legislature
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5a9daf31cc9d72387404dd23
Extracted: 2025-06-18T22:11:21.156303
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Department of Human Services
Social Services
Administration (SSA)
Report Dated November 20, 2017

--- Page 2 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Audit Overview
 SSA supervises, directs, and monitors social services
programs, including foster care, adoption and
guardianship, and child protective services conducted
by the State’s 24 local departments of social services
(LDSSs).
 Our audit focused primarily on SSA’s procedures and
controls for fulfilling its responsibilities with regard to
these programs, and in particular, its efforts to ensure
compliance with laws, regulations, and policies relating
to these programs.
 Our report included 14 findings, 2 (Findings 6 and 14)
of which were repeated from our preceding audit report
on SSA.
 OLA determined that SSA’s accountability and
compliance level was unsatisfactory, in accordance with
the rating system OLA established in conformity with
State law. The primary factors contributing to the
unsatisfactory rating were the significance and quantity
of the audit findings.
DHS – Social Services Administration
Page 2

--- Page 3 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Audit Overview
According to the Children’s Electronic Social Services
Information Exchange (CHESSIE), the computerized child
welfare information system used by SSA and the LDSSs,
social services program activity processed during fiscal
year 2016 totaled approximately $270 million.
Fiscal Year 2016
Expenditures Processed via CHESSIE
Number of Number of Expenditures
Expenditure Category Children During Providers / (In millions of
Year Parents dollars)
Treatment Foster Care 2,249 33 $ 71.1
Group Foster Care 1,368 63 64.1
Adoption Assistance 7,092 4,785 63.0
Guardianship Assistance 3,057 2,168 25.6
Family Foster Care 2,648 1,490 12.5
Teen Mother Foster Care 101 8 4.1
Other Foster Care 636 453 2.3
Subtotal (Maintenance) 17,151 9,000 $ 242.7
Ancillary Funds 27.5
Total Expenditures $ 270.2
DHS – Social Services Administration
Page 3

--- Page 4 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Key Findings
 SSA did not have a comprehensive quality assurance
process to ensure that child welfare programs were
being effectively administered by the LDSSs.
 SSA lacked adequate procedures to
• monitor the LDSSs to ensure that foster children were
placed in the least restrictive environment and
received certain required services;
• ensure that the LDSSs complied with State regulations
regarding initial approval of foster care providers and
ongoing monitoring of foster care providers, adoptive
parents, and guardians; and
• maximize federal funds available to the State for costs
incurred for child welfare programs.
 SSA did not adequately monitor
• the timeliness of child neglect and abuse
investigations by the LDSSs;
• the timeliness of required assessments of controlled
substance-exposed newborns; and
• SSA’s timely notification to the LDSSs of children born
to parents with terminated parental rights or any
necessary follow-up action by the LDSSs.
DHS – Social Services Administration
Page 4

--- Page 5 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Quality Assurance Program (Finding 1)
SSA did not have comprehensive quality assurance
processes in place to ensure that certain critical program
services and functions were effectively completed by the
LDSSs in accordance with State law and regulations, as well
as SSA policy.
Those program services and functions included, for example
• approving and monitoring foster care providers and
placing children with appropriate providers;
• ensuring that children in care receive specified
services, such as medical and dental care, within
required timeframes; and
• timely assessment and investigation of child abuse
allegations.
A comprehensive quality assurance process includes
implementation of effective monitoring procedures of
specific program activities and implementation and oversight
of quality assurance reviews of cases conducted at each
LDSS.
DHS – Social Services Administration
Page 5

--- Page 6 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Program Monitoring (Finding 2)
SSA had not established procedures to monitor the LDSSs
to ensure there was documentation supporting the
performance of certain critical requirements relating to the
placement and care of foster children.
The following table indicates the results of our test of 57
children in foster care for documentation and proper
recording in CHESSIE of five such requirements. Fiscal year
2016 payments for these children totaled $2.3 million.
( )
Two requirements did not apply to all 57 children.
Results of our Test of Foster Care Requirements
Documentation
Foster Care Documentation Provided – Not
Tested Total
Requirements Not Provided Recorded in
CHESSIE
Legal Basis for Child
57 9 0 9
Entering Foster Care
Effort to Place with
57 35 0 35
Relatives
Medical Exam since Child
57 12 10 22
Entered Foster Care
Dental Exam since Child
53 14 10 24
Entered Foster Care
Attended School During
27 8 6 14
Fiscal Year 2016
Total 251 78 26 104
DHS – Social Services Administration
Page 6

--- Page 7 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Program Monitoring (Finding 2 – cont.)
• The 26 cases for which there was no documentation of
a medical or dental exam since entering foster care
related to children who had been in foster care for 20
months to 17 years.
• Although periodic reports of services provided to
children in foster care were generated from CHESSIE,
as noted by our test, documented services were often
not recorded in CHESSIE. Consequently, these reports
could not be relied on to accurately reflect services
provided.
The lack of documentation and accurate reporting
disclosed by our review restricted SSA’s ability to
effectively monitor and ensure the delivery of required
services.
Subsequent to the completion of our field work, and
almost one year after our initial inquiries, SSA was able to
provide us with certain additional documentation that
reduced the total number of discrepancies noted in the
table from 104 to 88. This included previously missing
court orders associated with the initial placement of 9
children (“Legal Basis for Child Entering Foster Care”).
DHS – Social Services Administration
Page 7

--- Page 8 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Program Monitoring (Finding 3)
SSA did not establish procedures to ensure the LDSSs
appropriately approved family foster care providers, and
verified the continued eligibility of providers, adoptive
parents, and guardians, in accordance with State
regulations. Our testing found several instances of
required documentation, such as provider background
checks, site visits, and training that was not included in
CHESSIE.
• SSA did not periodically identify all new providers added
to CHESSIE and examine documents to confirm that all
requirements were met.
• SSA did not ensure the LDSSs conducted quarterly
visits with providers and those providers received
annual training, as required by State regulations.
• SSA did not ensure that LDSSs verified, through annual
redeterminations, the continued eligibility of providers,
adoptive parents, and guardians. Redeterminations
assess the child’s environment and the continued
eligibility of adoptive parents and guardians for payment
assistance. For 7 of 20 providers reviewed, it had been
17 to 28 months since the last redeterminations were
recorded in CHESSIE.
DHS – Social Services Administration
Page 8

--- Page 9 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Federal Funds (Finding 5)
SSA lacked adequate procedures to ensure that federal
reimbursement was received for costs incurred on behalf
of all children, in foster care or in the adoption and
guardianship assistance programs, who were eligible for
reimbursement under Title IV-E of the Social Security Act.
• Of 36 children tested for which federal funding was not
being received, 18 (50%) were either incorrectly
determined by the LDSSs to be ineligible, or incorrectly
recorded as ineligible for reimbursement in CHESSIE,
resulting in a potential loss of federal funds totaling $1
million (as of February 2017) of which $259,000 was
unrecoverable due to federal time limits. (See next
slide)
• SSA’s selected reviews of federal fund eligibility
determinations made by the LDSSs only addressed
eligible cases and excluded those deemed ineligible.
• Based on the results of our testing, a comprehensive
review of the eligibility determination for all children
deemed ineligible (approximately 7,000 as of January
2017) appears warranted.
DHS – Social Services Administration
Page 9

--- Page 10 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Federal Funds (Finding 5 - cont.)
Activity Children Findings from Test Results
Tested Tested
Initial Eligibility 25 For 14 children, SSA could not provide
Determination required eligibility determination
Test worksheets to document the initial
eligibility decision or those worksheets
lacked preparer or approval signatures.
For 9 children, either the eligibility
determination was incorrect or it was
improperly recorded, resulting in the failure
to obtain federal reimbursement totaling
$308,000 of which $73,000 was not
recoverable.
Redetermination 11 For 10 children, SSA could not provide
Test eligibility redetermination worksheets.
For 9 children, originally the services were
correctly deemed ineligible, but
subsequent changes related to the
provider resulted in their current eligibility.
Since these children were currently with
approved providers, SSA could have
requested reimbursements of $690,000
since as early as December 2010;
$186,000 of this amount was no longer
recoverable.
DHS – Social Services Administration
Page 10

--- Page 11 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Federal Funds (Finding 6)
SSA did not maximize the recovery of federal funds for 9 of
the 14 children tested who were eligible for Supplemental
Security Income (SSI).
• For 4 children eligible for both SSI and Title IV-E funding,
neither funding source was obtained.
• For 5 children, SSI recoveries were not maximized,
resulting in losses totaling $56,100.
o As of February 2017, SSI totaling $42,000 had not
been collected for 3 children since they entered foster
care, dating back to 2014.
o For 1 child, SSI was not collected until 21 months past
the date the child entered foster care, resulting in a
loss of $9,000.
o For 1 child eligible for both SSI and Title IV-E funding,
the IV-E funding was requested instead of SSI,
resulting in a loss of federal funds of $5,100.
When children are eligible for both funding sources, it is
SSA’s responsibility, in conjunction with the LDSSs, to
ensure that the maximum amount of funds is obtained as
allowed under federal guidelines.
DHS – Social Services Administration
Page 11

--- Page 12 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Child Protective Services (Finding 7)
SSA did not establish oversight procedures, including a
review of available CHESSIE reports, to ensure that the
LDSSs conducted reviews and investigations of allegations of
child abuse or neglect within timeframes established by SSA
policy and State law. According to CHESSIE reports:
• Investigations were deemed warranted for 1,176 of the
3,048 allegations received in July 2016, but 208 of those
1,176 allegations were not initially determined to be
warranted for investigation for at least 2 days, although
SSA requires a determination within 2 hours.
• 976 of the 3,498 investigations completed between May
and July 2016 were not completed within 60 days from
receipt of the related allegation as required by State law.
For 265 of the 976 cases, the reports indicated that the
investigations concluded that abuse or neglect had
occurred.
• As of August 2016, 332 allegations had been under
investigation for 60 days or more of which 23 (associated
with 12 different LDSSs) had been open for more than a
year.
DHS – Social Services Administration
Page 12

--- Page 13 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Child Protective Services (Findings 8 and 9)
 SSA did not establish oversight procedures to ensure the
LDSSs completed and approved the required formal
safety assessment and family risk assessments of
controlled substance-exposed newborns within the
required timeframes. For example, family risk
assessments were not prepared timely for 3 of the 10
cases reviewed. Further, CHESSIE reports distributed to
LDSSs by SSA were missing useful information for
monitoring assessments, such as child’s name and birth
date. During FY 2016, LDSSs were notified of 1,959
controlled substance-exposed newborns (Finding 8).
 SSA lacked adequate procedures to ensure that, as
required by State law, it immediately notified the
appropriate LDSS of children born to individuals who
previously had their parental rights terminated for abuse
or neglect. The LDSS requires notification in order to
review its records and determine whether to assess the
family situation and offer any services. According to SSA
records, from October 2015 to August 2016, there were
89 children born to such individuals and our test of 8
cases found 2 where the LDSS was not notified until we
brought the matter to SSA’s attention (9 months after
SSA became aware of the cases) (Finding 9).
DHS – Social Services Administration
Page 13

--- Page 14 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Other Findings
 SSA had not established procedures to ensure that the
children who remained in foster care, adoption, and
guardianship programs after they reached the age of 18
were eligible to do so (Finding 4).
 SSA did not ensure that overpayments made to certain
providers of child placement services were identified and
resolved in a timely manner (Finding 10).
 SSA had not established procedures to ensure that
monthly adoption assistance payments to an adoptive
parent were suspended, terminated, or, as permitted,
renegotiated with the adoptive parent if the adopted
child was subsequently moved to an out-of-home
placement, such as foster care (Finding 11).
 Ancillary expenditures, such as for specialized training
and personal care supplies, to further support children in
social services programs were not adequately controlled
(Finding 12).
DHS – Social Services Administration
Page 14

--- Page 15 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Other Findings (cont.)
 Adoption assistance rates paid by the LDSSs in excess
of the maximum permitted were not always approved by
SSA as required (Finding 13).
 SSA did not ensure that payments made to a State
university for three interagency agreements were
adequately supported, were reasonable in relation to
the tasks performed, and were made in accordance
with the terms of the agreements (Finding 14).
DHS – Social Services Administration
Page 15

--- Page 16 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Conclusions
SSA should:
• establish comprehensive quality assurance processes to
ensure that child welfare programs are effectively and
properly administered by the LDSSs and records are
properly maintained;
• establish adequate procedures to monitor and ensure:
o compliance with all critical social service program
requirements,
o maximum federal reimbursement is obtained for all
children eligible for Title IV-E funding and SSI,
o child abuse and neglect allegations and investigations
are conducted and completed timely, and
o assessments associated with controlled substance-
exposed newborns and those children born to
individuals whose parental rights have been
terminated for abuse or neglect are addressed and
completed timely; and
• ensure that all social service program payments are
proper, including the adjustment and recovery of
payments when appropriate.
DHS – Social Services Administration
Page 16