Title: Presentation to the Joint Audit Committee - Board of Liquor License Commissioners for Baltimore City (Performance)

Related Report Dated 3/28/2013
Date: 09/10/2013
Type: Presentations to the Legislature
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5a9daf2ccc9d72387404dc46
Extracted: 2025-06-18T13:49:12.773517
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Performance Audit
Board of Liquor License
Commissioners for Baltimore City
Report Dated March 28, 2013
Presentation to the Joint Audit Committee
Thomas J. Barnickel III, CPA
Timothy R. Brooks, CPA, CFE
Edward L. Shulder, CPA
September 10, 2013

--- Page 2 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Audit Overview
 Chapter 263 of the Laws of Maryland, 2011,
effective October 1, 2011, requires the Office of
Legislative Audits (OLA), at least once every 3
years, to conduct a performance audit of the
Board of Liquor License Commissioners for
Baltimore City (BLLC).
 The purpose of the audit was to evaluate the
effectiveness and efficiency of the BLLC
management practices and the economy with
which BLLC uses resources.
 The law also states that the audit focus on BLLC
operations related to licensing, inspections,
disciplinary procedures, and management
oversight.
 This represents the first OLA audit of the BLLC.
Board of Liquor License Commissioners
Page 2
for Baltimore City Performance Audit

--- Page 3 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
BLLC Overview
 BLLC’s responsibilities include
• processing applications and issuing licenses to
sell beer, wine, and liquor;
• licensing and regulating audit entertainment
businesses;
• conducting periodic inspections of businesses
licensed to sell alcoholic beverages;
• conducting disciplinary proceedings for license
violations; and
• collecting license fees and disciplinary fines.
 BLLC issued approximately 1,360 alcoholic
beverage and adult entertainment licenses as of
December 1, 2011.
 License fees range from $82.50 to $12,000
depending on the license type.
 BLLC had a full-time staff of 25 and 5 part-time
employees. For FY 2012, BLLC revenues totaled
$2.2 million and expenditures totaled $2 million.
Board of Liquor License Commissioners
Page 3
for Baltimore City Performance Audit

--- Page 4 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Audit Objectives
1. Licensing - to evaluate BLLC’s procedures over
alcoholic beverage licensing and to determine if
the licensing process complied with State law
and Board requirements.
2. Inspections - to evaluate the BLLC procedures for
performing inspections of alcoholic beverage
licensees and determine whether inspections
were performed in accordance with these
procedures and any other requirements.
3. Disciplinary Procedures - to evaluate the
disciplinary process and determine whether BLLC
complied with applicable State law, as well as
Board rules and regulations.
4. Management Oversight - to determine whether
proper oversight exists over BLLC operations.
Board of Liquor License Commissioners
Page 4
for Baltimore City Performance Audit

--- Page 5 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Audit Methodology
We conducted comprehensive reviews and tests of
numerous BLLC licensing, cash receipts and payroll
records, and automated systems. Much of this effort
was directed at developing licensing statistics (not
always readily available) and verifying the reliability of
BLLC data. Our work included
 interviewing Board commissioners, BLLC
employees, and other City and State employees;
 compiling a database, from BLLC’s paper license
files, of all activity related to licensees with 2011-
2012 licenses, including licensee information,
inspection activity, and disciplinary actions;
 performing tests using the database and BLLC’s
licensee files and automated systems; and
 surveying personnel from liquor boards in other
MD jurisdictions, employees of various related
national organizations, and other states to obtain
information on liquor board operations and to
identify any consistent best practices. None were
found.
Board of Liquor License Commissioners
Page 5
for Baltimore City Performance Audit

--- Page 6 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Key Audit Issues
 In each area of BLLC’s operations we reviewed,
comprehensive written policies and procedures
were lacking. Staff were provided with minimal
formal guidance for processing licenses, conducting
inspections of licensed facilities, and handling
disciplinary actions for instances of noncompliance
with requirements.
 BLLC lacked processes for management to
effectively oversee and determine the efficiency
and effectiveness of operations. When automated
systems existed, management did not generate
reports that could be used to monitor performance
and, for certain critical operations, no automated
system existed and no manual processes had been
developed for management reporting.
 These deficiencies were contributing factors for a
number of findings identified in the report.
Board of Liquor License Commissioners
Page 6
for Baltimore City Performance Audit

--- Page 7 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Objective 1 – Licensing
Licensing Policies
BLLC lacked formal written policies to direct staff in
processing alcoholic beverage license applications,
renewals, and transfers. Also, controls were not in
place, such as a documented supervisory review
process, to ensure licensees provided adequate
documentation and paid proper fees (Finding 1).
Licensing Documentation
BLLC frequently issued licenses without receiving all
required documents from licensees or applicants to
support the application (Finding 2). Our review of
1,360 issued licenses found missing documentation.
• Automated records did not note payment of
personal property taxes, as required by State law,
for 207 licenses, while related documentation was
missing from 534 manual files.
• BLLC’s licensing system did not record the
existence of a valid trader’s licenses for 358 cases,
as required by BLLC procedures.
Board of Liquor License Commissioners
Page 7
for Baltimore City Performance Audit

--- Page 8 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Objective 1 – Licensing (cont.)
Licensing Process:
Our test of the licensing process disclosed that
BLLC often did not comply with State law and its
own regulations (Finding 3). Our test of 30 license
files (10 new, 10 renewals, and 10 transfers)
found that only 2 met all requirements and noted
several significant documentation problems.
• For 10 new licenses reviewed, OLA noted that
for 6 the inspectors did not document their
verification of the establishment’s proximity to
schools and churches.
• For 8 of 18 new and transferred licenses tested,
BLLC staff did not document that a review of
applicants’ criminal history information had
been completed as required. (This policy did not
apply to two transfers, which were only changes
of location).
Board of Liquor License Commissioners
Page 8
for Baltimore City Performance Audit

--- Page 9 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Objective 1 – Licensing (cont.)
Licensing Fees
BLLC could not account for all fees for licenses
issued and did not always assess late fees allowed
by State law (Finding 4). For example, we could
not locate evidence of payment for 19 licenses
issued (totaling over $20,000) and that BLLC
could have assessed late fees of $86,300 for the
2011 license renewal period, but only assessed
fees totaling $23,550.
License Transfers
License transfers were often not completed within
the 180-day period as required by State law
(Finding 6). Our test of 10 transfers found that 4
were completed between 246 and 706 days after
the Board approved the transfer. However, legal
advice on this issue is unclear as to whether Board
compliance with the 180-day license transfer
period is mandatory.
Board of Liquor License Commissioners
Page 9
for Baltimore City Performance Audit

--- Page 10 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Objective 2 - Inspection s
Inspection Policies and Procedures
BLLC lacked comprehensive written policies and
procedures to govern the inspection process (Finding
8).
• Existing procedures did not detail the process to
be used to conduct inspections and the specific
criteria for evaluating each area covered during
an inspection. Staff advised OLA that they apply
common sense and their own criteria to assess
licensee compliance during an inspection.
• There was no written requirement to specify the
frequency for conducting inspections of
licensees. Our review of inspections performed
over a 12-month period found that 202 licensees
had not been inspected, while 15 had been
inspected 10 or more times.
Board of Liquor License Commissioners
Page 10
for Baltimore City Performance Audit

--- Page 11 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Objective 2 – Inspectio n s (cont.)
Monitoring of Inspectors
BLLC lacked a method to monitor inspections
performed, including the completion of the mandatory
number of inspections by each inspector (Finding 9).
For example, guidelines required each full-time
inspector to perform 4 routine inspections daily;
however, none of the 12 full-time inspectors met this
requirement for the same 12 month period – the
percentage of days the inspection requirement was
not met for all inspectors was 83%.
Inspector Workloads
BLLC had not assessed workload requirements or
actual staffing needs and OLA concluded that the
number of full-time inspectors appeared excessive
based on BLLC’s workload (Finding 10) . Based on 4
inspections per day, OLA estimated an annual
workload of 872 inspections per inspector and found
that the percentage of estimated annual workload not
completed by the 12 inspectors ranged from 41% to
95% (for an average of 64%).
Board of Liquor License Commissioners
Page 11
for Baltimore City Performance Audit

--- Page 12 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Objective 2 – Inspectio n s (cont.)
Part-time Inspectors
BLLC did not properly monitor its part-time inspectors
(Finding 11). State law states that BLLC shall employ
part-time inspectors. Although the related
employment contract required each inspector to
complete 20 inspections per month, this was not
monitored. For example, the 2 part-time inspectors
who worked all year, together only completed 56% of
the required annual inspections, but were paid the full
contracted amount.
Monitoring by Inspection Supervisors
The 2 inspection supervisors did not document duties
performed and did not account for the work
performed by inspectors (Finding 12). Supervisors did
not document the performance of required duties,
including training, supervising, and evaluating
inspectors, and ensuring the timely completion of
investigations. For example, inspectors provided OLA
with 449 Inspector’s Reports dated from 11/30/07 to
4/11/12 that had not been filed as of 4/20/12.
Board of Liquor License Commissioners
Page 12
for Baltimore City Performance Audit

--- Page 13 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Objective 2 – Inspectio n s (cont.)
311 System Complaints
BLLC routinely either did not follow-up timely on
public complaints, as reported through Baltimore
City’s 311 Complaint System, or failed to document
the resulting investigations and resolutions.
 BLLC lacked written policies for processing and
documenting investigations and resolutions of
311 complaints (Finding 14). The two BLLC
complaint investigators were not required to
document the results of their investigations. Also,
BLLC closed cases in the 311 System prior to
investigating the complaint.
 Our test of complaints found that complaints were
often not investigated timely, complaint resolution
in the System did not agree to investigation
documents, and BLLC routinely lacked
documentation that it referred complaints to other
agencies (e.g., Baltimore City Police Department)
as indicated in the records (Finding 15).
Board of Liquor License Commissioners
Page 13
for Baltimore City Performance Audit

--- Page 14 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Objective 3 – Disciplina ry Procedures
Board Hearings
BLLC had adopted alternatives to the formal Board
hearing process to address licensee violations and
infractions. These alternative processes were not
approved by the Board, open to the public, or
specifically addressed in State law (Finding 17). For
example, BLLC allowed licensees to pay a fine in lieu
of a Board hearing for certain violations that were a
first offense (including sales to minors).
Policies and Procedures
BLLC lacked written policies and procedures for the
disciplinary process (Finding 18). For example,
written guidance for deciding which violations should
be adjudicated by the Board was not established.
OLA’s review of 408 documented violations from
inspection reports noted 149 violations for which
BLLC did not initiate disciplinary actions and
therefore were not referred to the Board, even
though the issues were the same as other violations
that did result in a hearing (e.g., an expired license).
Board of Liquor License Commissioners
Page 14
for Baltimore City Performance Audit

--- Page 15 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Objective 4 - Managem e nt Oversight
Management Practices
BLLC management had not established sufficient
practices and procedures to oversee and assess the
effectiveness and efficiency of its operations
(Finding 21). For example, BLLC
• did not routinely generate reports from automated
systems, and
• used a number of manual processes without
developing the necessary monitoring tools or when
tools were available they were not used. For
example, the inspectors’ Daily Summary Reports of
inspection activity were not reviewed by
supervisors or upper management.
Financial Disclosure Forms
Board Commissioners and BLLC staff did not file
annual financial disclosure forms as required by
Baltimore City Code. For example, 16 of 29
employees tested for filing the CY 2010 form had not
filed the document as of 12/2/11 (Finding 22).
Board of Liquor License Commissioners
Page 15
for Baltimore City Performance Audit

--- Page 16 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Objective 4 - Managem e nt Oversight (cont.)
Employee Performance Evaluations
BLLC did not routinely perform formal evaluations of
employee performance, as required (Finding 23).
Nineteen of 27 employees tested had no record of
ever receiving a written performance appraisal.
Eleven of these employees had been with BLLC since
at least 1999. According to State law, BLLC
employees are part of the City’s classified civil service
and City policy requires annual evaluations.
Payroll Processing
Internal controls over payroll, totaling $1.8 million
during FY 2012, were inadequate (Finding 24).
• Three management employees did not record their
time worked.
• Certain employees had inappropriate access to the
automated system used to process payroll.
• Employee sign-in and sign-out entries on
documents used to support payroll entries did not
correspond with our on-site observations.
Board of Liquor License Commissioners
Page 16
for Baltimore City Performance Audit

--- Page 17 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Conclusions
 BLLC needs to develop and implement written
guidance, including formal Board policy and
internal regulations/procedures/controls, to
govern all facets of its operations.
 BLLC should work to develop and implement
technologies to better allow it to perform its
routine duties, manage operations, and
measure performance.
 BLLC needs to ensure that adequate and
appropriate documentation is established and
retained of its staffs’ actions and
performance to support the results of BLLC’s
operations and compliance with State and
City laws and Board policy.
Board of Liquor License Commissioners
Page 17
for Baltimore City Performance Audit