Title: Presentation to the Joint Audit Committee - Department of Health and Mental Hygiene - Developmental Disabilities Administration

Related Report Dated 10/2/2013
Date: 11/19/2013
Type: Presentations to the Legislature
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5a9daf2ccc9d72387404dc3b
Extracted: 2025-06-18T13:47:33.253469
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Department of Health and Mental
Hygiene – Developmental Disabilities
Administration (DDA)
Report Dated October 2, 2013
Presentation to the Joint Audit Committee
Thomas J. Barnickel III, CPA
Joshua S. Adler, CPA, CFE
James M. Fowler
November 19, 2013

--- Page 2 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Audit Overview
 DDA plans, develops policies and regulations, and
funds a Statewide system of services for
individuals with developmental disabilities and
their families.
 Through private contractors, DDA funds services
to the developmentally disabled, with various
community-based programs that include
community residential services, day habilitation
services, and vocational training.
 In FY 2012, DDA served over 24,000 individuals
with developmental disabilities and its
expenditures totaled $805.5 million, consisting of
$445 million in general funds, $360 million in
federal funds (primarily Medicaid
reimbursements), and $500,000 in special funds.
 The report included 13 findings, 7 of which were
repeated from the preceding audit report and
appear as 6 findings in this report.
DDA - Developmental Disabilities Administration
Page 2

--- Page 3 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Audit Overview (cont’d)
 OLA determined that DDA’s accountability and
compliance level was unsatisfactory, in
accordance with the rating system OLA
established in conformity with State law. The
primary factors contributing to the unsatisfactory
rating were the significance of the audit findings
and the number of repeat findings (Findings 1, 3,
4, 5, 12, and 13 are repeated from the last
audit).
 DDA has a federal liability of approximately $20.6
million. The liability amount is related to DDA
federal reimbursement overbillings for certain
residential service costs, as calculated by a
federal audit covering the period from July 2009
through June 2012. In May 2012, prior to the
completion of the federal audit, DDA
implemented appropriate billing changes.
DDA - Developmental Disabilities Administration
Page 3

--- Page 4 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Key Audit Issues
 Service coordinators were not monitored to ensure
that DDA consumers received services in
accordance with their individual service plans.
 DDA missed opportunities to maximize federal fund
recoveries:
 Methodology for determining certain federal
reimbursement rates did not accurately reflect
incurred costs.
 Certain provider claims were not obtained and
submitted for processing (and subsequent
reimbursement).
 Claims rejected due to eligibility edits were not
investigated.
 Certain federal fund reimbursement requests
were untimely.
 Year-end provider payment reconciliations were not
performed timely and overpayments were not
promptly recovered.
DDA - Developmental Disabilities Administration
Page 4

--- Page 5 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Consumers’ Services
DDA did not have procedures to verify that
consumers received services from providers as
stipulated in annual service plans (Finding 1).
• DDA had contracts with 15 vendors, referred to
as resource/service coordinators (RSC),
responsible for monitoring 24,092 consumers
with service expenditures totaling $759 million
in FY 2012.
• DDA did not obtain reports of the RSCs’
monitoring efforts and did not directly review
RSC records to ensure the delivery of service to
consumers. OLA’s test of 16 consumers
monitored by 2 RSCs in 2011 found for 5
consumers that the records lacked sufficient
evidence that the RSC verified the delivery of all
required services.
DDA - Developmental Disabilities Administration
Page 5

--- Page 6 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Federal Funds
DDA’s methodology for determining federal
reimbursement rates for contractual payment system
expenditures did not accurately reflect the costs
incurred (Finding 2).
• DDA’s reimbursable costs for the Individual Support
Services (ISS) program exceeded its
reimbursements by $2.4 million in FYs 2011 and
2012. DDA’s federal billing rates were understated
because the annual rates were based on prior year
costs without adjustment for actual costs, which
historically rise every year. DDA also included all
consumers in the cost calculation rather than just
Medicaid-eligible consumers.
• DDA could not provide documentation supporting
its ISS rate calculations and substantiating that
the calculations had been reviewed by supervisors.
• ISS program expenditures totaled $109 million
during FYs 2010 through 2012.
DDA - Developmental Disabilities Administration
Page 6

--- Page 7 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Federal Funds (cont’d)
DDA did not have adequate procedures in place to
ensure that providers submitted all ISS expenditure
claims for federal reimbursement (Finding 3).
• DDA prepays ISS providers and requires them to
submit claims for actual services rendered for
federal billing purposes.
• OLA’s review of ISS provider prepayments and
federal reimbursements for FYs 2010 through
2012 found that claim documentation for $10.4
million of the $32.8 million prepayments were not
submitted by providers. Consequently, DDA may
have lost the opportunity to claim as much as
$5.2 million in federal funds (50 percent of the
$10.4 million).
DDA - Developmental Disabilities Administration
Page 7

--- Page 8 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Federal Funds (cont’d)
Federal fund reimbursement requests were not
always timely, resulting in lost investment income of
$262,000 during the period from July 2009 through
February 2012 (Finding 4).
OLA’s test of $789 million in requests found that
$89 million were submitted from 1 to 19 months
after the claims could have been submitted.
DDA - Developmental Disabilities Administration
Page 8

--- Page 9 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Federal Funds (cont’d)
DDA did not investigate federal fund reimbursement
claims that were rejected by automated DHMH
Medicaid eligibility edits. Claims could be rejected for
various reasons, such as consumer or provider not
eligible on the date of service (Finding 5).
OLA’s review of almost 50 percent of the 36,194
claims rejected in FY 2011-12 found:
• One provider was responsible for 8,587 rejected
claims totaling $536,000 during a 23-day period
in November 2010, due to temporarily losing
Medicaid eligibility. Upon OLA bringing this matter
to DDA’s attention, the claims were resubmitted
and DDA received reimbursement.
• 8,740 claims, for $284,000, were erroneously
rejected as conflicting with other claims. In 2010
DDA noted the error and while correcting the edit,
did not resubmit the claims. When discovered, the
period for reimbursement eligibility had past.
DDA - Developmental Disabilities Administration
Page 9

--- Page 10 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Contribution to Care
DDA did not ensure the accuracy of consumers’
contribution to care (CTC) recorded by providers in its
computer system (PCIS2). Certain consumers
receiving residential services are required to make
financial contributions for the cost of their care. CTC
reduces DDA’s provider payments (Finding 6).
• Although DHMH calculates the CTC during the
consumer’s eligibility determination process,
providers were permitted to record CTC into PCIS2
without any DDA verification. CTC amounts (e.g.,
Social Security payments) are received directly by
the providers.
• OLA’s comparison of DHMH calculated CTC to
provider recorded CTC in PCIS2 from January 2009
to February 2012 found that DHMH had calculated
an additional $4.8 million CTC. Consequently, DDA
could have been paying providers more than it is
responsible for.
DDA - Developmental Disabilities Administration
Page 10

--- Page 11 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Alcohol Tax Funds
DDA allowed the use of funds derived from an
additional tax on alcoholic beverages for purposes
that were not specified in its policies (Finding 7).
• DDA received a $15 million supplemental
appropriation in FY 12 funded by an alcohol
beverage tax to address DDA’s consumer waiting
list. A portion of these funds were allocated for
services of short duration (SSD). SSDs were to be
simple and meaningful and prevent an immediate
or future crisis.
• DDA SSD policies specifically allowed vehicle
adaptations, but not vehicle purchases. DDA
authorized the purchase of 23 vehicles costing
$610,000 for consumers.
• In FY 2012 SSD expenditures totaled $10.9 million
for 1,100 consumers. The SSD program was
discontinued in FY 2013.
DDA - Developmental Disabilities Administration
Page 11

--- Page 12 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Provider Payment Reco nciliations
DDA did not ensure that annual reports from Fee
Payment System providers were submitted within 6
months of FYE and contained certain information
needed to determine any underpayments or
overpayments to providers based on actual services
(Finding 8).
• As of May 2012, 17 reports due for 2010 or 2011
had not been submitted for providers that
received payments of $9.8 million and DDA had
only followed up with one provider.
• Certified attendance reports prepared by certain
provider auditors stated the attendance data
reported by providers were accurate, but the
auditors’ reports did not include the number of
days.
• Payment reconciliations for certain providers were
not performed within one year of their report
submissions.
DDA - Developmental Disabilities Administration
Page 12

--- Page 13 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Other Issues
 Accounts receivable processes did not ensure that
all funds owed DDA were recovered.
 Certain local jurisdictions were not billed $1.4
million for their share of day habilitation and
vocational services charges, as required by law
(Finding 9).
 DDA did not recoup at least $390,000 in
overpayments identified by routine audits of
provider records (Finding 10).
 DDA did not maintain documentation to support
journal entries that adjusted expenditures recorded
on the State’s accounting records (Finding 11).
 Proper security access controls over critical PCIS2
data (including sensitive consumer information)
had not been established. For example, terminated
employees’ access was not always immediately
deactivated, as required, and provider employees
had been granted unnecessary access capabilities
to modify critical consumer data (Finding 12).
DDA - Developmental Disabilities Administration
Page 13

--- Page 14 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Conclusions
DDA needs to:
 monitor RSC to ensure all required duties are
performed timely and documented.
 maximize the recovery of federal funds by revising
its reimbursement methodology as practicable to
better reflect actual costs, ensuring provider
claims and reimbursement requests are
submitted timely, and promptly investigate and
resubmit rejected claims.
 ensure the accuracy of CTC amounts recorded in
its payment system.
 ensure that funds are used for purposes specified.
 ensure the timely submission and review of
annual provider reports.
 implement appropriate control processes over
accounts receivable, journal entries, and IT.
DDA - Developmental Disabilities Administration
Page 14