Title: Presentation to the Joint Audit Committee - Update on the Board of Liquor License Commissioners for Baltimore City Corrective Action Plan

Related Report Dated 3/28/2013
Date: 11/19/2013
Type: Presentations to the Legislature
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5a9daf2ccc9d72387404dc3f
Extracted: 2025-06-18T13:48:15.034751
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Update on the Board of Liquor License Commissioners (BLLC) for Baltimore
City Corrective Action Plan
Presented by
Thomas J. Barnickel III, Legislative Auditor
November 19, 2013
During the September 10, 2013 Joint Audit Committee meeting, the Office of
Legislative Audits was asked to review the BLLC’s Corrective Action Plan (CAP)
and determine whether the intended actions address our March 2013 report.
We have reviewed the plan and have concluded that the actions specified in
the plan address the report recommendations. The implementation timelines
for most recommendations, particularly those relating to establishing policies
for licensing and inspections activities, have target dates of April 2014 – June
2014.
We recently met with Mr. Paige, BLLC’s Acting Executive Secretary, and have
concluded that some progress has been made. For example, certain interim
processes have been implemented to provide some management oversight of
the licensing, inspection and complaint investigation processes.
However, BLLC’s efforts to meet the CAP target dates may be hindered by
vacancies at the management level. Mr. Paige is effectively the only
management employee at BLLC. The necessity of addressing daily operational
matters has diverted attention away from drafting and finalizing standard
operating procedures, and establishing appropriate oversight functions.
It is our understanding that the hiring an Executive Secretary and other
management positions is a priority and that Baltimore City government is
assisting in several ways, such as developing an information system for the
inspection process.
In summary, while some actions have been taken, significant work remains.
The CAP implementation dates may not be realistic due to management
vacancies. The Committee has requested that BLLC provide an update on its
progress by January 1, 2014, which would give the Committee the opportunity
to evaluate any additional actions it may wish to take.