Title: Presentation to the Senate Education, Health, and Environmental Affairs Committee and the House Ways and Means Committee - State Board of Elections

Related Report Dated 4/24/2017
Date: 09/06/2017
Type: Presentations to the Legislature
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5a9daf31cc9d72387404dd15
Extracted: 2025-06-20T00:02:56.869026
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
State Board of Elections
(SBE)
Report dated April 24, 2017
Presentation to
Senate Education, Health, and Environmental
Affairs Committee and
House Ways and Means Committee
Stephen P. Jersey, CPA, CISA
Adam J. Westover, CPA
September 6, 2017

--- Page 2 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Report Overview
The audit report contained 8 findings, including 5
Information Systems related findings, which are the
subject of this presentation.
Key Information Systems Related Findings
 SBE did not ensure the accuracy of data recorded in
the Statewide voter registration system
(MDVOTERS) or whether related user access was
appropriate.
 SBE did not ensure that the third party who received
personally identifiable information (PII) from
MDVOTERS was properly securing PII.
 SBE unnecessarily retained PII within the
MDVOTERS database.
 Certain voters who requested absentee ballots were
not adequately authenticated.
 A critical voting system was not backed up offsite
and was not properly addressed in the SBE Disaster
Recovery Plan.
State Board of Elections
Page 2

--- Page 3 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Statewide Voter Registration (Finding 1)
SBE did not have a comprehensive oversight process
in place to ensure the accuracy of the data recorded
in the Statewide voter registration system
(MDVOTERS) and the appropriateness of related user
access to the system.
 SBE did not verify that local boards of election
(LBE) properly investigated individuals appearing
on periodic reports of possible ineligible voters and
took appropriate corrective action. For example,
the January 2016 report included 5,871 voters
registered in Maryland who may be deceased.
 SBE did not conduct any reviews of the propriety of
user access granted to MDVOTERS by LBEs or
verify that LBEs actually reviewed their personnel’s
user access. For example, OLA identified 619
usernames with access to MDVOTERS with no
access activity for 6 months and 24 users with
critical administrative rights, which had not been
used for over a year.
State Board of Elections
Page 3

--- Page 4 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Statewide Voter Registration (Finding 2)
SBE did not ensure the personally identifiable
information (PII) from MDVOTERS provided to and in
the custody of a third party entity was safeguarded.
 Under a multi-state compact, SBE provides
certain Maryland voter registration information,
including name, date of birth, drivers license
number and last four digits of the social security
number (SSN), to the nonprofit Electronic
Registration Information Center (ERIC) for the
identification of potential ineligible voters.
 State law defines name and a drivers license
number as PII, which is commonly sought by
criminals for use in identify theft.
 ERIC uses a third-party contractor to store and
process the SBE-submitted information.
 SBE did not require independent reviews be
performed of ERIC or its contractor to ensure the
Maryland voter data provided to these parties
was securely maintained.
State Board of Elections
Page 4

--- Page 5 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Statewide Voter Registration (Finding 3)
SBE unnecessarily retained certain PII within its
MDVOTERS database.
 MDVOTERS contained names and the full SSNs
for 592,236 out of 4,100,000 voters even
though the full SSN was not necessary for voter
registration purposes.
 There are several methods for Maryland citizens
to register to vote, including the use of a hard
copy voter registration form, which requires that
voters provide a Maryland driver’s license
number or Maryland Motor Vehicle Administration
issued ID number, or the last four digits of their
SSN.
 SBE advised that some voters using the hard
copy form provided their full SSN to SBE, which
was recorded in MDVOTERS even though it was
not required or necessary.
State Board of Elections
Page 5

--- Page 6 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Absentee Ballots (Finding 4)
SBE did not adequately authenticate certain voters
who requested absentee ballots during primary and
general elections.
 Certain voters were only required to authenticate
themselves by providing information (first and
last name, date of birth, and address) that is
publicly available.
 For those voters SBE lacked assurance that the
person requesting the absentee ballot, and
completing and submitting the absentee ballot, is
the registered voter that they purported to be.
 Therefore, the risk exists that an individual or
group could submit fraudulent absentee ballots
in an attempt to influence election results.
State Board of Elections
Page 6

--- Page 7 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
File Backup and Disaster Recovery (Finding 5)
The Electronic Pollbook Interchange and Conversion
(EPIC) system was not backed up offsite when in use
during voting periods and was not properly addressed
in the SBE Disaster Recovery Plan (DRP).
 Although the EPIC database was backed up to a
server that resided at the same location as the
server hosting the production EPIC database, it
was not backed up offsite.
 We also noted that the SBE DRP did not
specifically identify how the communication link
between the facility hosting the EPIC production
server and the early voting sites could be readily
re-created in the event of a disaster at the hosting
facility
 The EPIC system is used to identify citizens who
have voted in a particular election (including early
voting) and is also used for the same-day voter
registration process during early voting.
State Board of Elections
Page 7

--- Page 8 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Conclusion
SBE should
• ensure reports of potential ineligible voters are
investigated and appropriate action is taken,
• require periodic independent reviews (such as
AICPA recommended SOC 2 Type 2 reviews) for
ERIC and contractors that host PPI and perform
timely reviews of the related reports to ensure any
weaknesses noted are corrected,
• amend MDVOTERS to only accept the last four
SSN digits and remove all full SSNs currently in
MDVOTERS (retaining the last four digits),
• strengthen the authentication process for voters
requesting absentee ballots by requiring non-
public information and validating this information,
and
• backup the EPIC database on a daily basis to an
offsite location and update its DRP to properly
address the EPIC server and its communications
with SBE early voting sites.
State Board of Elections
Page 8