Title: Presentation to the Joint Audit Committee - Fraud Hotline Activity - OLA Results from Pursuing Allegations


The reports referenced in this presentation are listed below.

Department of Transportation - State Highway Administration - Construction Inspection Services Contracts (11/21/2011)

Department of the Environment (11/21/2011)

Department of Transportation - State Highway Administration - Possible Conflicts of Interest Involving Certain Construction-Related Contracts (6/24/2011)

Department of Natural Resources (4/1/2011)
Date: 12/31/2011
Type: Presentations to the Legislature
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5a9daf2bcc9d72387404dbc7
Extracted: 2025-06-18T13:36:43.688695
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Fraud Hotline Activity
OLA Results from Pursuing
Allegations
Presentation to
Maryland General Assembly
Joint Audit Committee
Brian S. Tanen, CPA, CFE
Nicholas L. Marrocco, CPA, CFE, CFF
December 13, 2011

--- Page 2 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Hotline History
 August 2002 – JAC instructed OLA to
implement a hotline and web referral
process for the reporting of allegations
of fraud, waste, and abuse in State
government operations.
 February 2003 – OLA’s hotline and web
referral process were launched with an
expected call volume of 200 calls per
year.
Fraud Hotline Activity
Page 2

--- Page 3 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Hotline Marketing
OLA’s hotline and web
referral process are
marketed to State
employees through a variety
of methods including:
 Fraud Posters in State
Offices
 Biennial message on
State employee payroll
notices
 Annual email reminders
to State employees
Fraud Hotline Activity
Page 3

--- Page 4 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Hotline Activity
Call Volume
(Calendar Year Basis)
Volume has consistently exceeded expectations
Fraud Hotline Activity
Page 4

--- Page 5 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Hotline Operations
 Allegations are received by phone, web referral,
mail, and from OLA staff auditors in the field.
 Callers are assured that the information
provided is considered confidential and are
provided with information about the State’s
“whistleblower” laws, if reassurance is needed.
 Audit professionals (certified fraud examiners)
handle calls during business hours in
accordance with established procedures.
 All allegations are assessed for credibility and
due diligence is performed before field
investigations are initiated.
 Allegations are either investigated by OLA,
referred to the applicable State agencies, or not
pursued.
Fraud Hotline Activity
Page 5

--- Page 6 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Hotline Allegation Dispos ition
Hotline Allegation Disposition
(February 2003 through September 2011)
Investigations in Process or
22%
Completed by OLA
Referred to Future OLA Audit or
2%
Investigation
Referred to State Agencies 42%
Not Pursued 34%
Fraud Hotline Activity
Page 6

--- Page 7 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Allegation Findings
OLA will highlight the following report findings
related to fraud, waste and abuse allegations:
 State Highway Administration – Special Review
(Report Dated June 24, 2011) - Possible conflict
of interest and questionable procurement
practices
 State Highway Administration – Special Review
(Report Dated November 21, 2011) – Improper
use of contract funds
 Department of Natural Resources (Report dated
April 1, 2011) – Questionable corporate
purchasing card activity
 Department of Environment (Report Dated
November 21, 2011) – Questionable
procurement activity
Fraud Hotline Activity
Page 7

--- Page 8 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
State Highway Administr a tion (June 24, 2011)
Original Hotline Allegation:
Possible conflict of interest between SHA management
employees and architectural and engineering firms.
Key Findings:
 A senior SHA management employee in SHA’s Office of
Construction (OOC) appeared to have solicited funds from
firms doing, or seeking to do, business with SHA potentially
violating State Ethics Laws, a Governor’s Executive Order, and
SHA policies. The employee’s business interest was not
always disclosed on the annual Financial Disclosure
Statements filed with the State Ethics Commission.(Finding 1)
 A former senior SHA management employee started working
for a firm doing construction management and inspection
services for SHA within 12 days of retiring from SHA in
December 2008. The employee was directly involved in SHA’s
procurement of the firm’s contract and subsequently was
directly involved in this contract as an executive of the firm.
(Finding 2)
 SHA employees were routinely hired by firms doing business
with SHA but no attempts were made to identify these
employees and/or to ensure that their employment was not
violating State Ethics Laws and SHA policies.(Finding 3)
Fraud Hotline Activity
Page 8

--- Page 9 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
State Highway Administr a tion (June 24, 2011)
Key Findings: (continued)
 Our review of the procurement and related payments for
two $16 million contracts involving the aforementioned
employees and firms disclosed several deficiencies
including:
 The failure to perform a complete rating of the
technical proposals and adequately document certain
key components of the rating process (Finding 4)
 Independent contract approval process was
compromised (Finding 4)
 SHA, in conjunction with the firms, redirected contract
funds from the two aforementioned contracts for
unrelated projects, and/or to conceal overspending on
other contracts, thereby circumventing Board of Public
Works oversight and approval. (Finding 5)
Disposition:
 OLA referred this case to the Office of Attorney General’s
Criminal Division and to the State Ethics Commission
 Expanded review performed of construction inspection
services contracts (Special Review dated November 21,
2011)
Fraud Hotline Activity
Page 9

--- Page 10 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
State Highway Administr a tion (November 21, 2011)
Background:
We performed an expanded review of construction inspection
services contracts processed by the Office of Construction due
to concerns identified in our June 2011 Special Report. We
reviewed invoices totaling $70 million from 16 contracts
involving 12 firms for the period from 1/1/08 to 4/4/11.
Key Findings:
 SHA and 10 architectural and engineering firms arranged
to use unexpended balances of contracts, totaling $11.3
million, to pay for work that was outside the scope of those
contracts without obtaining required Board of Public Works
(BPW) approval. These arrangements are indicative of a
less than arm’s-length relationship that, in turn, could raise
questions regarding the integrity of the procurement and
payment process for subsequent contracts involving these
firms. (Finding 1)
 SHA did not issue written task orders to formally assign
work and to manage construction inspection services
contracts awarded to the firms. As a result, SHA could not
effectively monitor services provided by firms, as well as
the related charges billed by the firms. (Finding 2)
Fraud Hotline Activity
Page 10

--- Page 11 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
State Highway Administr a tion (November 21, 2011)
Key Findings: (continued)
 During the period from September 2008 through August
2009, SHA improperly extended the contract expiration
dates for all nine construction inspection services contracts
reviewed that had expired, allowing SHA to retain
approximately $26 million in unspent contract funds. SHA
extended the related contract periods for certain of these
contracts a total of 19 times—resulting in extensions of
each for two or more additional years—without BPW
approval. (Finding 3)
 Our test of four contract awards totaling $34 million and
approved by the BPW, disclosed that SHA could not
adequately support the amount of funds that had been
requested. Furthermore, our review of supporting
documents disclosed no consistent, discernible basis for
estimating construction inspection contract values. The
percentage of construction inspection contract values to
related construction costs ranged from 3 to 27 percent
based on original estimates and ranged from 5 to 11
percent based on subsequent support. (Finding 4)
Fraud Hotline Activity
Page 11

--- Page 12 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
State Highway Administr a tion (November 21, 2011)
Key Findings: (continued)
 SHA procured new construction inspection contracts even
though unspent funds remained on existing contracts. For
example, in November 2009 SHA requested and received
BPW approval for a $10 million contract when there was
$36.5 million in contract funds remaining in other
contracts in this district (See table below). Furthermore, as
previously noted in Finding 3, during this same period, SHA
was entering into agreements with firms to extend the
contract terms to retain unspent funds. (Finding 5)
Construction Inspection Contracts for One District
Remaining Balance of Earlier Contracts as
BPW Contract
Contract of
Approval Amount
10/15/08 12/17/08 11/18/09
1 06/21/06 $ 8,000,000 $ 4,440,276 $ 4,067,744 $ 1,734,312
2 07/26/06 $ 8,000,000 $ 5,185,068 $ 4,515,665 $ 2,665,936
3 10/18/06 $ 8,000,000 $ 5,810,564 $ 5,464,158 $ 3,362,342
4 10/15/08 $ 16,000,000 - $ 16,000,000 $ 12,957,848
5 12/17/08 $ 16,000,000 - - $ 15,741,364
6 11/18/09 $ 10,000,000 - - -
Total $ 66,000,000 $15,435,908 $ 30,047,567 $ 36,461,802
Fraud Hotline Activity
Page 12

--- Page 13 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Department of Natural R e sources (April 1, 2011)
Corporate Purchasing Card Activity (Finding 2 – Exhibit 1)
 Purchases made by one employee using both the
corporate purchasing card and invoice payment
transmittal process were not always thoroughly
reviewed by supervisory personnel, resulting in
potential fraudulent transactions by this employee.
 In January 2010 the Comptroller of Maryland
questioned a CPC purchase by this employee. DNR
initiated an investigation and identified other
questionable purchases by this employee and referred
the matter to OLA and the OAG.
 With the concurrence of the OAG we expanded the
investigation and found a pattern of questionable
purchases made by this employee via both the CPC
and transmittal process.
 We identified over $71,000 in questionable purchases,
many of which were delivered to the employee’s home
address.
 According to the OAG website, the employee has been
indicted on one count of Felony Theft Scheme by a
Grand Jury.
Fraud Hotline Activity
Page 13

--- Page 14 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Department of the Enviro nment (November 21, 2011)
Bay Restoration - Septic System Upgrades (Finding 6– Exhibit 2)
 The pattern of bidding between two contractors involved in
57 septic system projects totaling $1.1 million was
questionable, with the average grant award for these
projects being $7,000 higher than the statewide average.
 For 50 of the projects, these two contractors were the only
bidders and there appeared to be a pattern of alternating
low bids between the contractors.
 A review of the bid documentation for 19 projects disclosed
a consistency between the winning bid costs regardless of
the contractor performing the work. The average costs when
each contractor was the lowest bidder was $20,800 and
$20,200, respectively.
 Two of these projects (totaling $38,800) were for each
contractor’s residence, with the homeowner winning the bid.
 For 23 projects totaling $452,600, the bid documentation
submitted was not always complete or proper. For example,
bids were not always appear unique to the specific project or
was missing critical information (such as, bid date, property
address, name of applicant).
Fraud Hotline Activity
Page 14

--- Page 15 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Conclusion
Efforts Devoted to OLA’s Hotline Have Been
Worthwhile
 Significant efforts have been made to build
awareness of the hotline.
 Hotline activity has continued to exceed initial
expectations.
 OLA continues to identify and report on
significant findings, in both fiscal compliance
audit reports and reports of special reviews
based on hotline allegations.
Fraud Hotline Activity
Page 15

--- Page 16 ---
Exhibit 1
Fraud Hotline Activity – December 13, 2011
Excerpts from the Department of Natural Resources Report
Dated April 1, 2011
Office of Legislative Audits Finding
Questionable Purchases
Finding 2
Purchases made by one employee through the use of corporate purchasing cards and the
invoice payment transmittal process were not always thoroughly reviewed by supervisory
personnel, resulting in potential fraudulent transactions by this employee.
Analysis
Purchases made by one employee through the use of corporate purchasing cards (CPC) and the
invoice payment transmittal process were not always thoroughly reviewed by supervisory
personnel. The supervisory review of CPC purchases made by this employee was deficient and
not conducted in accordance with the Comptroller of Maryland’s Corporate Purchasing Card
Program Policy and Procedures Manual. Even though a supervisor approved the related
activity, the monthly cardholder activity logs did not include all of the purchases listed on the
related bank statement and purchases were not always supported by vendor invoices.
Furthermore, in some instances, the aforementioned cardholder making the purchases also signed
the log as one of the approvers. The lack of a thorough supervisory review and the lack of
supporting documentation allowed significant potentially fraudulent transactions by this
employee without detection by DNR. In addition, this employee also initiated and approved the
payment request forms for purchases made through the invoice payment transmittal process,
resulting in other questionable transactions.
In January 2010, the Comptroller of Maryland – General Accounting Division, based on its own
monitoring of CPC activity, contacted DNR regarding a questionable corporate purchasing card
purchase totaling $720 made in December 2009. DNR initiated an investigation of this CPC
transaction and expanded it to other selected questionable purchases made with the same card
and other purchases made by the cardholder through the invoice payment transmittal process. As
a result of this investigation, DNR identified a number of questionable purchases made by the
employee and referred the matter to the Office of the Attorney General – Criminal Division for
further investigation.
Page 1 of 3

--- Page 17 ---
During the course of our audit, we expanded on the previous DNR investigation, with the
concurrence of the Criminal Division, and found a pattern of questionable purchases made by
this cardholder via both the CPC and transmittal process. We identified over $71,000 in
questionable purchases, many of which were delivered to the employee’s home address. In
many instances, the cardholder made purchases on-line and then prepared an invoice to serve as
documentation of the purchase, often using a common product description that misrepresented
what was actually purchased. For example, although the invoices may have indicated the
purchase of certain office supplies, the actual items purchased included computer games and
equipment, clothing, and numerous gift cards. In addition, due to the volume of activity in some
months exceeding the employee’s card limit, the employee used the CPC assigned to another
DNR employee (with that employee’s consent) to make additional questionable purchases. DNR
terminated this individual’s employment in March 2010.
The Comptroller of Maryland’s Corporate Purchasing Card Program Policy and Procedures
Manual requires each cardholder’s immediate manager to approve monthly charges, including
determining whether the transactions were appropriate. According to the bank’s records, as of
December 3, 2010, DNR had 912 active CPCs and the related expenditures totaled
approximately $9 million during fiscal year 2010.
Recommendation 2
We recommend that DNR
a. reiterate to all employees that all CPC activity is required to be thoroughly reviewed by
a supervisor, who must ensure that the monthly cardholder activity logs include all of
the purchases listed on the related bank statement, and ensure that all purchases are
supported by vendor invoices and approved;
b. ensure that all purchases made through the invoice payment transmittal process are
reviewed and approved by supervisory personnel; and
c. continue to work in conjunction with the Office of the Attorney General to investigate
and resolve the aforementioned alleged fraudulent activity.
Page 2 of 3

--- Page 18 ---
Response from the Department of Natural Resources
Questionable Purchases
Finding 2
Purchases made by one employee through the use of corporate purchasing cards and the invoice
payment transmittal process were not always thoroughly reviewed by supervisory personnel,
resulting in potential fraudulent transactions by this employee.
Recommendation 2
We recommend that DNR
a) reiterate to all employees that all CPC activity is required to be thoroughly reviewed by a
supervisor, who must ensure that the monthly cardholder activity logs include all of the
purchases listed on the related bank statement, and ensure that all purchases are supported by
vendor invoices and approved;
b) ensure that all purchases made through the invoice payment transmittal process are reviewed
and approved by supervisory personnel; and
c) continue to work in conjunction with the Office of the Attorney General to investigate and
resolve the aforementioned alleged fraudulent activity.
Department Response:
The Department agrees with the finding and related recommendations. The current DNR
protocol and Comptroller guidelines require supervisory review of all CPC purchases;
appropriate documentation and reconciliation of all purchases, and additional review by a unit
administrator and an administrative staff person in FAS. The alleged fraud occurred due to
employees not following established procedures; the procedures and protocols were in place.
After immediately alerting the Office of the Attorney General (OAG) and the Office of
Legislative Audits of the alleged fraud, the Department: 1) convened its Leadership Team (unit
and program directors) to alert them of the potential fraud and to emphasize the importance of
following existing procedures for approval of credit card usage; 2) met with unit fiscal officers to
review credit card policies and procedures; 3) conducted a study and evaluation of its system of
internal controls for credit card purchasing; and 4) analyzed Department-wide credit card usage
and reduced the number of cards issued. Going forward, the Department will develop an on line
training seminar to share information obtained from DBM's Fraud Committee, including the
University of Maryland's Fraud Analysis presentation made in January 2011 and the Risk and
Materiality Assessment presented in June 2010.
Purchases paid through the invoice payment transmittal process require a single signature from
an approved unit fiscal contact. In cases where the unit fiscal contact is the individual making
the purchase, the potential exists that no "supervisory" review will be made. The Department
will change its current invoice processing procedures to require an independent level of review
and approval from the person submitting the invoice. The Department will continue to assist the
OAG as requested in its investigation of the alleged fraudulent activity.
Page 3 of 3

--- Page 19 ---
Exhibit 2
Fraud Hotline Activity – December 13, 2011
Excerpts from the Department of the Environment Report
Dated November 21, 2011
Office of Legislative Audits Finding
Bay Restoration Fund
Background
The Bay Restoration Fund (BRF) enabling legislation, which became effective July 1, 2004,
established the Wastewater Treatment Program (WWTP), and the Septic System Program to
further Maryland’s efforts to reduce nitrogen and phosphorus loading in the Chesapeake Bay.
The Septic System Program is funded by imposing a $30 annual fee on each property served by
an onsite well and septic system. Funds collected are to be used to upgrade or replace existing
septic systems or to install new septic systems with the best available technology (BAT) for
nitrogen removal, which reduces the septic system’s nitrogen load in half. According to State
law, funding priorities for septic upgrades are first given to failing septic systems in the
Chesapeake and Atlantic Coastal Bay Critical Area2 and then to failing septic systems that MDE
determines are a threat to public health or water quality. WWTP is a separate program targeted
at upgrading 67 major wastewater treatment plants with enhanced nutrient removal technologies,
which is funded by a $2.50 monthly fee on each household served by a wastewater treatment
plant.
In addition, Chapter 280, Laws of Maryland, 2009, effective October 1, 2009, requires all new
and replacement septic systems serving property in the Critical Area to include the BAT for
removing nitrogen, and these systems are also eligible for funding through the BRF, whether or
not they replace an existing failing system. Funding for septic systems (including new and
replacement systems) is provided to property owners, on a reimbursable basis, who obtain
certain approvals and inspections. Prior to July 1, 2010, septic grants were awarded either
directly through MDE or by designated local jurisdictions allowed to process septic grant
applications. Effective July 1, 2010, although MDE still funds the projects through the BRF, the
awards for these septic projects are the responsibility of the local county health departments or
other related local organizations, in accordance with MDE revised policies and procedures.
MDE subsequently makes payments to the locals to reimburse eligible property owners.
2 The Chesapeake and Atlantic Coastal Bay Critical Area includes all land within 1,000 feet of Maryland’s tidal
waters and tidal wetlands. It also includes the waters of the Chesapeake Bay, the Atlantic Coastal Bays, their tidal
tributaries, and the lands underneath these tidal areas.
Page 1 of 5

--- Page 20 ---
According to MDE’s records, there are approximately 420,000 septic systems in Maryland, of
which approximately 52,000 are located within the Critical Area. As of September 30, 2010,
MDE has awarded funding to upgrade 2,417 septic systems, of which 1,251 systems were
located within the Critical Area. According to the January 2011 BRF Annual Status Report, as
of September 30, 2010, approximately $36.9 million in grants have been awarded since the
program was established, of which $17.7 million was awarded directly to property owners by
MDE, and $19.2 million was provided to local jurisdictions to fund septic grant awards to
property owners. Additionally, as of September 30, 2010, MDE has awarded approximately
$322.2 million in grants to upgrade wastewater treatment plants. As of June 30, 2010, according
to the State’s records, the balance in the BRF approximated $86 million, of which approximately
$5.2 million was for the Septic System Program, and the balance was for the WWTP.
Finding 6
MDE’s process for reviewing applications and awarding grants prior to July 1, 2010 for the
Septic System Program lacked adequate oversight and our review disclosed a number of
questionable awards.
Analysis
MDE’s process for reviewing applications and awarding grants prior to July 1, 2010 for the
Septic System Program lacked adequate oversight. As a result, there was a lack of assurance that
septic system bids submitted were independent and fair and that the number of grants awarded
was maximized. Prior to July 1, 2010, during the application process, property owners were
required to submit a minimum of three bids for the installation of the septic systems; the bids
were required to include at least three separate manufacturers of the best available technology
(BAT) septic system units and at least two different installers.3 However, MDE allowed
installation contractors to act as agents for property owners which allowed the contractors to
solicit and collect the required bids for the project, including their own bids. Consequently, the
contractors had access to the other bids and could adjust their own bids. We also noted that,
when making the awards, MDE generally did not sufficiently review bid documentation for
completeness, comparability, and legitimacy.
Based on our analysis of MDE’s grant award records related to applications processed directly
by MDE, we identified higher than average grant awards on 57 projects awarded during the
period from May 1, 2008 to March 2, 2009, which involved two installation contractors serving
the same geographic area of the State. Specifically, the average grant award for these 57 projects
was $19,860; whereas, the average grant award for the other 1,596 projects located throughout
the remainder of the State was $12,600—a difference of approximately $7,260. We reviewed
3 One installation contractor could provide two bids, each with a different BAT septic system, resulting in the
submission of three bids from two different installers.
Page 2 of 5

--- Page 21 ---
these 57 projects, with awards totaling approximately $1.1 million, and noted the following
questionable practices:
• Based on our detailed review of 51 projects totaling approximately $1 million, the pattern of
bidding between the aforementioned two installation contractors was questionable.
Specifically, for 50 projects, these two contractors were the only bidders, with one of the
contractors submitting two bids, each with a different BAT system, to account for the
required three bids. For the remaining project, all three bids were submitted by the same
contractor. Additionally, 2 of these 51 projects, which totaled approximately $38,800, were
for each contractor’s home residence in which the other contractor was the losing bidder. For
49 projects, the winning bids, which had been submitted by both contractors, included the
installation of the same manufacturer’s BAT unit. Furthermore, one of the two contractors
was the only authorized supplier of this unit in Maryland.
Our review of the bid documentation for 19 of these 51 projects, which were approved during
the period from January 5, 2009 to March 2, 2009, disclosed a consistency between the
winning bid costs regardless of the contractor performing the work. Specifically, one
contractor was the low bidder on 11 projects (with an average cost of $20,769) and the other
contractor was the low bidder on 8 projects, (with an average cost of $20,185), with the same
BAT systems installed in each case.
• For 23 projects, the bid documentation submitted by these two contractors was not always
complete or proper. Specifically, bids for BAT units did not always identify the specific
property or project information and did not always include the dates that the estimates were
provided. We identified 11 projects, totaling approximately $210,000, in which the losing
high bids did not appear to have been specifically prepared for the project under
consideration; rather, the bids appeared to be copies of previously submitted bids used for
other projects. Additionally, for 12 other projects totaling approximately $242,600, either
certain critical information (such as bid date, property address, name of applicant) in the
losing bid documentation was missing or this critical information was hand-written onto a
generic form bid; these characteristics were unlike bids for other projects submitted by the
same contractor.
We believe that the aforementioned questionable practices and conditions could be contributing
factors in the average grant award for these projects being approximately $7,260 higher than
other projects throughout the State. When we brought the aforementioned conditions is to its
attention, MDE could not provide an explanation. The cumulative average cost differential for
these 57 projects is in excess of $400,000. Based on the aforementioned conditions, we referred
this matter to the Criminal Division of the Office of the Attorney General. A referral to the
Criminal Division does not mean that a criminal act has actually occurred or that criminal
charges will be filed.
As previously noted, while there are no established regulations governing this program (see
Finding 5 in this report), effective July 1, 2010, MDE revised its procedures for determining and
Page 3 of 5

--- Page 22 ---
awarding septic system upgrade grants. These revised procedures establish maximum grant
award amounts and provide for MDE to pre-approve BAT units eligible for installation,
eliminating the need for applicants to obtain competitive bids. If a homeowner decides to install
a BAT unit that is not pre-approved, the grant award is now limited to the established maximum
grant award and the homeowner is responsible for the cost difference. These revisions should
help reduce the potential for future questionable awards similar to the aforementioned awards we
identified. As of June 8, 2011, the specific BAT unit used routinely by the two contractors had
not been pre-approved by MDE. Additionally, MDE’s current maximum grant award is $12,307
for the region of the State where the aforementioned 57 projects were located, which is
approximately $7,550 less than the average award for the 57 projects.
Recommendation 6
We recommend that MDE work in conjunction with the Office of the Attorney General to
investigate and resolve the aforementioned questionable activity. We also recommend that,
for all septic grants processed by local jurisdictions after July 1, 2010, MDE ensure the
local jurisdictions are administering the Septic System Program in accordance with
established requirements.
Page 4 of 5

--- Page 23 ---
Response from the Department of the Environment
Finding 6
MDE’s process for reviewing applications and awarding grants prior to July 1, 2010 for the
Septic System Program lacked adequate oversight and our review disclosed a number of
questionable awards.
Recommendation 6
We recommend that MDE work in conjunction with the Office of the Attorney General to
investigate and resolve the aforementioned questionable activity. We also recommend that,
for all septic grants processed by local jurisdictions after
July 1, 2010, MDE ensure the local jurisdictions are administering the Septic System
Program in accordance with established requirements.
MDE Response
MDE partially concurs with the finding, but will fully implement the recommendation.
The Department will work with the Office of the Attorney General related to the issues included in the
finding and take appropriate action based on the results of the investigation. Also, MDE has already
taken steps to ensure that all septic grants processed by local jurisdictions after July 1, 2010, are
administered in accordance with established requirements.
As expressively acknowledged by the auditors, MDE had proactively revised its procedures and by doing
so had already addressed the concerns raised by the audit finding. Moreover, in the Department’s view,
there are other possible explanations for the cost differential based on differences in technology. MDE
is conducting additional investigation into the circumstances surrounding the cost differential and will
provide the results of the investigation to the Office of the Attorney General.
Page 5 of 5