Title: Presentation to the Joint Audit Committee - Department of Health and Mental Hygiene - Developmental Disabilities Administration

Related Report Dated 11/18/2016
Date: 12/06/2016
Type: Presentations to the Legislature
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5a9daf30cc9d72387404dcd6
Extracted: 2025-06-18T14:04:23.571777
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Department of Health and
Mental Hygiene (DHMH)
- Developmental Disabilities
Administration (DDA)
Report dated November 18, 2016
Presentation to the Joint Audit Committee
Thomas J. Barnickel III, CPA
Joshua S. Adler, CPA, CFE
December 6, 2016

--- Page 2 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Report Overview
The report contained 10 findings, including 3 repeat
findings from the prior report.
Key Findings
Contribution to Care (CTC) – DDA incorrectly
directed providers to collect an estimated $4.2
million annually from certain consumers.
Consumers’ Services – Service delivery by providers
was not monitored to ensure that approximately
25,000 consumers received the required services.
Contracts – The procurement and monitoring of 2
contracts with a vendor for the financial
restructuring of DDA’s operations lacked assurance
that hourly rates were reasonable, deliverables
were received, and payments were proper.
Provider Consumer Information System (PCIS2) –
Controls were lacking to ensure the propriety of
critical provider account adjustments and sensitive
consumer information was not protected.
Developmental Disabilities Administration Page 2

--- Page 3 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Contribution to Care (Finding 1)
Prior to FY 2015, DDA incorrectly directed providers
to collect payments from certain residential
consumers for the cost of care. The amount
improperly collected could have been $4.2 million
annually.
• DDA identified this error in FY 2014 and directed
providers to stop collecting from this population.
• DHMH’s legal counsel concluded that DDA had
no legal obligation to return these funds.
• While not impossible to calculate, DDA advised
that the costs to calculate the amounts
incorrectly collected outweigh the potential
benefits to the consumers. DDA cited a number
of reasons to support this conclusion.
• DDA’s decision to not pursue a remedy has not
been communicated to the General Assembly for
its consideration.
Developmental Disabilities Administration Page 3

--- Page 4 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Consumers’ Services (Finding 2)
DDA did not adequately monitor the delivery of
services to consumers to ensure that they received
the required services from providers.
DDA contracted with 18 resource/service coordinators
(RSC), responsible for monitoring service delivery to
25,315 consumers with service expenditures totaling
$876 million in FY 2015.
• DDA did not obtain reports of the RSC’ monitoring
efforts and did not directly review RSC records to
ensure the delivery of services to consumers. For 9
of 14 consumers tested, evidence was lacking that
the 2 assigned RSCs had verified the delivery of
required services.
• DDA did not ensure that the RSCs assisted with the
annual Medicaid eligibility reassessments for
consumers, resulting in certain consumers losing
eligibility and shifting to 100 percent State
funding.
Developmental Disabilities Administration Page 4

--- Page 5 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Financial Restructuring Contracts (Finding 4)
Background
Beginning in 2013, DDA entered into two services
contracts with a vendor to assist in the financial
restructuring of DDA operations for which it paid $8.1
million.
Contract Procurement
• DDA did not negotiate the contract rates for the
professional positions contained in both contracts
nor did the contracts describe their duties.
 DDA lacked assurance the hourly rates, such
as the $416 per hour for a programmatic
leader and $347 per hour for a finance
director, were reasonable.
• DDA procured the second contract as an
emergency procurement even though the actual
services performed by the vendor, such as budget
and cost performance reviews, did not appear to
constitute an emergency under State regulations.
Developmental Disabilities Administration Page 5

--- Page 6 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Financial Restructuring Contracts (Finding 5)
Contract Monitoring and Payments
DDA lacked an effective means to ensure payments
were commensurate with the completion of contract
deliverables.
• The contracts contained numerous deliverables
and tasks, but did not establish the anticipated
effort to complete the deliverables and tasks as a
means to control costs.
• DDA could not explain why the two largely
concurrent contracts included some similar
deliverables. These similarities raise questions,
in part, about the possibility of DDA paying twice
for the same work.
Developmental Disabilities Administration Page 6

--- Page 7 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Financial Restructuring Contracts (Finding 6)
Contract Monitoring and Payments
DDA did not effectively monitor the contracts and the
related payments.
• The contract costs were not modified even though
3 of 4 contract deliverables tested were not
received (such as documenting the requirements
for a new DDA financial system).
• Vendor status reports required by the contracts
were not always obtained to support the amounts
invoiced. When obtained, they were not used to
determine the propriety of the invoices.
• DDA verbally authorized the vendor to perform
routine fiscal services, which were outside the
scope of the contracts. Billing rates were
approximately $200 more per hour than the
hourly rate of a DDA employee who performed
similar fiscal services.
Developmental Disabilities Administration Page 7

--- Page 8 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Provider Consumer Information System (PCIS2)
DDA’s PCIS2 provides a mechanism for provider
payment and includes provider and consumer activity,
services, and related payment rates.
As of June 2015, there were 1,778 system users and
FY 2015 expenditures processed through the system
totaled $915 million.
Finding 9 – Critical PCIS2 Adjustments Were Not
Verified
• Controls had not been established over critical
DDA adjustments to provider accounts. Two of four
payment adjustments tested resulted in providers
receiving $505,000 more than due.
• Access to PCIS2 was not reviewed to ensure it was
limited to appropriate users. Nine of 10 DDA users
tested could perform system functions not
required for their jobs.
Developmental Disabilities Administration Page 8

--- Page 9 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Provider Consumer Information System (PCIS2)
Finding 10 – Sensitive Information Not Safeguarded
DDA inappropriately stored sensitive personally
identifiable information (PII) in clear text.
• As of August 2015, the PCIS2 database contained
58,022 unique social security numbers for
consumers along with names, dates of birth, and
addresses in clear text.
• This sensitive PII was not protected by other
substantial mitigating controls.
Developmental Disabilities Administration Page 9

--- Page 10 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Other Findings
Finding 3 – Consumers’ Services
DDA did not compare hours invoiced by RSCs with
the hours worked recorded in PCIS2 prior to payment
to ensure that the payments were proper.
Finding 7 – Federal Funds Reimbursements
Federal fund reimbursement requests were not
always timely, resulting in lost interest income
totaling approximately $210,000 during the period
from July 2011 trough June 2015.
Finding 8 – Community Supported Living
Arrangement (CSLA)
DDA did not conduct audits of CSLA providers to
identify and recover overpayments. During FY 2015,
DDA paid CSLA providers $90 million for these
services.
Developmental Disabilities Administration Page 10

--- Page 11 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Conclusions
DDA should
• determine the extent of the improperly collected
CTC and present this issue to the General
Assembly for its consideration;
• monitor the RSCs to ensure that consumers
received the required services from providers and
that billings from RSCs are correct;
• negotiate contract rates when only one bid is
received and ensure that emergency
procurements are used appropriately;
• include deliverables in contracts to provide for
effective monitoring and ensure that deliverables
are received;
• ensure that requests for federal fund
reimbursements are submitted timely; and
• implement the recommended actions to improve
controls over the CSLA payments and critical
PCIS2 adjustments and sensitive PII.
Developmental Disabilities Administration Page 11