Title: Presentation to the Joint Audit Committee - Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services - Office of the Secretary and Other Units

Related Report Dated 11/18/2015
Date: 12/08/2015
Type: Presentations to the Legislature
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5a9daf2dcc9d72387404dc89
Extracted: 2025-06-18T13:55:45.824592
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Department of Public Safety and
Correctional Services
Office of the Secretary
and Other Units
Report Dated November 18, 2015
Presentation to the Joint Audit Committee
Thomas J. Barnickel III, CPA
Adam J. Westover, CPA
December 8, 2015

--- Page 2 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Audit Overview
The Office provides overall executive direction and
coordination for the activities of the operating
units of DPSCS and provides central support
services, oversight, and accountability to those
units.
The Office also has statewide responsibility for the
supervision and rehabilitation of incarcerated and
paroled individuals. The Office absorbed certain
functions from the Division of Parole and
Probation (DPP) after DPP ceased to exist as a
budgetary unit following a departmental
reorganization effective July 1, 2012.
In FY 2014, The Office’s expenditures totaled
approximately $218 million.
The audit report included 9 findings, 2 of which
were repeated from the preceding audit reports of
the Office and the DPP.
Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services
Page 2
Office of the Secretary and Other Units

--- Page 3 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Key Audit Issues
Issues were found with the procurement and
oversight of various contractual agreements, as the
Office structured an inmate services procurement
in a way that may have limited competition,
resulting in only one contractor bidding on the
contract.
The Office augmented its information technology
staff beyond its budgeted positions through an
interagency agreement with a State university and
did not assess liquidated damages totaling
$840,000 against an inmate health care
contractor when required staffing levels were not
met for fiscal years 2013 and 2014.
Security and control deficiencies were noted over
the Office’s new Offender Case Management
System (OCMS), as the Office did not ensure that
certain inmate release date information was
transferred to OCMS and certain sensitive
personally identifiable information was not
appropriately safeguarded.
Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services
Page 3
Office of the Secretary and Other Units

--- Page 4 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Inmate Services Procur e ment
The Office structured an inmate services
procurement in a manner that may have limited
competition, resulting in only one contractor bidding
on the contract, and did not ensure the State
received the best value (Finding 1).
 The Office combined into a single contract, the
procurement of three unrelated goods and
services, including (1) commissary operations (a
revenue producing contract), (2) the design and
implementation of an inmate banking information
technology system (MOBSII), and (3) the
procurement of inmate welfare kits.
 The sole bidder was not required to identify the
MOBSII development costs, but rather to present
proposed commissary rates net of those costs.
Consequently, the Office was estimated to receive
$17.3 million in commissions over the full 5 year
contract term, but the true expected commissary
revenue and MOBSII costs were unknown.
Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services
Page 4
Office of the Secretary and Other Units

--- Page 5 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Inmate Services Procur e ment (continued)
 The Office did not consult with the Department of
Information Technology (DoIT) to determine if the
MOBSII development project should have been
subject to its oversight. DoIT advised OLA that
because the costs were unknown it could not
conclude if it should have been involved.
 The contract had no provisions for liquidated
damages to protect the State’s interest in the
event MOBSII requirements were not met. When
launched in August 2014, MOBSII could not
provide the required system reports needed for
DPSCS facilities to perform inmate bank account
reconciliations.
 The contract included the purchase of inmate
welfare kits, which were available under a State
procurement preference from Blind Industries and
Services. This purchase from a private vendor
and the related costs were not clearly conveyed
when presented to the Board Public Works.
Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services
Page 5
Office of the Secretary and Other Units

--- Page 6 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Interagency Agreement
The Office entered into interagency agreements
with a unit of a State university that enabled the
Office to augment its information technology staff
beyond its budgeted positions and enhance related
salaries. Also, the work performed by these
contractual employees did not appear consistent
with the unit’s mission (Finding 2).
 This arrangement has existed for a number of
years, and the FY 2015 agreement effectively
created an additional 30 positions, at a cost of
$3.4 million, beyond the 214 positions
authorized in the budget for the Office’s
Information Technology and Communications
Division (ITCD).
 These university employees were integrated into
the ITCD organizational and management
structure, and OLA observed them functioning as
regular ITCD personnel with similar roles and
responsibilities.
Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services
Page 6
Office of the Secretary and Other Units

--- Page 7 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Interagency Agreement (continued)
 ITCD advised that the agreements allowed ITCD to
hire staff at enhanced salaries. The university
performed no oversight or monitoring of these
employees and its involvement was generally
limited to hiring the employees and paying their
salaries. ITCD was responsible for the employees’
daily oversight, including assigning projects and
tasks, and employees completed university
timesheets, which were approved by their ITCD
supervisors.
 The services provided by the university unit did not
appear to directly relate to its mission, which was to
support science-based, crime-related initiatives.
The FY 2015 agreement described the services as
relating to assisting ITCD with 5 major IT projects.
 ITCD management advised these services were
outside the unit’s normal mission, but the
agreement allowed ITCD to obtain IT employees at
salaries higher than DPSCS salaries and to expand
and contract for its staff as needed.
Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services-
Page 7
Office of the Secretary and Other Units

--- Page 8 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Inmate Mental Healthc a re Contract
The Office did not assess liquidated damages against
its inmate mental healthcare contractor when
required staffing levels were not met, and the Office
authorized an increase in staffing levels without a
formal contract modification or seeking required
Board of Public Works (BPW) approval (Finding 3).
 The inmate health services contract required
certain monthly staffing levels and provided for
liquidated damages if those levels were not met;
however, damages were not assessed. For
example, the Office did not asses damages,
estimated at $840,000, for staffing levels that
were not met at individual service delivery areas for
October 1, 2012 through June 30, 2014.
 The Office authorized additional staffing services
beginning in November 2012, but did not prepare a
formal contract modification nor seek BPW
approval until April 2014. The additional services
were estimated to cost $1.1 million through June
30, 2017.
Depar tment of Public Safety and Correctional Services
Page 8
Office of the Secretary and Other Units

--- Page 9 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Offender Case Manage m ent System (OCMS)
The Office did not ensure that the correct inmate
release date information was transferred to its
current Offender Case Management System
(OCMS) from the preceding system (OBSCIS I), and
testing disclosed release date discrepancies
between the two systems that had not been
resolved (Finding 4).
 In December 2011, the Office began the
transition of information between the two
systems and, in June 2014, believing that there
were problems with the transfer of diminution
credits from OBSCIS I to OCMS, all previously
transferred diminution credit data from OCMS
were deleted and transferred again.
 During July 2014 the Office performed a series
of matches comparing release dates between
the two systems. Ultimately 2,499 discrepancies
between the release dates in the two systems
were identified.
Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services
Page 9
Office of the Secretary and Other Units

--- Page 10 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
OCMS (continued)
 During our audit, we were advised that the 2,499
discrepancies would not be individually researched
and resolved. Rather, the Office would continue to
rely on a manual release date review process prior
to each inmate’s scheduled release.
 OLA’s review of 346 of the 2,499 discrepancies, for
inmates scheduled for release between August
2014 and May 2015 in OCMS, noted both earlier
and later release dates than OBSCIS I.
The discrepancies ranged from releases
o
potentially 28 years earlier to 7 months later
than appropriate.
34 of the OCMS release dates were more than a
o
year earlier than those in OBSCIS I, although
none of these inmates had been released.
 As a result, certain release date information is
inaccurate and unreliable. In FY 2014, there was
an average inmate population of 20,868 inmates
incarcerated in DPSCS’ correctional facilities.
Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services
Page 10
Office of the Secretary and Other Units

--- Page 11 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
OCMS (continued)
Sensitive personally identifiable information (PII) in
OCMS was not appropriately safeguarded, as PII
was stored in clear text for 370,067 individuals
and was not protected by other substantial
mitigating controls (Finding 5).
Account, password, and monitoring controls over
OCMS were not sufficient (Finding 6).
 Account lockout for repeated unsuccessful logon
attempts did not exist.
 Password length, complexity, aging, history, and
sharing provisions did not meet minimum
requirements of the State of Maryland
Information Security Policy.
 OCMS was not configured to log any database
security activity (such as direct changes to critical
data tables and changes to security settings),
which could result in unauthorized or
inappropriate activity going undetected.
Depart ment of Public Safety and Correctional Services
Page 11
Office of the Secretary and Other Units

--- Page 12 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Other Issues
The Office had certain control deficiencies over
fines, costs, fees, and restitution (FCFR).
 The Office did not adequately reconcile its cash
balance of FCFR funds with the State’s
accounting records (Finding 7).
 The Office had not established adequate
procedures and controls over refunds made to
offenders for FCFR overpayments and changes to
restitution recipient addresses. Output reports of
these transactions were not reviewed for propriety
(Finding 8).
Equipment maintained by the Office’s ITCD was not
adequately controlled, including a failure to
periodically reconcile its control account and detail
records and report missing equipment valued at
$3.2 million that had not been located from 1 to 7
years (Finding 9).
Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services
Page 12
Office of the Secretary and Other Units

--- Page 13 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Conclusions
The Office should
 ensure future procurements are structured to
promote maximum competition, comply with State
law when purchasing supplies available from
preferred vendors, and consult with DoIT on future
IT projects;
 refrain from entering into interagency agreements
to augment its budgeted positions;
 assess liquidated damages to the extent permitted;
 investigate OCMS inmate release date
discrepancies, take the recommended actions to
ensure data transfers are properly controlled, and
improve information systems security and controls;
 complete FCFR reconciliations in a timely manner
and investigate and resolve all differences;
 establish controls over FCFR transactions, including
generating output reports and performing
documented supervisory reviews; and
 comply with the Department of General Services’
Inventory Control Manual.
Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services
Page 13
Office of the Secretary and Other Units