Title: Presentation to the Joint Audit Committee - Board of Liquor License Commissioners for Baltimore City (Performance)

Related Report Dated 7/13/2016
Date: 08/03/2016
Type: Presentations to the Legislature
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5a9daf30cc9d72387404dce6
Extracted: 2025-06-18T14:06:09.165736
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Performance Audit
Board of Liquor License
Commissioners for Baltimore City
(BLLC)
Report Dated July 13, 2016
Presentation to the Joint Audit Committee
Thomas J. Barnickel III, CPA
Timothy R. Brooks, CPA, CFE
Stephen C. Pease, CPA
August 3, 2016

--- Page 2 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Audit Objectives
1. Licensing - to evaluate BLLC’s procedures over
alcoholic beverage licensing and to determine if
the licensing process complied with State law
and Board requirements.
2. Inspections - to evaluate the BLLC procedures for
performing inspections of alcoholic beverage
licensees and determine whether inspections
were performed in accordance with these
procedures and any other requirements.
3. Disciplinary Procedures - to evaluate the
disciplinary process and determine whether BLLC
complied with applicable State law, as well as
Board rules and regulations.
4. Management Oversight - to determine whether
proper oversight exists over BLLC operations.
Board of Liquor License Commissioners
Page 2
for Baltimore City Performance Audit

--- Page 3 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Report Overview
 18 Findings – 8 of the 24 findings from prior
audit were satisfactorily addressed, and the
remaining 16 findings were repeated in this
report as 15 findings.
 Overarching Issues:
— Comprehensive written policies and
procedures to guide staff were lacking in
each area of BLLC’s operations.
— BLLC lacked processes for management to
effectively oversee and determine the
efficiency and effectiveness of operations.
— BLLC did not have an effective system to
track investigations performed of
approximately 1,300 licensed
establishments and the outcomes of
inspections.
Board of Liquor License Commissioners
Page 3
for Baltimore City Performance Audit

--- Page 4 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Licensing
Finding 1 - Licensing Policies
BLLC lacked formal written policies to direct staff in
processing alcoholic beverage license applications,
renewals, and transfers.
 Controls were not in place, such as a documented
supervisory review process, to ensure licensees
provided adequate documentation and paid
proper fees.
Finding 2 - Licensing Fees
BLLC renewed some licenses without receiving all
required fees, including late fees, from licensees.
 Licensees for 8 of the 41 renewals tested for the
2015-16 license year paid a total of $2,420 less
than the $68,405 that should have been paid.
 Three of the 41 renewals appeared to be
submitted late, but late fees of $650 were not
assessed. Renewal applications were not date
stamped.
Board of Liquor License Commissioners
Page 4
for Baltimore City Performance Audit

--- Page 5 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Licensing (continued)
Finding 3 - Casino Fees:
BLLC did not assess the proper license fee for the
casino operating in Baltimore City nor did it ensure
the concessionaires operating within the casino were
licensed and assessed licensing fees.
 The casino had been assessed an annual license
fee of $12,000 rather than $15,000 prescribed
by law for such facilities. BLLC management
attributed the improper fee assessment to
licensing system limitations.
 BLLC did not license seven concessionaires that
served alcohol and did not require each to pay
the $5,000 annual license fee.
 The casino and its concessionaires were under
assessed fees totaling $76,000 for the 2014 and
2015 license years, although BLLC now claims 3
of the 7 concessionaires do not require separate
licenses.
Board of Liquor License Commissioners
Page 5
for Baltimore City Performance Audit

--- Page 6 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Licensing (continued)
Finding 4 - Licensing Transfers
License transfers were not always completed within
180 days of Board approval as required.
 OLA’s test of 10 judgmentally selected transfers
found 2 were completed one year after the Board
approved the transfers.
Finding 5 - Updates to Criminal Records
BLLC did not receive updates to criminal background
information, as provided for by State law, after the
initial background checks it received on new
licensees and license transfers.
 State law specifies that a license may not be
renewed if a criminal conviction renders the
licensee unfit.
Board of Liquor License Commissioners
Page 6
for Baltimore City Performance Audit

--- Page 7 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Licensing (continued)
Finding 6 - Controls Over Collections
Procedures and recordkeeping practices for cash
receipts and accounts receivable did not provide
adequate control.
 Checks were not restrictively endorsed upon
receipt nor properly secured.
 There was a lack of adequate separation of
duties over the cash receipts and accounts
receivable functions.
 Monthly reconciliations were not completed to
verify cash receipts recorded on its records were
deposited, as documented on the City’s
accounting records. BLLC was unaware that
during FYs 2013 to 2015 a total of $1,066,550
had been posted to the BLLC holding account
rather than being recorded in the appropriate City
revenue account.
Board of Liquor License Commissioners
Page 7
for Baltimore City Performance Audit

--- Page 8 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Inspections
Finding 7 - Inspection Policies and Procedures
BLLC lacked comprehensive written policies and
procedures to guide the inspection process. At the
time of our audit, minimal guidance existed.
 Existing guidance did not detail the process to be
used to conduct inspections and the specific
aspects of each inspection area and topic to be
covered during an inspection.
 BLLC staff applied their own criteria to assess
licensee compliance during an inspection.
 No guidance was provided on how to perform and
document the review of invoices related to
alcohol deliveries to determine if licensee alcohol
was purchased from a wholesaler licensed by the
Comptroller of Maryland, as required.
Board of Liquor License Commissioners
Page 8
for Baltimore City Performance Audit

--- Page 9 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Inspections (continued)
Findings 8 & 9 - Monitoring of Inspections
BLLC lacked an effective tracking system to monitor
inspections performed, including determining if the
goal of inspecting each licensee, on average, four
times per year was met.
 Based on OLA’s statistical analysis, no more than
3,600 inspections were conducted for the year
ended April 30, 2015, 25% fewer than the goal of
completing 5,200 inspections annually.
 On average, 19 licensees with high sales volume
were inspected 2.63 times including 2 licensees
who were never inspected during that year.
 Documentation of supervisory review of inspection
reports was lacking.
Board of Liquor License Commissioners
Page 9
for Baltimore City Performance Audit

--- Page 10 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Inspections (continued)
Finding 10 - 311 System Complaints
BLLC lacked comprehensive written policies for
processing and timely resolving 311 complaints
about licensed establishments.
 There was inadequate documentation of
complaint resolution by BLLC, which resulted in
many complaints being closed without evidence of
investigation.
BLLC closed 927 complaints between 1/29/15
and 8/11/15 when only 495 complaints had been
received.
 OLA’s test found that 12 of the 14 complaints
received during that period were either not closed
timely or lacked adequate documentation to
support the closure.
Board of Liquor License Commissioners
Page 10
for Baltimore City Performance Audit

--- Page 11 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Disciplinary Procedures
Fines and Board Hearings
 The Board’s assessment of fines and granting of
fine waivers appeared to be reasonably consistent
within violation types.
 BLLC staff had discontinued conducting informal
hearings with violators and violations were
addressed through the Board hearing process.
Finding 12 - Policies and Procedures
BLLC lacked written policies and procedures for
deciding which violations should be adjudicated by
the Board or for specifying the time frame within
which violations would go before the Board.
 OLA’s test of 15 cases with 34 violations that were
heard by the Board found that 17 violations were
heard from 181 to 783 days after the violation
occurred.
Board of Liquor License Commissioners
Page 11
for Baltimore City Performance Audit

--- Page 12 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Management Oversight
Finding 14 - Management Practices
BLLC had not implemented management practices to
effectively oversee and manage the agency’s
functions.
 Many recommendations in OLA’s preceding audit
report had not been implemented.
 BLLC did not routinely generate system reports to
monitor licensing activity and 311 complaint
resolution.
 Advertisements of proposed Board action on
license applications during a six-month period
were not posted in newspapers as required by law.
Board of Liquor License Commissioners
Page 12
for Baltimore City Performance Audit

--- Page 13 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Management Oversight (continued)
Finding 15 - Financial Disclosure Forms
Board Commissioners and BLLC staff did not file
annual financial disclosure forms as required by
Baltimore City Code. Management did not review
disclosure forms for conflicts of interest.
 As of July 13, 2015, 8 of 16 individuals required
to file had not submitted the CY 2014 forms,
which were due on April 30, 2015.
 Four newly hired inspectors and two new
commissioners had not filed the forms within 30
days as required by City Code.
Board of Liquor License Commissioners
Page 13
for Baltimore City Performance Audit

--- Page 14 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Management Oversight (continued)
Finding 16 - Employee Performance Evaluations
BLLC did not routinely perform formal evaluations of
employee performance as required by City policy.
 As of June 2015, 11 of the 16 BLLC employees
employed by BLLC had not received a
performance evaluation during their tenure, which
ranged from one year to more than 10 years.
Finding 17 - Payroll Processing
Internal controls over payroll, totaling $1.6 million
during FY 2015, were inadequate.
 Three upper management employees did not
record their time worked and for other employees
electronic timesheets did not always agree to daily
employee sign-in and sign-out sheets.
 Approval for overtime paid was not documented.
 Certain employees had inappropriate access to
the automated system used to process payroll.
Board of Liquor License Commissioners
Page 14
for Baltimore City Performance Audit

--- Page 15 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Conclusions
BLLC needs to
 develop and implement written guidance,
including formal Board policy and internal
regulations, procedures, and controls, to govern
all facets of its operations;
 work to develop and implement technologies to
better allow it to perform its routine duties,
manage operations, and measure performance;
and
 ensure that adequate and appropriate
documentation is established and retained of its
staffs’ actions and performance to support the
results of BLLC’s operations and compliance with
State and City laws and Board policy.
Board of Liquor License Commissioners
Page 15
for Baltimore City Performance Audit