Title: Presentation to the House Economic Matters Committee - Audit Issues Pertaining to the Injured Workers Insurance Fund
Date: 01/22/2008
Type: Presentations to the Legislature
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5a9daf22cc9d72387404dace
Extracted: 2025-06-18T09:09:21.721808
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Audit Issues Pertaining to
Injured Workers Insurance Fund
Presentation to House Economic Matters Committee
Bruce A. Myers
Phyllis M. Clancy
Stephen C. Pease
January 22, 2008

--- Page 3 ---
Injured Workers Insurance Fund (IWIF) issues included in
Office of the State Treasurer’s Audit Report
dated July 24, 2007
Background:
• Under 1990 agreement with the Board of Public Works (BPW), IWIF
provides claims processing services for workers’ compensation claims
filed by State employees (approximately $40 million annually)
• STO administers the agreement on behalf of BPW
• IWIF receives funds at start of year for anticipated claims and costs
• Agreement provides that administrative costs be based on the
proportionate share of IWIF’s administrative costs (based on the State’s
portion of all claims expenses); these costs are approximately $10
million annually
• Periodically, the State makes payments to IWIF to be held on account to
reduce the State’s unfunded long-term liability (which was estimated to
be $230 million at June 30, 2006)
Page 1 of 2

--- Page 4 ---
Audit Report Finding 5 (Policy Issue)
The services provided by IWIF for the State have not been subject to
competitive bid. Using IWIF for claims processing services has not been
analyzed to determine if this practice is the most beneficial to the State and if
the related costs are commensurate with the services rendered.
• Services have been provided under the same agreement for more than
17 years
• Services are available from private insurance companies
• IWIF as an entity has become more autonomous since this agreement
was first entered into
• Funds on account to liquidate the State’s long term workers’
compensation liability are held by IWIF
Audit Report Finding 6
Monitoring of the agreement was inadequate:
• No verification of propriety of claims
• Administrative costs were not verified
• No verification that the State received all interest earnings due
Page 2 of 2

--- Page 5 ---
Excerpt from OLA Audit Report (Dated July 24, 2007) on the Office of
the State Treasurer
Injured Workers’ Insurance Fund (IWIF)
Background
Under the terms of a 1990 agreement between the IWIF and the Board of Public Works (BPW),
IWIF provides claims processing services for workers’ compensation claims filed by State
employees. The State is self-insured for such claims. The agreement provides that the State
Treasurer’s Office is responsible for administering the agreement, on behalf of the Board.
As required by the agreement, at the start of each fiscal year, the Office sends a payment to IWIF
for State workers’ compensation claims for the upcoming year. The payment includes an
amount to pay for anticipated workers’ compensation claims and an amount for IWIF’s
administrative costs associated with providing claims processing services to the State. Payments
for anticipated claims are based on the actual amount of claims paid, as reported by IWIF, in a
prior fiscal year. Payments for administrative costs are based on the Office’s proportionate share
of IWIF’s administrative costs (allocated based on the State’s proportionate share of actual
losses incurred by the State to actual losses incurred by all insureds of IWIF, including the
State). According to the Office’s records, during fiscal years 2004 through 2006, payments to
IWIF for workers compensation claims and administrative costs totaled $137.4 million ($105.3
million for claims, $30.6 million for administrative costs and an additional $1.5 million for costs
related to the State’s risk management program). Claim and administrative costs are recovered
through State agency assessments prepared by the Office.
In addition, based on funds included in the State budget, the Office makes payments to IWIF to
reduce the State’s long-term liability for workers’ compensation claims. The long-term liability
is the difference between what actuaries have determined is adequate to cover future liability and
amounts the State has transferred to IWIF for the liability. According to its records, during fiscal
year 2006, the Office paid $10 million to IWIF to reduce the unfunded liability, which according
to IWIF’s actuary is estimated at $230 million as of June 30, 2006.
Finding 5 (Policy Issue)
The services provided by IWIF have not been subject to a competitive bid process and the
appropriateness of making advance payments to IWIF has not been adequately assessed.
Analysis
Certain aspects pertaining to the use of IWIF for claims processing services have not been
analyzed to determine if they are the most beneficial to the State.
Page 1 of 3
• The contract with IWIF to administer all workers’ compensation claims filed against the
State has been in effect for over 16 years and has not been subject to a competitive bid

--- Page 6 ---
process. (We were advised by Office management that these claims processing services have
never been competitively bid.) Since this contract was entered into, IWIF has become more
autonomous from the State. For example, the requirement that the State Treasurer be the
custodian of the IWIF was repealed from State law effective October 1, 2000. Office
management advised us that obtaining competitive bids was not considered because the
contract with IWIF was approved by BPW and because using IWIF to process workers’
compensation claims has been a long-standing practice. While competitive bids are not
required for contracts between units of State government, considering the significant
amounts paid to IWIF annually ($10.9 million for administrative costs in fiscal year 2006), as
well as the availability of this service from private insurance companies, we believe that a
competitive bid process should be used to determine if the State is receiving a fair price for
services rendered.
• There was no apparent reason for the State to allow IWIF to hold funds in reserve for its
long-term workers’ compensation liability rather than maintaining the funds in the State
Treasury. As of August 30, 2006, according to information received from IWIF, State funds
on deposit with IWIF for the State’s long-term workers’ compensation liability totaled $25
million in an account that is interest bearing to the State. Officials in the Office could not
provide any reasonable justifications for this practice. Consequently, it was unclear as to the
benefit to the State to have IWIF hold the funds as opposed to allowing the funds to be held
and invested by the Office.
Under the contract, IWIF is responsible for investigating, defending, and making payment for
claims that the State is legally obligated to pay for damages resulting from bodily harm to or
death of an employee of the State, resulting from the employee’s employment, such as it would
for other clients. The contract provides that the State can terminate the contract for any reason
after giving IWIF 90 days written notice.
Recommendation 5
We recommend that the Office, in conjunction with BPW, consider obtaining competitive
bids for the claims processing services for workers’ compensation claims filed by State
employees, and take the necessary actions to ensure that these services are obtained in the
manner that is most beneficial to the State. We also recommend that the Office determine
the appropriateness of allowing IWIF to hold funds in reserve.
Page 2 of 3

--- Page 7 ---
Finding 6
The Office did not adequately monitor the agreement to ensure the propriety of amounts
paid to IWIF.
Analysis
The Office did not take any action to assess the propriety of amounts paid to IWIF. Essentially,
the Office’s only involvement with the agreement was to make payments to IWIF and to recover
the assessments from State agencies.
• The Office did not verify that claims reported by IWIF were for actual payments made on
behalf of State employees who suffered work-related injuries. Since claims reported by
IWIF serve as the basis for payments of approximately $40 million per year to IWIF, it is
essential that the Office verify the propriety of the reported claims.
• Administrative costs requested by, and paid to, IWIF were also not subject to independent
verification. Specifically, the Office did not receive documentation that the administrative
costs billed by IWIF properly represented the State’s share of total administrative costs
incurred by IWIF. Since such amounts exceeded $30 million over a three-year period, these
costs should also be periodically verified.
• Although, under the terms of the agreement, amounts paid to IWIF shall be held in a separate
account and the State is to receive interest earned on money on deposit with IWIF, the Office
did not verify that the State received all interest to which it was entitled. Since the Office
pays IWIF at the start of each fiscal year and claims would be expected to be paid throughout
the year, interest earnings could be significant.
Recommendation 6
We recommend that the Office, at least on a test basis, review amounts previously paid to
IWIF for propriety and, in the future, determine the propriety of amounts paid to IWIF.
This verification should be documented and include a review of appropriate supporting
documentation such as evidence of amounts paid for injured State workers and
documentation of the propriety of administrative costs billed by IWIF. We also
recommend that the Office verify that the State receives all interest to which it is entitled.
Page 3 of 3

--- Page 9 ---
Excerpt from the Response of the Office of the State Treasurer
Injured Workers Insurance Fund (IWIF):
Finding #5 (Policy Issue)
The services provide by IWIF have not been subject to a competitive bid process and the
appropriateness of making advance payments to IWIF has not bee adequately assessed.
Recommendation:
We recommend that the Office, in conjunction with BPW, consider obtaining competitive bids
for the claims processing services for workers’ compensation claims filed by State employees,
and take the necessary actions to ensure that these services are obtained in the manner that is
most beneficial to the State. We also recommend that the Office determine the appropriateness
of allowing IWIF to hold funds in reserve.
Response:
The Office agrees that this is a policy issue, and respectfully suggests that the policy decision is
one for the General Assembly, first, and the Board of Public Works, second. It is not a policy
decision to be made by the Office, which simply serves as the administrator for the State’s
contract with IWIF.
The State’s workers’ compensation claims processing services have never been competitively
bid. IWIF’s predecessor, the State Accident Fund (“SAF”), was established by the General
Assembly in 1914 as the State agency charged with guaranteeing workers’ compensation
coverage for all of Maryland’s employers and their employees. In addition to serving the State,
the SAF and IWIF have served as workers’ compensation insurers of last resort for Maryland
employers for 93 years.
Until 1988, the SAF was part of the Department of Personnel. The Office of Legislative Audits
(OLA) conducted regular audits of SAF and IWIF until 2002, when the General Assembly
granted IWIF greater autonomy. In fact, as a result of OLA recommendations, the General
Assembly reorganized the SAF in 1988, and the SAF contract with the State was renegotiated in
1990.
Although there is no statutory mandate that the State contract with IWIF for workers’
compensation claims processing services, it is the evident intent of the General Assembly that
IWIF provide such services for the State. The General Assembly created IWIF, granted and
amended its powers, periodically reorganized its structure and responsibilities, and annually
appropriates funds to pay for its services. In light of the State’s historic 93-year relationship
with the SAF and IWIF, the Office believes that it would be inappropriate to competitively bid
such services absent legislative direction to do so.
Page 1 of 3

--- Page 10 ---
The Office concurs with the Auditors’ statement that the Office determine the appropriateness of
allowing IWIF to hold funds in reserve. However, after a review of the Agreement and in
consultation with the Office’s Assistant Attorney General, we have determined that if the Office
withdraws the funds from the Unfunded Liability Account and deposits them in an account
invested by the Office, any interest earned on those funds must be credited to the General Fund.
The Treasurer is required to credit interest earned directly to the General Fund except as
otherwise specifically provided by law. The Office could find no provision for an exception in
this case even if the funds were held in a separate account in the State Treasurer’s Office, and,
therefore, such interest could no longer be dedicated to the reduction of the long term liability.
In light of the explicit intent of the Governor and the General Assembly to eventually eliminate
the unfunded liability, and absent an explicit change in that intent, the Office believes it lacks
authority to unilaterally withdraw these funds, thereby resulting in the loss of interest income
dedicated to reducing the unfunded liability.
Finding #6
The Office did not adequately monitor the agreement to ensure the propriety of amounts
paid to IWIF.
Recommendation:
We recommend that the Office, at least on a test basis, review amounts previously paid to IWIF
for propriety and, in the future, determine the propriety of amounts paid to IWIF. This
verification should be documented and include a review of appropriate supporting
documentation such as evidence of amounts paid for injured State workers and documentation of
the propriety of administrative cost billed by IWIF. We also recommend that the Office verify
that the State receives all interest to which it is entitled.
Response:
As noted in response to Finding #5, the Agreement between the State and IWIF was renegotiated
in 1990. Under that Agreement, IWIF serves as third-party administrator for claims brought
against the State under Maryland’s Workers’ Compensation Law.
The Agreement describes three primary responsibilities which involve the Office. The first
requires that the Treasurer decide all matters relating to contract administration and performance.
The second requires IWIF to submit an annual invoice to the Treasurer reflecting the amount of
actual losses incurred by the State, as well as an invoice reflecting the balance of the State’s
account. The third requires IWIF to compile whatever reports the Treasurer determines to be
necessary to:
Page 2 of 3

--- Page 11 ---
(a) monitor the performance of the claims administration activity;
(b) assess the financial liability of the program to the State;
(c) project loss experience for the purposes of establishing budgets and
agency premiums; and
(d) analyze the causes of losses.
A review of the BPW’s files, including the January 31, 1991 agenda item and transcript, does not
reveal any other information defining the requirements of this provision, with the sole exception
of a general comment made by Treasurer Maurer to the effect that the STO’s Insurance Division
was working closely with IWIF. Additionally, there is no record to reflect whether these
performance reports have ever been deemed “necessary”, or have been requested or produced.
Since the inception of the Agreement in 1990, the Office has received an annual report, via the
Department of Budget and Management, that identifies the amount the Governor, through DBM,
has proposed and the General Assembly has appropriated for workers’ compensation coverage,
including any appropriation for the unfunded liability. The Office prepares a disbursement
transmittal, wires this amount to IWIF, and subsequently collects from each agency its share of
the appropriated amounts. In the event that an agency questions the amount of its premium, it is
directed back to IWIF to request a report listing all claims for their agency.
While the Office has not routinely requested performance reports from IWIF, a report on the
State Assessment for Workers’ Compensation was prepared by the Department of Budget and
Management in August of 2001 and was submitted to the Office. This report reviewed, analyzed
and commented on the amounts the State paid and the administrative costs charged by IWIF. In
addition, as a State agency, IWIF was subject to periodic Legislative Audits until 2002. It is now
subject to audit by MIA. The Office monitors these audits and notes that, to date, there have
been no findings questioning the propriety of IWIF premiums or administrative charges.
The Treasurer acknowledges a 1990 contractual provision regarding monitoring claims
administration activity, but notes that there is no definition in the historical records of what this
monitoring process was intended to entail and there is no record of a performance report ever
having been requested or submitted. Since the Treasurer’s responsibilities are based on the 1990
agreement between IWIF and the BPW, there are a number of ways to resolve this issue. The
Office believes discussions with the Board of Public Works for direction on what type of
oversight or information the State deems necessary would be appropriate at this time and will
initiate them. If detailed monitoring and oversight, including independent verification that the
State’s financial interests are adequately protected against a catastrophe, are deemed to be
necessary, as the Auditors suggest, it is likely to require identifying and supplying staff and
monetary resources that the Office does not currently have.
The Office concurs with the Auditor’s recommendation to verify that the State receives all
interest to which it is entitled and will follow-up directly with IWIF to obtain the necessary
confirmation.
Page 3 of 3