Title: Presentation to the Joint Audit Committee - Comptroller of Maryland - Revenue Administration Division

Related Report Dated 9/16/2016
Date: 12/06/2016
Type: Presentations to the Legislature
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5a9daf30cc9d72387404dcd0
Extracted: 2025-06-18T14:03:49.299982
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Comptroller of Maryland
Revenue Administration Division
Report dated September 16, 2016
Presentation to the Joint Audit Committee
Thomas J. Barnickel III, CPA
Mark S. Hagenbuch, CPA
Michael J. Murdzak, CPA
December 6, 2016

--- Page 2 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Report Overview
The report contained 8 findings, including 3 repeat
findings from the prior report.
Key Findings
Local Income Tax Distribution – Local tax
revenues were incorrectly distributed in one
county. RAD had not fully determined the
underlying cause(s) for the distribution errors and
lacked sufficient procedures to consistently
identify the proper taxing areas for distribution
purposes.
Tax Credits – Required documentation was not
always on file to support credits claimed by
taxpayers for taxes paid to other states.
Tax Adjustments – Controls over critical financial
and nonfinancial adjustments to taxpayer
accounts to ensure their propriety were lacking.
Comptroller of Maryland
Page 2
Revenue Administration Division

--- Page 3 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Local Income Tax Distributions (Finding 1)
RAD had not determined the underlying cause(s) for
erroneous subdivision codes assigned to numerous
taxpayers in one county, which affected
distributions of local income taxes.
• A review conducted by the Comptroller of
Maryland disclosed that addresses for 14,861 of
500,000 returns filed by Montgomery County
taxpayers were not properly coded (had an
incorrect subdivision code) in the State’s
automated tax system.
• The erroneous coding resulted in local income
taxes totaling approximately $8.7 million being
incorrectly distributed to certain special taxing
areas within Montgomery County and the County
at large for tax years 2010 through 2014.
Comptroller of Maryland
Page 3
Revenue Administration Division

--- Page 4 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Local Income Tax Distributions (Finding 1)
• Certain steps were taken to correct the
distribution errors, which resulted in 15 taxing
areas receiving a net under-distribution ranging
from $10,000 to $6.1 million and 8 taxing areas
receiving a net over-distribution ranging from
$5,000 to $4.9 million.
• But RAD did not pursue an additional 1,393
returns filed for tax year 2014 (local taxes totaling
$2.2 million) for which taxpayer addresses could
not be identified via automated processes as
legitimate Montgomery County addresses.
• Without a detailed analysis, the extent of the
coding problems, including whether other
jurisdictions were affected, is unknown.
Comptroller of Maryland
Page 4
Revenue Administration Division

--- Page 5 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Local Income Tax Distributions (Finding 2)
Policies and procedures to ensure that the proper
subdivision codes were assigned to taxpayers in the
automated tax system were not sufficient.
• Comprehensive written procedures were not
provided to the RAD employees responsible for
identifying the proper subdivision codes when
automated processes were unsuccessful.
• Incomplete and non-current sources of address
data were used to identify the proper codes.
• RAD lacked procedures to ensure that codes
recorded in the tax system for taxpayers, based on
prior year returns, were accurate.
• Current tax forms did not facilitate the
identification of a taxpayer’s correct taxing area
when an address change occurs after the tax year
but before filing the return for that year.
Comptroller of Maryland
Page 5
Revenue Administration Division

--- Page 6 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Out-of-State Tax Credits (Finding 3)
Required documentation was not always on file to
support out-of-state tax credits claimed on paper tax
returns.
• Our examination of 20 MD tax returns submitted
in paper format for tax year 2013 that claimed
out-of-state tax credits totaling $35 million
disclosed 6 returns for which credits totaling
$27.2 million were allowed by RAD, even though
the required documentation, such as a copy of
the other state’s tax return, was not on file.
RAD’s procedures stipulate that out-of-state tax
credits be disallowed if the required documentation
is not submitted by the filer.
According to RAD’s records, out-of-state tax credits
totaling $112 million were claimed by taxpayers on
approximately 14,300 paper tax returns for tax year
2013.
Comptroller of Maryland
Page 6
Revenue Administration Division

--- Page 7 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Adjustments to Taxpayer Accounts (Finding 4)
Significant financial adjustments to corporate
taxpayer accounts processed by one RAD unit were
not always subject to the required supervisory review.
• There was no documented supervisory review for
3 of 10 adjustments tested that reduced
corporate taxpayer liabilities by $23.4 million.
• System output reports to identify all adjustments
for review were not used as required by formal
RAD procedures.
Between July 2012 and June 2015, this unit
processed adjustments that reduced corporate tax
liabilities by $696.5 million.
Comptroller of Maryland
Page 7
Revenue Administration Division

--- Page 8 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Adjustments to Taxpayer Accounts (Finding 5)
Nonfinancial adjustments to critical taxpayer account
information, such as address changes and
identification numbers, were not adequately
controlled. A review of procedures in place at three
units responsible for processing 34,000 such
adjustments during fiscal year 2015 disclosed:
• Automated output reports of adjustments
processed were not used, as required, by
supervisory personnel in two units to identify
adjustments for review.
• Although output reports were used by the third
unit, not all adjustments were subject to review,
and the reviews performed did not include an
examination of source documentation supporting
the adjustments.
• All 10 adjustments reviewed (primarily address
changes) for one of the three units lacked
required documentation to support their propriety.
Comptroller of Maryland
Page 8
Revenue Administration Division

--- Page 9 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Other Findings
Finding 6 – Information Systems
Critical database security and audit events were not
logged and change reports were not reviewed for
propriety. As a result, unauthorized or inappropriate
activities affecting the integrity of taxpayer data could
occur without detection by management.
Finding 7 – Cash Receipts
• RAD did not reconcile its records to ensure that all
checks that it remotely deposited were
subsequently shredded, reducing the possibility of
misappropriation.
• Certain employees with access to checks received
in the mail could also process critical adjustments
to taxpayer accounts.
Finding 8 – Replacement Refund Checks
Replacement checks, totaling $125 million during the
audit period, were not always reviewed for propriety.
Comptroller of Maryland
Page 9
Revenue Administration Division

--- Page 10 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Conclusions
RAD should
• determine the underlying causes of erroneous
address coding, and the full extent of all
distribution errors;
• establish and implement policies and procedures
so that taxpayer addresses are assigned to the
proper taxing area;
• ensure that required documentation is submitted
and retained to support out-of-state tax credits;
• enhance its procedures to ensure that all
adjustments to corporate and individual taxpayer
accounts are subject to a documented review for
propriety; and
• implement the recommended actions to ensure
that critical database events are logged and
reviewed, and to improve controls over cash
receipts and replacement checks.
Comptroller of Maryland Page 10
Revenue Administration Division