Title: Presentation to the House Appropriations Subcommittee - Department of Transportation - Maryland Transit Administration

Related Report Dated 2/17/2012
Date: 03/05/2012
Type: Presentations to the Legislature
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5a9daf2bcc9d72387404dbe7
Extracted: 2025-06-18T13:40:41.780572
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Department of Transportation
Maryland Transit Administration
Report dated
February 17, 2012

--- Page 2 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Audit Overview
 The Maryland Transit Administration (MTA) is
responsible for the construction, operation and
maintenance of the Baltimore area transit
system and commuter services in the suburban
areas of the State.
 Transit modes in operation include Metro
subway, bus, light rail and the Maryland Rail
Commuter service. MTA also operates the
federally mandated Mobility Paratransit
Program (MPP) and Reduced Fare Program
(RFP) for disabled and/or elderly individuals.
 MTA has approximately 3,100 employees and
its FY 2011 operating and capital expenditures
totaled approximately $947 million.
 The audit report, which covered the period from
November 1, 2007 to December 31, 2010,
included 11 findings, one of which was
repeated from the preceding audit.
Maryland Transit Administration
Page 2

--- Page 3 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Audit Overview (continue d )
 Farebox Recovery Rates
 MPP and RFP Fares
MTA charged significantly lower fares than
allowed by Federal regulations for MPP and
RFP services. OLA calculated that had MTA
charged the federally allowed maximum fares
during FY 2011, an additional $1.6 million
and $3.4 million could have been collected
for the MPP and RFP, respectively.
Maryland Transit Administration
Page 3

--- Page 4 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Key Audit Issues
 MTA did not ensure the propriety of claims
reimbursements and administrative fee
payments for employee and retiree healthcare
costs, which totaled $112.7 million during FYs
2009 through 2011.
 MTA lacked adequate procedures and controls
to ensure that amounts paid under a $10
million engineering contract were proper.
 MTA lacked sufficient procedures and controls
over the MPP eligibility process, did not
adequately monitor one MPP contract and
related payments, and did not attempt to
obtain refunds of fuel excise taxes paid.
 The RFP application process for disabled
riders was not sufficiently controlled and
lacked formal guidance for determining
eligibility.
 Deficiencies were noted in a number of other
areas including payroll and inventory.
Maryland Transit Administration
Page 4

--- Page 5 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Contract Payments and Monitoring
MTA’s monitoring of a vendor contracted to
administer and pay healthcare claims on behalf
of its union employees and retirees was
insufficient. (Finding 1) During FY 2009 through
FY 2011, MTA paid the vendor $112.7 million,
($104.4 million in claims reimbursements and
$8.3 million in administrative fees).
 MTA paid for claim reimbursements without
any verification that the amounts invoiced
were proper. For example, MTA paid a March
2011 weekly invoice totaling $2.6 million,
which included estimated and previously
unpaid billed amounts, without any verification
that the charges were proper.
 MTA did not adequately ensure that
administrative fees invoiced and paid to the
vendor were proper or that utilization reviews
paid for were conducted by the vendor.
Maryland Transit Administration
Page 5

--- Page 6 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Contract Payments and Monitoring
(continued)
MTA lacked adequate procedures and controls to
ensure that amounts paid under a consulting
contract for various engineering services were
proper. (Finding 2) The contract covers a 5-year
period ending January 2014 and consists primarily
of $8.9 million in estimated direct labor and
overhead costs and $880,000 in fixed fees.
 MTA could not document that it approved
increases in the labor rates or compared the
invoiced rates with the contract. Certain
invoiced labor rates selected for testing did not
agree with the related contract.
 MTA did not ensure the propriety of the
reimbursable overhead costs. Since the
contract’s inception, MTA paid the firm an
overhead rate of 130% rather than the actual
overhead rate for each FY as provided for in the
contract. A similar condition was noted with
overhead rates charged by a subcontractor.
Maryland Transit Administration
Page 6

--- Page 7 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Mobility Paratransit Program
Background
 MTA operates the
Fiscal Year 2011 MPP Statistics
federally mandated
Annual Cost - $59.7 million
Mobility Paratransit
Rides Provided – 1.7 million
Program (MPP) for Average Cost Per Trip - $39.47
Standard Fare Charged Per Trip - $1.85
individuals who are
Source: MTA Records (unaudited)
unable to use the
MTA’s fixed route bus, metro, or light rail
services.
 The MPP is funded by the Transportation
Trust Fund and provides door-to-door service
within a three-quarter mile range from any
fixed route system.
 MTA generally provided the vehicles for the
MPP but contracted with three vendors to
provide the drivers, fuel, and maintenance.
Maryland Transit Administration
Page 7

--- Page 8 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Mobility Paratransit Pro gram (continued)
MTA lacked adequate procedures and controls
over the MPP eligibility process. (Finding 5)
 Eligibility determinations were not subject
to independent review and approval. All
30 MPP enrollees tested lacked critical
information to support the applicant’s
eligibility.
 MTA had not established formal guidance
to assist MTA staff in determining
applicant eligibility and did not adequately
define which healthcare providers were
qualified to certify an applicant’s disability.
Maryland Transit Administration
Page 8

--- Page 9 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Mobility Paratransit Pro gram (continued)
MTA did not adequately monitor one MPP
contract selected for review and the related
payments. (Finding 6)
 MTA could not document its verification of
driver hours billed by the vendor.
 MTA paid the vendor for vehicle runs based
on scheduled ending times even when the
routes were completed early. Our review of
one day’s billing totaling $50,000, disclosed
that MTA overpaid the vendor approximately
$2,400 for vehicle runs that ended prior to
the scheduled time.
 MTA did not ensure that fuel charges invoiced
by the vendor were proper and fares collected
by the vendor were properly accounted for.
Maryland Transit Administration
Page 9

--- Page 10 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Mobility Paratransit Pro gram (continued)
MTA did not attempt to obtain refunds of
excise taxes paid to the MPP vendors for fuel
used in State vehicles. (Finding 7) For
example,
 Amounts invoiced to MTA included federal
($0.244 per gallon for diesel and $0.184
per gallon for gas) excise taxes.
 During FY 2011 alone, OLA determined that
MTA paid the three MPP vendors $331,028
for federal excise taxes.
 MTA had determined that certain of these
taxes may no longer be recoverable.
Maryland Transit Administration
Page 10

--- Page 11 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Other Findings
 MTA did not always use the appropriate
payment method for disbursements. (Finding 3)
 MTA had not established adequate controls to
ensure the propriety of payroll payments and
pension records for union operator employees.
Related expenditures totaled $201 million
during FY 2011. (Finding 4)
 MTA lacked sufficient policies, procedures, and
controls over the RFP application process for
disabled individuals. For example, one
individual had unilateral control over the
process without any independent review and
approval. (Finding 8)
 MTA did not maintain reliable mileage records
to ensure that bus inspections were performed
as required. (Finding 9)
 MTA had not established adequate controls
over its materials and supplies and equipment
inventories. (Findings 10 &11)
Maryland Transit Administration
Page 11

--- Page 12 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Conclusion
MTA should:
 Establish procedures to ensure that amounts
invoiced by vendors are proper and identify and
recover any previous amounts improperly paid
to vendors.
 Ensure MPP and RFP eligibility decisions are
subject to independent review and approval
and establish formal guidance to aid in the
eligibility decisions, including the definition of a
qualified healthcare professional, as applicable.
 Determine the amount of fuel excise taxes that
can be recovered, seek refunds of these taxes,
and ensure that future excise taxes are properly
recovered in a timely manner.
 Establish adequate controls and processes over
payroll, disbursements, bus inspections, and
inventory.
Maryland Transit Administration
Page 12