Title: Presentation to the House Appropriations Subcommittee - Maryland Department of Transportation - Motor Vehicle Administration

Related Report Dated 11/22/2017
Date: 02/12/2018
Type: Presentations to the Legislature
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5a9daf31cc9d72387404dd1f
Extracted: 2025-07-02T15:45:22.691722
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Maryland Department of
Transportation
Motor Vehicle Administration (MVA)
Report Dated November 22, 2017

--- Page 2 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Audit Overview
 MVA oversees a variety of activities related to the
ownership and operation of motor vehicles, including
the registration and titling of vehicles, and issues
driver’s licenses and personal identification cards.
 Our audit focused primarily on MVA’s procedures and
controls for fulfilling these responsibilities, as well as
the procedures and controls over procurements and
disbursements, cash receipts, payroll, and information
systems security.
 Our report included 12 findings and concluded that
MVA had satisfactorily addressed 8 of the 9 findings
in the preceding audit report. The remaining finding is
repeated in this report (Finding 8).
 MVA maintains its headquarters in Anne Arundel
County and 24 branch offices. Fiscal year 2016
collections, which primarily consisted of motor vehicle
excise tax receipts and vehicle registration fees,
totaled $1.7 billion.
 As of August 25, 2016, there were approximately 4.8
million active driver’s licenses and identification
cards.
MDOT – Motor Vehicle Administration
Page 2

--- Page 3 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Key Findings
 An internal MTA investigation revealed that 270
fraudulent federally non-compliant driver’s licenses
and identification cards (collectively known as
products) had been issued. However, the scope of
MVA’s investigation was limited and we found several
hundred additional products that may have been
issued improperly.
 MVA lacked adequate procedures to ensure that
• for four information technology service contracts
valued at approximately $57.2 million the hours
billed were reasonable, all deliverables were
received, or contract terms were complied with;
• certain driving records were being reviewed for
possible administrative action, such as license
suspension or revocation;
• differences between recorded collections and
amounts deposited at branch offices were
adequately investigated; and
• collections received from county offices for vehicle
registration renewals they processed were received
timely, adequately controlled, and deposited.
MDOT – Motor Vehicle Administration
Page 3

--- Page 4 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Licensing Issuance (Finding 1)
An internal investigation revealed that MVA issued 270
fraudulent federally non-compliant driver’s licenses (DL)
and identification cards (ID), referred to as products, to
walk-in applicants based on counterfeit documents.
However, the scope of the investigation was limited. Our
expanded review identified an additional 329 products
that may have been issued improperly.
Applicants for a non-compliant DL and ID card are
required to make an appointment to obtain the product
and present a letter from the Comptroller of Maryland,
which reflects a control number unique to the individual
as evidence of Maryland income tax filings for the
previous two years. The MVA investigation
• covered the period from October 13, 2015 to March
7, 2016 and included two employees at one branch
location;
• identified internal control deficiencies that allowed the
270 products to be issued to walk-in applicants; and
• noted that, for walk-in applicants, the Driver’s
Licensing System did not identify if the Comptroller
number had been previously used.
MDOT – Motor Vehicle Administration
Page 4

--- Page 5 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Licensing Issuance (Finding 1 – cont.)
OLA determined that internal control deficiencies
identified by MVA in its investigation were not corrected
timely:
• MVA continued to allow walk-in candidates to apply for
a non-compliant DL or ID card, and
• did not institute verification procedures for walk-in
applicants to identify if a Comptroller number had
been previously used.
OLA’s expanded analysis extracted data for all 4.8 million
active products as of August 2016 and identified 82,660
that were obtained using a Comptroller number. Results
of OLA’s analysis of products issued using a Comptroller
number disclosed 329 individuals who may have
improperly received federally non-compliant DL or ID
cards:
• 225 individuals used 62 Comptroller numbers
including one Comptroller number that was used 16
times, and
• 104 additional individuals used a Comptroller number
where the first and/or last names did not match the
Comptroller’s records.
MDOT – Motor Vehicle Administration
Page 5

--- Page 6 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Licensing - Suspension/Revocation (Finding 3)
MVA did not ensure that all driving records were being
reviewed, as required, for possible administrative action
resulting from traffic offenses incurred. Our tests
disclosed records for which the required administrative
action was not taken.
• Certain cases in which the drivers had previously
accumulated 8 or 12 points on their driving records
were being incorrectly excluded from MVA’s review to
determine potential administrative action.
• For example, for 10 days tested, we determined that
34 of 427 traffic offense convictions were not
subject to the review process.
• Our review of 31 excluded driving records disclosed
8 that required administrative action to be taken
against them, such as license suspension,
revocation, or an extension of an existing suspension
or revocation. For example, 2 drivers who were
serving a 30-day suspension subsequently
accumulated more points which should have
resulted in a 90-day suspension.
MDOT – Motor Vehicle Administration
Page 6

--- Page 7 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Contract Monitoring (Finding 5)
MVA’s procedures did not ensure that the most
favorable rates were obtained for one Information
Technology (IT) contract. Also MVA’s procedures for IT
contract monitoring were not effective in ensuring that
hours billed and paid for were reasonable, all
deliverables were received, and contract terms were
complied with.
We examined four IT contracts with a collective value of
$57.2 million and related payments totaling $40.2
million as of May 11, 2017.
Most Favorable Rates for Certain Labor Categories Were
Not Obtained From One Vendor
• A $21.4 million IT contract was procured using a
competitive sealed proposal process when lower
rates for certain required labor categories could have
been obtained through a Consulting and Technology
Services master contract maintained by the State’s
Department of Information Technology. Over the
course of the contract term, which continues through
June 2023, the higher contract rates could
potentially cost MVA an additional $272,000.
MDOT – Motor Vehicle Administration
Page 7

--- Page 8 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Contract Monitoring (Finding 5 – cont.)
Effective Contract Monitoring Was Not Established
• For two contracts valued at $17.8 million, MVA did
not establish comprehensive task orders to direct
the work and to allow effective contract monitoring.
• For three contracts totaling $46.6 million, MVA
lacked sufficient evidence that deliverables were
properly completed and received.
• For two contracts totaling $28.6 million, MVA did not
review the qualifications of new contractor
employees and did not approve these employees.
Review of Invoices was Insufficient
For two contracts valued at $17.8 million, MVA did not
adequately review the invoices to ensure compliance
with contract terms and rates. For example, for one of
these contracts, the task order proposals and related
invoices totaling $1.1 million for two software
modifications were based on a flat fee; however, the
contract generally required such tasks to be performed
on a time and materials basis for established labor
categories and to be supported by timesheets.
MDOT – Motor Vehicle Administration
Page 8

--- Page 9 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Cash Receipts (Findings 7 and 8)
 MVA did not have adequate procedures to ensure that
differences between fees collected and recorded on
MVA’s automated system and amounts deposited by
branch offices were adequately investigated and
resolved, and related documentation was not always
maintained. We reviewed three branch offices with
receipts totaling $184.4 million in fiscal year 2016. In
addition, investigations of bank chargeback
transactions were not always adequately performed
and were not subject to supervisory review (Finding 7).
 Collections received at MVA headquarters for vehicle
registration renewals processed at 12 county offices
were not adequately controlled. Checks received from
county offices were not always immediately recorded
and restrictively endorsed and duties were not
properly segregated to ensure all collections received
were deposited and recorded. MVA also did not
ensure that the funds and supporting documentation
due from the county offices were received timely
(Finding 8).
MDOT – Motor Vehicle Administration
Page 9

--- Page 10 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Other Findings
 MVA had not established adequate controls over its
inventory stock of blank driver’s licenses and
identification cards (Finding 2).
 MVA did not ensure that supervisory reviews of driving
record transactions, such as suspensions and
revocations, were adequately performed (Finding 4).
 MVA did not adequately control electronically
submitted vendor bids (Finding 6).
 Effective controls were not established over critical
virtual servers and numerous employee workstations
were not properly secured (Findings 9 and 10).
 Employees responsible for reviewing and approving
changes to critical data in the Ignition Interlock
Program had access capability allowing them to change
these data, such as the period a driver was required to
be in the Program (Finding 11).
 MVA did not adequately monitor corporate purchasing
card purchases and did not always comply with related
State policies and procedures (Finding 12).
MDOT – Motor Vehicle Administration
Page 10

--- Page 11 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Conclusions
MVA should
• establish comprehensive procedures to ensure the
proper issuance of federally non-compliant driver’s
licenses and identification cards, investigate the
results of OLA’s expanded analysis of licenses and
cards improperly issued, and take appropriate action;
• take the recommended steps to properly monitor all
contracts and ensure costs are reasonable, invoices
are consistent with contract terms, and
comprehensive task orders are established;
• establish procedures to ensure that supervisory
review of driving record transactions are performed
and that all driving records with accumulated 8 or 12
points are reviewed and that appropriate
administrative action is taken; and
• implement the recommended actions to improve
controls of information security, cash receipts,
corporate purchasing cards, inventory stock of blank
driver’s licenses and identification cards, and other
exception areas.
MDOT – Motor Vehicle Administration
Page 11