Title: Presentation to the Senate Budget and Taxation Subcommittee - Department of Human Services - Office of the Secretary and Related Units

Related Report Dated 9/12/2017
Date: 01/29/2018
Type: Presentations to the Legislature
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5a9daf31cc9d72387404dd2b
Extracted: 2025-06-20T00:05:37.562276
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Department of Human Services
(DHS) – Office of the Secretary and
Other Units
Report dated September 12, 2017

--- Page 2 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Audit Overview
 The Department of Human Services (DHS) provides
intervention services to stabilize families and
vulnerable adults, encourages financial
independence by providing temporary support and
transition services, and provides for the welfare of
children at risk.
 To deliver these services, DHS is organized into 7
budgetary units. This audit included the:
 Office of the Secretary, which provides overall
direction and coordination for DHS programs;
 Operations office, which provides core
administrative services to DHS units; and
 Office of Technology, which is responsible for the
management and direction of DHS information
systems.
The other units of DHS are audited and reported
upon separately.
 The report has 13 findings, with 4 repeat findings
(4, 5, 10, & 12) from the preceding audit report.
DHS - Department of Human Services Page 2

--- Page 3 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Key Findings
 DHS did not effectively administer Information
Technology (IT) contract terms and task order activity
to ensure the reasonableness of vendor-proposed
services and costs.
 Due to improper project planning and
administration, DHS cancelled an IT project after
paying $10.1 million, including $4.8 million that was
paid unnecessarily.
 DHS could not explain why guaranteed minimum
compensation was offered to some legal firms while
others were compensated on a per-case fee basis.
The guaranteed compensation resulted in higher
payments ($616,000) than what would have been
paid using the per-case fee basis.
 DHS did not have adequate procedures to ensure
that payments to legal firms were proper and did not
follow up on problems that were identified.
 DHS information systems that included sensitive
personal information were not properly secured.
DHS - Department of Human Services Page 3

--- Page 4 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
IT Contract (Findings 1 and 2)
Background
DHS contracted with a vendor for the period June
2010 through December 2015 at a cost of
approximately $125.4 million to provide computer
application services to existing DHS information
technology (IT) systems and programs. The contract
was renewed until December 2017 at an additional
cost of $51.5 million.
The contract included 2 levels of services referred to
as Level 1 and 2. The Level 2 services were for
projects expected to take more than 500 hours and
$10 million was authorized per year. For these
services, DHS solicited a technical proposal from the
vendor for each task order, including the number of
anticipated hours and cost to complete each task.
Payments for Level 2 services during the audit period
were $30 million.
DHS - Department of Human Services Page 4

--- Page 5 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
IT Contract (Finding 1)
DHS did not effectively administer contract terms and
task order activity associated with Level 2 services,
resulting in a lack of assurance that services and
costs proposed by the vendor were reasonable
(Finding 1).
• DHS did not have formal procedures to verify the
reasonableness of task order hours and costs.
For example, the vendor proposed a task order in
May 2014 estimating 12,840 hours at a cost of
$1.55 million. DHS asserted that it reviewed the
task order, but could not document its review or
explain its methodology.
• In 2012, DHS changed the billing process for level
2 services from a deliverables basis to a fixed-
price installment basis, which was inconsistent
with the contract terms. That is, the total task
order price was divided into equal monthly
payments for the task order term, which were paid
without regard to deliverables received.
DHS - Department of Human Services Page 5

--- Page 6 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
IT Contract (Finding 1 – cont.)
• DHS did not monitor task orders resulting in FY
2015 payments of $8.4 million for task orders
beyond the annual authorized contract amount of
$10 million.
o No contract modification was prepared or
submitted to the Board of Public Works.
o The resulting expenditures exceeded DHS
available FY 2015 appropriation by $4.5
million, including $1.7 million in general
funds.
DHS - Department of Human Services Page 6

--- Page 7 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
IT Contract (Finding 2)
DHS did not properly plan and administer task order
projects, resulting in payments totaling $10.1 million
toward a $27.6 million project that was cancelled
(Finding 2).
• In December 2011, DHS issued two task orders
to modernize one of its computer systems, which
were cancelled in October 2012.
• DHS cited the enactment of the federal Affordable
Care Act (ACA) as the reason for the cancellation.
The decision to initiate the project is questionable
since ACA was enacted in March 2010, well
before the issuance of the task orders.
• DHS paid $10.1 million on the installment basis,
which was $4 million more than if DHS had, in
accordance with the contract, paid based on the
value of deliverables received, which was $6.1
million.
DHS - Department of Human Services Page 7

--- Page 8 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
IT Contract (Finding 2 – cont.)
• Although cancelled in October 2012, the
contractor was not formally notified until January
2013, resulting in additional unnecessary
payments of $781,000.
• There is no evidence any of the deliverables
received will provide any future benefits. Costs
for the task orders were generally shared
equally between the State and the federal
government.
DHS - Department of Human Services Page 8

--- Page 9 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Legal Services (Finding 3)
Background
DHS’ Maryland Legal Services Program (MLSP) was
created to provide legal representation to children
who are victims of abuse or neglect and adults
involved in adult guardianship proceedings. DHS
entered into emergency contracts with 8 incumbent
legal firms valued at $24.5 million from September
2013 through August 2015.
 DHS executed guaranteed minimum compensation
contracts with 2 of the 8 firms, but did not attempt
to maximize the cases assigned to those firms.
DHS assigned cases on a rotating basis to all firms
(Finding 3).
• Based on our analysis, under these
circumstances, DHS paid these 2 firms
approximately $616,000 more than if they had
been reimbursed on a per-case fee, as the
other 6 firms were.
• DHS could not explain why some firms were
offered minimum compensation agreements
but others were not.
DHS - Department of Human Services Page 9

--- Page 10 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Legal Services (Finding 4)
DHS did not have adequate procedures to ensure that
payments to legal firms were proper and did not follow
up on the deficiencies with the services identified
during annual site visits (Finding 4).
• DHS did not always obtain and review appropriate
documents to verify its responsibility to provide legal
services for invoiced individuals. Our test of 10
invoices totaling $2.2 million disclosed that for 3
invoices totaling approximately $329,000, the
verifications were not signed and dated, and DHS
did not document that it sighted the verification
records for all of the individuals on the invoice.
• DHS did not follow up on deficiencies noted during
annual site visits to assess whether contractual
requirements were met. Follow-up was not
conducted for three firms that did not respond to
DHS’ request for supporting documentation of
services provided, including one firm for which DHS
has “significant concerns/issues” regarding client
visits.
DHS - Department of Human Services Page 10

--- Page 11 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Information Systems Security
 Sensitive customer information was stored in
several databases in clear text. For example, we
noted that a table in one of these databases
contained the full names, social security
numbers, and dates of birth for 1.6 million unique
individuals in clear text (Finding 9).
 Monitoring controls over several critical DHS
databases were insufficient, as modifications to
numerous database tables and certain security
events were not recorded or logged for
subsequent review (Finding 10).
 DHS’ computers and network were not properly
protected. For example, DHS did not ensure, on
an ongoing basis, that malware protection
software was installed, up-to-date, and
operational on all its computers. The malware
protection for almost 1,700 computers was not
being centrally monitored (Finding 11).
DHS - Department of Human Services Page 11

--- Page 12 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Other Selected Findings
Grant Management
DHS lacked sufficient procedures and accountability
over grants to a network of community and faith-
based organizations and governmental departments
and agencies. FY 2015 grants totaled $17.9 million
(Finding 5).
Purchasing and Disbursements
In August 2015 DHS paid a State university $300,000
for a power upgrade system at the university building
used as an emergency shelter; as of March 2017 the
upgrades had not been performed (Finding 7).
Federal Funds
State funds were used to cover the cost of residential
rehabilitation services that are potentially eligible for
federal reimbursement (Finding 8).
Electronic Benefits Transfer System
DHS lacked assurance that the System service
provider was properly secured against operational and
security risks (Finding 12).
DHS - Department of Human Services Page 12

--- Page 13 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Conclusion
DHS should:
• establish appropriate procedures and controls to
ensure vendor accountability in accordance with
all contract and task order terms and conditions;
• eliminate the use of guaranteed minimum
contracts for legal services and ensure that all
payments are supported by necessary
documentation;
• Implement necessary IT system controls over
customer data and DHS databases and
computers or networks; and
• implement the recommended actions to improve
controls over grants, purchasing and
disbursements, federal funds, and the electronic
benefits transfer system.
DHS - Department of Human Services Page 13