Title: Presentation to the Joint Audit Committee - Department of Business and Economic Development

Related Report Dated 10/9/2015
Date: 11/03/2015
Type: Presentations to the Legislature
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5a9daf2ecc9d72387404dca5
Extracted: 2025-06-18T13:58:55.939514
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Department of Legis lative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Department of Business and
Economic Development
(renamed the Department of
Commerce)
Report dated October 9, 2015
Presentation to the Joint Audit Committee
Thomas J. Barnickel III, CPA
Paul R. Denz, CPA
Bekana Edossa, CPA, CFE
Terry S. Gibson, CFE
November 3, 2015

--- Page 2 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Audit Overview
 DBED’s (recently renamed the Department of
Commerce) primary purpose is to stimulate and
strengthen the Maryland economy by developing
policies and implementing programs to help
generate new jobs or retain existing jobs.
 DBED also develops policies and implements
programs to help generate investments by
attracting businesses to the State, by facilitating
the expansion and retention of existing
companies, and by promoting Maryland’s
strategic assets.
 DBED uses various financing programs and
incentives, such as loans, grants, tax credits, and
other financial investments to accomplish its
purpose. During FY 2014, DBED’s operating
expenditures totaled $140.8 million, including
$43 million for grants and $59.9 million for loans
and other investments.
 Report includes 11 findings; 1 was repeated from
the preceding audit report (current Finding 6).
Department of Business and Economic Development Page 2

--- Page 3 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Key Audit Issues
 DBED did not ensure that comprehensive
procedures had been developed and adopted to
govern the Premium Tax Credit auction
established under the Invest Maryland Program.
 The methodology used by DBED’s Maryland
Venture Fund Authority to select venture firms to
invest in qualified Maryland companies, as well
as the determination of how much capital to
provide each firm, was not adequately
documented.
 DBED lacked adequate processes to ensure that
requirements had been met before forgiving
certain conditional loans and grants, and granting
certain tax credits.
 DBED had not properly established and
maintained certain records pertaining to its
financing programs.
Department of Business and Economic Development Page 3

--- Page 4 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Premium Tax Credit Au c tion
Effective oversight of the Premium Tax Credit auction
was not established, since DBED did not ensure
comprehensive written procedures were developed
and adopted to govern the auction process (Finding
1). The auction raised $84 million in capital by the
sale of $100 million in premium tax credits to 11
insurance companies.
 DBED had little specific knowledge of how critical
auction functions, such as the evaluations of
participant applications and bids, were conducted
by the auction vendor.
 DBED lacked documentation as to why the bidding
methodology used for the auction was preferable
to another available option.
 DBED accepted applications to participate in the
auction after the deadline established in the law,
and premium tax certificates issued to winning
bidders included incorrect identifying information.
Department of Business and Economic Development Page 4

--- Page 5 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Premium Tax Credit Au c tion (continued)
DBED did not adequately document the selection
process and allocation of capital raised to venture
firms, and the monitoring efforts over the firms’
investment activity were not sufficient (Finding 2). Of
the $84 million capital raised by the auction, $56
million was designated for investment by venture
firms in Maryland innovative technology companies.
 DBED could not adequately document how it
selected 7 firms from the 37 deemed eligible to
receive funds and how it allocated capital to these
firms, which ranged from $3 million to $12 million.
 DBED lacked procedures for ensuring that required
quarterly investment reports were received from
venture firms for its review. We found that 18 of
24 reports required from 5 firms in CYs 2013 and
2014 were not submitted or were incomplete.
 DBED did not monitor management fees charged
by the firms. For CY 2013, DBED had not
questioned or investigated $309,000 in fees that
appeared to exceed the amounts allowed by law.
Department of Business and Economic Development Page 5

--- Page 6 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Financing Programs
Maryland Economic Development Assistance Authority
and Fund (MEDAAF)
DBED’s process for verifying employment data
submitted by recipients of conditional loans and grants
provided by MEDAAF was not effective. DBED forgave
loans and grant repayments based on recipient
reported information, including the creation of a
specified number of jobs, without adequately verifying
its accuracy. Between December 2010 and January
2015, DBED forgave 22 loans and grants totaling $6.8
million (Finding 4).
 OLA tests of 5 forgiven loans and grants disclosed
that required recipient employment reports were
incomplete for 2, totaling $1.5 million. Missing data
included wage and salary information.
 DBED staff performed employment data verifications
for only 2 of the 22 loans and grants, totaling
$700,000, including none after February 2012.
DBED also received certain independent data
compiled by a State university from State sources to
aid in the verification process, but it often did not
reconcile to recipient submitted employment data.
Department of Business and Economic Development Page 6

--- Page 7 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Financing Programs (co n tinued)
Maryland Small Business Development Financing
Authority (MSBDFA)
DBED had not developed formal written procedures
and criteria for the use of forbearance agreements
when MSBDFA loan recipients defaulted on those
obligations and did not have a mechanism to track and
monitor the use of these agreements (Finding 5).
 In a forbearance agreement, DBED agrees to not
pursue legal remedies, such as liquidation of
collateral, if a delinquent borrower agrees to a
modified payment plan.
 Forbearance agreements could be modified multiple
times due to the borrower’s inability to meet the
modified payment plan. A review of 4 loans totaling
$434,000 found multiple modifications; 1 loan was
modified 6 times over a 6 year period.
 DBED’s automated system did not adequately track
the use of forbearance agreements or the history of
this loan activity.
 MSBDFA executed and disbursed loans totaling
$4.2 million in FY 2014.
Department of Business and Economic Development Page 7

--- Page 8 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Financing Programs (co n tinued)
Automated Records
Employee capabilities to record critical transactions
on DBED’s financing programs monitoring system
were not sufficiently restricted (Finding 6 - repeat).
Eleven of 47 system users could process critical
transactions without supervisory review and
approval; and 7 users had such access, but did not
need it for their job duties.
Certain cash balances per the system were not
adequately reconciled to the State’s records
(Finding 7). As of January 2015, the most recent
cash balance reconciliation performed for 2
financing programs was for September 2014, and
both had unresolved differences. For one program
the unreconciled difference was $1.6 million.
The monitoring system tracks critical financial
transactions, including approvals and payments of
more than 500 active financial instruments (such
as loans and grants) totaling $592.5 million as of
June 30, 2014.
Department of Business and Economic Development Page 8

--- Page 9 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Tax Credit Programs
One Maryland Tax Credit Program
DBED did not sufficiently verify applicant compliance
with job creation and cost requirements (Finding 8).
Businesses investing in a qualified development
project creating at least 25 new jobs in 24 months
may be eligible for up to $5.5 million in income tax
credits based on project’s costs. Credits totaling
$54.7 million were issued to 15 program applicants
during our audit period.
 Job creation requirements were not adequately
verified as DBED did not routinely receive detailed
payroll reports and DBED staff only reviewed 2 of
15 applicants issued credits during our audit
period.
 DBED did not obtain adequate supporting
documentation from applicants of claimed costs,
such as invoices, to confirm their eligibility for the
tax credit.
Department of Business and Economic Development Page 9

--- Page 10 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Tax Credit Programs (co ntinued)
Film Production Activity Tax Credit Program
Program regulations were not established as
required, and DBED lacked documentation of
supervisory reviews of credits issued (Finding 9).
State law provides that an entity may be entitled to
an income tax credit for certain costs incurred to
carry out film production activity in Maryland.
During FYs 2012 through 2014, 9 tax credits
totaling $36.4 million were issued to 5 entities.
 DBED did not jointly adopt regulations with the
Comptroller of Maryland, as required by law, to
carry out the provisions of the Program, including
the criteria and procedures for application,
approval, and continued monitoring of eligibility.
 DBED lacked documentation that supervisory
personnel had reviewed the tax credit certificates
prior to their issuance to film production entities.
Department of Business and Economic Development Page 10

--- Page 11 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Other Issues
DBED did not obtain the required approval from the
State Treasurer in advance of opening 4 investment
bank accounts. DBED deposited approximately
$34.5 million and disbursed $18.1 million prior to
obtaining the Office’s approval (Finding 3).
DBED had not established adequate procedures and
controls over Maryland State Arts Council grant
awards. For example, one employee had virtually
complete control over the grant record keeping and
payment processes. Approximately 250 grants were
awarded during FY 2014 with related disbursements
totaling approximately $10.3 million (Finding 10).
DBED had not established proper controls over its
purchasing transactions and the assignment of user
access capabilities on the State’s Financial
Management Information System (FMIS). For
example, several employees could process
purchases without independent approval.
Disbursements processed through FMIS totaled
$118.1 million during FY 2014 (Finding 11).
Department of Business and Economic Development Page 11

--- Page 12 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Conclusions
DBED needs to
 ensure that formal procedures are prepared for
significant programs and related processes, such
as the Premium Tax Credit auction;
 adequately document the selection and allocation
of funds to venture firms, obtain and review
complete activity reports from these firms, and
monitor management fees charged;
 establish an effective process to verify
employment data for loans and grants to be
forgiven, and establish procedures and
appropriate records for forbearance agreements;
 ensure that access to the financing programs
monitoring system is adequately restricted and
that cash balances are reconciled with State
records;
 ensure the propriety of certain tax credits issued;
 improve controls over certain grants; and
 implement appropriate FMIS controls.
Department of Business and Economic Development Page 12