Title: Presentation to the Joint Audit Committee - Summary of Reports Issued and Recommended Committee Action - August 1, 2015 to November 30, 2015


The reports referenced in this presentation are listed below.

Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services - Division of Parole and Probation - Probation Intake and Fee Assessment Processes (11/30/2015)

Department of State Police (11/23/2015)

Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services - Office of the Secretary and Other Units (11/18/2015)

Video Lottery Operations Revenue - Small, Minority, and Women-Owned Businesses Account (10/23/2015)

Department of Business and Economic Development (10/9/2015)

Maryland Health Benefit Exchange (10/2/2015)
Date: 12/08/2015
Type: Presentations to the Legislature
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5a9daf2ecc9d72387404dc9e
Extracted: 2025-06-18T22:12:14.946504
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Summary of Reports Issued and
Recommended Committee Action
August 1, 2015 to November 30, 2015
Presentation to Joint Audit Committee
Thomas J. Barnickel III, CPA
Legislative Auditor
December 8, 2015

--- Page 3 ---
Reports Issued August 1, 2015 to November 30, 2015
Summary
Total Reports Issued 30
Reports Recommended for Action 6
Recommended
Agency Action
1. Maryland Health Benefit Exchange JAC Letter of Concern
2. Department of Business and Economic Development JAC Hearing1
3. Video Lottery Operations Revenue – Small, Minority, and JAC Hearing1
Women-Owned Businesses Account (Performance)
4. Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services – JAC Hearing2
Office of the Secretary and Other Units
5. Department of State Police JAC Hearing2
6. Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services – JAC Hearing2
Division of Parole and Probation – Probation Intake
and Fee Assessment Processes
Summary of Recommended Action
Joint Audit Committee (JAC) Hearing 5
JAC Letter of Concern 1
Total 6
1 Presented to Joint Audit Committee in November 2015
2 Presented to Joint Audit Committee in December 2015
1

--- Page 4 ---
REPORTS ISSUED
AUGUST 1, 2015 TO NOVEMBER 30, 2015
Number
Agency Report Date of Pages
St. Mary’s County – Office of the Clerk of Circuit Court 8/05/15 5
Caroline County – Office of the Register of Wills 8/19/15 5
Comptroller of Maryland – Office of the Comptroller – Bureau of Revenue EsTtimotaatl eNsu mb8e/r2 o8f/ 1R5e ports Issued:5 6 3
Maryland Commission on Civil Rights 9/01/15 5
Comptroller of Maryland – Central Payroll Bureau 9/02/15 5
Executive Department – Office of the Governor – Boards , Commissions, and Offices –
Governor’s Office for Children – Office of the Deaf and Hard of Hearing 9/04/15 8
Department of Transportation – Financial Management Information System –
Centralized Operations 9/09/15 6
Kent County – Office of the Clerk of Circuit Court 9/14/15 5
Review of Local Government Audit Reports – Fiscal Yea r Ending
June 30, 2014 (Special) 9/15/15 14
Caroline County – Office of the Clerk of Circuit Court 9/17/15 8
St. Mary’s County Public Schools (Financial Management Practices Audit) 9/21/15 34
Department of Health and Mental Hygiene – Clifton T. Perkins Hospital Center 9/18/15 6
Office of the State Prosecutor 9/22/15 4
Montgomery County – Office of the Register of Wills 10/01/15 5
Maryland Health Benefit Exchange 10/02/15 33
Department of Health and Mental Hygiene – Springfield Hospital Center 10/06/15 7
Department of Business and Economic Development 10/09/15 30
Department of Health and Mental Hygiene – Spring Grove Hospital Center 10/15/15 7
Department of Health and Mental Hygiene – Western Maryland Hospital Center 10/16/15 8
Kent County – Office of the Register of Wills 10/20/15 6
Video Lottery Operations Revenue – Small, Minority, and Women-Owned
Businesses Account (Performance) 10/23/15 29
Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services – North Region 10/28/15 13
Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services – South Region 10/28/15 18
Review of the Actions Taken by the Comptroller of Maryland – Revenue
Administration Division to Resolve Repeat Audit Findings in Response
to the April 2015 Joint Chairmen’s Report (Special) 11/04/15 5
Worcester County – Office of the Register of Wills 11/04/15 5
Worcester County – Office of the Clerk of Circuit Court 11/10/15 5
Department of Housing and Community Development 11/16/15 21
Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services – Office of the
Secretary and Other Units 11/18/15 27
Department of State Police 11/23/15 33
Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services – Division of Parole and
Probation – Probation Intake and Fee Assessment Processes 11/30/15 23
Total Number of Reports Issued: 30
2

--- Page 5 ---
Reports Recommended for Committee Action
Significant Audit Findings
August 1, 2015 to November 30, 2015
1) Maryland Health Benefit Exchange (MHBE) (10/02/15 – 33 pages – 10 Findings)
This report contains the findings for the fiscal compliance audit of the Maryland Health Benefit
Exchange (MHBE), which excludes the results of an evaluation of the procurement and contracting
policies and practices for significant contract awards to develop the original Exchange System.
Those results will be presented in a separate performance audit report to be issued in the future.
• MHBE did not comply with its procurement policy when purchasing certain goods and services
under the emergency and sole source procurement methods. Our review of five such contract
awards totaling $96.5 million disclosed that certain aspects of the procurements were not
carried out in accordance with MHBE policies. Also, relevant procurement and contract
documentation, such as evidence of negotiating for best price and terms, could not be provided.
• MHBE did not routinely obtain or evidence its review of certain vendor documentation to verify
hourly labor charges.
• MHBE had not verified the propriety of FY2014 grant expenditures incurred by six entities
providing outreach and enrollment services under the Connector Program totaling $23.4 million.
• MHBE did not submit federal fund reimbursement requests in a timely manner, resulting in a
loss of interest income of $199,000.
• MHBE had not implemented procedures to account for and control its equipment inventory,
including computer equipment purchased for the original Exchange System.
• The Board of Trustees of the Exchange was found to have violated the Open Meetings Act by
the State Open Meetings Law Compliance Board.
• Numerous security and control issues were noted regarding MHBE’s information systems,
including the lack of appropriate safeguards for personally identifiable information.
Recommended Committee Action – Letter of Concern
3

--- Page 6 ---
Reports Recommended for Committee Action
Significant Audit Findings
August 1, 2015 to November 30, 2015
2) Department of Business and Economic Development (DBED) (10/09/15 – 30 pages – 11
Findings)
• DBED did not establish effective oversight over the Premium Tax Credit auction, established
under the Invest Maryland Program, since it did not ensure that comprehensive procedures had
been developed and adopted to govern the auction process. Proceeds from the auction totaled
$84 million in exchange for $100 million in tax credits to be provided to winning bidders
(insurance companies). For example, procedures did not adequately explain how the final bid
rate to be paid by the winning bidders was to be determined. In addition, the bidding
methodology used by DBED resulted in all of the winning bidders paying the same lowest
accepted bid rate even though most winning bids exceeded that rate. DBED lacked
documentation as to why this methodology was determined to be the most advantageous to the
State.
• The methodology used by the Maryland Venture Fund Authority to select venture firms to invest
in qualified Maryland companies, as well as the determination of how much capital to provide to
each firm, was not adequately documented. Periodic investment reports from these firms were
often not received or were incomplete.
• Procedures used to verify employment data provided by recipients of financing from the
Maryland Economic Development Assistance Authority and Fund were not effective. These
data are often used in determining whether conditional loans and grants will be forgiven.
Between December 2010 and January 2015, DBED forgave 22 loans and grants.
• DBED lacked formal procedures for its use of forbearance agreements for loans issued by its
Maryland Small Business Development Financing Authority which become delinquent and did
not preserve the historical record of the agreement activity.
• Employee capabilities to record critical transactions on DBED’s financing programs monitoring
system were not adequately restricted, and cash balances recorded on the system were not
adequately reconciled with the State’s records.
• DBED did not sufficiently verify applicants’ compliance with job creation requirements of the
One Maryland Tax Credit program, for which credits totaling $54.7 million were issued during
our audit period.
• Controls over DBED’s Maryland State Arts Council Grants were not sufficient, including the lack
of adequate documentation of grant award decisions.
Recommended Committee Action – Hearing (Presented at the Committee’s November 2015
Meeting)
4

--- Page 7 ---
Reports Recommended for Committee Action
Significant Audit Findings
August 1, 2015 to November 30, 2015
3) Video Lottery Operations Revenue – Small, Minority, and Women-Owned Businesses
Account (Performance) (10/23/15 – 29 pages – 7 Findings)
As required by Section 9-1A-35 of the State Government Article of the Annotated Code of
Maryland, we conducted a performance audit to evaluate the utilization of the video lottery terminal
(VLT) funds that are allocated to small, minority, and women-owned businesses as loans and
investment capital by fund managers during FY2014. The source of these funds is grants made by
the Board of Public Works (BPW) to fund managers from the Small, Minority, and Women-Owned
Businesses Account (Account).
• The appropriate amount of VLT proceeds, which totaled $8,421,677, was distributed to the
Account for FY 2014. All loans we selected for testing appeared to be made to eligible small,
minority, and women-owned businesses by the fund managers. We also concluded that each
fund manager awarded at least 50 percent of its grants funds as loans to eligible businesses in
targeted areas, as required by State law.
• The BPW and its administering agency, the Department of Business and Economic
Development (DBED), since renamed the Department of Commerce, should enhance their
oversight by establishing overall goals, objectives, and related outcome measures to direct the
lending and investing activities and to measure and evaluate the success of this program and
fund manager performance.
• DBED did not establish interim financial reporting requirements and did not ensure managers
submitted audited financial statements of grant activity as required.
• DBED had not established a formal process to verify manager compliance with key contract
requirements. For example, fund managers’ underwriting processes were not reviewed and
DBED did not ensure that loans were properly underwritten to reduce the risk of default.
• DBED had not established a formal evaluation process to assess the performance of managers,
including whether desired results were achieved.
• DBED did not comply with all terms and conditions in the agreements that fall under BPW
authority. DBED authorized a contract modification for one fund manager that increased the
fund establishment expense fee for administrative costs by $145,000 without BPW approval.
• DBED lacked effective oversight of the financial transactions processed by fund managers
through the State checking accounts established to disburse loan and investment funds and pay
the fund managers’ expenses.
Recommended Committee Action – Hearing (Presented at the Committee’s November 2015
Meeting)
5

--- Page 8 ---
Reports Recommended for Committee Action
Significant Audit Findings
August 1, 2015 to November 30, 2015
4) Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services – Office of the Secretary and
Other Units (11/18/15 – 27 pages – 9 Findings)
• The Office structured the procurement of inmate services in a manner that may have limited
competition, resulting in only one contractor bidding on the contract. The Office combined, into
a single request for proposal, the procurement of commissary operations (a revenue producing
contract) with the design and implementation of an inmate banking information technology (IT)
system and the procurement of inmate welfare kits, previously supplied by Blind Industries and
Services of Maryland. The Office instructed bidders to include estimated costs for implementing
the IT system as a reduction from the proposed commissions from commissary operations and,
accordingly, the true expected revenue from commissary operations and the actual costs of the
banking system were unknown.
• The Office entered into interagency agreements with a State university that enabled it to
augment its staff beyond its budgeted positions. The FY 2015 agreement effectively created an
additional 30 positions, at a cost of $3.4 million, beyond the 214 positions authorized in the
budget for the Office’s Information Technology and Communications Division (ITCD). The
university performed no oversight of these employees and its involvement was generally limited
to hiring the employees and paying their salaries.
• Liquidated damages totaling $840,000 were not assessed against the inmate mental healthcare
contractor when required staffing levels were not met for FYs 2013 and 2014. The Office
authorized the contractor to provide additional staffing levels for more than a year before
modifying the contract and seeking Board of Public Works’ approval.
• The Office did not ensure the correct inmate release date information was transferred from its
Offender-Based State Correctional Information System I to its new Offender Case Management
System (OCMS), which was implemented in August 2014. Noted discrepancies in inmate
release dates for at least 2,500 inmates had not been resolved.
• Sensitive personally identifiable information was not appropriately safeguarded in OCMS, and
account, password, and monitoring controls were not sufficient.
• The Office did not adequately reconcile its cash balance of fines, costs, fees, and restitution
(FCFR) with the corresponding cash balance on the State’s accounting records. Certain
controls were not established over refunds to offenders for FCFR overpayments.
• Equipment maintained by the Office’s ITCD was not adequately controlled, including a failure to
periodically reconcile its control account and the detail records and report missing equipment
valued at $3.2 million that had not been located from 1 to 7 years.
Recommended Committee Action – Hearing (presented during the December 2015 JAC
meeting)
6

--- Page 9 ---
Reports Recommended for Committee Action
Significant Audit Findings
August 1, 2015 to November 30, 2015
5) Department of State Police (DSP) (11/23/15 – 33 pages – 12 Findings)
• DSP did not properly account for certain special fund activities. DSP did not establish separate
accounts in the State’s accounting records to readily identify individual fund balances for certain
activities, and certain expenditure activity was not properly recorded. As a result, one special
fund had a deficit balance of $44.2 million while another had a positive balance of $34.4 million
at the end of FY 2014, neither of which appeared reasonable given the nature of the activity
pertaining to these funds. DSP had not investigated these balances.
• Certain budgetary year-end closing transactions for FY 2014 were not adequately supported
and reporting discrepancies were noted. For example, DSP did not maintain adequate
documentation to support that revenue totaling $28.2 million recorded as of June 30, 2014 was
available to cover incurred expenditures. DSP also retained certain special funds at year-end
without proper legal justification.
• DSP did not include critical information in its solicitations for certain contracts tested to ensure
DSP received bids that satisfactorily addressed its needs, made the appropriate award
decisions, and had established reasonable contract values. For example, for four contracts
tested totaling $9.0 million, approximate quantities for the various services needed either were
not provided in the solicitations or could not be supported. A number of deficiencies were also
noted in the process used to evaluate and award some of these contracts which, in some cases,
raise questions as to the propriety of the award decisions and related contract values.
• DSP procedures over handgun qualification licenses (HQL) and handgun registration
applications were not sufficiently comprehensive. For example, DSP did not require handgun
dealers to submit certain required HQL documentation with the handgun registration
applications and did not have procedures to ensure that dealers submitted completed
applications in a timely manner. DSP also did not adequately ensure that handgun information
recorded in its automated systems was accurate. We noted that the handgun serial numbers
for approximately 4,000 registered handguns differed in two automated systems.
• Numerous security and control issues were noted regarding DSP’s information systems and
critical data. Specifically, DSP’s network and numerous workstations were not properly
maintained and secured, and assurance was lacking that critical data hosted by a third-party
service provider were adequately safeguarded.
• Controls over certain cash receipts, accounts receivable, and equipment were not sufficient.
Recommended Committee Action – Hearing (presented during the December 2015 JAC
meeting)
7

--- Page 10 ---
Reports Recommended for Committee Action
Significant Audit Findings
August 1, 2015 to November 30, 2015
6) Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services (DPSCS) – Division of Parole and
Probation (DPP) – Probation Intake and Fee Assessment Processes (11/30 /15 – 23 pages
– 4 Findings)
We conducted an audit of the probation intake and fee assessment processes within the DPSCS for
certain offenders monitored under the Division of Parole and Probation (DPP), including offenders
in the Drinking Driver Monitor Program (DDMP). This audit was initiated based on an allegation we
received through our fraud hotline.
• DPP did not revise its offender intake processing policies and procedures manual when a new
automated case management system – the Offender Case Management System (OCMS) – was
implemented in December 2012. Offender probation monitoring was previously performed
using the Offender-Based State Correctional Information System II (OBSCIS II), which
continues to be used to record and track offender fees and assessments. The use of two
systems added more complexity to the intake process.
• Procedures and controls at the four field offices selected for review that prepared offender
assessment documents were insufficient to ensure all fees and restitution were properly
assessed and recorded. As of May 2015, none of these field offices had established a
documented supervisory review process to ensure that all fees and restitution were properly
calculated and recorded in OBSCIS II.
• Procedures and controls over user access in the DPP module of OCMS were not sufficient to
ensure that only appropriate and necessary access was granted and such access was not
periodically reviewed. Also, the capabilities defined to certain critical system user roles were not
appropriately restricted and input validation controls were not comprehensive.
• We conducted an automated match of OCMS and OBSCIS II data to identify DDMP cases in
which DDMP fees may not have been fully assessed or were not assessed at all. This match
identified 3,983 cases in which DDMP fees were potentially under-assessed for a total of $2.1
million. Our detailed review of 45 of these cases disclosed that, collectively, DDMP fees totaling
$42,625 were not assessed in 32 cases. We also identified certain errors with the assessment
of supervision fees. Generally for the remaining cases tested, while the assessments were
determined to be proper, other data reliability problems, as well as certain limitations in our
match, caused the cases to be identified as potential under-assessments. For these reasons,
the extent to which the DDMP fees were actually under-assessed is unknown.
• The proper assessment of DDMP fees and their ultimate collection are important since
collections are credited to a special fund account used to pay program costs. DDMP fees
collected during FY 2014 totaled $6.4 million. However, the applicable special fund has
frequently incurred deficits, requiring general fund deficiency appropriations.
Recommended Committee Action – Hearing (presented during the December 2015 JAC
meeting)
8