Title: Presentation to the House Appropriations Subcommittee - Department of Human Resources -Child Support Enforcement Administration

Related Report Dated 9/1/2011
Date: 02/06/2012
Type: Presentations to the Legislature
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5a9daf2bcc9d72387404dbf7
Extracted: 2025-06-18T13:42:31.646302
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Department of Human
Resources - Child Support
Enforcement Administration
(CSEA)
Report dated September 1, 2011

--- Page 2 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Audit Overview
 The Child Support Enforcement Administration
(CSEA) is responsible for operating a statewide child
support program and provides services to both the
noncustodial and custodial parents, which include
the establishment of paternity and child support
orders, the collection of support payments, and the
distribution of such funds.
 Local child support offices, other state and local
government agencies and a private contractor
perform various child support services.
 According to CSEA records, during federal fiscal
year 2010 (October 2009 – September 2010), the
Statewide child support collections totaled $530
million and the caseload totaled approximately
248,000. As of September 30, 2010, the statewide
unpaid child support due from noncustodial parents
totaled $1.72 billion relating to 165,403 cases.
 The audit report included 11 findings, 5 of which
were repeated from the preceding audit report.
DHR - Child Support Enforcement Administration
Page 2

--- Page 3 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Key Audit Issues
 CSEA has a number of enforcement tools at its
disposal to assist in the collection of unpaid child
support owed to custodial parents; however, some
of these were not used or not used as effectively as
possible; including:
 Wage withholding orders,
 Federal Office of Child Support Enforcement
(OCSE) match results,
 Occupational license suspensions,
 Bank account seizures, and
 Driver’s license suspensions
 Local office monitoring needs improvement; CSEA
did not ensure that:
 the Baltimore City contractor complied with all
contract terms, and
 sufficient procedures were established to identify
payments to deceased custodial parents
DHR - Child Support Enforcement Administration
Page 3

--- Page 4 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Enforcement Procedure s
Background:
 Child support services are generally performed in
local offices throughout the State with oversight
provided by CSEA. CSEA has a number of
enforcement tools that it can utilize when
noncustodial parents do not pay child support.
 The wage withholding enforcement tool accounted
for 67% (or $356 million) of all child support
collections in federal fiscal year 2010. The primary
sources for wage reporting are the State’s new hire
registry and the National Directory of New Hires and
wage data from the Federal OSCE. By State law, all
employers in Maryland are required to report their
newly hired employees within 20 days.
 Other collection tools include seizing funds in
personal bank accounts, suspending driver’s and
occupational licenses and intercepting State vendor
payments.
DHR - Child Support Enforcement Administration
Page 4

--- Page 5 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Enforcement Procedure s (continued)
CSEA did not utilize the wage withholding
enforcement tool to the fullest extent possible.
(Finding 1)
 OLA matched a CSEA file of noncustodial
delinquent parents with a file from the
Department of Labor, Licensing and Regulation
(DLLR) of employees with wages from the 3rd
quarter of CY 2010. The match identified 8,763
individuals with $88 million in child support
arrearages who had $43 million in wages, but
had no wages withheld.
 OLA tested 22 of these cases, found that for 12
cases with 3rd quarter wages totaling $191,000
and arrearages totaling $336,000, wage
withholding was appropriate, but was not used.
OLA found that CSEA’s automated system
prompted these 12 cases for manual review by
local child support offices based on Federal OCSE
notification, but this was not done.
DHR - Child Support Enforcement Administration
Page 5

--- Page 6 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Enforcement Procedure s (Finding 1 continued)
 For 8 of the aforementioned 12 cases, the
employers failed to report the hiring of non-
custodial parents via the State’s new hire registry,
as required by State law. These 8 cases had 3rd
quarter wages of $147,000 and arrearages of
$255,000.
 These conditions were the result of CSEA not
effectively monitoring the local offices and the
contractor who maintains the new hire registry.
For example, a daily report from the Federal OCSE
of cases prompted for manual review is available
to each local office, but we were informed by two
large jurisdictions that accounted for 61% of the
delinquent child support owed as of September
2010 that this report was not used.
DHR - Child Support Enforcement Administration
Page 6

--- Page 7 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Enforcement Procedure s (continued)
CSEA did not effectively use occupational license
suspension as an enforcement tool. State law permits
CSEA to request 15 State licensing authorities to
suspend applicable licenses of noncustodial parents
who are delinquent in support by >120 days.(Finding 2)
 Although CSEA matched delinquent accounts with
licensee records from 7 authorities, the matches
were not properly designed (e.g., CSEA set a high
precision level that limited the matches’ usefulness).
 CSEA did not obtain licensing data from 8 licensing
authorities (see Exhibit A). OLA obtained data from 4
of the 8 authorities, which contained 477,837
licensees.
 OLA’s match of files from these 4 authorities and 6
others to CSEA records identified 6,966 individuals
with occupational licenses who owed child support
totaling $47 million. OLA tested 25 individuals and
found 17 with delinquent payments totaling
$966,000, who were in arrears beyond 120 days
and eligible, but not referred, for suspension.
DHR - Child Support Enforcement Administration
Page 7

--- Page 8 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Enforcement Procedure s (continued)
CSEA was not identifying or seizing certain obligor bank
account funds to satisfy unpaid child support balances
as permitted by State law. (Finding 3)
 State law allows the seizure of bank account funds
when a noncustodial parent owes more than $500
and has not paid for >60 days, yet CSEA’s policy was
to only match its records to financial institutions for
individuals owing >$2,500. As of December 2010,
there were 25,550 cases, which owed $33.6 million
in arrearage, but were not subject to matching since
they owed between $500 and $2,500.
 CSEA seized funds from obligor savings accounts,
but did not seize funds from checking accounts even
though such garnishments were allowed by State
law. From July 2009 – October 2010, obligors
owned 1,052 checking accounts with balances
totaling $3.8 million (including 51 with balances >
$10,000).
 According to CSEA, bank account seizures totaled
$600,000 from November 2009 to October 2011.
DHR - Child Support Enforcement Administration
Page 8

--- Page 9 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Enforcement Procedur e s (continued)
CSEA did not ensure that two large local offices
investigated and resolved inaccurate noncustodial
parent social security numbers (SSNs) recorded in
the automated Child Support Enforcement System
(CSES). Accurate SSNs is a required element of CSES
and key to enforcing payments through various
automated processes and matches. (Finding 4)
 Although the Federal OCSE provided daily reports
of incorrect SSNs recorded in CSEA’s records,
these reports were not used by two large local
offices to investigate and resolve incorrect SSNs.
 OLA’s test of 17 noncustodial parents’ SSNs that
the Federal OCSE reported to CSEA as being
incorrect, found that the local offices did not
follow-up on 16 (with arrearages totaling
$292,000). In 7 of the 16 instances the Federal
OSCE informed CSEA of the correct SSNs, but the
local offices only corrected 2 of these and this
occurred 3 and 7 years later. The other 9
inaccurate SSNs remained uncorrected.
DHR - Child Support Enforcement Administration
Page 9

--- Page 10 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Enforcement Procedur e s (continued)
CSEA did not adequately review and process driver’s
license suspension referrals rejected by the MVA. When
rejected, MVA’s system has an edit that provides CSEA
with information and possible matches to resolve the
rejected referrals. (Finding 5)
OLA tested 20 rejected referrals of noncustodial
parents (with outstanding child support totaling $1.5
million) and found that for 18, CSEA did not take
proper follow-up action, such as correcting the
submission based on the new information from MVA
and resubmitting it to the MVA. For 12 of the
accounts, with arrearages totaling $780,000, OLA
noted only minor variances between the records and
found that MVA provided CSEA with sufficient
information to readily correct and resubmit the
referrals.
According to MVA records, 30,361 licenses were
suspended in FY 2010 and 7,929 referrals were
rejected by MVA.
DHR - Child Support Enforcement Administration
Page 10

--- Page 11 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Local Office Monitoring Issues
 CSEA did not take sufficient actions to ensure that
the contractor hired to provide child support
functions in Baltimore City complied with certain
contract requirements. For example, in one
quarterly report it was noted that all appropriate
enforcement remedies and resources were not
used to enforce delinquent court orders in 42% of
the cases reviewed. However, a comprehensive
corrective action plan was not required. This
contractor was paid $7.7 million in FY 2010.
(Finding 7)
 Sufficient procedures were not established to
identify payments made to deceased custodial
parents. Although CSEA matches custodial parents
with State death records, OLA’s match to Federal
death records noted numerous payments > 30
days after the payees’ date of death. (Finding 9)
DHR - Child Support Enforcement Administration
Page 11

--- Page 12 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Conclusion
CSEA should:
 Ensure that wage withholding orders are pursued
to the fullest extent possible.
 Effectively use occupational license suspension as
an enforcement tool for obligors.
 Enhance its use of other collection tools such
seizing delinquent obligors’ bank accounts.
 Investigate and resolve incorrect obligor social
security numbers recorded in its automated
records.
 Adequately investigate driver’s license suspension
referrals that were rejected by the MVA.
 Implement adequate procedures and controls to
address the other deficiencies noted in the report.
DHR - Child Support Enforcement Administration
Page 12

--- Page 13 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Exhibit A – Finding 2
DHR - Child Support Enforcement Administration
Page 13