Title: Presentation to the Joint Audit Committee - Proposed Changes to Laws Impacting the Office of Legislative Audits - Fiscal Compliance Audits
Date: 12/08/2015
Type: Presentations to the Legislature
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5a9daf2dcc9d72387404dc8f
Extracted: 2025-06-18T13:56:45.405628
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Proposed Changes to Laws Impacting the Office of Legislative Audits
Fiscal Compliance Audits (4 proposed changes)
Title Subtitle Agency or Audit Audit Language - Original Audit Language – Revision
1F State Government 2-1220 Required Office of Legislative (a) State units. -- (a) State units. --
and authorized Audits
audits (2) (i) At least once every 3 years, the Office of (2) (i) At least once every 3 years, t The Office of
Legislative Audits shall conduct a fiscal/compliance audit Legislative Audits shall conduct a fiscal/compliance
of each unit of the State government, except for units in audit of each unit of the State government, except for
the Legislative Branch. units in the Legislative Branch.
(ii) In determining the audit schedule for a unit, the (ii) The audit of each unit shall be conducted at an
Office of Legislative Audits shall take into consideration: interval ranging from 3 to 4 years.
1. the materiality and risk of the unit’s fiscal (iii) In determining the audit interval schedule for a
activities with respect to the State’s fiscal activities; unit, the Office of Legislative Audits shall take into
consideration:
2. the complexity of the unit’s fiscal structure; and
1. the materiality and risk of the unit’s fiscal
3. the nature and extent of audit findings in the unit's activities with respect to the State's fiscal activities;
prior audit reports.
2. the complexity of the unit’s fiscal structure; and
(iii) Each agency or program may be audited separately
or as part of a larger organizational unit of State 3. the nature and extent of audit findings in the
government. unit’s prior audit reports.
(iv) Each agency or program may be audited
separately or as part of a larger organizational unit of
State government.
Page 1 of 2

--- Page 2 ---
2F State Finance and 3A-506 Universal Department of (g) Audits. -- (g) Audits. --
Procurement Service Trust Fund Information Technology
(1) The Legislative Auditor shall conduct postaudits of a (1) The Legislative Auditor shall may conduct
fiscal and compliance nature of the Universal Service postaudits of a fiscal and compliance nature of the
Trust Fund and the expenditures made for purposes of § Universal Service Trust Fund and the expenditures made
3A-504(a) of this subtitle and § 3A-602(a) of this title. for purposes of § 3A-504(a) of this subtitle and § 3A-
602(a) of this title.
(2) The cost of the fiscal portion of the postaudit
examination shall be paid from the Universal Service (2) The cost of the fiscal portion of the postaudit
Trust Fund as an administrative cost. examination shall be paid from the Universal Service
Trust Fund as an administrative cost.
3F Local Government 30-106 Assets of Baltimore City Police (d) Audit; annual report. -- (d) Audit; annual report. --
Fund Department Death Relief
Fund (1) The Fund shall be audited regularly by the 1) The Fund shall be audited regularly by the
Legislative Auditor and from time to time by an Legislative Auditor from time to time by an independent
independent certified public accountant that the Board certified public accountant that the Board retains.
retains.
4F Agriculture 2-505 Maryland Department of (h) Audit. -- The Fund shall be audited annually by the (h) Audit. -- The Fund is subject to audit shall be
Agricultural Land Agriculture Legislative Auditor in the manner prescribed by law. audited annually by the Legislative Auditor in the
Preservation Fund manner prescribed by law as provided in § 2-1220 of the
State Government Article.
Page 2 of 2