Title: Presentation to the Senate Budget and Taxation Subcommittee - Department of Health and Mental Hygiene - Office of the Secretary and Other Units

Related Report Dated 2/19/2015
Date: 03/09/2015
Type: Presentations to the Legislature
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5a9daf2dcc9d72387404dc73
Extracted: 2025-06-18T13:53:32.089916
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Department of Health and
Mental Hygiene
O ffice of the Secretary and Other Units
Report Dated February 19, 2015

--- Page 2 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Audit Overview
The Department (DHMH) is responsible for promoting
the health of the public and for strengthening
partnerships between State and local governments, the
business community, and MD health care providers.
The following units, which provide administrative
infrastructure and oversight to DHMH and other health
providers, were included in this audit:
 Office of the Secretary
 Deputy Secretary of Operations
 Deputy Secretary for Public Health Services
(excluding Vital Statistics Administration)
 Deputy Secretary for Behavioral Health and
Disabilities
 Deputy Secretary of Health Care Financing
During FY 2014, expenditures for these five units
totaled $53.6 million.
The audit report included 15 findings, 3 of which were
repeated from the preceding audit report (Findings 6,
11, and 13).
DHMH - Office of the Secretary
Page 2

--- Page 3 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Key Audit Issues
 Issues were identified with two information
technology (IT) development projects.
• Certain aspects of a major IT system procurement
process, including the potential risks regarding the
award decision, were not formally communicated
by DHMH to the Board of Public Works.
• For another IT project, DHMH did not adequately
plan its development or seek the approval of the
Department of Information Technology (DoIT)
when the project was initiated.
 Audits of Local Health Departments and certain
grantees were not performed timely and in
accordance with professional standards.
 Reimbursement for the cost of care provided to
patients admitted to State hospitals was not always
adequately pursued, related records properly
maintained, or collections adequately controlled.
 DHMH had not established sufficient security and
controls over its information systems.
DHMH - Office of the Secretary
Page 3

--- Page 4 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Medicaid Enterprise Res t ructuring Project (MERP)
Background
• DHMH is the State agency responsible for
administering the Medicaid Program in Maryland.
• Medical providers submit claims for services
rendered to eligible recipients, which are
processed, adjudicated, and paid through a
federally certified Medicaid Management
Information System (MMIS).
• DHMH has begun the process of replacing MMIS
with MERP and worked with DoIT to develop the
MERP request for proposals (RFP) for a combined
MMIS replacement and full fiscal agent (claims
processing) services vendor.
• In January 2012, DHMH awarded a 5-year contract
totaling $171 million for the period from March
2012 through February 2017, with federal funding
paying for the majority of costs.
• MERP has encountered a number of publicized
development problems, significantly delaying
project completion.
DHMH - Office of the Secretary
Page 4

--- Page 5 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Medicaid Enterprise Re s tructuring Project (
cont’d)
DHMH did not formally communicate certain
pertinent aspects of the MERP procurement process
and the potential risks regarding the award decision
when it sought Board of Public Works (BPW)
approval of the contract (Finding 1).
 There was a lack of evidence that the BPW or its
staff were fully apprised that
• the RFP qualifications were changed to obtain
bidders,
• the successful bidder had past performance
issues involving similar projects, and
• a change was made to contractor liability
provisions after the successful bidder was
notified of the award.
 According to the results of DHMH’s bid evaluation
process, it selected the contractor with the best
technical evaluation and lowest price; however,
the evaluation committee’s results did not include
a complete assessment of the potential risks
involving its selection.
DHMH - Office of the Secretary
Page 5

--- Page 6 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Medicaid Enterprise Re s tructuring Project (
cont’d)
RFP Qualification Changes
The first of 8 RFP addendums changed the
experience requirements due to potential bidder
questions (8 contractors originally expressed
interest in the procurement).
Originally, bidders were to have fiscal agent and
MMIS implementation experience for a federally-
certified state MMIS within the last 5 years, but this
was changed to also consider the bidder’s
subcontractor and the certification period was
extended to 10 years.
After this addendum, DHMH received bids from 2
contractors it deemed potentially qualified, although
it is questionable whether the eventual losing bidder
actually met the revised qualifications due to a lack
of MMIS experience.
DHMH - Office of the Secretary
Page 6

--- Page 7 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Medicaid Enterprise Res t ructuring Project (
cont’d)
Technical Evaluation and Past Performance Issues
The contract award recommendation memorandum
(memo) from DHMH’s eight-member bid evaluation
committee did not provide a complete and objective
assessment of the proposals, including a description
of the potential risks involving the selection of the
successful bidder.
The memo commented on many bidder strengths
based on an evaluation of the technical proposal, but
did not comment on any past performance issues
that would have provided a more complete disclosure
of possible risks. For example, a key strength in the
memo was the development of an MMIS in 2 states;
however, no mention was made that both systems
had taken longer than originally planned (up to 3
years longer) and had significant cost overruns
beyond the original projects’ budgets (up to 300%).
OLA believes that past performance can be indicative
of future experience and risks, which should have
been included in the memo.
DHMH - Office of the Secretary
Page 7

--- Page 8 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Medicaid Enterprise Res t ructuring Project (
cont’d)
Changes to Liability Provisions After Award
After DHMH notified the successful bidder that it had
been selected, but prior to signing the contract, the
bidder requested a change of then standard State
contract language providing unlimited liability for
breach of contract, which was included in the RFP, to
a $20 million liability cap.
DHMH believed it had two options, either cancel the
entire procurement or change the liability and ask
both bidders to submit a last Best and Final Offer
(BAFO). After obtaining legal advice, DHMH issued its
8th RFP addendum and reduced the liability to three
times the contract value and requested both bidders
to submit a BAFO.
OLA questioned whether there should have been a
realistic expectation of receiving a BAFO from the
losing bidder, given that DHMH had previously told the
bidder it had not been selected, in part because it
lacked fiscal agent experience and had no recent
MMIS implementation experience.
DHMH - Office of the Secretary
Page 8

--- Page 9 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Medicaid Enterprise Res t ructuring Project (
cont’d)
Conclusion
When the contract was submitted to BPW for its
approval, evidence was lacking that all pertinent
considerations pertaining to DHMH’s award decision
had been formally communicated. DHMH’s formal
presentation materials for the BPW meeting and the
pre-meeting briefing did not identify the significant
project risks. There was no mention of:
• the changes to the experience qualification to allow
for potentially qualified bidders,
• the prior negative system development experiences
of the successful bidder and its subcontractor, and
• the late change in the contractor breach of contract
provision.
Individuals who attended the pre-meeting recalled
that other issues were discussed beyond that in the
formal materials; however, other than the liability
issue, the actual topics could not be recalled with
clarity.
DHMH - Office of the Secretary
Page 9

--- Page 10 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Long Term Supports an d Services (LTSS)
DHMH’s LTSS IT project was not adequately planned
nor was DoIT approval obtained when the project was
initiated. Further, DHMH used a MOU with a State
university to develop and implement the LTSS system
rather than a competitive procurement (Finding 2).
Project costs totaled $20.1 million as of 10/31/13.
• A comprehensive development and implementation
plan, including user needs, timelines, and estimated
costs, was not established prior to the project’s start.
• The university subcontracted out the majority of the
work without a competitive solicitation, so DHMH
lacked assurances these services were received at
the best value. DHMH did not formally approve the
university’s selection of the subcontractor, as
required by the MOU; who was paid $7.4 million
during FYs 2012 and 2013.
• After development contract costs had well exceeded
the $1 million DoIT oversight criteria, DHMH notified
DoIT of the project, and DoIT advised that it should
have been involved from the start of the project.
DHMH - Office of the Secretary
Page 10

--- Page 11 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Office of the Inspector G eneral (OIG)
OIG had not established a formal written policy
governing the timely completion of audits of local
health departments (LHD) and private non-profit
providers receiving grant funds, nor was there a policy
to ensure that audits were conducted in accordance
with professional standards (Finding 3).
• We noted 9 of the 24 LHDs and 36 of the 68
providers had not been audited in > 5 years to verify
that grant funds were properly used. Related FY
2008 & 2009 grant awards totaled $217.6 million
and $83.7 million, respectively.
• For the 3 audits reviewed, written audit plans were
not prepared and evidence of supervisory review of
the audit work was lacking.
There are 24 LHDs and 68 providers that received
grant awards of $1.8 billion and $891 million,
respectively, during FYs 2008 to 2013.
DHMH - Office of the Secretary
Page 11

--- Page 12 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Division of Cost Accoun t ing & Reimbursements
In accordance with State law, the Division of Cost
Accounting & Reimbursements (DCAR) conducts
investigations of all patients admitted to DHMH
facilities to determine their ability to pay, and bills
and collects any amounts due. In FY 2012, DACR
recovered $66 million, consisting primarily of
Medicaid and Medicare collections.
Delinquent receivables were not adequately
pursued for collection and/or transfer to the
State’s Central Collection Unit (Finding 6 -repeat).
According to DHMH records, as of March 31,
2013, there were 1,615 outstanding accounts
receivable totaling $22 million, of which $16
million was outstanding for > 120 days.
DCAR lacked appropriate procedures to ensure
that all cash receipts, which totaled $3.3 million in
FY 2013, were deposited (Finding 7).
DHMH - Office of the Secretary
Page 12

--- Page 13 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Corporate Purchasing C ards
Corporate Purchasing Cards (CPC) transactions were
not always thoroughly reviewed and supported
(Finding 9). As of February 2013, cards had been
issued to 325 DHMH employees and related FY
2012 expenditures were $22 million. Our test of
169 CPC purchases totaling $122,000 disclosed:
• For 18 purchases totaling $15,000 there were no
itemized receipts to support the transactions, even
though related activity logs had been approved by
supervisors. Also, monthly cardholder bank
statements were not always approved.
• Supervisory personnel did not always perform a
documented review of Level-3 data (a detailed
description of purchases provided by some
merchants) to help determine the propriety of CPC
transactions. We previously noted in another audit
report that we used Level-3 data to identify
inappropriate cardholder purchases of $45,640 at
a LHD between January 2008 and February 2012.
DHMH - Office of the Secretary
Page 13

--- Page 14 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Information Systems Se curity & Controls
DHMH had not established sufficient security and
controls over its information systems and network.
Intrusion detection prevention system coverage
and controls for the DHMH network were
insufficient (Finding 10).
Network access to critical internal network devices
was not properly restricted and monitoring of
security events over a critical firewall was not
adequate (Finding 11- repeat).
Malware protection on DHMH workstations and
servers needs improvement (Finding 12).
Controls over the National Electronic Disease
Surveillance System database, which is used to
track and transmit sensitive information related to
infectious diseases, and the Hospital Management
Information System, which records certain
information for patients in State hospitals, were not
sufficient (Finding 13 – repeat).
DHMH - Office of the Secretary
Page 14

--- Page 15 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Other Issues
The DHMH OIG did not adequately verify LHD and
private non-profit provider compliance with sub-
vendor audit and oversight requirements (Finding 4).
Records for open financial investigations of patient’s
ability to pay for their cost of care received in State
facilities were not properly maintained and
monitored by DHMH’s DCAR. In addition,
investigations were not always timely conducted and
reviewed by supervisory personnel (Finding 5).
Supervisory oversight of federal fund reimbursement
requests were not always effective, resulting in
errors or drawdown delays (Finding 8).
Proper controls were not established over the
processing of capital grant project settlement checks
(Finding 14).
Equipment record keeping and physical inventory
procedures were not in compliance with certain
State requirements (Finding 15).
DHMH - Office of the Secretary
Page 15

--- Page 16 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Conclusions
DHMH should ensure that
• all pertinent circumstances regarding significant
procurement award decisions are documented and
disclosed to the BPW, a comprehensive plan is
developed prior to IT system developments, proper
DoIT approval is obtained, and arrangements with
State agencies are evaluated to ensure that
required services should not be obtained through a
competitive procurement process;
• grant audits are performed timely and in accordance
with professional standards and that compliance
with various grant requirements, including sub-
vendor audit and oversight requirements, is verified;
• the records related to cost recoveries for patients
admitted to State hospitals are properly maintained,
delinquent accounts pursued, and the deposit of
collections is verified;
• proper security and controls are established over its
information systems; and
• appropriate controls are established and followed.
DHMH - Office of the Secretary
Page 16