Title: Presentation to the Joint Audit Committee - Department of Human Resources - Family Investment Administration

Related Report Dated 2/9/2011
Date: 09/20/2011
Type: Presentations to the Legislature
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5a9daf2bcc9d72387404dbd9
Extracted: 2025-06-18T13:39:36.397339
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Department of Human Resources
Family Investment Administration
Report dated February 9, 2011
Presentation to the Joint Audit Committee
Bruce A. Myers, CPA
Paul R. Denz, CPA
Bekana Edossa, CPA
September 20, 2011

--- Page 2 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Audit Overview
 The Family Investment Administration (FIA)
oversees a number of public assistance programs
administered by the 24 local departments of
social services (LDSSs). The three major
assistance programs are:
 Temporary Cash Assistance (TCA)
 Home energy assistance programs
 Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program
(SNAP, formerly the food stamp program)
 TCA and the home energy programs are State and
federally funded, while SNAP is entirely federally
funded. FY 2010 payments for these three
programs totaled $141 million, $150 million, and
$837 million, respectively.
 Our report included 8 findings, 2 of which were
repeated from our preceding audit report.
DHR - Family Investment Administration
Page 2

--- Page 3 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Key Audit Issues
 The results of computer matches and data
verification procedures used to identify
potentially ineligible benefit recipients were not
investigated and resolved in a timely and
adequate manner.
 FIA reduced its efforts to monitor LDSSs
compliance with established quality assurance
program requirements.
 Several verification, documentation, and
internal control deficiencies existed within the
home energy assistance programs.
 Steps were not always taken to verify the
propriety of certain temporary disability
assistance program benefits.
DHR - Family Investment Administration
Page 3

--- Page 4 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Computer Matches
FIA did not ensure that LDSSs promptly investigated and
resolved the results of FIA’s computer matches of
recipient data to independent sources, such as Social
Security Administration (SSA) records and State prisoner
records. (Finding 1)
 OLA’s review of 28,700 automated alerts of recipient
SSNs not being verified to federal records or missing
from the case record, disclosed that 2,600 had been
outstanding for over a year without resolution. FIA
estimated that FY 2010 DHR benefit payments to the
related individuals totaled $3.4 million. Federal &
State regulations require that recipients disclose
SSNs during the eligibility determination process or
document that one had been applied for.
 Recoupment of overpayments was not always initiated
for cases in which FIA matches disclosed benefit
payments made for recipients while incarcerated.
OLA’s review of 11 such cases disclosed
overpayments of $14,400, of which $9,300 had been
cashed, but not recouped; one recipient was
recertified while incarcerated.
DHR - Family Investment Administration
Page 4

--- Page 5 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Quality Assurance Programs
FIA did not ensure that LDSSs complied with its quality
assurance programs. These programs were established
to assess case worker performance and to identify and
reduce or eliminate case errors, such as incorrect
eligibility determinations. (Finding 2)
 FIA discontinued certain longstanding follow-up
processes, such as requiring corrective action plans
from the LDSSs when there was continued
noncompliance with program requirements.
 FIA did not promptly investigate delays in the
resolution of case errors by LDSSs. In 37 of 150
SNAP (food stamp) cases with errors identified by
FIA, it took the LDSSs between 107 to 256 days to
correct them. In 2010, the federal government
sanctioned Maryland $423,563 because its SNAP
error rate exceeded national performance measures.
DHR - Family Investment Administration
Page 5

--- Page 6 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Energy Assistance Programs
Verification, documentation and internal control
deficiencies were found over procedures relating to the
Electric Universal Service Program and the Maryland
Energy Assistance Program. These programs provided
assistance totaling $150 million in FY 2010 to pay
recipients’ home energy costs. The assistance
payments are disbursed directly to utility companies on
behalf of approved applicants.
 FIA did not employ matching procedures, such as
those used for other assistance programs, to help
ensure recipient eligibility and the validity of benefit
amounts. (Finding 3)
 Local Administering Agencies (LAAs) responsible for
processing applications for assistance did not
always obtain documentation to support required
application data. OLA review of 25 cases at one LAA
disclosed a lack of documentation, such as utility
bills, to support payments of $20,900 on behalf of
12 recipients. (Finding 4)
DHR - Family Investment Administration
Page 6

--- Page 7 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Energy Assistance Programs (continued)
 FIA’s access controls to the data management
system used to process program applications and
calculate benefit amounts due were not properly
established. For example, 117 individuals at LAAs
and DHR headquarters could modify applications
and certify the adjusted applications for payment
without independent review and approval. Eighty-
eight of these individuals could also modify existing
case files, including names, addresses and benefit
amounts without review and approval. (Finding 5)
 FIA lacked adequate controls over collections,
consisting primarily of refunds of benefit
overpayments. For example, independent reports of
refunds issued were not received from the utility
companies for comparison to collections actually
received. FY 2010 refunds totaled approximately $5
million. Also, these collections were first received
and recorded by FIA, but during the period of May
2008 to December 2009, there was no verification
of the disposition of collections. (Finding 6)
DHR - Family Investment Administration
Page 7

--- Page 8 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Temporary Disability Assistance Program
FIA lacked assurance that extended Temporary
Disability Assistance Program (TDAP) benefits were
paid only to qualified recipients. (Finding 7)
 TDAP benefits, which are State funded and totaled
approximately $41.6 million in FY 2010, are paid to
eligible recipients (low-income disabled adults) on a
temporary basis, generally not more than 9 months.
Benefits may be extended when the individual is
actively applying to the SSA for federal benefits.
 A review of 20 cases (out of 4,600 recipients who
had been receiving benefits for over one year)
disclosed 2 in which benefits of $22,000 were paid
even though FIA lacked documentation that federal
benefits were being pursued. In one of those cases,
benefits should have stopped in June 2003, but
continued until we brought this to FIA’s attention in
August 2010. In a third case, $4,200 in benefits
were issued (but not cashed by the recipient) for 2
years after the recipient was approved for federal
benefits and TDAP benefits should have stopped.
DHR - Family Investment Administration
Page 8

--- Page 9 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Conclusion
FIA needs to:
 Ensure that the results of computer matches are
investigated and resolved in a timely and adequate
manner.
 Ensure that LDSSs complete required quality
assurance reviews and effectively address errors
identified within required timeframes.
 Use available matching procedures to
independently verify critical data, such as income
and social security numbers, submitted by
applicants for energy assistance program benefits,
and maintain all critical supporting documentation.
 Take steps to adequately control access to the
automated system used to process energy
assistance applications and benefits, and improve
controls over collections received.
 Verify the continued eligibility of individuals
receiving TDAP benefits for extended periods.
DHR - Family Investment Administration
Page 9