Title: Presentation to the Senate Budget and Taxation Subcommittee - State Department of Assessments and Taxation

Related Report Dated 12/16/2013
Date: 02/20/2014
Type: Presentations to the Legislature
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5a9daf2ccc9d72387404dc51
Extracted: 2025-06-18T13:50:33.985849
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
State Department
of Assessments and Taxation
Report Dated December 16, 2013

--- Page 2 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Audit Overview
 The State Department of Assessments and Taxation
(DAT) is responsible for administering the State’s real
and personal property tax laws, programs that
provide property tax credits, and various functions
applicable to corporations (e.g., issuing corporate
charters and collecting certain taxes). DAT is
headquartered in Baltimore City and it operates
assessment and taxation offices in each of the State’s
24 local subdivisions.
 In fiscal 2012, DAT’s expenditures totaled
approximately $131.5 million and revenue collected
totaled $232 million. DAT’s 2011 annual report
identified the total assessable real property tax
subject to State tax rates to be valued at $690 billion
consisting of 2,171,132 individual properties.
 The report included 11 findings, 4 of which were
repeated from the preceding audit report and appear
as 3 findings (Findings 5, 10, and 11) in this report.
State Department of Assessments and Taxation Page 2

--- Page 3 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Key Audit Issues
 Certain aspects of DAT’s quality assurance process for
real property assessments, such as oversight of local
assessment offices and documentation to support
assessment values, need to be improved.
 Physical exterior inspections were not performed for all
properties as required by State law and a record of
inspections performed was not maintained.
 The Assessment Administration and Valuation System
(AAVS) had vulnerabilities that placed critical
assessment data at risk.
 Verifications of information on personal property returns
and on applications for certain tax credits were not
performed timely.
State Department of Assessments and Taxation Page 3

--- Page 4 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Real Property Asses s ments
DAT had instituted certain quality assurance procedures,
but written guidance was not established regarding
certain oversight and supervision to ensure compliance
with DAT policies. Further, we identified variations in the
documentation for assessment values at 3 local offices
reviewed (Finding 1).
 DAT lacked formal processes for independently
reviewing local offices.
• Area supervisors’ oversight of local offices was not
formalized. The extent of area supervisors’ reviews,
the method for communicating findings and
corrective actions, and documentation requirements
were not established in DAT policy.
• The Department of Legislative Audits (OLA) tests
found 16,948 property accounts at one local office
that received land value reductions during one year
ranging from 20 to 43% (totaling $285.5 million),
which could not be explained by the local office and
lacked documentation of the area supervisor’s
review.
State Department of Assessments and Taxation Page 4

--- Page 5 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Real Property Asses s ments
(Cont.)
 DAT lacked written policies defining certain
responsibilities of local office supervisors.
• There was no requirement that local supervisors
review assessment computations performed by
assessors for reasonableness and document their
approval.
• We were advised that “spot checks” of assessors’
work were performed by reviewing various
assessment system reports, but this was not
documented.
State Department of Assessments and Taxation Page 5

--- Page 6 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Real Property Asses s ments
(Cont.)
 DAT’s policies lacked specificity regarding the
documentation to be maintained by local offices
supporting residential and commercial property
assessments.
• 12 of 39 commercial property assessments lacked
certain information supporting recorded values. For
example, 4 properties with assessed values of
$58 million lacked current property income
information. For 4 other properties, the recorded
values ($91 million) did not agree with the
assessor’s valuations ($106 million).
• For 5 of 6 residential properties with a total
assessable base of $1.3 million, there was no
documentation supporting the market value index,
which was also used to adjust values for about
9,400 properties in one jurisdiction.
State Department of Assessments and Taxation Page 6

--- Page 7 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Real Property Asses s ments
(Cont.)
Physical exterior inspections were not performed for all
properties in accordance with State Law (Finding 2).
 DAT advised that physical inspections of all properties
once every three years have not been conducted in
many years primarily because of staffing shortages.
• DAT only required physical inspections when certain
events occurred such as a property was sold or new
construction.
• As of fiscal 2012, 152 field assessors were
responsible for assessing 2,171,132 accounts over
the 3-year cycle. DAT advised that the recent
addition of 22 new assessors will not enable it to
comply with the law.
 The number of physical inspections conducted by local
offices could not be determined by DAT, since
documentation requirements were not established and
a record of all inspections was not maintained.
State Department of Assessments and Taxation Page 7

--- Page 8 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Assessment Administration and Valuation
System
DAT’s centralized database (AAVS), which performs real
property valuations and other assessment administration
functions, had access vulnerabilities. Certain historical
data was not archived (Finding 3).
 Due to deficiencies in the AAVS program, all system
users (including those with read-only access) could
perform unauthorized and undetectable modifications
to property assessment data via commonly used
functions. After OLA brought the matter to DAT’s
attention, DAT instructed the system vendor to resolve
the issue.
 OLA noted that DAT was running a version of AAVS
that was eight versions behind the latest version.
 DAT did not maintain a historical record of changes to
AAVS data pertaining to the 2012-13 tax year.
State Department of Assessments and Taxation Page 8

--- Page 9 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Assessment Administration and Valuation
System
(Cont.)
DAT procedures did not ensure that data received from
local county government offices were reviewed and
accurately entered into AAVS at the 3 local assessment
offices we reviewed (Finding 4).
 For two local offices, critical information (real property
sales, transfers, permit improvement data) was
entered into AAVS via a manual process.
• A log of such documents received was not prepared
to ensure all information was entered.
• There was no documented supervisory review to
ensure all data entered AAVS was supported.
• This is significant because permits that result in
improvements ≥$100,000 require completion of an
assessment at that time.
 For a third office, the office did not verify that data
received electronically from the local government was
not properly processed. The local office advised that
it lacked sufficient knowledge to review system
reports of processing errors.
State Department of Assessments and Taxation Page 9

--- Page 10 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Tax and Credit Verifi c ation Procedures
Certain verification procedures designed to help ensure
the accuracy of information submitted on personal
property returns, franchise tax returns, and applications of
homeowners’ and renters’ tax credits were not performed
timely or were not comprehensive (Finding 5 – repeat).
For example, as of March 2013:
 Audits of selected personal property returns had not
been performed for returns submitted for
calendar 2008 to 2011 (latest tax year at time of our
audit). The audits verify the propriety of reported
values and ensure the accurate recordation of return
information into DAT’s personal property assessment
system. Calendar 2011 personal property assessable
taxable base was $11.6 billion, from over 300,000
accounts.
 DAT had not completed audits of selected applications
from homeowners and renters who were granted tax
credits for calendar 2009 to 2011. Fiscal 2012
approved tax credits totaled $65.3 million to
approximately 61,000 taxpayers.
State Department of Assessments and Taxation Page 10

--- Page 11 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Other Findings
 Security and control weaknesses were noted with
respect to DAT’s information systems and network.
 Access and monitoring controls over the AAVS
database were not sufficient to protect critical data
(Finding 6).
 DAT’s network was not adequately secured to
prevent or detect security breaches (Finding 7).
 Malware protection on DAT workstations and
servers needs improvement (Finding 8).
 An up-to-date and comprehensive disaster
recovery plan did not exist (Finding 9).
 DAT did not monitor certain payments to two
contractors or verify that billings were proper prior to
payment (Finding 10 – repeat).
 Adequate accountability and control was not
established over certain collections, which totaled
$23.5 million during fiscal 2012, including a lack of
documentation that collections were subsequently
deposited (Finding 11 – repeat) .
State Department of Assessments and Taxation Page 11

--- Page 12 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Conclusions
DAT needs to
 enhance its property assessment quality control
processes;
 take appropriate actions to comply with State law
regarding the physical inspection of properties and
maintain records of inspections performed;
 perform a full evaluation of AAVS to identify and
correct system access vulnerabilities;
 establish procedures to ensure the completeness
and accuracy of data input into AAVS;
 perform timely verifications of information on
personal property returns and applications for
homeowners’ and renters’ tax credits;
 take the recommended actions to improve
information security controls;
 ensure the propriety of contractor payments; and
 verify all collections received were deposited.
State Department of Assessments and Taxation Page 12