Title: Presentation to the Senate Finance Committee and the Senate Budget and Taxation Subcommittee - Department of Human Resources - Child Support Enforcement Administration

Related Report Dated 6/26/2015
Date: 09/09/2015
Type: Presentations to the Legislature
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5a9daf2ecc9d72387404dca9
Extracted: 2025-06-18T13:59:35.469252
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Department of Human Resources –
Child Support Enforcement
Administration (CSEA)
Report Dated June 26, 2015
Presentation to the Senate Finance Committee and
Senate Budget and Taxation
Health and Human Services Subcommittee
Joshua S. Adler, CPA, CFE
Robert A. Wells, CPA
September 9, 2015

--- Page 2 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Audit Overview
 The Child Support Enforcement Administration
(CSEA) is responsible for operating the Statewide
child support program, which includes the
establishment of paternity and child support
orders, and the collection and distribution of child
support payments.
 Local child support offices, other state and local
government agencies, and private contractors
perform various child support functions.
 During federal FY 2014, Statewide child support
collections totaled $559 million and CSEA’s
caseload totaled approximately 214,000. As of
September 2014, the Statewide unpaid child
support due from obligors (noncustodial parents)
totaled $1.33 billion.
 The report included 6 findings, and noted that
CSEA had corrected all 11 findings from the
preceding report.
CSEA - Child Support Enforcement Administration
Page 2

--- Page 3 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Key Audit Issues
 Certain enforcement tools available to assist in
the collection of unpaid child support were not
used as effectively as possible. These
enforcement tools included wage withholding
orders, driver’s license suspensions, and
occupational license suspensions.
 CSEA needs to enhance its monitoring of the
vendor responsible for providing all child support
services at one local child support office to
ensure the timely follow-up of delinquent
accounts and proper controls over account
adjustments.
 CSEA did not adequately monitor the
completeness of the new hire registry information
and did not verify the propriety of the related
contractor billings.
CSEA - Child Support Enforcement Administration
Page 3

--- Page 4 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Enforcement Procedure s
Background
 Child support services are generally performed by
local offices throughout the State with oversight
provided by CSEA headquarters personnel.
 The wage withholding enforcement tool accounted
for 71 percent of total collections in federal FY
2014. The primary sources for wage identification
are the State’s new hire registry, which includes
newly hired employees as reported by Maryland
employers, and the federal Office of Child Support
Enforcement (OCSE), which includes wage data from
Maryland and other states.
 As allowed by State law, other enforcement tools
include suspending the driver’s and occupational
licenses of obligors who are delinquent with child
support payments.
CSEA - Child Support Enforcement Administration
Page 4

--- Page 5 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Enforcement Procedure s (continued)
Local offices did not take timely action for employers
with wage withholding orders that did not remit
related payments within the required 90 days
(Finding 1).
CSEA’s automated system (CSES) alerted the local
offices to these cases, but caseworkers did not
always follow up with the employers in a timely
manner.
OLA’s test of 18 cases with unpaid child support
totaling $734,000 disclosed that for 5 cases, with
unpaid support totaling $226,000, CSES
prompted the local office to contact the employer
and inquire about wage withholding, but no such
action was taken for 3 to 26 months.
In 1 of the 5 cases, the obligor owed $65,000 and
the local office was prompted by CSES on 4
occasions to contact the employer, but no contact
had been made. During part of this period, the
obligor earned $92,000 annually.
CSEA - Child Support Enforcement Administration
Page 5

--- Page 6 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Enforcement Procedure s (continued)
Certain obligors were improperly excluded from the
driver’s license suspension process at the local child
support office where we performed testing (Finding 2).
State law provides for the suspension of a driver’s
license by MVA when an obligor is at least 60 days
delinquent in support payments. This local office
miscoded the accounts of obligors in CSES who
entered into payment plans so that they were not
subject to the license suspension process if they
became delinquent on their payment plans.
OLA tested 19 cases that were miscoded and noted
7 cases of obligors not current with their payment
plans, with balances totaling $143,000, but
because they had been removed from the
suspension process their licenses were not
suspended.
As of October 2014, this local child support office
had 682 obligors with unpaid child support totaling
$10.5 million who had entered into payment plans.
CSEA - Child Support Enforcement Administration
Page 6

--- Page 7 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Enforcement Procedure s (continued)
Certain obligors were improperly excluded from the
automated occupational license suspension
enforcement process (Finding 3).
State law permits the suspension of an
occupational license for an obligor who is at least
120 days delinquent.
OLA testing disclosed that certain obligors from
multiple offices were improperly excluded from the
suspension process based on how the cases were
coded in CSES. For example, obligors with inactive
occupational licenses were coded to be excluded
from the suspension process. As a result, if the
licenses were to be reactivated, the obligors would
not be subject to suspension.
As of September 2014, there were 281 obligors
with occupational licenses and unpaid child
support totaling $6.8 million who were excluded
from the suspension process based on this coding.
CSEA - Child Support Enforcement Administration
Page 7

--- Page 8 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Enforcement Procedure s (continued)
CSEA did not determine whether State licensing
authorities suspended obligors’ occupational licenses
when requested (Finding 4).
During our audit period, CSEA requested various
licensing authorities to suspend the occupational
licenses of 1,894 obligors who owed child support
totaling $31.5 million, but did not routinely follow
up when it did not receive notification or
confirmation of the requested suspension.
OLA’s test of 10 cases at one local office disclosed
that, for 7 cases, CSEA did not take follow up
action when the licensing authorities did not notify
CSEA of the suspensions.
Two licensing authorities associated with 3 of these
7 cases informed OLA that they do not suspend
licenses when requested by CSEA. CSEA had
referred 165 obligors with balances of $2.6 million
to the two authorities, but was unaware that they
were not suspending licenses.
CSEA - Child Support Enforcement Administration
Page 8

--- Page 9 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Local Office Contract M onitoring
CSEA needs to enhance its monitoring over the
vendor responsible for all child support services at
one local office (Finding 5).
CSEA performed reviews of vendor performance,
but did not sufficiently review the vendor’s actions
with respect to cases on the delinquency report
(cases with balances outstanding >90 days). This
office had 12,220 cases that were >90 days
delinquent as of April 2014.
OLA tested 15 cases from the delinquency report
with balances totaling $144,000. For 9 cases
totaling $62,000, the vendor had not documented
follow-up with the obligors within 30 days as
required. For 2 of the 9 cases, there was no
documented follow-up and for the other 7 cases
delays ranged from 24 to 184 days.
CSEA - Child Support Enforcement Administration
Page 9

--- Page 10 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Local Office Contract M onitoring (continued)
In addition to vendor follow-up on delinquent obligor
accounts, CSEA also needs to improve monitoring
with respect to vendor controls over adjustments to
account balances and changes to payee information.
The contract required an independent operational
review of cash receipts at the local office to be
performed by an accounting firm, however, this
review did not include an assessment of controls
over adjustments.
OLA’s test of 15 account adjustments, totaling
$9.5 million, found that 7, totaling $7.8 million,
were approved by a supervisor, but required
supporting documentation was not on file to justify
the adjustments.
Changes to payee name and mailing address
information recorded in CSES were not verified for
propriety by supervisory personnel. In a different
local office, >$100,000 was stolen by an employee
by, in part, changing payee address information.
CSEA - Child Support Enforcement Administration
Page 10

--- Page 11 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
New Hire Registry Cont r act
CSEA did not adequately monitor the new hire registry
contract and did not verify the propriety of the related
vendor invoices (Finding 6).
State law requires employers to report newly hired
employees, which CSEA uses to identify obligors
who may be eligible for wage withholding. CSEA
contracts with a vendor who receives these reports
and transmits the information to CSEA.
CSEA did not verify that the vendor transmitted
complete and timely new hire data.
CSEA paid the vendor invoices without verifying the
number of records billed. The vendor was paid a
fixed price for each new hire submission
transmitted to CSEA. However, CSEA did not
capture the number of records transmitted by the
vendor so that it could verify the related invoices.
The three-year vendor contract was valued at
$925,000.
CSEA - Child Support Enforcement Administration
Page 11

--- Page 12 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Conclusions
CSEA needs to
 ensure local offices take timely follow-up action
when employers fail to remit wage withholding
payments,
 ensure all obligors are subject to the driver’s
license and occupational license suspension
processes,
 follow up with licensing authorities that do not
notify CSEA of requested occupational license
suspensions,
 strengthen its monitoring over the vendor
responsible for child support services at one local
office to ensure documented follow-up action is
taken within 30 days on delinquent cases and
that account adjustments were properly supported
and reviewed, and
 establish procedures to verify the completeness
and timeliness of the new hire registry information
and the propriety of the related vendor invoices.
CSEA - Child Support Enforcement Administration
Page 12