Title: Review of Community College Audit Reports - Fiscal Year Ending June 30, 2009
Date: 11/01/2010
Type: Special Reports and Letters
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5a9eb7914212041b34c9617f
Extracted: 2025-06-18T09:04:16.640575
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Review of Community College Audit Reports
Fiscal Year Ending June 30, 2009
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
 This report and any related follow-up correspondence are available to the public through the
Office of Legislative Audits at 301 West Preston Street, Room 1202, Baltimore, Maryland
21201. The Office may be contacted by telephone at 410-946-5900, 301-970-5900, or 1-877-
486-9964.
 Electronic copies of our audit reports can be viewed or downloaded from our website at
http://www.ola.state.md.us.
 Alternate formats may be requested through the Maryland Relay Service at 1-800-735-2258.
 The Department of Legislative Services – Office of the Executive Director, 90 State Circle,
Annapolis, Maryland 21401 can also assist you in obtaining copies of our reports and related
correspondence. The Department may be contacted by telephone at 410-946-5400 or 301-
970-5400.

--- Page 3 ---
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY
November 1, 2010
Karl S. Aro Bruce A. Myers, CPA
Executive Director Legislative Auditor xxx
Senator Verna L. Jones, Co-Chair, Joint Audit Committee
Delegate Steven J. DeBoy, Sr., Co-Chair, Joint Audit Committee
Members of Joint Audit Committee
Annapolis, Maryland
Mr. Kevin M. O’Keefe, Chairman
Maryland Higher Education Commission
Mr. Karl S. Aro, Executive Director
Department of Legislative Services
Ladies and Gentlemen:
In accordance with the provisions of the Education Article, Section 16-315(h) of
the Annotated Code of Maryland, we have reviewed the audit reports that must be
filed by 15 of the State’s community colleges with the Maryland Higher
Education Commission (MHEC) for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2009. We are
herein summarizing the results of such audits.
Our review disclosed that all opinions expressed by the colleges’ independent
auditors stated that the applicable financial statements were fairly presented in
conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of
America. However, one of the colleges had a deficit net assets balance as of June
30, 2009. Additionally, there were three colleges for which the applicable
auditors reported a total of 14 material weaknesses in internal control for fiscal
year 2009. In these instances, MHEC evaluated the adequacy of the colleges’
responses to the material weaknesses and concluded that appropriate follow-up
actions had been taken.
A draft copy of this report was provided to the MHEC for review and comment.
Since there are no recommendations in this report, a written response was not
necessary.
Respectfully submitted,
Bruce A. Myers, CPA
Legislative Auditor

--- Page 4 ---
2

--- Page 5 ---
Background Information and Purpose of Review
According to the State's records, State aid totaling approximately $255 million
for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2009 was granted to 15 of Maryland's 16
community colleges. This aid primarily consisted of funding based on cost and
student enrollment data. In addition, it included certain retirement benefits and
various other grants. The remaining college (Baltimore City Community College)
is a budgetary unit of the State and receives an annual State appropriation.
Baltimore City Community College is not subject to the Education Article,
Section 16-315(h) of the Annotated Code of Maryland; however, it obtains annual
financial audits that are conducted by a certified public accounting firm. The
College is also subject to fiscal compliance audits by the Office of Legislative
Audits. We issue separate reports on the College, which contain information
regarding the results of these audits.
The Education Article, Section 16-315(a) of the Annotated Code of Maryland
requires the Maryland Higher Education Commission (MHEC) to adopt
guidelines for the preparation of annual audit reports on the colleges. The
guidelines promulgated by MHEC require independent auditors to express
opinions as to the fairness of presentation of the colleges’ financial statements as
well as to the cost and student enrollment data used for calculating the State aid to
the colleges. The guidelines also require the auditors to issue management letters
containing all material weaknesses in the colleges’ systems of internal controls.
While not required, many of the auditors issue management letters that contain
non-material weaknesses.
We reviewed the audit reports of the State’s community colleges for the fiscal
year ended June 30, 2009 to determine compliance with the applicable statutes
and the guidelines promulgated by MHEC. We also reviewed the reports to
determine if any of the community colleges had deficit net asset balances, or
uninsured/uncollateralized bank deposits. This report contains the results of that
review.
3

--- Page 6 ---
Results of Review
Audit Reports
Fourteen of the 15 audit reports for fiscal year 2009 were filed timely.
Our review disclosed that 14 of the 15 community college audit reports were filed
timely with MHEC for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2009. The Garrett College
audit report was submitted after the required filing date, including the extension to
file that had been granted to the College. The College’s audit report was also
filed late in fiscal year 2008.
The State’s community colleges are required by law to file annual audit reports
within 90 days of the fiscal year end (June 30) unless an extension is granted.
All audit reports expressed unqualified opinions and were in accordance
with generally accepted auditing standards.
Our review also disclosed that all 15 community college audit reports for the
fiscal year ended June 30, 2009 contained unqualified opinions from their auditors
and were presented in accordance with generally accepted auditing standards.
MHEC’s audit guidelines require the auditors to express opinions as to the
fairness of the presentation of the colleges’ financial statements and that the audits
be performed in accordance with generally accepted auditing standards. An
unqualified opinion is issued when the auditor states that the applicable financial
statements are presented fairly, in all material respects, in conformity with
accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America.
Financial Statements
One community college disclosed a deficit balance in the unrestricted portion
of its net assets at June 30, 2009.
Our review disclosed one college with a deficit balance in the unresticted portion
of its net assets as of June 30, 2009. Specifically, Carroll Community College
had an unrestricted net assets deficit of $2,219,166. Since the College’s invested
in capital assets component had a balance of $1,836,519, which offsets the
unrestricted net assets deficit, the total net assets deficit was $382,647 as of June
4

--- Page 7 ---
30, 2009. A deficit net assets balance indicates that a college has more liabilities
than assets and could indicate a potential financial problem.
We did not perform a detailed analysis to determine the cause of this deficit;
nevertheless, the College’s financial statements and accompanying notes
contained certain pertinent information relative to the deficit. Specifically, the
College’s financial statements disclosed that the decrease in net assets in fiscal
year 2009 of approximately $2.2 million was due primarily to the Other Post
Employment Benefit obligation which accounted for fiscal year 2009 expenses of
$2.1 million.
Generally accepted accounting principles specify that liabilities for post
employment benefits, which are deferred until retirement or another future event,
be recognized in the years in which the employee provides services rather than
during the postemployment period when payments are made.
Management Letters
Management letters for fiscal year 2009 included a total of 33
recommendations for improvement, including a total of 14 recommendations
considered to be material weaknesses in three colleges’ systems of internal
control.
We reviewed the management letters applicable to the audits of the community
colleges that were filed with MHEC for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2009. Our
review disclosed that 7 of the community colleges did not receive any
recommendations, while the remaining 8 community colleges received a total of
33 recommendations, 14 of which were considered material weaknesses in the
colleges’ systems of internal control. The material weaknesses were found to
exist at College of Southern Maryland, Garrett College, and Prince George’s
Community College and were related to the colleges’ grants, financial reporting,
financial aid, fixed assets, and accounts receivable.
As required by the Education Article, Section 16-315(c) of the Annotated Code of
Maryland, MHEC evaluated the adequacy of the colleges’ responses to the
material weaknesses and determined that appropriate follow-up action had been
taken.
MHEC did not formally evaluate the adequacy of the colleges’ responses to the
19 non-material recommendations since, in accordance with MHEC’s guidelines,
comments and suggestions related to non-material weaknesses are not required.
5

--- Page 8 ---
When auditors include such items in the letters, the colleges’ follow-up actions
are subject to the auditors’ review during subsequent audits.
The following schedule provides a summary of the fiscal year 2009
recommendations by fiscal area. Nine of the 33 recommendations (6 of which
were also considered material weaknesses in 2008) were repeated from the
preceding year.
Number of
Fiscal Area of Recommendation Recommendations
Financial aid 9
Grants and contracts 9
Accounting and financial reporting 5
Fixed assets, inventory 3
Cash receipts and disbursements 2
Electronic data processing systems 2
Student enrollment and residency 2
Accounts receivable 1
Total 33
6

--- Page 9 ---
A T
UDIT EAM
Robert A. Garman, CPA
Assistant Director
Catherine M. Easter
Senior Auditor
Sandra C. Medeiros
Staff Auditor