Title: Maryland Health Care Provider Rate Stabilization Fund - January 1, 2007 to December 31, 2007
Date: 03/10/2008
Type: Fiscal Compliance
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5aa004594212033a3cdd098d
Extracted: 2025-06-17T19:24:11.808317
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Audit Report
Maryland Health Care Provider Rate Stabilization Fund
January 1, 2007 to December 31, 2007
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
• This report and any related follow-up correspondence are available to the public through the
Office of Legislative Audits at 301 West Preston Street, Room 1202, Baltimore, Maryland
21201. The Office may be contacted by telephone at 410-946-5900, 301-970-5900, or 1-877-
486-9964.
• Electronic copies of our audit reports can be viewed or downloaded from our website at
http://www.ola.state.md.us.
• Alternate formats may be requested through the Maryland Relay Service at 1-800-735-2258.
• The Department of Legislative Services – Office of the Executive Director, 90 State Circle,
Annapolis, Maryland 21401 can also assist you in obtaining copies of our reports and related
correspondence. The Department may be contacted by telephone at 410- 946-5400 or 301-
970-5400.

--- Page 3 ---
March 10, 2008
Senator Verna L. Jones, Co-Chair, Joint Audit Committee
Delegate Steven J. DeBoy, Sr., Co-Chair, Joint Audit Committee
Members of Joint Audit Committee
Annapolis, Maryland
Ladies and Gentlemen:
As required by the Insurance Article, Section 19-808 of the Annotated Code of
Maryland, we have audited the receipts and disbursements of the Maryland Health
Care Provider Rate Stabilization Fund for the period beginning January 1, 2007 and
ending December 31, 2007. The Fund is administered by the Commissioner of the
Maryland Insurance Administration (MIA).
Our audit did not include procedures designed to verify the propriety of the subsidy
payments made to medical professional liability insurers since State law requires
MIA to conduct annual audits of each insurer for this purpose. At the time of our
audit, MIA had not yet completed (including the issuance of audit reports) any audits
under this requirement. Our audit also disclosed that delinquent premium taxes
were not pursued on a timely basis.
A schedule of the Fund’s financial activity for the 2007 calendar year is included
in this report. As disclosed in that schedule, the Fund’s cash balance was
approximately $133 million as of December 31, 2007.
Respectfully submitted,
Bruce A. Myers, CPA
Legislative Auditor

--- Page 4 ---
2

--- Page 5 ---
Background Information
Establishment and Purpose of the Fund
The Insurance Article, Section 19-802 of the Annotated Code of Maryland
established the Maryland Health Care Provider Rate Stabilization Fund effective
April 1, 2005. The law provides that the Fund will serve several purposes,
including retention of certain health care providers in the State by subsidizing
their malpractice insurance premiums for a specified number of years, and by
increasing fee-for-service rates paid to providers by the Maryland Medical
Assistance program (Medicaid) and payments to managed care organizations that
serve that program. The Fund is administered by the Commissioner of the
Maryland Insurance Administration (MIA).
The Fund consists primarily of revenues generated by an annual premium tax
imposed on health maintenance organizations and managed care organizations.
All revenues are to be initially deposited into the Fund, and then allocated, in
accordance with a schedule established in the law, to two accounts: the Rate
Stabilization Account and the Medical Assistance Program Account. Amounts
allocated to the Rate Stabilization Account are to be paid, in accordance with
established criteria, to medical professional liability insurers who apply to MIA
for rate subsidies on behalf of insured health care providers. Amounts allocated
to the Medical Assistance Program Account are to be paid by MIA to the State’s
Department of Health and Mental Hygiene to increase payments to Medicaid
providers and managed care organizations. The law provides that revenue
allocations to the two accounts will continue through fiscal year 2009. Beginning
in fiscal year 2010, all Fund revenues are to be allocated to the Medical
Assistance Program Account.
Insurer Dividend Distributed to Fund
On September 12, 2007, the Board of Directors of the Medical Mutual Liability
Insurance Society of Maryland, a medical professional liability insurer
participating in the Fund, declared a dividend to its members in the amount of
$68.6 million. Notice of the resolution adopted by the Board approving and
implementing the dividend payment was provided to the Insurance Commissioner
on the same date. Pursuant to the Society’s participation in the Fund, as well as
certain related statutory requirements, the Society proposed in its resolution
distributing a portion of the dividend to the State (approximately $44.2 million),
with the remainder being distributed to its policyholders in the form of a credit
against their renewal premiums effective January 1, 2008.
3

--- Page 6 ---
As of December 12, 2007, the Society had received subsidies on behalf of its
policyholders from the Fund totaling approximately $72.4 million, and was due
an additional $11.7 million for calendar year 2007 for a total of $84.1 million.
However, the law also provides certain conditions under which an insurer
participating in the Fund must pay a portion of any dividend or similar
distribution to the State. On September 13, 2007, the Insurance Commissioner
issued an order to the Society to cease and desist from advertising, publicizing,
implementing, or otherwise taking any action under or with respect to the
dividend resolution adopted by the Society’s Board of Directors. According to
that order, a question existed as to the exact portion of the dividend to which the
State was entitled. The Commissioner held public hearings on this matter, and on
November 20, 2007, issued a final order requiring the Society to pay the entire
dividend to the State for the benefit of the Fund. Payment was due within 30 days
from the date of the order to allow parties from MIA and the Society to meet and
determine if other alternatives to the Commissioner’s order existed.
On December 12, 2007, the Board rescinded its original dividend declaration of
$68.6 million and declared a new dividend in the amount of approximately $97.9
million. The Board proposed to divide the dividend between the Fund ($84.1
million) and the Society’s policyholders ($13.8 million). On the same date, the
Commissioner and the Society entered into a consent order agreeing to the terms
in the Board’s proposal. The Society also agreed that in 2008 it would not
participate in the Fund nor would it receive any further disbursements. On
December 19, 2007, the Society transferred $72.4 million ($84.1 million less
$11.7 million due to the Society but not yet received) to MIA to be credited to the
Fund’s Rate Stabilization Account.
Financial Information
On page 5 is a summary of the receipts and disbursements for the Maryland
Health Care Provider Rate Stabilization Fund for the period beginning January 1,
2007 and ending December 31, 2007, based on the State’s accounting records.
This summary is not intended to and does not provide the financial position and
results of operations in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles.
Specifically, certain financial statements and disclosures (for example, balance
sheet, summary of significant accounting policies) have not been provided as
would be required had this summary been prepared in accordance with generally
accepted accounting principles.
4

--- Page 7 ---
SUMMARY OF FINANCIAL ACTIVITY
January 1, 2007 to
December 31, 2007
RECEIPTS:
Premium taxes $ 79,274,114
Premium tax exemption value (1) 9,170,192
Insurer dividend distributed to Fund (2) 72,419,650
Interest income 404,730
Total receipts 161,268,686
DISBURSEMENTS:
Payments to medical professional liability insurers 23,911,651
Payments to Department of Health and Mental Hygiene 45,550,736
Administration expenses (3) 133,000
Total disbursements 69,595,387
EXCESS OF RECEIPTS OVER DISBURSEMENTS 91,673,299
FUND BALANCE (cash basis), December 31, 2006 40,913,598
FUND BALANCE (cash basis), December 31, 2007 $ 132,586,897
(1)
Premium tax exemption value represents amounts paid by non-profit health maintenance organizations
in lieu of premium taxes.
(2)
See Background Information.
(3)
The law provides for an annual allocation of up to $350,000 for costs incurred by the Commissioner to
administer the Fund.
5

--- Page 8 ---
Findings and Recommendations
Audits
Finding 1
Required audits of applications submitted by insurers for subsidy payments
were not completed on a timely basis.
Analysis
Required audits of application information submitted by medical professional
liability insurers that applied for and received subsidies from the Fund were not
completed on a timely basis. Such audits provide assurance that insurers properly
calculated subsidy amounts due the insurers. We were advised that, as of
February 20, 2008, the Maryland Insurance Administration (MIA) was in the
process of completing audits of three of the four insurers who had applied for and
received subsidy payments for subsidy year 2005. However, MIA had not yet
held exit meetings to discuss the audit results with the insurers or issued audit
reports, and MIA was uncertain as to when these actions would occur. We were
further advised that an audit of the fourth insurer had just been started on
February 15, 2008. Subsidy payments to insurers totaled $29.6 million, $42.3
million, and $23.9 million for calendar years 2005, 2006, and 2007, respectively.
The law requires the Commissioner (or designee) to conduct an annual audit to
verify application information submitted by each medical professional liability
insurer that applied for a subsidy payment from the Fund for an applicable
subsidy year. Since all participating insurers do not implement rate changes on
the same date and often renew policies on a staggered basis throughout the year,
the subsidy year for each insurer will vary and may not end for months after the
end of the related calendar year (for example, subsidy year activity may not be
completed for more than a year after the related calendar year). MIA policy
provides that audits will begin as soon as practicable after the end of the insurer’s
subsidy year. We believe that MIA should complete these audits on a timely
basis.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that MIA complete audits of subsidy application information
submitted by insurers on a timely basis, and take any appropriate follow-up
action deemed necessary.
6

--- Page 9 ---
Delinquent Premium Taxes
Finding 2
MIA did not pursue delinquent premium taxes on a timely basis.
Analysis
MIA did not pursue delinquent premium taxes on a timely basis. Our review
disclosed that, as of January 2008, one health maintenance organization (HMO)
had not made required quarterly tax payments or filed the related tax forms for the
last three quarters of calendar year 2007. Additionally, MIA had not taken any
action to determine why the payments and forms, which were due June 15,
September 15, and December 15 of 2007, had not been received. MIA advised us
that the company owed approximately $2.9 million for these three quarters.
As previously mentioned, the Fund consists primarily of revenues generated by an
annual tax imposed on premiums written by HMOs and managed care
organizations (MCOs) for insurance business transacted in the State. The law
requires all entities subject to the tax to make quarterly tax payments and file a
corresponding tax declaration form. Although entities that do not submit
premium taxes when due are subject to interest charges and penalties as provided
for in the law, we believe that MIA should take appropriate follow-up action on a
timely basis when required payments are not received. During calendar year
2007, the Fund received approximately $88 million in premium taxes or premium
tax exempt values from a total of 14 HMOs and MCOs.
Recommendation 2
We recommend that, in the future, MIA pursue delinquent premium taxes
on a timely basis. Specifically, we recommend that MIA contact applicable
HMOs or MCOs within a reasonable period of time, such as 30 days, when a
required tax form and/or payment is not received. We also recommend that
MIA collect all taxes due from the HMO noted in our review, along with any
applicable penalties and interest.
7

--- Page 10 ---
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
As required by the Insurance Article, Section 19-808 of the Annotated Code of
Maryland, we have audited the receipts and disbursements of the Maryland Health
Care Provider Rate Stabilization Fund for the period beginning January 1, 2007
and ending December 31, 2007. The Fund is administered by the Commissioner
of the Maryland Insurance Administration (MIA). The audit was conducted in
accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards.
The objectives of this audit were to examine the Fund’s receipts and
disbursements and related records and internal control, and to evaluate
compliance with applicable State laws, rules, and regulations.
Our audit procedures included inquiries of appropriate personnel, inspections of
documents and records, and observations of the Fund’s operations. We also
tested transactions and performed other auditing procedures that we considered
necessary to achieve our objectives.
MIA is required by law to annually audit each medical professional liability
insurer that applied for a subsidy payment from the Fund to verify application
information submitted by the insurer; accordingly, our audit did not include
procedures designed to verify the propriety of the amounts requested by medical
professional liability insurers and the disposition of such payments. As
previously mentioned, at the time of our audit, MIA had not yet completed
(including the issuance of audit reports) any audits under this requirement.
Therefore, we will review the results of MIA’s audits during subsequent audits of
the Fund. In addition, we conducted a separate audit of the Medical Mutual
Liability Insurance Society of Maryland as required by State law, for the period
beginning January 1, 2005 and ending December 31, 2006. Our audit report on
the Society was issued on February 25, 2008.
Our audit did not include certain support services provided to the Fund by MIA.
These support services (such as maintenance of accounting records and related
fiscal functions) are included within the scope of our audit of MIA.
MIA’s management is responsible for establishing and maintaining effective
internal control over the Fund. Internal control is a process designed to provide
reasonable assurance that objectives pertaining to the reliability of financial
records, effectiveness and efficiency of operations including safeguarding of
assets, and compliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations are achieved.
8

--- Page 11 ---
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate.
Our reports are designed to assist the Maryland General Assembly in exercising
its legislative oversight function and to provide constructive recommendations for
improving State operations. As a result, our reports generally do not address
activities we reviewed that are functioning properly.
This report includes a finding relating to a condition that we consider to be a
significant deficiency in the design or operation of internal control that could
adversely affect MIA’s ability to maintain reliable financial records, operate
effectively and efficiently, and/or comply with applicable laws, rules, and
regulations. Our report also includes a finding regarding a significant instance of
noncompliance with applicable laws, rules, or regulations.
MIA’s response to our findings and recommendations is included as an appendix
to this report. As prescribed in the State Government Article, Section 2-1224 of
the Annotated Code of Maryland, we will advise MIA regarding the results of our
review of its response.
9

--- Page 13 ---
MIA Response to
Findings and Recommendations
Finding 1
Required audits of applications submitted by insurers for subsidy payments were
not completed on a timely basis.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that MIA complete audits of subsidy application information
submitted by insurers on a timely basis, and take any appropriate follow-up action
deemed necessary.
MIA Response:
The audits were initiated as soon as practicable after the end of the insurer’s subsidy year
as required by MIA’s internal policy. Additionally the fieldwork is substantially complete
for three of the four audits; however, finalization of the audits and issuance of the related
reports has been delayed. These delays are primarily due to issues disclosed during these
initial audits of the carriers’ rate subsidy requests, which in several instances required
review and advice of legal counsel to resolve. We agree the audits should be completed
on a timely basis, and fully intend to do so.
We expect to conduct exit meetings with two of the insurers by March 31, 2008, and
issue the final report by April 30, 2008. The fieldwork for the third 2005 subsidy year
audit is scheduled for completion by March 31, 2008, with an exit meeting to be held in
April 2008 and final report issuance in May 2008. The final 2005 subsidy year audit is
expected to be completed in May 2008, with an exit meeting to be held in June 2008 and
final report issuance in July 2008. Additionally, we intend to start the audits for the 2006
subsidy year for the carriers that are still participating in the rate subsidy program as soon
as practicable after the end of their 2006 subsidy year activity.

--- Page 14 ---
Finding 2
MIA did not pursue delinquent premium taxes on a timely basis.
Recommendation 2
We recommend that, in the future, MIA pursue delinquent premium taxes on a
timely basis. Specifically, we recommend that MIA contact applicable HMOs or
MCOs within a reasonable period of time, such as 30 days, when a required tax
form and/or payment is not received. We also recommend that MIA collect all taxes
due from the HMO noted in our review, along with any applicable penalties and
interest.
MIA Response:
The MIA does not pursue missing quarterly estimated tax payments, but rather, relies on
the final return and audit of the return to detect missing or underpayments. As part of the
final audit an underpayment of quarterly estimated taxes is assessed penalty and interest
as provided for by statute. Our procedure is consistent with other federal and state taxing
authorities. However, we recognize that the tax collected from health maintenance
organizations (HMOs) and managed care organizations (MCOs) funds the rate
stabilization fund, and the funding in each year is dependent upon a projected level of
collections. Therefore, we agree to pursue missing quarterly estimated tax payments from
HMOs and MCOs.
Regarding the tax owed by the one HMO that had not made estimated tax payments for
the last three quarters of calendar year 2007, the MIA contacted the HMO and as of
March 6, 2008, the HMO wired the estimated taxes due totaling $2,905,224 to the State.
Any penalty and interest due as a result of the HMO’s late payment of estimated taxes
will be computed and assessed in conjunction with the audit of the annual premium tax
return, which is due by March 15, 2008.
P:\private\CurrentMAK Files\SCHOTT\Reports\MyersRSF Audit MIA response 03072008.doc

--- Page 15 ---
AUDIT TEAM
Paul R. Denz, CPA
Audit Manager
Robert W. Lembach, CPA
Senior Auditor
Jennifer L. Thompson
Jacquelyn M. Tindall
Staff Auditors