Title: Maryland Department of Health - Prevention and Health Promotion Administration - Office of Population Health Improvement - Office of Preparedness and Response
Date: 04/04/2018
Type: Fiscal Compliance
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5acce0ea4212035238c7ee18
Extracted: 2025-06-18T22:14:50.969764
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Audit Report
Maryland Department of Health
Prevention and Health Promotion Administration
Office of Population Health Improvement
Office of Preparedness and Response
April 2018
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
For further information concerning this report contact:
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
301 West Preston Street, Room 1202
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Phone: 410-946-5900 · 301-970-5900
Toll Free in Maryland: 1-877-486-9964
Maryland Relay: 711
TTY: 410-946-5401 · 301-970-5401
E-mail: OLAWebmaster@ola.state.md.us
Website: www.ola.state.md.us
The Office of Legislative Audits operates a Fraud Hotline to report fraud, waste, or abuse
involving State of Maryland government resources. Reports of fraud, waste, or abuse
may be communicated anonymously by a toll-free call to 1-877-FRAUD-11, by mail to the
Fraud Hotline, c/o Office of Legislative Audits, or through the Office’s website.
The Department of Legislative Services does not discriminate on the basis of age, ancestry, color,
creed, marital status, national origin, race, religion, gender, gender identity, sexual orientation, or
disability in the admission or access to its programs, services, or activities. The Department’s
Information Officer has been designated to coordinate compliance with the nondiscrimination
requirements contained in Section 35.107 of the Department of Justice Regulations. Requests for
assistance should be directed to the Information Officer at 410-946-5400 or 410-970-5400.

--- Page 5 ---
Table of Contents
Background Information 5
Agency Responsibilities 5
Organizational Change 5
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report 6
Findings and Recommendations 7
Drug Rebates
Finding 1 – The Prevention and Health Promotion Administration (PHPA) 7
did not ensure that all rebates from drug manufacturers were received
and were accurate. Our tests disclosed one manufacturer did not pay
rebates for six months, and rebates for 20 drugs were underpaid by as
much as $2 million for one quarter in 2016.
Client and Provider Eligibility
* Finding 2 – PHPA did not use available independent resources to help 9
verify applicant income for certain programs and to identify possible
third-party insurance coverage.
MADAP Client Services
* Finding 3 – PHPA did not adequately restrict user access to the Maryland 11
AIDS Drug Assistance Program (MADAP) system. In addition, PHPA
did not adequately review overrides of rejected MADAP pharmacy
claims and manually processed MADAP-Plus insurance premium
payments.
Finding 4 – PHPA did not recover pharmacy claim overpayments totaling 12
$425,000 that were identified during pharmacy audits.
Cash Receipts
Finding 5 – PHPA lacked adequate procedures and controls over MADAP 13
collections.
Confidential Information
Finding 6 – Numerous PHPA employees had unnecessary access to the 14
confidential demographic and health information of certain patients.
* Denotes item repeated in full or part from preceding audit report
3

--- Page 6 ---
Food Protection
Finding 7 – PHPA did not conduct timely inspections to ensure 15
food-processing facilities were operating in accordance with State
regulations.
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology 17
Agency Response Appendix
4

--- Page 7 ---
Background Information
Agency Responsibilities
The Prevention and Health Promotion Administration (PHPA), the Office of
Population Health Improvement (OPHI), and the Office of Preparedness and
Response (OPR) are units within the Maryland Department of Health (MDH).
 PHPA protects, promotes, and improves the health and well-being of
Marylanders and their families through the provision of public health
leadership and community-based public health efforts, including partnerships
with local health departments, with special attention to at-risk and vulnerable
populations. PHPA provides State grant funding to the local health
departments for various purposes, including support for their operational
costs. Programs administered by PHPA include the Maryland AIDS Drug
Assistance Program (MADAP), the Maryland AIDS Drug Assistance Program
– Plus (MADAP-Plus), and the Breast and Cervical Cancer Diagnosis and
Treatment Program (BCCDTP).
 OPHI seeks to transform public health through stewardship of data,
partnerships, and funding initiatives to develop innovative health policy and
improve the health infrastructure of Maryland.
 OPR organizes and prepares for public health and medical emergencies
through statewide partnerships with public, private, and government agencies
to coordinate an effective emergency response for the health and safety of all
Maryland residents.
According to the State’s records, during fiscal year 2017, expenditures for PHPA,
OPHI, and OPR totaled $346.7 million, $55.8 million, and $17.6 million,
respectively.
Organizational Change
During the period between January and July 2015, MDH reorganized certain
program responsibilities underneath the Deputy Secretary for Public Health
Services. OPHI assumed most functions previously performed by the Health
Systems and Infrastructure Administration (HSIA), which was phased out. In
addition, the Office of Primary Care Access, previously under HSIA, was
transferred to PHPA.
5

--- Page 8 ---
Status of Findings from Preceding Audit Report
Our audit included a review to determine the status of the five findings contained
in our preceding audit report dated March 18, 2015. We determined that MDH
satisfactorily addressed three of these five findings. The remaining two findings
are repeated in this report.
6

--- Page 9 ---
Findings and Recommendations
Drug Rebates
Background
The Maryland Department of Health (MDH) – Prevention and Health Promotion
Administration (PHPA) receives prescription drug rebates from drug
manufacturers for covered outpatient drugs dispensed to its approved clients
under the Maryland AIDS Drug Assistance Program (MADAP). MADAP helps
low to moderate income individuals pay for certain HIV/AIDS related drugs.
The U.S. Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act of 1990 set a statutory rebate
mechanism for pharmacy reimbursement systems under state Medicaid programs.
Subsequently, the U.S. Veterans Health Care Act of 1992 authorized the 340B
Drug Pricing Program which requires drug manufacturers to provide outpatient
drugs to eligible health care organizations for eligible clients at significantly
reduced prices, and established a ceiling price for covered drugs for specified
programs (including MADAP) and entities (hospitals, and freestanding health
centers). In addition, supplemental rebates exist on certain drugs based on the
difference between the net Medicaid rate paid for the drugs and nationally
negotiated prices.
PHPA receives rebates on a quarterly basis. According to PHPA records, drug
rebates received during fiscal year 2016 from all manufacturers under MADAP
totaled approximately $52.4 million.
Finding 1
PHPA did not ensure that all rebates from drug manufacturers were
received and were accurate. Our tests disclosed one manufacturer did not
pay rebates for six months, and rebates for 20 drugs were underpaid by as
much as $2 million for one quarter in 2016.
Analysis
PHPA had not established monitoring and verification procedures to ensure drug
rebates due from drug manufacturers under MADAP were received and that the
amounts paid were accurate. Our testing disclosed that one manufacturer did not
pay rebates for a six-month period and that the rebates for 20 drugs were
underpaid for the period tested.
 PHPA did not compare the quarterly rebates received from prescription drug
manufacturers with a listing of the specific manufacturers who were required
7

--- Page 10 ---
to pay rebates for that quarter to ensure all rebates were submitted. According
to agency records, for the quarter ending June 30, 2016, there were
approximately 170 drug manufacturers. We tested 10 of these manufacturers
who, based on reports of drugs purchased for clients under MADAP, were
required to pay rebates for drugs sold during the quarter. Our review
disclosed that, as of March 9, 2017, one manufacturer had not submitted
rebates for the June 30, 2016 quarter or for the preceding quarter ending
March 31, 2016. PHPA was unaware of the delinquent rebate payments until
we brought the delinquencies to its attention. Subsequent to our testing,
PHPA received a $49,300 rebate from the manufacturer for the two quarters.
The payments from the other tested drug manufacturers for the June 30, 2016
quarter were received between August and October 2016.
 PHPA did not independently calculate the quarterly rebates due from each
manufacturer to ensure the rebates calculated and paid by the manufacturer
were proper. PHPA management advised us that it could not perform a
verification because it did not have access to the necessary information, such
as the supplemental drug prices, and because the calculations would be
complicated. However, we were able to obtain the necessary information
from various sources that PHPA also could have accessed. We recalculated
certain rebates which identified as much as $2 million in underpayments.
Specifically, we independently recalculated 20 rebates received from eight
manufacturers for the quarter ending June 30, 2016, and noted that all 20
rebates appeared to have been underpaid. For the 20 rebates tested, we
estimated that PHPA should have received $14.2 million instead of the $12.2
million paid by these eight manufacturers for this quarter. Based on
discussions with PHPA management, our calculation of the rebate
underpayments reflects adjustments we made for certain limits manufacturers
placed on the supplemental rebates in instances in which PHPA was the third-
party payer. PHPA management advised that there may be other rebate limits
not considered in our calculation; however, as of December 2017, they were
not able to provide us with any other limits that should have been considered
in our calculation.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that PHPA
a. establish procedures to ensure that all required manufacturers pay
rebates and that the rebates paid are accurate;
b. recalculate rebates received in prior periods, and pursue collection of any
underpayments, including those noted above.
8

--- Page 11 ---
Client and Provider Eligibility
Background
PHPA is responsible for administering the Breast and Cervical Cancer Diagnosis
and Treatment Program (BCCDTP), the Maryland AIDS Drug Assistance
Program (MADAP), and the MADAP-Plus program, including determining client
and provider eligibility.
BCCDTP pays for certain medical costs on behalf of low-income individuals who
have a qualifying medical condition. According to the State’s records, BCCDTP
spent approximately $13.2 million in special funds (primarily from the Cigarette
Restitution Fund) on behalf of approximately 1,480 recipients during fiscal year
2016.
MADAP helps low to moderate income individuals pay for certain HIV/AIDS
drugs, and MADAP-Plus helps some of these individuals pay for their health
insurance premiums, providing access to inpatient and outpatient health care, as
well as prescription coverage. According to the State’s records, during fiscal year
2016, MADAP and MADAP-Plus expenditures totaled approximately $46.3
million. As of June 30, 2016, MADAP was serving a total of 5,773 clients, of
which 2,324 were also enrolled in MADAP-Plus. These two programs were
funded by special funds (primarily MADAP drug rebates) and federal funds.
Finding 2
PHPA did not use available independent resources to help verify applicant
income for certain programs and to identify possible third-party insurance
coverage.
Analysis
PHPA did not use available independent resources to help verify reported income
of applicants for BCCDTP, MADAP, and MADAP-Plus and to identify possible
third-party insurance coverage.
 For the majority of our audit period, PHPA did not use the Maryland
Automated Benefits System (MABS)1 to verify that new and renewal
applicants submitted complete and accurate income information. PHPA
required applicants to submit documentation of income reported (for example,
pay stubs, signed federal tax returns), but did not begin using MABS to
1 MABS is maintained by the Department of Labor, Licensing and Regulation – Division of
Unemployment Insurance (DLLR – DUI). MABS tracks payments to, and amounts due from,
unemployment insurance claimants and utilizes claimant data such as earned wage data collected
by DLLR – DUI.
9

--- Page 12 ---
manually verify the income information submitted by applicants until April
2016 for BCCDTP and March 2016 for MADAP and MADAP-Plus. MABS
is used by other State entities, such as the Department of Human Services, to
verify applicant income for programs such as the Food Supplement Program.
Furthermore, our test of 10 applications that were processed and approved
after April 2016 disclosed that, for 5 applications, PHPA lacked evidence that
MABS was used to verify either the applicant’s or the applicant’s spouse’s
income information. Both incomes are to be considered as part of household
income for assessing eligibility.
 Although PHPA required BCCDTP and MADAP applicants to provide
documentation of any third-party insurance coverage they maintained, PHPA
had no procedure in place to independently identify the existence of third-
party insurance for its clients. Effective July 1, 2016, PHPA was included, by
amendment, in the contract with the vendor used by MDH’s Medical Care
Programs Administration (MCPA) to search for possible third-party insurance
for Medicaid applicants and recipients. However, as of February 2017, PHPA
management personnel advised us that PHPA had not begun using this
vendor’s services because of technical difficulties in transferring its data to the
vendor. According to PHPA’s records, it collected approximately $280,000
from third parties for program clients during the audit period.
Because applicant income must be considered when determining an applicant’s
eligibility, and the existence of third-party insurance may affect the amount of
program payments made for a recipient, it is critical that steps be taken to ensure
the complete and accurate reporting of this information. Similar conditions were
commented upon in our preceding audit report.
Recommendation 2
We recommend that PHPA
a. use MABS to independently verify applicant household income (repeat);
and
b. take appropriate action, including the use of MCPA’s vendor, to identify
applicants and recipients who have third-party insurance coverage
(repeat).
10

--- Page 13 ---
MADAP Client Services
Finding 3
PHPA did not adequately restrict user access to the MADAP system. In
addition, PHPA did not adequately review overrides of rejected MADAP
pharmacy claims and manually processed MADAP-Plus insurance premium
payments.
Analysis
PHPA did not adequately restrict user access to the MADAP system which
maintained critical information on individuals eligible for MADAP and MADAP-
Plus. This information interfaced with PHPA’s claims adjudication and point-of-
sale system used by pharmacies to check the MADAP eligibility of individuals
requesting medications as well as to initiate payment for the related claims.
PHPA also did not adequately review system overrides of rejected MADAP
pharmacy claims and MADAP-Plus insurance premium payments that were
manually processed and entered into the MADAP system for payment.
Consequently, there was a lack of assurance that only valid payments were made
for eligible persons.
 Our review of access capabilities as of December 13, 2016 disclosed that 23
of the 31 users of the MADAP system could enter applications and record
individuals as eligible for MADAP and MADAP-Plus without any
independent approval. While an employee reviewed 10 percent of the
eligibility determinations for propriety, the employee was not independent
because the employee also had the capability to record an individual as
eligible. This employee, as well as an additional 4 of the 23 users did not
need this access based on their job responsibilities. A similar condition was
commented upon in our preceding audit report.
 Overrides of rejected pharmacy claims were not independently reviewed for
propriety. According to PHPA’s records, there were 4,626 overrides of
rejected claims totaling approximately $4.8 million during fiscal year 2016.
PHPA contracted with a pharmacy benefits manager to process claims
submitted by pharmacies through the claims adjudication and point-of-sale
system on behalf of MADAP clients. Claims that were rejected due to certain
system edits were forwarded to PHPA employees who investigated the claims
and overrode the edits for any claims that were determined to be proper. For
example, a claim could be rejected if the client had another insurance provider
that may be responsible for the claim and then subsequently approved if that
insurance policy was not currently in effect. However, these overrides were
not subject to any independent review and approval. Our test of 10 overrides
11

--- Page 14 ---
totaling approximately $212,000 did not disclose any instances where claims
were improperly overridden and processed for payment.
 PHPA approved insurance premium payments without verifying the accuracy
and propriety of the amounts paid. Specifically, MADAP-Plus clients
submitted insurance premium invoices to PHPA for manual entry into the
MADAP system for payment processing. While an independent PHPA
employee approved the payments, the approver did not review any supporting
documentation to ensure the payments were accurate and proper. In fiscal
year 2016, according to PHPA’s records, insurance premium payments totaled
$9.3 million. Our test of 5 payments totaling approximately $21,000 did not
disclose any improper payments.
Recommendation 3
We recommend that PHPA
a. eliminate the capability of the employee who reviews eligibility
determinations to enter and approve applications on the MADAP system;
b. eliminate capabilities to ensure employees can only perform duties
required as part of their job responsibilities (repeat); and
c. independently review and approve, at least on a test basis, pharmacy
claim overrides and insurance premium payments by examining
supporting documentation.
Finding 4
PHPA did not recover pharmacy claim overpayments totaling $425,000 that
were identified during pharmacy audits.
Analysis
PHPA did not recover pharmacy claim overpayments totaling $425,000 that were
identified by a vendor during the two most recent pharmacy claim audits that
were performed for calendar years 2014 and 2013. PHPA contracted with a
vendor to perform audits of pharmacies participating in MADAP to verify the
propriety of claims submitted and paid. The vendor analyzed all pharmacy claims
data for each year to identify policy and billing violations as well as any potential
fraud, waste, and abuse. Based on this analysis, the vendor requested pharmacies
to provide support for selected claims.
Our review of the audit reports disclosed that, as of February 2017, PHPA had not
recovered any of the $270,000 in overpayments that were identified in the 2014
audit that was issued in February 2016. Furthermore, PHPA had not recovered
$155,000 of the $162,000 in overpayments that were identified in the 2013 audit
12

--- Page 15 ---
that was issued in October 2014. PHPA management advised us that it lacked the
resources to follow up on the audit results in a timely manner; nevertheless, after
our audit, PHPA advised us that certain of these overpayments were reduced
based on follow-up actions and appeals by the pharmacies.
Recommendation 4
We recommend that PHPA take timely action to recover claim overpayments
identified by pharmacy audits.
Cash Receipts
Finding 5
PHPA lacked adequate procedures and controls over MADAP collections.
Analysis
PHPA lacked adequate procedures and controls over MADAP collections which,
according to its records, totaled approximately $52.7 million during fiscal year
2016. MADAP receives collections primarily from drug manufacturers for
rebates relating to the prescription drugs provided MADAP clients. Our review
disclosed the following conditions:
 PHPA did not immediately restrictively endorse checks upon receipt and did
not maintain strict accountability over the funds. The employee who first
received and recorded the checks transferred them to another employee, at
which time the checks were restrictively endorsed. Furthermore, PHPA did not
document the transfer of collections between these two employees to maintain
accountability over the funds. According to the Comptroller of Maryland’s
Accounting Procedures Manual, agencies are required to restrictively endorse
checks immediately upon receipt.
 The employee who was responsible for verifying deposits did not use the initial
record of cash collections received directly from the preparer for verification
purposes. Rather, this employee used a record of collections that was
maintained in a database that could be altered by another employee with cash
handling duties. As a result, loss or misappropriation of funds could occur
without detection. The Accounting Procedures Manual requires an
independent verification of collections to deposit using proper documentation.
 PHPA did not comply with certain requirements pertaining to the destruction
and safeguarding of remotely deposited checks. Specifically, we were advised
by management personnel that checks scanned into the remote deposit system
13

--- Page 16 ---
by PHPA were maintained for approximately one year before being destroyed.
Consequently, sensitive banking information recorded on these checks was
unnecessarily retained, increasing the risk of unauthorized disclosure. The
Office of the State Treasurer’s Policy on the Use of Remote Deposit Services
by Maryland State Agencies requires that scanned checks be destroyed within
30 days of deposit.
Recommendation 5
We recommend that PHPA establish adequate controls over MADAP
collections. Specifically, we recommend that PHPA
a. restrictively endorse checks immediately upon receipt as required;
b. document the transfer of funds from one employee to another;
c. use the initial record of cash receipts, received directly from the preparer,
for deposit verification purposes as required; and
d. destroy remotely deposited checks within 30 days as required.
Confidential Information
Finding 6
Numerous PHPA employees had unnecessary access to the confidential
demographic and health information of certain patients.
Analysis
Numerous PHPA employees had unnecessary access to the confidential
demographic and health information of all patients maintained in PHPA’s
Sexually Transmitted Disease (STD) Patient Reporting Investigation and
Surveillance Manager (PRISM) system. PHPA did not have a process to
periodically review user access to PRISM to ensure that access was necessary for
each user’s job duties. PRISM includes information on all patients diagnosed
with STDs in the State, including both personally identifiable information (PII)
and protected health information (PHI). As of December 14, 2016, PRISM
contained PII and PHI for 486,676 unique patient records, and there were 217
active users with access to PRISM, including data entry personnel, data analysts,
and health investigators.
Our review of PRISM activity as of January 5, 2017 disclosed that 28 of these
users had not accessed PRISM since its creation in March 2015. We also noted
that 18 users had not accessed PRISM within six months of the date of our test
and, therefore, we question the need for these employees to have access to these
confidential data.
14

--- Page 17 ---
The State of Maryland Information Security Policy requires that agencies must
ensure that access to confidential information is strictly controlled and audited
and that it supports the concepts of least possible privilege and need to know.
Furthermore, the MDH Information Technology, Technical Security Policy,
Standards, and Requirements states that access to confidential information should
be limited to those employees with explicit need to know.
Recommendation 6
We recommend that PHPA
a. conduct periodic documented reviews of user access to PRISM to ensure
such access is necessary for the employee’s job duties, and
b. restrict access to confidential PRISM data to employees who require the
data for their job duties.
Food Protection
Finding 7
PHPA did not conduct timely inspections to ensure food-processing facilities
were operating in accordance with State regulations.
Analysis
PHPA did not conduct timely inspections of food-processing facilities to ensure
the facilities were complying with applicable food safety laws and regulations.
PHPA licenses and inspects food-processing facilities to promote the safety of
food processed in Maryland. These facilities include wholesale food
manufacturing plants, warehouses, canneries, soft drink and bottled water
facilities, crabmeat plants, shellfish plants, and food transportation vehicles.
As of December 2016, there were 1,267 active licensees for which inspections
were delinquent for 288 food-processing facilities, according to delinquency
reports produced at our request. Our subsequent testing disclosed that, due to the
failure to accurately record inspection data in the applicable system, these reports
were not reliable. Nevertheless, our tests disclosed a number of facilities for
which inspections were delinquent.
We tested inspections for 19 food-processing facilities for which PHPA’s
December 2016 reports indicated that the inspections were delinquent. Our test
disclosed that, for 12 of the facilities, required inspections were overdue from 3
months to 4.6 years, including one facility that did not receive a pre-opening
inspection. For the remaining 7 facilities, the inspection dates recorded on the
delinquency reports did not agree with the dates reflected on the hard copy
15

--- Page 18 ---
inspection reports and the inspections were not, in fact, delinquent as indicated by
the reports. These inaccuracies restricted PHPA’s ability to effectively monitor
the timeliness of inspections conducted.
State regulations generally require inspections to be performed semi-annually,
annually, or biennially, based upon the risk associated with the type of food
processing facility. For example, 306 facilities are required to be inspected
annually and 701 are required to be inspected semi-annually. As a result, there
was a lack of assurance that these facilities complied with applicable food safety
laws and regulations.
Recommendation 7
We recommend that the PHPA take the necessary actions to ensure that
food-processing inspections are conducted timely, in accordance with State
regulations, and to ensure the accuracy of its inspection data.
16

--- Page 19 ---
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the following units of the
Maryland Department of Health (MDH) for the period beginning October 28,
2013 and ending August 8, 2016.
Prevention and Health Promotion Administration
Office of Population Health Improvement
Office of Preparedness and Response
The audit was conducted in accordance with generally accepted government
auditing standards. Those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to
obtain sufficient, appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our
findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives. We believe that the
evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions
based on our audit objectives.
As prescribed by the State Government Article, Section 2-1221 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, the objectives of this audit were to examine MDH’s financial
transactions, records and internal control, and to evaluate its compliance with
applicable State laws, rules, and regulations.
In planning and conducting our audit, we focused on the major financial-related
areas of operations based on assessments of significance and risk. The areas
addressed by the audit included contracts and grants (except as described below),
client and provider eligibility and related claims, cash receipts, food protection,
and system access. We also determined the status of the findings contained in our
preceding audit report.
Our audit did not include certain support services provided by MDH’s Office of
the Secretary. These support services (such as payroll, purchasing, contract
procurement, maintenance of accounting records, and related fiscal functions) are
included within the scope of our audit of the MDH’s Office of the Secretary and
Other Units. Furthermore, responsibilities related to grants awarded to local
health departments are divided between the MDH – Office of the Secretary and
the various administrations. Our audit included a review of the calculations of
amounts awarded which is the responsibility of the administrations, but did not
include other responsibilities related to these grant awards such as ensuring the
grant funds are expended in accordance with the related agreements which is
within the scope of our audit of MDH – Office of the Secretary. In addition, our
audit did not include an evaluation of internal controls over compliance with
federal laws and regulations for federal financial assistance programs and an
17

--- Page 20 ---
assessment of MDH’s compliance with those laws and regulations because the
State of Maryland engages an independent accounting firm to annually audit such
programs administered by State agencies, including MDH.
To accomplish our audit objectives, our audit procedures included inquiries of
appropriate personnel, inspections of documents and records, observations of
MDH’s operations, and tests of transactions. Generally, transactions were
selected for testing based on auditor judgment, which primarily considers risk.
Unless otherwise specifically indicated, neither statistical nor non-statistical audit
sampling was used to select the transactions tested. Therefore, the results of the
tests cannot be used to project those results to the entire population from which
the test items were selected.
We also performed various data extracts of pertinent information from the State’s
Financial Management Information System (such as revenue and expenditure
data). The extracts are performed as part of ongoing internal processes
established by the Office of Legislative Audits and were subject to various tests to
determine data reliability. We determined that the data extracted from these
various sources were sufficiently reliable for the purposes the data were used
during this audit. Finally, we performed other auditing procedures that we
considered necessary to achieve our objectives. The reliability of data used in this
report for background or informational purposes was not assessed.
MDH’s management is responsible for establishing and maintaining effective
internal control. Internal control is a process designed to provide reasonable
assurance that objectives pertaining to the reliability of financial records,
effectiveness and efficiency of operations including safeguarding of assets, and
compliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations are achieved.
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate.
Our reports are designed to assist the Maryland General Assembly in exercising
its legislative oversight function and to provide constructive recommendations for
improving State operations. As a result, our reports generally do not address
activities we reviewed that are functioning properly.
This report includes findings relating to conditions that we consider to be
significant deficiencies in the design or operation of internal control that could
adversely affect MDH’s ability to maintain reliable financial records, operate
18

--- Page 21 ---
effectively and efficiently, and/or comply with applicable laws, rules, and
regulations. Our report also include findings regarding significant instances of
noncompliance with applicable laws, rules, or regulations. Other less significant
findings were communicated to MDH that did not warrant inclusion in this report.
MDH’s response to our findings and recommendations is included as an appendix
to this report. As prescribed in the State Government Article, Section 2-1224 of
the Annotated Code of Maryland, we will advise MDH regarding the results of
our review of its response.
19

--- Page 23 ---
Prevention and Health Promotion Administration,
Office of Population Health Improvement, and
Office of Preparedness and Response
Audit Responses
Background Information
Agency Responsibilities
The Prevention and Health Promotion Administration (PHPA), the Office of
Population Health Improvement (OPHI), and the Office of Preparedness and
Response (OPR) are units within the Maryland Department of Health (MDH).
● PHPA protects, promotes, and improves the health and well-being of
Marylanders and their families through the provision of public health
leadership and community-based public health efforts, including partnerships
with local health departments, with special attention to at-risk and vulnerable
populations. PHPA provides State grant funding to the local health
departments for various purposes, including support for their operational
costs. Programs administered by PHPA include the Maryland AIDS Drug
Assistance Program (MADAP), the Maryland AIDS Drug Assistance Program
– Plus (MADAP-Plus), and the Breast and Cervical Cancer Diagnosis and
Treatment Program (BCCDTP).
● OPHI seeks to transform public health through stewardship of data,
partnerships, and funding initiatives to develop innovative health policy and
improve the health infrastructure of Maryland.
● OPR organizes and prepares for public health and medical emergencies
through statewide partnerships with public, private, and government agencies
to coordinate an effective emergency response for the health and safety of all
Maryland residents.
According to the State’s records, during fiscal year 2017, expenditures for PHPA,
OPHI, and OPR totaled $346.7 million, $55.8 million, and $17.6 million,
respectively.
1

--- Page 24 ---
PHPA’s Response
PHPA concurs with the summary of agency responsibilities.
OPHI’s Response
OPHI concurs with this assessment of OPHI’s responsibilities.
OPR’s Response
OPR concurs with the background information.
2

--- Page 25 ---
Findings and Recommendations
Drug Rebates
Background
The Maryland Department of Health (MDH) – Prevention and Health Promotion
Administration (PHPA) receives prescription drug rebates from drug
manufacturers for covered outpatient drugs dispensed to its approved clients
under the Maryland AIDS Drug Assistance Program (MADAP). MADAP helps
low to moderate income individuals pay for certain HIV/AIDS related drugs.
The U.S. Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act of 1990 set a statutory rebate
mechanism for pharmacy reimbursement systems under state Medicaid programs.
Subsequently, the U.S. Veterans Health Care Act of 1992 authorized the 340B
Drug Pricing Program which requires drug manufacturers to provide outpatient
drugs to eligible health care organizations for eligible clients at significantly
reduced prices, and established a ceiling price for covered drugs for specified
programs (including MADAP) and entities (hospitals, and freestanding health
centers). In addition, supplemental rebates exist on certain drugs based on the
difference between the net Medicaid rate paid for the drugs and nationally
negotiated prices.
PHPA receives rebates on a quarterly basis. According to PHPA records, drug
rebates received during fiscal year 2016 from all manufacturers under MADAP
totaled approximately $52.4 million.
PHPA’s Response
PHPA concurs with the background information.
3

--- Page 26 ---
Drug Rebates
Finding 1
PHPA did not ensure that all rebates from drug manufacturers were
received and were accurate. Our tests disclosed one manufacturer did not
pay rebates for six months, and rebates for 20 drugs were underpaid by as
much as $2 million for one quarter in 2016.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that PHPA
a. establish procedures to ensure that all required manufacturers pay
rebates and that the rebates paid are accurate;
b. recalculate rebates received in prior periods, and pursue collection of any
underpayments, including those noted above.
PHPA’s response
a. PHPA concurs with the recommendation. In April 2018, MADAP established
and began to implement procedures to verify that all required manufacturers
pay rebates and, on a test basis, that the rebates paid are accurate.
b. PHPA concurs with the recommendation. As of February 2018, PHPA began
recalculating rebates received in prior periods starting from 2015 and pursuing
collections of underpayments.
4

--- Page 27 ---
Client and Provider Eligibility
Finding 2
PHPA did not use available independent resources to help verify applicant
income for certain programs and to identify possible third-party insurance
coverage.
Recommendation 2
We recommend that PHPA
a. use MABS to independently verify applicant household income (repeat);
and
b. take appropriate action, including the use of MCPA’s vendor, to identify
applicants and recipients who have third-party insurance coverage
(repeat).
PHPA’s response
a. PHPA concurs with the recommendation. MADAP and BCCDTP began
using the Maryland Automated Benefits Systems (MABS) beginning in
March 2016 and will continue using the system. PHPA’s procedures were
updated effective December 2017 to include MABS verification of a spouse’s
income when the spouse’s Social Security Number is provided in the
application
b. PHPA concurs with the recommendation. As of October 2013, PHPA has
actively pursued inclusion in the contract with the vendor used by MCPA to
search for possible third-party insurance. The vendor has subsequently
encountered multiple problems providing the deliverables specified in the
contract, further delaying PHPA’s ability to obtain files containing third party
insurance information of the programs’ participants. On March 1, 2018,
BCCDTP and MADAP received the first deliverable file from the vendor that
met program requirements. PHPA anticipates fully implementing the process
of verifying third-party insurance beginning in May 2018.
5

--- Page 28 ---
MADAP Client Services
Finding 3
PHPA did not adequately restrict user access to the MADAP system. In
addition, PHPA did not adequately review overrides of rejected MADAP
pharmacy claims and manually processed MADAP-Plus insurance premium
payments.
Recommendation 3
We recommend that PHPA
a. eliminate the capability of the employee who reviews eligibility
determinations to enter and approve applications on the MADAP system;
b. eliminate capabilities to ensure employees can only perform duties
required as part of their job responsibilities (repeat); and
c. independently review and approve, at least on a test basis, pharmacy
claim overrides and insurance premium payments by examining
supporting documentation.
PHPA’s response
a. PHPA concurs with the recommendation. Effective November 2017, PHPA
established a policy in which employees who review eligibility determination
no longer have access to enter and approve applications on MADAP’s system.
b. PHPA concurs with the recommendation. Effective November 2017, all
employees access to the MADAP system were evaluated and adjusted to their
duties as required as part of their job responsibilities. In January 2018,
MADAP management implemented a documented monthly verification
procedure to review employees’ access capabilities.
c. PHPA concurs with the recommendation. Effective January 2018, MADAP
management implemented, on a monthly test basis, an independent review and
approval procedure of pharmacy claim overrides. MADAP management also,
on a test basis, examines the supporting documentation for insurance premium
payments to ensure payments were accurate and proper.
6

--- Page 29 ---
Finding 4
PHPA did not recover pharmacy claim overpayments totaling $425,000 that
were identified during pharmacy audits.
Recommendation 4
We recommend that PHPA take timely action to recover claim overpayments
identified by pharmacy audits.
PHPA’s response
PHPA concurs with the recommendation. In January 2018, PHPA established
procedures in which overpayment recoveries will be pursed within 90 days
following the receipt of the final pharmacy audit report. Furthermore, the
recovery process for the prior audits have been completed; and the subsequent
years are being reviewed.
7

--- Page 30 ---
Cash Receipts
Finding 5
PHPA lacked adequate procedures and controls over MADAP collections.
Recommendation 5
We recommend that PHPA establish adequate controls over MADAP
collections. Specifically, we recommend that PHPA
a. restrictively endorse checks immediately upon receipt as required;
b. document the transfer of funds from one employee to another;
c. use the initial record of cash receipts, received directly from the preparer,
for deposit verification purposes as required; and
d. destroy remotely deposited checks within 30 days as required.
PHPA’s response
a. PHPA concurs with the recommendation. Effective November 2017, PHPA
implemented a procedure that require all staff who first receives checks to
endorse the checks upon receipt.
b. PHPA concurs with the recommendation. Effective November 2017, PHPA
implemented a procedure that require all staff involved in the check receipt
and deposit process to sign/date transfer logs each time checks are transferred
to one another.
c. PHPA concurs with the recommendation. Effective November 2017, PHPA
began using the initial record of cash receipts, received directly from the
preparer, to verify deposit.
d. PHPA concurs with the recommendation. Effective November 2017, PHPA
implemented procedures that will ensure the destruction of remotely deposited
checks no later than 30 days from the date of deposit.
8

--- Page 31 ---
Confidential Information
Finding 6
Numerous PHPA employees had unnecessary access to the confidential
demographic and health information of certain patients.
Recommendation 6
We recommend that PHPA
a. conduct periodic documented reviews of user access to PRISM to ensure
such access is necessary for the employee’s job duties, and
b. restrict access to confidential PRISM data to employees who require the
data for their job duties.
PHPA’s response
a. PHPA concurs with the recommendation. As of November 2017, the Data
Manager, who oversees the PRISM data system, will be conducting
semiannual reviews of the necessity of user’s access to PRISM.
b. PHPA concurs with the recommendation. As of January 2018, monthly
review will be performed to determine if access to PRISM is no longer
required or warranted by an employee; and action will be taken to inactivate
accounts as appropriate. Reviews are documented by the Data Manager and
reviewed by the Deputy Chief.
9

--- Page 32 ---
Food Protection
Finding 7
PHPA did not conduct timely inspections to ensure food-processing facilities
were operating in accordance with State regulations.
Recommendation 7
We recommend that the PHPA take the necessary actions to ensure that
food-processing inspections are conducted timely, in accordance with State
regulations, and to ensure the accuracy of its inspection data.
PHPA’s response
PHPA concurs with the recommendation. PHPA is in the process of designing
and implementing a new electronic system to manage the permitting, licensing,
and inspection functions of the Office of Food Protection in the Environmental
Health Bureau. PHPA anticipates that the new system will be partially
implemented by the end of 2018, with full implementation by the end of Fiscal
Year 2019. Prior to the implementation of that new system, PHPA’s Office of
Food Protection will conduct quality checks quarterly using the current
information management system to ensure facilities are being inspected in
accordance with their State schedule.
10

--- Page 33 ---
A
UDIT
T
EAM
Joshua S. Adler, CPA, CFE
Audit Manager
James M. Fowler
Senior Auditor
Christopher J. Fowler
Mindy R. Garrett
Charles H. Hinds, IV, CPA
Amanda M. Jones
Winnie J. Tenekam
Staff Auditors