Title: Maryland Department of the Environment
Date: 05/14/2018
Type: Fiscal Compliance
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5afed0f14212031e902339dd
Extracted: 2025-06-18T22:15:17.373925
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Audit Report
Maryland Department of the Environment
August 2022
Public Notice
In compliance with the requirements of the State Government Article Section
2-1224(i), of the Annotated Code of Maryland, the Office of Legislative Audits
has redacted cybersecurity findings and related auditee responses from this
public report.
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Senator Clarence K. Lam, M.D. (Senate Chair) Delegate Mark S. Chang (House Chair)
Senator Malcolm L. Augustine Delegate Steven J. Arentz
Senator Adelaide C. Eckardt Delegate Nicholas P. Charles II
Senator George C. Edwards Delegate Andrea Fletcher Harrison
Senator Katie Fry Hester Delegate Trent M. Kittleman
Senator Cheryl C. Kagan Delegate Carol L. Krimm
Senator Benjamin F. Kramer Delegate David Moon
Senator Cory V. McCray Delegate Julie Palakovich Carr
Senator Justin D. Ready Delegate Elizabeth G. Proctor
Senator Craig J. Zucker Delegate Geraldine Valentino-Smith
To Obtain Further Information
Office of Legislative Audits
The Warehouse at Camden Yards
351 West Camden Street, Suite 400
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Phone: 410-946-5900
Maryland Relay: 711
TTY: 410-946-5401 ꞏ 301-970-5401
E-mail: OLAWebmaster@ola.state.md.us
Website: www.ola.state.md.us
To Report Fraud
The Office of Legislative Audits operates a Fraud Hotline to report fraud, waste, or abuse involving State
of Maryland government resources. Reports of fraud, waste, or abuse may be communicated anonymously
by a toll-free call to 1-877-FRAUD-11, by mail to the Fraud Hotline, c/o Office of Legislative Audits, or
through the Office’s website.
Nondiscrimination Statement
The Department of Legislative Services does not discriminate on the basis of age, ancestry, color, creed,
marital status, national origin, race, religion, gender, gender identity, sexual orientation, or disability in the
admission or access to its programs, services, or activities. The Department’s Information Officer has been
designated to coordinate compliance with the nondiscrimination requirements contained in Section 35.107
of the United States Department of Justice Regulations. Requests for assistance should be directed to the
Information Officer at 410-946-5400 or 410-970-5400.

--- Page 3 ---
August 3, 2022
Senator Clarence K. Lam, M.D., Senate Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Delegate Mark S. Chang, House Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Members of Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Annapolis, Maryland
Ladies and Gentlemen:
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the Maryland Department of the
Environment (MDE) for the period beginning December 20, 2016 and ending
April 30, 2021. MDE is responsible for protecting and restoring the quality of the
State’s land, air, and water resources, and safeguarding the public from health
risks associated with pollution.
Our audit disclosed that MDE did not always use available system reports to
ensure that all registered rental units had current lead inspections as required. Our
data analysis of MDE’s Online Lead Rental Registry (OLRR) compared to
MDE’s lead inspection certification database disclosed that 973 rental units of the
25,054 registered rental units with changed occupancy did not have a lead
inspection recorded in OLRR or in the lead inspection certification database.
Consequently, there is no assurance that all required inspections were performed
or properly recorded in MDE records. In addition, MDE did not verify the
propriety of charges related to technology enterprise services received from the
Department of Information Technology valued at $5.1 million for fiscal years
2020 and 2021.
Significant risks existed within MDE’s computer network. However, in
accordance with the State Government Article, Section 2-1224(i) of the
Annotated Code of Maryland, we have redacted these findings from this audit
report. Specifically, State law requires the Office of Legislative Audits to redact
cybersecurity findings in a manner consistent with auditing best practices before
the report is made available to the public. The term “cybersecurity” is defined in

--- Page 4 ---
the State Finance and Procurement Article, Section 3A-301(b), and using our
professional judgment we have determined that the redacted findings fall under
the referenced definition. The specifics of the cybersecurity findings were
previously communicated to MDE as well as those parties responsible for acting
on our recommendations.
Finally, our audit also included a review to determine the status of the seven
findings contained in our preceding audit report. For the non-cybersecurity-
related findings, we determined that MDE satisfactorily addressed all four
findings.
MDE’s response to this audit is included as an appendix to this report. We
reviewed the response to our findings and recommendations, and have concluded
that the corrective actions identified are sufficient to address all audit issues. In
accordance with our policy, we have edited MDE’s response to remove any
vendor names or products mentioned by MDE in this document. Consistent with
the requirements of State law, we have redacted the elements of MDE’s response
related to cybersecurity audit findings.
We wish to acknowledge the cooperation extended to us during the audit by MDE
and its willingness to address the audit issues and implement appropriate
corrective actions.
Respectfully submitted,
Gregory A. Hook, CPA
Legislative Auditor
2

--- Page 5 ---
Table of Contents
Background Information 4
Agency Responsibilities 4
Financial Statement Audits and Single Audits– Maryland Water Quality 5
Financing Administration
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report 6
Findings and Recommendations 7
Lead Inspections
Finding 1 – The Maryland Department of the Environment (MDE) did 7
not always use available system reports to ensure that all registered
rental units had a current lead inspection certificate as required.
Disbursements
Finding 2 – MDE did not verify the propriety of charges related to 8
technology enterprise services received from the Department of
Information Technology during fiscal years 2020 and 2021 valued at
$5.1 million.
Information Systems Security and Control
Finding 3 – Redacted cybersecurity-related finding 10
Finding 4 – Redacted cybersecurity-related finding 10
Finding 5 – Redacted cybersecurity-related finding 10
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology 11
Agency Response Appendix
3

--- Page 6 ---
Background Information
Agency Responsibilities
The Maryland Department of the Environment (MDE) is responsible for
protecting and restoring the quality of the State's land, air, and water resources,
and safeguarding the public from health risks associated with pollution. MDE's
duties and responsibilities include enforcing applicable laws and regulations,
conducting long-term planning and research, and assisting industries and
communities in their efforts to handle pollution, waste disposal, and emergency
spills of waste or oil. MDE consists of the following units:
 Office of the Secretary
 Coordinating Offices (including the Maryland Water Quality Financing
Administration1)
 Operational Services Administration
 Water and Science Administration
 Land and Materials Administration
 Air and Radiation Administration
According to the State's
records, during fiscal year
2021, MDE's operating
and capital expenditures
totaled approximately
$449.4 million (See
Figure 1). These
expenditures were funded
by general funds totaling
approximately $33.5
million, special funds
totaling approximately
$314.4 million, federal
funds totaling
approximately $83.1
million, and reimbursable
funds totaling
approximately $18.4
million.
1 The Maryland Water Quality Financing Administration administers the Water Quality and
Drinking Water Revolving Loan Funds and the Bay Restoration Fund.
4

--- Page 7 ---
MDE's capital expenditures primarily related to its Water Quality and Drinking
Water Revolving Loan Funds and the Bay Restoration Fund; these capital
expenditures totaled approximately $191.3 million and $90.0 million,
respectively.
Financial Statement Audits and Single Audits – Maryland Water
Quality Financing Administration
MDE engaged an independent accounting firm to perform audits of the Maryland
Water Quality Financing Administration's financial statements of the Water
Quality and Drinking Water Revolving Loan Funds and the Bay Restoration Fund
for the fiscal years ended June 30, 2018, 2019, 2020, and 2021. In the related
audit reports, the firm stated that the Administration's financial statements for
these Funds presented fairly, in all material respects, the financial position of the
Administration and its changes in financial position and its cash flows for the
years then ended in accordance with the accounting principles generally accepted
in the United States of America.
The accounting firm also conducts the Single Audit of the Maryland Water
Quality Financing Administration federal grant programs. The Single Audit is
intended to provide assurance to the federal government that adequate internal
controls are in place, and that the audited entity is generally in compliance with
certain program requirements. In the related reports for the fiscal years ended
June 30, 2018, 2019, 2020, and 2021, the firm stated that the Administration
complied, in all material respects, with the types of compliance requirements that
could have a direct and material effect on each of its major federal programs.
According to the financial statements, as of June 30, 2021, the Maryland Water
Quality Financing Administration's net position totaled approximately $1.83
billion.
The Maryland Water Quality Financing Administration provides a combination of
federal and State funds for low-interest loans to local jurisdictions and private
entities throughout the State for drinking water and water quality capital projects.
These projects include upgrades and expansions to wastewater treatment plants
and pump stations, and creation of storm water management facilities.
Additionally, the Administration provides Bay Restoration Fund grants for
enhanced nutrient removal upgrades to existing wastewater facilities, for sewer
infrastructure rehabilitation, and for septic system upgrades.
5

--- Page 8 ---
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report
Our audit included a review to determine the status of the seven findings
contained in our preceding audit report dated May 14, 2018. As disclosed in
Figure 2, for the non-cybersecurity-related findings, we determined that MDE
satisfactorily addressed all four of these findings.
Figure 2
Status of Preceding Findings
Preceding Implementation
Finding Description
Finding Status
MDE used interagency agreements with a college to augment
its staff, allowing it to avoid using competitive procurement
Finding 1 Not repeated
processes or budgeted positions. MDE did not ensure the rates
for these services were reasonable.
MDE did not establish a sufficient process to ensure that
owners of affected lead paint properties had required
Finding 2 inspection certificates. We identified 10,832 registered rental Not repeated
units without inspection certificates that MDE had not
investigated.
Inspections of certain construction sites were not performed as
required by State regulations, and MDE lacked a formal plan
Finding 3 Not repeated
for inspecting all sites. Only 1,033 of 5,942 sites were
inspected during fiscal year 2016.
MDE did not always retain documentation to support penalties
Finding 4 assessed against construction contractors and to evidence Not repeated
supervisory approval.
Eleven contractors had unnecessary network-level access to the
Finding 5 Status Redacted2
entire MDE internal network.
Malware protection was not sufficient to provide MDE with
Finding 6 Status Redacted
adequate assurance that its computers were properly protected.
A critical database and numerous servers were running on
Finding 7 Status Redacted
outdated software.
2 Specific information on cybersecurity findings has been redacted from this publicly available
audit report in accordance with State Government Article, Section 2-1224(i) of the Annotated
Code of Maryland.
6

--- Page 9 ---
Findings and Recommendations
Lead Inspections
Finding 1
The Maryland Department of the Environment (MDE) did not always use
available system reports to ensure that all registered rental units had a
current lead inspection certificate as required.
Analysis
MDE did not always use available system reports to ensure that all registered
rental units had a current lead inspection certificate as required. We obtained a
report from MDE’s Online Lead Rental Registration system (OLRR) as of
October 29, 2021, for all active registered rental units through April 30, 2021,
which we deemed reliable for our purposes. The rental units recorded on this
system, should represent the known population of rental units subject to lead
inspections, which are recorded by MDE in the system. However, the inspections
noted in OLRR are not the official record for MDE lead inspection purposes; as
the official record is the separately maintained lead inspection certification
database. Our review of the OLRR report identified 25,054 rental units built prior
to 1978 that were newly registered during our audit period and that also had a
reported change in occupancy after December 2016. We compared this report to
a report of certificates recorded in the lead inspection certification database and
noted that for 973 of the 25,054 rental units registered during our audit period
with a reported change in occupancy there was no inspection certificate recorded
in either the OLRR or the lead inspection certification database. Consequently,
there is no assurance that all required inspections were performed or properly
recorded in MDE’s records. We selected 10 of these rental units and determined
that MDE did not investigate 4 units to determine whether an inspection was
required or had been performed.
While not all registered rental units require an owner to have an inspection
certificate (for example, unoccupied properties), MDE should investigate
registered rental units with a change in occupancy to determine if an inspection
was required. During our prior audit we noted approximately 10,832 units in the
OLRR did not have any inspection certificates recorded in the lead inspection
certification database. While MDE has significantly reduced the number of
missing inspections, given the importance of this potential health-related issue, we
believe that additional effort is both appropriate and necessary to ensure all
required lead inspections are received.
7

--- Page 10 ---
State law requires that an owner of an affected property (based on year of
construction) to have the property inspected at each change in occupancy prior to
new tenancy to verify that risk reduction standards have been satisfied. State law
further allows for penalties, not to exceed $500 per day, for violations of these
provisions and procedures.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that MDE use available reports to identify missing
inspections and take appropriate corrective action.
Disbursements
Finding 2
MDE did not verify the propriety of charges related to technology enterprise
services received from the Department of Information Technology (DoIT)
during fiscal years 2020 and 2021, which were valued at $5.1 million.
Analysis
MDE did not verify the propriety of charges related technology enterprise
services received from DoIT during fiscal years 2020 and 2021, which were
valued at $2.5 million and $2.6 million, respectively. At the beginning of fiscal
year 2020, DoIT transitioned to a cost allocation model for technology enterprise
services provided to State agencies, including MDE. Under this model, DoIT
submitted an invoice at the beginning of each fiscal year that included a cost
allocation covering the services it planned to provide to MDE during fiscal years
2020 and 2021, which MDE was to pay in four equal quarterly payments. The
invoice specified the general categories of work to be performed. For example,
the annual invoice for fiscal year 2021 included end user support services totaling
$857,000 for 1,159 devices, $300,000 for access to the State’s Financial
Management Information System (FMIS) for 193 users, and $72,000 for
connection to the State’s fiber network (network Maryland).
Invoices provided to MDE from DoIT lacked supporting documentation to
substantiate the services provided. For example, based on our review of DoIT’s
user access charge for FMIS, we determined that MDE was unable to readily
determine the reasonableness of the amount charged, which had increased from
$95,000 in fiscal year 2020 to $300,000 in fiscal year 2021 (an increase of
$205,000 or about 216 percent). MDE did not verify the accuracy of the number
of devices or users billed for service charges or the extent to which services were
provided. MDE also could not determine the reasonableness of other charges,
8

--- Page 11 ---
such as how the $72,000 cost for connection to the State’s fiber network was
determined based on connection speed and related equipment.
The aforementioned conditions occurred, in part, because MDE and DoIT did not
execute a memorandum of understanding (MOU). A MOU would clarify DoIT’s
responsibilities over information technology support services performed,
remaining technology responsibilities at MDE, and how the cost for these services
should be calculated, supported, and invoiced. In our most recent DoIT audit
report, dated May 1, 2020, we recommended that DoIT enter into MOUs with
State agencies that receive technology enterprise services. DoIT agreed with the
recommendation and stated that its staff would work with agencies to execute
MOUs. According to MDE management personnel, DoIT provided a final draft
MOU in November 2020 for MDE to sign. As of February 2022, MDE advised
us that it had not signed the MOU and it was in the process of negotiating the
terms of the MOU with DoIT.
Recommendation 2
We recommend that MDE
a. finalize a MOU with DoIT that clarifies DoIT’s responsibilities over
information technology support services performed, remaining
technology responsibilities at MDE, and how the cost for these services
should be calculated, supported, and invoiced;
b. ensure all charges invoiced related to technology enterprise services
received are proper, including those noted above; and
c. recover amounts determined to have been billed inappropriately, if any.
Information Systems Security and Control
MDE’s information technology (IT) operations involved a combination of internal
MDE support services with additional separate support provided by DoIT. MDE
personnel supported multiple computer applications and databases, including the
software for the comprehensive environmental tracking system, all of which
operated on DoIT supported computer servers. DoIT also provided the following
separate IT support services functions for MDE:
 network firewalls and IT security services (such as firewall and intrusion
detection prevention systems operations and maintenance),
 workstation management, and
 hardware and software support (including malware prevention procedures).
9

--- Page 12 ---
DoIT operates a Statewide network for MDE that connects MDE’s local offices
and the MDE headquarters. The Statewide network provides MDE users access
to various information technology services including the aforementioned
applications, network services, and internet access.
We determined that Findings 3 through 5 related to “cybersecurity”, as defined by
the State Finance and Procurement Article, Section 3A-301(b) of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, and therefore are subject to redaction from the publicly
available audit report in accordance with the State Government Article 2-1224(i).
Consequently, the specifics of the following findings, including the analysis,
related recommendation(s), along with MDE’s responses, have been redacted
from this report copy.
Finding 3
Redacted cybersecurity-related finding.
Finding 4
Redacted cybersecurity-related finding.
Finding 5
Redacted cybersecurity-related finding.
10

--- Page 13 ---
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the Maryland Department of the
Environment (MDE) for the period beginning December 20, 2016 and ending
April 30, 2021. The audit was conducted in accordance with generally accepted
government auditing standards. Those standards require that we plan and perform
the audit to obtain sufficient, appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis
for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives. We believe that
the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and
conclusions based on our audit objectives.
As prescribed by the State Government Article, Section 2-1221 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, the objectives of this audit were to examine MDE’s financial
transactions, records, and internal control, and to evaluate its compliance with
applicable State laws, rules, and regulations.
In planning and conducting our audit, we focused on the major financial-related
areas of operations based on assessments of significance and risk. The areas
addressed by the audit included certain special funded programs (such as the Bay
Restoration Fund Septic System and Wastewater grants); permitting, inspections,
and violation assessments; procurements and disbursements; critical information
systems; accounts receivable; and payroll. We also determined the status of the
findings contained in our preceding audit report.
MDE engaged an independent accounting firm to perform audits of the Maryland
Water Quality Financing Administration’s financial statements. In related audit
reports for the fiscal years ended June 30, 2018, 2019, 2020, and 2021, the firm
stated that the Administration’s financial statements presented fairly, in all
material respects, the financial position of the Administration and its changes in
financial position and its cash flows for the years then ended in accordance with
the accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America.
Furthermore, the accounting firm also conducts the Single Audit of the Maryland
Water Quality Financing Administration federal grant programs. The Single
Audit is intended to provide assurance to the federal government that adequate
internal controls are in place, and the entity is generally in compliance with
certain program requirements. In the related reports for the aforementioned fiscal
years, the firm stated that the Administration complied, in all material respects,
with the types of compliance requirements that could have a direct and material
effect on each of its major federal programs. We have relied on the work of the
independent accounting firm to provide audit coverage of certain aspects of the
Maryland Water Quality Financing Administration’s operations (internal controls
and testing for the Water Quality and Drinking Water Revolving Loan Funds
11

--- Page 14 ---
programs). Our audit procedures in these areas were generally limited, therefore,
to obtaining a sufficient basis for that reliance.
Our audit did not include an evaluation of internal controls over compliance with
federal laws and regulations for the remaining federal financial assistance
programs not covered by the aforementioned Single Audit of the Maryland Water
Quality Financing Administration and an assessment of MDE’s compliance with
those laws and regulations. The State of Maryland engages an independent
accounting firm to annually audit such programs administered by State agencies,
including MDE.
Our assessment of internal controls was based on agency procedures and controls
in place at the time of our fieldwork. Our tests of transactions and other auditing
procedures were generally focused on the transactions occurring during our audit
period of December 20, 2016 to April 30, 2021, but may include transactions
before or after this period as we considered necessary to achieve our audit
objectives.
To accomplish our audit objectives, our audit procedures included inquiries of
appropriate personnel, inspections of documents and records, tests of transactions,
and to the extent practicable, observations of MDE’s operations. Generally,
transactions were selected for testing based on auditor judgment, which primarily
considers risk, the timing or dollar amount of the transaction, or the significance
of the transaction to the area of operation reviewed. As a matter of course, we do
not normally use sampling in our tests, so unless otherwise specifically indicated,
neither statistical nor non-statistical audit sampling was used to select the
transactions tested. Therefore, unless sampling is specifically indicated in a
finding, the results from any tests conducted or disclosed by us cannot be used to
project those results to the entire population from which the test items were
selected.
We performed various data extracts of pertinent information from the State’s
Financial Management Information System (such as revenue and expenditure
data) and the State’s Central Payroll Bureau (payroll data). These extracts are
performed as part of ongoing internal processes established by the Office of
Legislative Audits and were subject to various tests to determine data reliability.
We determined that the data extracted from these sources were sufficiently
reliable for the purposes the data were used during this audit. We also extracted
data from MDE’s permit, registration, and enforcement systems, and from the
Statewide Personnel System (SPS) for the purpose of testing certain areas, such as
permits, inspections and penalties processes, as well as certain payroll
transactions. We performed various tests of the relevant data and determined that
12

--- Page 15 ---
the data were sufficiently reliable for the purposes the data were used during the
audit. Finally, we performed other auditing procedures that we considered
necessary to achieve our audit objectives. The reliability of data used in this
report for background or informational purposes was not assessed.
MDE’s management is responsible for establishing and maintaining effective
internal control. Internal control is a process designed to provide reasonable
assurance that objectives pertaining to the reliability of financial records;
effectiveness and efficiency of operations, including safeguarding of assets; and
compliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations are achieved. As
provided in Government Auditing Standards, there are five components of
internal control: control environment, risk assessment, control activities,
information and communication, and monitoring. Each of the five components,
when significant to the audit objectives, and as applicable to MDE, were
considered by us during the course of this audit.
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate.
Our reports are designed to assist the Maryland General Assembly in exercising
its legislative oversight function and to provide constructive recommendations for
improving State operations. As a result, our reports generally do not address
activities we reviewed that are functioning properly.
This report includes findings relating to conditions that we consider to be
significant deficiencies in the design or operation of internal control that could
adversely affect MDE’s ability to maintain reliable financial records, operate
effectively and efficiently, and/or comply with applicable laws, rules, and
regulations. Our report also includes findings regarding significant instances of
noncompliance with applicable laws, rules, or regulations. Other less significant
findings were communicated to MDE that did not warrant inclusion in this report.
State Government Article Section 2-1224(i) requires that we redact in a manner
consistent with auditing best practices any cybersecurity findings before a report
is made available to the public. This results in the issuance of two different
versions of an audit report that contains cybersecurity findings – a redacted
version for the public and an unredacted version for government officials
responsible for acting on our audit recommendations.
13

--- Page 16 ---
The State Finance and Procurement Article, Section 3A-301(b), states that
cybersecurity is defined as “means processes or capabilities wherein systems,
communications, and information are protected and defended against damage,
unauthorized use or modification, and exploitation”. Based on that definition, and
in our professional judgement, we concluded that certain findings in this report
fall under that definition. Consequently, for the publicly available audit report all
specifics as to the nature of cybersecurity findings and required corrective actions
have been redacted. We have determined that such aforementioned practices, and
government auditing standards, support the redaction of this information from the
public audit report. The specifics of these cybersecurity findings have been
communicated to the MDE and those parties responsible for acting on our
recommendations in an unredacted audit report.
MDE’s response to our findings and recommendations is included as an appendix
to this report. Depending on the version of the audit report, responses to any
cybersecurity findings may be redacted in accordance with State law. As
prescribed in the State Government Article, Section 2-1224 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, we will advise MDE regarding the results of our review of its
response.
14

--- Page 17 ---
APPENDIX
July 19, 2022
Gregory A. Hook, CPA
Legislative Auditor
Office of Legislative Audits
The Warehouse at Camden Yards
351 West Camden Street, Suite 400
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Dear Mr. Hook:
Please find enclosed the Maryland Department of the Environment’s (MDE) response to the draft
legislative audit report dated July 2022. We would like to thank you and your staff for reviewing
MDE’s business practices and providing constructive recommendations as a result of this audit.
The professionalism conducted by your staff was greatly appreciated.
Sincerely,
Horacio Tablada
Secretary
Enclosure

--- Page 18 ---
Maryland Department of the Environment
Agency Response Form
Lead Inspections
Finding 1
The Maryland Department of the Environment (MDE) did not always use available system
reports to ensure that all registered rental units had a current lead inspection certificate as
required.
We recommend that MDE use available reports to identify missing inspections and take
appropriate corrective action.
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide No additional comments.
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 1 Agree Estimated Completion Date: 10/30/2022
Please provide details of MDE will review the 973 of 25,054 active rental units (from which
corrective action or OLA selected the above-referenced rental units) that were registered
explain disagreement. during the audit period to determine compliance status. Following this
review, MDE will identify appropriate corrective action(s), which may
include making any necessary adjustments to OLRR and LRCA
functionality and developing additional procedures for manual
compliance status checks.
Page 1 of 3

--- Page 19 ---
Maryland Department of the Environment
Agency Response Form
Disbursements
Finding 2
MDE did not verify the propriety of charges related to technology enterprise services
received from the Department of Information Technology (DoIT) during fiscal years 2020
and 2021, which were valued at $5.1 million.
We recommend that MDE
a. finalize a MOU with DoIT that clarifies DoIT’s responsibilities over information
technology support services performed, remaining technology responsibilities at MDE,
and how the cost for these services should be calculated, supported, and invoiced;
b. ensure all charges invoiced related to technology enterprise services received are
proper, including those noted above; and
c. recover amounts determined to have been billed inappropriately, if any.
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide No additional comments.
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 2a Agree Estimated Completion Date: Done
Please provide details of MDE agrees with the recommendation and has returned the MOU signed
corrective action or by MDE to DoIT.
explain disagreement.
Recommendation 2b Agree Estimated Completion Date: Done
Please provide details of MDE agrees with the recommendation and has returned the MOU signed
corrective action or by MDE to DoIT. MDE has contacted DoIT about the discrepancies in
explain disagreement. billing to ensure all charges invoiced related to technology enterprise
services received are proper for each fiscal year.
Recommendation 2c Agree Estimated Completion Date: Done
Please provide details of MDE agrees with the recommendation and has returned the MOU signed
corrective action or by MDE to DoIT. MDE will continue to work with DoIT to recover any
explain disagreement. amount determined to have been inappropriately billed for each fiscal
year.
Page 2 of 3

--- Page 20 ---
Maryland Department of the Environment
Agency Response Form
Information Systems Security and Control
The Office of Legislative Audits (OLA) has determined that Findings 3 through 5 related to
“cybersecurity”, as defined by the State Finance and Procurement Article, Section 3A-301(b) of
the Annotated Code of Maryland, and therefore are subject to redaction from the publicly
available audit report in accordance with State Government Article 2-1224(i). Although the
specifics of the findings, including the analysis, related recommendations, along with MDE’s
responses, have been redacted from this report copy, MDE’s responses indicated agreement with
the findings and related recommendations.
Finding 3
Redacted cybersecurity-related finding.
Agency Response has been redacted by OLA.
Finding 4
Redacted cybersecurity-related finding.
Agency Response has been redacted by OLA.
Finding 5
Redacted cybersecurity-related finding.
Agency Response has been redacted by OLA.
Page 3 of 3

--- Page 21 ---
A T
UDIT EAM
Bekana Edossa, CPA, CFE
Audit Manager
R. Brendan Coffey, CPA, CISA
Edwin L. Paul, CPA, CISA
Information Systems Audit Managers
Edward J. Welsh, CFE
Lisa M. Beers, CFE
Marina I. Bulatova
Senior Auditors
Eric Alexander, CPA, CISA
Michael K. Bliss
Information Systems Senior Auditors
Keli R. Edmonds
Thomas J. Kraemer
Timothy Moon
Yuvaraj N. Sharma
Staff Auditors
Dominick R. Abril
Vickey K. Micah
Charles O. Price
Information Systems Staff Auditors