Title: Carroll County Public Schools
Date: 05/16/2018
Type: Local School Systems
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5b02d8c342120325b0f380ad
Extracted: 2025-06-18T22:15:27.035062
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Financial Management Practices Audit Report
Carroll County Public Schools
July 2024
Public Notice
In compliance with the requirements of the State Government Article Section
2-1224(i), of the Annotated Code of Maryland, the Office of Legislative Audits
has redacted cybersecurity findings and related auditee responses
from this public report.
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Senator Clarence K. Lam, M.D. (Senate Chair) Delegate Jared Solomon (House Chair)
Senator Joanne C. Benson Delegate Steven J. Arentz
Senator Paul D. Corderman Delegate Andrea Fletcher Harrison
Senator Katie Fry Hester Delegate Steven C. Johnson
Senator Shetty L. Hettleman Delegate Mary A. Lehman
Senator Cheryl C. Kagan Delegate David Moon
Senator Cory V. McCray Delegate Julie Palakovich Carr
Senator Justin D. Ready Delegate Stephanie M. Smith
Senator Bryan W. Simonaire Delegate M. Courtney Watson
Senator Craig J. Zucker One Vacancy
To Obtain Further Information
Office of Legislative Audits
The Warehouse at Camden Yards
351 West Camden Street, Suite 400
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Phone: 410-946-5900
Maryland Relay: 711
TTY: 410-946-5401 ꞏ 301-970-5401
E-mail: webmaster@ola.state.md.us
Website: www.ola.state.md.us
To Report Fraud
The Office of Legislative Audits operates a Fraud Hotline to report fraud, waste, or abuse involving State
of Maryland government resources. Reports of fraud, waste, or abuse may be communicated anonymously
by a toll-free call to 1-877-FRAUD-11, by mail to the Fraud Hotline, c/o Office of Legislative Audits, or
through the Office’s website.
Nondiscrimination Statement
The Department of Legislative Services does not discriminate on the basis of age, ancestry, color, creed,
marital status, national origin, race, religion, gender, gender identity, sexual orientation, or disability in the
admission or access to its programs, services, or activities. The Department’s Information Officer has been
designated to coordinate compliance with the nondiscrimination requirements contained in Section 35.107
of the United States Department of Justice Regulations. Requests for assistance should be directed to the
Information Officer at 410-946-5400 or 410-970-5400.

--- Page 3 ---
July 26, 2024
Senator Clarence K. Lam, M.D., Senate Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Delegate Jared Solomon, House Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Members of Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Annapolis, Maryland
Ladies and Gentlemen:
We conducted an audit of the financial management practices of the Carroll
County Public Schools (CCPS) in accordance with the requirements of the State
Government Article, Section 2-1220(e) of the Annotated Code of Maryland. The
objectives of this audit were to evaluate whether CCPS’ procedures and controls
were effective in accounting for and safeguarding its assets and whether its
policies provided for the efficient use of financial resources.
Our audit disclosed that certain requirements of CCPS’ procurement policies were
not being consistently used when obtaining goods and services under
intergovernmental cooperative purchasing agreements and the policies were not
sufficiently comprehensive. In addition, CCPS did not have a sufficiently
comprehensive policy to govern sole source procurements, resulting in written
justifications not being prepared for such procurements. Furthermore, CCPS
awarded a contract to a vendor for a school bus camera system without
documenting that it obtained the best value.
Our audit also disclosed certain risks in CCPS’ information systems. However, in
accordance with the State Government Article, Section 2-1224(i) of the
Annotated Code of Maryland, we have redacted these findings from this audit
report. Specifically, State law requires the Office of Legislative Audits to redact
cybersecurity findings in a manner consistent with auditing best practices before
the report is made available to the public. The term “cybersecurity” is defined in
the State Finance and Procurement Article, Section 3.5-301(b), and using our
professional judgment we have determined that the redacted findings fall under

--- Page 4 ---
the referenced definition. The specifics of the cybersecurity findings were
previously communicated to CCPS as well as those parties responsible for acting
on our recommendations.
Our audit also disclosed that CCPS needs to improve internal controls and
accountability for health care services. Specifically, CCPS did not audit or
adequately monitor the performance of its third-party administrators that provide
health care claims processing services.
Finally, based on our current audit assessment of significance and risk to our audit
objectives, our audit included a review to determine the status of 9 of the 13
findings contained in our preceding audit report. For the non-cybersecurity-
related findings we determined that CCPS satisfactorily addressed 4 of those 5
findings. The remaining finding is repeated in this report.
CCPS’ response to this audit is included as an appendix to this report. We
reviewed the response and noted agreement to our findings and related
recommendations and while there are other aspects of the response which will
require further clarification, we do not anticipate that these will require the Joint
Audit and Evaluation Committee’s attention to resolve. Additionally, in
accordance with our policy, we have edited CCPS’ response to remove vendor
names or products. Consistent with State law, we have also redacted the elements
of CCPS’ response related to the cybersecurity audit findings.
We wish to acknowledge the cooperation extended to us during the audit by
CCPS. We also wish to acknowledge CCPS’ willingness to address the audit
issues and implement appropriate corrective actions.
Respectfully submitted,
Brian S. Tanen
Brian S. Tanen, CPA, CFE
Legislative Auditor
2

--- Page 5 ---
Table of Contents
Background Information 5
Statistical Overview 5
Oversight 9
External Audits 10
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report 11
Findings and Recommendations 13
Revenue and Billing Cycle 13
Federal Funds 14
Procurement and Disbursement Cycle
Finding 1 – Certain requirements of State law and recognized best 16
practices were not incorporated into Carroll County Public Schools
(CCPS) policies and were not consistently used when participating in
intergovernmental cooperative purchasing agreements.
Finding 2 (Policy Issue) – CCPS did not have a sufficiently 18
comprehensive policy to govern sole source procurements and did not
prepare written justifications for certain sole source procurements.
Human Resources and Payroll 19
Equipment Control and Accountability 20
Information Technology
Finding 3 – Redacted cybersecurity-related finding 21
Finding 4 – Redacted cybersecurity-related finding 21
Finding 5 – Redacted cybersecurity-related finding 21
Finding 6 – Redacted cybersecurity-related finding 21
Finding 7 – Redacted cybersecurity-related finding 21
Facilities Construction, Renovation, and Maintenance 21
3

--- Page 6 ---
Transportation Services
Finding 8 – CCPS awarded a contract to a vendor for a school bus camera 24
system without documenting that it obtained the best value.
Finding 9 – Redacted cybersecurity-related finding 26
Food Services 26
School Board Oversight
Finding 10 – Certain requirements of State law were not incorporated 27
into CCPS ethics policies.
Management of Other Risks
* Finding 11 – CCPS did not sufficiently ensure the propriety of billings 29
and rebates or adequately monitor the performance of its third-party
administrators that provide health care claims processing services.
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology 31
Agency Response Appendix
 Denotes item repeated in full or part from preceding audit report
4

--- Page 7 ---
Background Information
Statistical Overview
Enrollment
According to student enrollment records compiled by the Maryland State
Department of Education (MSDE), Carroll County Public Schools (CCPS) ranks
10th in student enrollment among the 24 public school systems in Maryland.
Fiscal year 2022 full-time student enrollment was 25,054 students. CCPS had 40
schools, consisting of 22 elementary, 8 middle schools, 7 high schools, and 3
other types of schools (including special, alternative, and career and technical).
Funding
CCPS revenues consist primarily of funds received from Carroll County, the
State, and federal governments. According to the CCPS’ audited financial
statements, revenues from all sources totaled approximately $477.4 million in
fiscal year 2022; including approximately $177.4 million from the State.
According to MSDE’s records, the State funding included formula funding grants
totaling $126.7 million, Blueprint for Maryland’s Future grants totaling $11.9
million, State-share for employee pension payments totaling $20 million, and
other State funding sources, such as for capital projects, totaling $18.8 million.
See Figure 1 (on the following page) for CCPS’ funding by source for the six-year
period from fiscal year 2017 through fiscal year 2022. See Figure 2 (on page 7)
for revenue sources per enrolled student in fiscal year 2022 according to its
audited financial statements.
5

--- Page 8 ---
Figure 1
CCPS Funding by Source
Fiscal Years 2017 through 2022
(dollar amounts in millions)
The$177.4 million in
State funding for fiscal
year 2022 included the
$49.8 following:
$40.3 $126.7 million for
$26.5 $24.9 Foundation Formula
$23.1 $22.8
$177.4 Grants
$174.5
$160.8 $165.8 $11.9 million for
$162.0 $153.1 Blueprint Grants
$20 million for the State-
share of employee
pension costs
$250.2
$186.6 $193.6 $201.8 $204.5 $210.3 $13 million for Capital
Projects
$5.8 million for Other
State Funding
2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022
Local State Federal and Other
Source: CCPS’ Fiscal Year 2022 Audited Financial Statements and MSDE Data
6

--- Page 9 ---
Figure 2
CCPS’ Revenue Sources Per Enrolled Student
Fiscal Year 2022
Federal Other
$1,546 $440
8% 2%
Local
State $9,985
$7,082 53%
37%
Source: CCPS’ Fiscal Year 2022 Audited Financial Statements and MSDE Data
Blueprint for Maryland’s Future (Blueprint)
Blueprint is a State-funded grant program based on recommendations of the
Maryland Commission on Innovation and Excellence in Education.1 Chapter 771,
Laws of Maryland, 2019, effective June 1, 2019, established principles of the
Blueprint that are intended to transform Maryland’s early childhood, primary, and
secondary education systems to the levels of the highest-performing systems.
Blueprint specifies how funding is calculated to support programs and initiatives
from prekindergarten through college and career.
Blueprint allocates funding to schools based on a weighted-student formula. The
funding formula provides resources to local education agencies based on the
number of students enrolled at each school (known as Foundation Aid) and the
characteristics of those students (such as Special Education, Concentration of
Poverty, and Compensatory Education Aid). Blueprint also provides additional
funding for specific programs that schools offer (such as Prekindergarten Aid).
1 The Maryland Commission on Innovation and Excellence was established by Chapters 701 and
702, Laws of Maryland 2016, effective June 1, 2016 to review the adequacy of funding for
education.
7

--- Page 10 ---
Expenditures
According to CCPS’ audited financial statements, fiscal year 2022 expenditures
were approximately $477.3 million. The largest expenditure category was
salaries and wages, including benefits, which accounted for approximately 69
percent of total expenditures during fiscal year 2022. According to MSDE
records, during the 2021-2022 school year, CCPS had 3,345 full-time equivalent
positions, which consisted of 2,436 instructional and 909 non-instructional
positions. Instruction accounted for 53 percent of CCPS’ expenditures on a
categorical basis (see Figure 3).
Figure 3
CCPS Expenditures by Category and Selected Statistical Data
Fiscal Year 2022
(amounts in millions)
$253.1
Instruction
53%
Facilities & Capital $89.3
Projects
19%
Special Education $52.2 Enrollment
11% 25,054
$45.5
Administration & Support
10% Employees
3,345
$26.0
Transportation
5%
Cost Per Pupil
Fo od Service $11.1 $19,051
2%
Source: CCPS' Fiscal Year 2022 Audited Financial Statements and MSDE Data
8

--- Page 11 ---
Oversight
CCPS is governed by a local school board, consisting of five elected voting
members and one non-voting student member. MSDE exercises considerable
oversight of CCPS through the establishment and monitoring of various financial
and academic policies and regulations, in accordance with certain provisions of
the Annotated Code of Maryland. MSDE also works with CCPS to comply with
the requirements and mandates of federal law. The Carroll County government
also exercises authority over CCPS primarily through the review and approval of
CCPS’ annual operating and capital budgets.
Accountability and Implementation Board (AIB)
The AIB was established by State law as an independent unit of State government
in February 2021 and is responsible for holding State and local governments,
including local education agencies, accountable for implementing the Blueprint
State-funded grant program and for evaluating the outcomes. Specifically, the
AIB reviews the use of school-level expenditures and monitors school system
compliance with Blueprint requirements. The AIB consists of a 7-member Board
appointed by the Governor, with advice and consent of the Senate. The Board
Chair is designated by the Governor, the Senate President, and the Speaker of the
House.
Office of the Inspector General for Education (OIGE)
The OIGE was established by State law as an independent unit of State
government effective June 2019. The OIGE is responsible for examining and
investigating complaints or information regarding the management and affairs of
local boards of education, local school systems, public schools, nonpublic schools
that receive State funds, the Maryland State Department of Education, and the
Interagency Commission on School Construction. Specifically, the law provides
that the OIGE may receive and investigate information and complaints concerning
potential fraud, waste, and abuse of public funds and property; civil rights
violations involving students or employees; whether policies and procedures
governing the prevention and reporting of child abuse and neglect comply with
applicable federal and State laws; and compliance with other applicable federal
and State laws.
The OIGE initiates examinations and investigations based on its assessment of
complaints and information it receives from various sources, including State and
outside agencies and through its fraud, waste, and abuse hotline. The OIGE also
conducts an annual review of local school systems to ensure policies and
procedures governing the prevention and reporting of child abuse and neglect
comply with applicable federal and State laws. During the period covered by our
9

--- Page 12 ---
review the OIGE issued one public report related to CCPS reviews and
investigations. We considered the report during our current audit.
External Audits
As required by State law, CCPS engages a certified public accounting firm to
independently audit its annual financial statements. The firm performs
procedures to verify the amounts and disclosures in the financial statements. The
firm also evaluates the appropriateness of accounting policies used and the
reasonableness of significant accounting estimates made by management. In the
related audit reports, the firm stated that the financial statements presented fairly,
in all material respects, the financial position of CCPS as of June 30, 2017, 2018,
2019, 2020, 2021 and 2022, and the changes in its financial position and its cash
flows for the years then ended in accordance with accounting principles generally
accepted in the United States of America.
Additionally, in accordance with Government Auditing Standards, as part of the
audited financial statements the accounting firm also issued separate reports on
CCPS’ control over financial reporting and its tests of CCPS’ compliance with
certain provisions of laws, regulations, contracts, grant agreements and other
matters. These reports are an integral part of the annual independent audited
financial statements. In the report for the period ending June 30, 2017 the firm
noted a material weakness in financial reporting regarding depreciation for four
school buildings not being accurately calculated. CCPS corrected the deficiency
and it was not repeated in subsequent years.
The accounting firm also conducts the Single Audit of CCPS’ federal grant
programs. The Single Audit is intended to provide assurance to the federal
government that adequate internal controls are in place, and the entity is generally
in compliance with program requirements. In the Single Audit for the period
ending June 30, 2019 the firm noted a significant deficiency in internal control
over compliance where the Board used budgetary expenditures that did not
include certain adjustments in determining the indirect costs charged to a federal
grant, which resulted in those costs exceeding the negotiated indirect cost rate.
However, this finding was not repeated during subsequent years.
We reviewed the aforementioned financial statement audits and Single Audit
reports for fiscal years 2017 through 2022 and examined the related work papers
for the fiscal year 2022 audit, which were the latest available during our audit
fieldwork. Certain work of the independent certified public accounting firm,
which we determined was reliable, covered areas included in the scope of our
10

--- Page 13 ---
audit. As a result, we did not conduct any audit work related to the following
areas:
 State and local government revenues received via electronic funds transfer
 Accounts receivables
 Federal grant activity
The independent accounting firm did not disclose any material deficiencies in
these areas, other than those for federal grants mentioned above.
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report
Based on our current assessment of significance and risk relative to our audit
objectives, our audit included a review to determine the status of 9 of the 13
findings contained in our preceding audit report dated May 16, 2018. As
disclosed in Figure 4 on the following page, for the non-cybersecurity-related
findings, we determined that CCPS satisfactorily addressed 4 of these 5 findings.
The remaining non-cybersecurity-related finding is repeated in this report.
11

--- Page 14 ---
Figure 4
Status of Preceding Findings
Preceding Implementation
Finding Description
Finding Status
Individual schools did not always comply with established procedures
Not repeated
Finding 1 governing school activity funds, and CCPS did not periodically audit
(Not followed up on)
certain schools with significant activity funds.
CCPS did not ensure that certain parental approval was obtained to
Not repeated
Finding 2 enable billing for Medical Assistance services performed for eligible
(Not followed up on)
students.
Certain payroll adjustments processed by CCPS payroll staff were not
Finding 3 Not repeated
subject to an independent review.
Physical inventories of certain sensitive equipment were not properly
Not repeated
Finding 4 performed and documented, and detail records were not always
(Not followed up on)
accurate.
CCPS had not established automated scanning procedures to identify all
Finding 5 personally identifiable information maintained on its computer systems Status Redacted2
and ensure such data were protected.
The monitoring of the student information system database’s security-
Finding 6 related events did not include all sensitive activities and appropriate Status Redacted2
documentation.
Intrusion detection prevention system protection existed for internally
originated network traffic, but was not applied to untrusted traffic
Finding 7 Status Redacted2
entering the CCPS network, and certain affiliated third parties had
unnecessary network-level access to the internal network.
Malware protection controls relative to assigning administrative rights
Finding 8 and updating vulnerable software products did not sufficiently protect Status Redacted2
CCPS’ network.
CCPS had not implemented a process to verify the reported project
Finding 9 Not repeated
benefits of its energy conservation contract.
Certain elements used to determine payments to bus contractors did not
reflect market conditions, were not properly documented, or did not
Finding 10 Not repeated
consider available fuel credits, resulting in higher payments than
necessary for student transportation services.
CCPS did not have a process in place to ensure that financial disclosure
Finding 11 Not repeated
forms were properly completed and reviewed by its ethics panel.
CCPS did not ensure the propriety of certain claim payments for
employee and retiree healthcare costs as well as prescription drug Repeated
Finding 12
rebates. Sufficient documentation was not obtained to support (Current Finding 11)
dependents for healthcare.
CCPS did not formally reevaluate its current investment practices and
Not repeated
Finding 13 consider investing a portion of its funds in other legally permitted
(Not followed up on)
investment options.
2 Specific information on the current status of this cybersecurity-related finding has been redacted
from the publicly available report in accordance with State Government Article, Section 2-
1224(i) of the Annotated Code of Maryland.
12

--- Page 15 ---
Findings and Recommendations
Revenue and Billing Cycle
Background
Carroll County Public Schools (CCPS) revenues consist primarily of funds
received from Carroll County, the State, and the federal government. According
to CCPS’ audited financial statements, revenues from all sources totaled
approximately $477.4 million in fiscal year 2022 including approximately $177.4
million from the State.
External Audits
There were similarities between the work of the independent certified public
accounting firm (CPA) that audited CCPS’ financial statements and the objectives
of our audit for certain revenue activities. As a result, we relied on this work to
provide audit coverage for State and local government revenues received via
electronic funds transfer and accounts receivable, for which the auditor’s
procedural review (related to the fiscal year 2022 audit) and testing disclosed no
material weaknesses or significant deficiencies.
School Activity Funds
Schools collect funds for other purposes such as student activities, clubs, and
school publications. Because they are not considered school revenue, these
school activity funds are accounted for separately by each school and reported in
summary in the audited financial statements. During fiscal year 2022, school
activity collections totaled $3.6 million and the June 30, 2022 fund balance was
$3.1 million.
CCPS’ Board of Education (the Board) has a fiduciary responsibility to ensure
that school activity funds were used only for intended purposes. CCPS contracts
with a CPA to conduct limited reviews of the school activity funds at selected
schools on a rotating basis.
In addition, CCPS’ internal auditor conducts audits of school activity funds in
accordance with an annual work plan approved by the Board’s Audit Committee.
During fiscal years 2022 and 2023, the internal auditor performed 23 reviews.
The reviews consisted of evaluating and testing compliance with CCPS’ policies,
regulations, and procedures in accordance with the Procedures Manual for School
Funds. The Manual establishes standard procedures for all schools to follow to
ensure school activity funds are adequately safeguarded and accounted for in a
uniform manner. The results of the reviews were provided to the respective
school’s principal and CCPS management.
13

--- Page 16 ---
Conclusion
Based on our current assessment of significance and risk relative to our audit
objectives, we relied on the work of the CPA and CCPS’ internal auditor to
provide audit coverage in this area including procedures and controls related to
the accounting for and safeguarding of cash receipts with respect to revenue and
billing.
Federal Funds
Background
CCPS receives funds pertaining to federal government programs that are
generally restricted for use for a specific program (such as the School Lunch
Program or Special Education). According to CCPS’ Single Audit, fiscal year
2022 (latest available at the time of our audit) federal expenditures totaled $37.7
million, not including federally funded fee-for-service programs such as Medicaid
reimbursement for special education services.
According to the audited financial statements, federal fund revenues (excluding
Medicaid) increased, from $15.4 million in fiscal year 2019 to $38.7 million in
fiscal year 2022 (151 percent) due to COVID-19 pandemic grant funding.
Specifically, according to CCPS’ records, as of June 30, 2022, CCPS was
awarded federal COVID-19 pandemic grant funds totaling $43.4 million to be
distributed over federal fiscal years 2020 to 2024 under the Coronavirus Aid,
Relief, and Economic Security Act, the Coronavirus Response and Relief
Supplemental Appropriations Act, and the American Rescue Plan.3
As of June 30, 2022, CCPS expenditures related to these COVID-19 grants
totaled $23.4 million, from March 2020 to June 2022, and were primarily
comprised of staffing, laptops, instructional software and materials, personal
protection equipment, and sanitary supplies. CCPS has policies and procedures to
ensure grant funds are properly monitored and accounted for to ensure the funds
are used to the fullest extent possible. In addition, reports of grant fund activity
are presented periodically to the Board. CCPS initially funded the expenditures
with State and local funds and will obtain reimbursement from the
aforementioned programs to the extent allowed.
3 In addition to the federal grants, CCPS was also awarded two State and local COVID-19 grants
totaling $1.9 million, all of which had been spent as of June 30, 2022. For example, CCPS
received a County health department award of $1.8 million and a State broadband connectivity
award of $50,192. State and local grants are subject to review and testing during our audit.
14

--- Page 17 ---
Single Audit Reports Disclosed Minimal Reportable Conditions Regarding
Federal Grant Management
There were similarities in the work performed by the independent CPA that
conducted the Single Audit of CCPS’ federal grants and the objectives of our
audit in this area. In addition to expressing an opinion on CCPS compliance with
the terms of several grant programs, the auditor also considered the existing
internal control structure’s impact on compliance and audited the required
Schedule of Expenditures of Federal Awards (which includes claimed and
reported grant expenditures) for fiscal years 2017 through 2022.
The related reports stated that CCPS complied, in all material respects, with the
requirements applicable to its major federal programs. With respect to internal
controls over compliance with, and the operation of, major federal programs, the
auditors did not identify any material weaknesses or significant deficiencies,
except for fiscal year 2019, the auditors identified one significant deficiency
regarding inaccurate indirect costs. This deficiency was indicated as being
resolved in the subsequent fiscal year’s report.
Medicaid Funds for Eligible Services
CCPS has established a procedure to identify children eligible for Medicaid-
subsidized services and the services rendered. Medicaid is an entitlement
program for which certain service costs can be reimbursed to CCPS. Medicaid
activity is not covered by the Single Audit of federal grants.
The Maryland State Department of Education’s Interagency Medicaid Monitoring
Team issued a report in December 2021 of the results of its review of 63 student
case files for 76 criteria (including the correct billing of Medicaid for eligible
services). The report found that CCPS was generally compliant with most
criteria. For example, CCPS was 100 percent compliant with 66 criteria and
between 94 and 99 percent compliant with 6 criteria. According to CCPS records,
fiscal year 2022 state and federal reimbursements for Medicaid-subsidized
services totaled approximately $1.4 million, which was generally consistent with
the previous fiscal year.
Conclusion
Based on our current assessment of significance and risk relative to our audit
objectives, our audit did not include a review of Medicaid-subsidized services.
We relied on the work of the independent CPA that conducted the Single Audits
for all other work in this area, including policies, procedures, and controls with
respect to federal grants and expenditures.
15

--- Page 18 ---
Procurement and Disbursement Cycle
Background
According to the audited financial statements and CCPS’ records, disbursements
(excluding payroll) totaled $150 million during fiscal year 2022. CCPS uses a
combination of manual and automated methods to process purchases and
disbursements. CCPS uses a financial management system for purchases and
disbursements. Requisitions are manually created and approved by a supervisor
in the requesting department. Approved requisitions are then entered into the
financial management system and converted to purchase orders by the purchasing
department, which also generally handles the solicitation, bid evaluation, and
establishment of contracts.
Invoices are submitted by vendors to the requesting school or department for
approval and then submitted to the accounts payable department for entry into the
financial management system. The system matches the invoice to the related
purchase order and then prints the vendor checks, which are manually matched to
appropriate purchasing and receiving documents before mailing, and then posts
the payment to the financial records.
Section 5-112 of the Education Article of the Annotated Code of Maryland
requires that procurements exceeding $50,000 be competitively bid and CCPS
policy requires that procurements of contracts and agreements valued at $25,000
or more, be approved by the Board of Education.
Finding 1
Certain requirements of State law and recognized best practices were not
incorporated into CCPS policies and were not consistently used when
participating in intergovernmental cooperative purchasing agreements
(ICPAs).
Analysis
Certain requirements of State law and recognized best practices were not
incorporated into CCPS policies and were not consistently used by CCPS when
participating in an ICPA. State law, which legal counsel to the Maryland General
Assembly advised us is applicable to local education agencies, allows the use of
ICPAs only after the using entity has met the statutory requirement of determining
(or assessing) in writing that the use of such arrangements will provide cost
16

--- Page 19 ---
benefits, promote administrative efficiencies, or promote intergovernmental
cooperation.4
According to CCPS records, CCPS used the ICPA procurement method for 98
procurements with awards totaling at least $8.2 million during the period from
July 1, 2019 through May 8, 2023. The total amount procured under this method
could not readily be determined since CCPS did not include the award amounts
for certain procurements in its records. Our review of CCPS procurement policies
disclosed that the above statutory requirement as well as the following critical
best practices were not included:
 Analyze all costs of conducting competitive solicitations;
 Research, compare, and evaluate available ICPAs;
 Verify ICPA has a clause allowing utilization by other parties;
 Verify the ICPA solicitation was competitively bid and publicly
advertised, by obtaining the originating agency’s competitive procurement
documentation (including public advertisements and proposal
evaluations);
 Verify terms, scope of services, specifications and price meet our needs;
 Execute an addendum of participation with lead agency and remove or
incorporate necessary local terms and conditions; and
 Obtain a copy of ICPA and related price lists for invoice verification.
In addition, we tested CCPS’ participation in 4 ICPAs (selected based on
significance) awarded during fiscal years 2020 through 2022, with contract
payments totaling approximately $7.9 million during fiscal years 2021 and 2022.
Our review disclosed that CCPS did not adhere to three best practices for all four
ICPAs tested (preparing a written assessment of the benefits of using the ICPAs,
analyzing the costs of conducting competitive solicitations, and researching,
comparing, and evaluating other available ICPAs). In addition, CCPS did not
execute an addendum of participation with the lead agency for one ICPA.
4 Section 13-110 of the State Finance and Procurement Article of the Annotated Code of
Maryland, in part, defines an ICPA as a contract that is entered into by at least one governmental
entity in a certain manner, that is available for use by the governmental entity entering the
contract and at least one additional governmental entity, and that is intended to promote
efficiency and savings that can result from intergovernmental cooperative purchasing. The
aforementioned law applies to all ICPAs regardless of the services, goods, or commodities
purchased. In addition, Section 5- 112(a)(3) of the Education Article, of the Code provides that
local education agencies do not need to conduct competitive procurements for goods and
commodities if they use a contract awarded by public agencies or intergovernmental purchasing
organizations and the originating procuring agency followed public bidding procedures.
17

--- Page 20 ---
We did find that other best practices were performed despite not being included in
CCPS’ policies. For example, CCPS verified the ICPA had a clause allowing
utilization by other parties and verified the terms, scope of services, specifications
and overall price met their needs for all four ICPAs tested. CCPS also ensured
the amounts invoiced by the four ICPA vendors tested agreed with the original
contract pricing. Incorporating ICPA best practices into CCPS procurement
policies could help ensure they are consistently used.
The Institute for Public Procurement, formerly known as the National Institute of
Government Purchasing, as well as other public and educational organizations
have published ICPA best practices. These practices include comprehensive
multi-step checklists that require, among other things (as per the list above), that
prospective ICPA users verify that the contract allows other entities to participate.
In addition, ICPA users should ensure that the contract was awarded through a
competitive procurement process, require that addendums be executed
documenting their participation, and incorporate local required terms and
conditions.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that CCPS incorporate the aforementioned statutory
requirement and other identified and acknowledged best practices into its
procurement policies and ensure that the performance of the requirement
and best practices are documented when evaluating and participating in
ICPAs.
Finding 2 (Policy Issue)
CCPS did not have a sufficiently comprehensive policy to govern sole source
procurements and did not prepare written justifications for certain sole
source procurements.
Analysis
CCPS did not have a sufficiently comprehensive policy governing sole source
procurements and did not prepare written justifications for certain sole source
procurements. Although CCPS’ procurement policy states that State procurement
law may be used as guidance for setting policy, it had not adopted the State’s sole
source requirement for written justification to use this procurement method.
According to a CCPS report of awarded purchase orders, CCPS used the sole
source procurement method for 18 procurements with awards totaling $1.1
million during the period from July 1, 2019 through May 8, 2023. CCPS
established a policy to require written justification to use the sole source
18

--- Page 21 ---
procurement method for purchases charged to federal grants, but this policy did
not apply to such purchases with State and local government funds. According to
CCPS records of awarded purchase orders, CCPS used the sole source
procurement method for 12 procurements with awards of State and local
government funds totaling approximately $800,000 during the aforementioned
period.
Our test of four sole source procurements (selected based on materiality) awarded
with State and local government funds during fiscal years 2020 through 2023
totaling $405,790 disclosed that written justifications for not competitively
procuring the contracts were not prepared. For example, CCPS awarded a
$262,000 sole source contract for a learning management information system
without a written justification. Although there was documentation that CCPS
established a committee that identified other vendors, there was no documentation
to support the decision to use the selected vendor without a formal competitive
solicitation.
State law requires that competitive procurement practices be used to the extent
possible for purchases exceeding $50,000. Further, State regulations require that
a written justification be prepared by State agencies when there is only one source
available.
Recommendation 2
We recommend that CCPS establish a comprehensive policy, approved by
the Board, that governs sole source procurements and includes a
requirement for written justifications when this non-competitive
procurement method is used by CCPS.
Human Resources and Payroll
Background
Payroll expense represents the largest single cost component in the CCPS budget.
According to CCPS’ records, fiscal year 2022 salary, wage, and benefit costs
totaled approximately $327 million, representing 68.5 percent of the total
expenditures. According to Maryland State Department of Education reports,
during the 2021-2022 school year, CCPS had 3,345 full-time equivalent positions,
which consisted of 2,436 instructional and 909 non-instructional positions.
CCPS uses automated systems to maintain human resources information, record
employee time, track employee leave usage, and process and record payroll
transactions. The system generates payroll checks and direct deposit advices.
19

--- Page 22 ---
Payroll processing involves both automated processes (such as compiling leave
and running edit reports) and manual processes (such as data entry of new
employee information).
Conclusion
Our audit did not disclose any significant deficiencies in the design or operation
of CCPS’ internal control over the human resources and payroll areas of
operations reviewed. Our audit also did not disclose any significant instances of
noncompliance with applicable laws, rules, or regulations.
Equipment Control and Accountability
Background
According to CCPS’ audited financial statements, the undepreciated value of its
capital equipment inventory totaled $52.3 million as of June 30, 2022. CCPS
maintains centralized automated records for all equipment including assets with a
cost of $5,000 or more that are capitalized for financial statement purposes.
Control and recordkeeping of laptop computers assigned to schools, students, and
employees was maintained in a database maintained by the Office of Technology
Services. CCPS has established comprehensive written equipment policies and
performs inventories at each school at least every two years.
Conclusion
Based on our current assessment of significance and risk relative to our audit
objectives, our audit did not include a review of policies, procedures, and controls
with respect to the equipment area of operations.
Information Technology
We determined that the Information Technology section, including Findings 3
through 7 related to “cybersecurity,” as defined by the State Finance and
Procurement Article, Section 3.5-301(b) of the Annotated Code of Maryland, and
therefore are subject to redaction from the publicly available report in accordance
with the State Government Article, Section 2-1224(i). Consequently, the
specifics of the following findings, including the analysis, related
recommendations, along with CCPS’ responses, have been redacted from this
report copy.
20

--- Page 23 ---
Finding 3
Redacted cybersecurity-related finding.
Finding 4
Redacted cybersecurity-related finding.
Finding 5
Redacted cybersecurity-related finding.
Finding 6
Redacted cybersecurity-related finding.
Finding 7
Redacted cybersecurity-related finding.
Facilities Construction, Renovation, and Maintenance
Background
CCPS employs a staff of 324 employees to maintain its 40 schools (including
vocational and special education) and a number of other facilities (such as
administrative and support offices). According to its fiscal year 2023 Capital
Improvement Plan, necessary construction, major renovations, and systemic
improvements to CCPS’ facilities over the next five years are estimated to cost
$188 million.
CCPS Capital Projects Were Competitively Solicited and Approved by the
Board and Related Expenditures Were Generally Properly Supported
Our review of four construction-related procurements related to CCPS’ two major
capital projects awarded during fiscal years 2019 to 2021 totaling $133 million,
disclosed that all four contracts were competitively solicited and approved by the
Board. In addition, our test of 10 invoices totaling $18.7 million for these
contracts disclosed that, generally, the invoices were properly supported and the
amounts invoiced were in accordance with contract terms.
21

--- Page 24 ---
Processes are in Place to Promote Ongoing Facility Maintenance and to
Minimize Energy Costs
CCPS has processes in place to promote ongoing facility maintenance and to
minimize energy costs. For example, CCPS provides preventive maintenance of
its buildings and equipment with the goal of preventing emergency repairs. In
addition, CCPS reviews utility billings to monitor energy usage and related costs.
CCPS participates in various programs with the local utility companies that
reduces energy usage during various non-peak periods, like the summer months.
CCPS has written best practices that encourage both students and employees to be
aware of and limit their energy use and conducts internal on-site reviews of
building energy efficiency. Further, CCPS has initiatives in place involving
limited use of solar and geothermal alternative energy sources.
Conclusion
Our audit did not disclose any significant deficiencies in the design or operation
of CCPS’ internal control over financial-related areas of operations for facilities
construction, renovation, and maintenance. Our audit also did not disclose any
significant instances of noncompliance with applicable laws, rules, or regulations.
Transportation Services
Background
According to statistics compiled by the Maryland State Department of Education,
CCPS has approximately 24,700 students eligible to receive student transportation
services. These students were transported using 256 contractor-owned buses.
CCPS reported that 5.2 million route miles were traveled to transport students for
the 2021-2022 school year.
CCPS bus contracts are for one-year terms and continue annually throughout the
service life of the contractor’s buses, subject to the Board’s right to terminate the
contract for various reasons (such as available funding, cause, contractor
insolvency, and termination of routes to reduce or consolidate routes). During
school year 2021-2022, CCPS had contracts with 38 bus contractors for student
transportation. According to CCPS’ financial records, fiscal year 2022
transportation costs totaled $26 million, of which $23 million (88 percent) were
payments for the contracted bus services for various costs. The cost components
for contractor bus payments for fiscal year 2022 are summarized in Figure 5 on
the following page.
22

--- Page 25 ---
Figure 5
Cost Components for Bus Contractor Payments
Fiscal Year 2022
(dollar amounts in millions)
Cost Component Amount
Reimbursements for Drivers Hourly Rates $9.4 41%
Maintenance Fee and Fuel Costs 8.0 35%
Per-vehicle Allotment (PVA) – reimbursement for the cost of
4.7 20%
purchasing a bus
Other Costs – (such as administrative fee and spare buses) 0.9 4%
Total $23.0
Source: CCPS Records
School Bus Safety Camera Program
As allowed by State and County law, CCPS contracted for the use of school bus
safety cameras to monitor drivers who illegally pass a stopped school bus and
entered into a Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) with the Carroll County
Sheriff’s Office to process citations and receive CCPS’s share of program
revenue. In June 2020, CCPS’ School Board approved a five-year contract (with
a five-year renewal option) to a vendor to install and operate cameras that would
be owned and maintained by the vendor on CCPS’ contracted school buses. The
contract also provided for cameras to monitor the conduct of drivers and students
inside the bus along with global positioning units to track the buses. Furthermore,
under the contract, CCPS was provided with communications equipment, routing
equipment, and software to develop and revise bus routes.
As of the date of the contract, vehicles that are caught on camera illegally passing
a bus are assessed a $250 fine. The cameras take videos and still images of
vehicles (and license plate) passing a bus that is operating its alternating flashing
red lights. The registered owner(s) of the vehicles are identified by vendor
employees using access provided to Maryland Motor Vehicle Administration
(MVA), the National Law Enforcement Telecommunications System (NLETS)
and other databases. The Carroll County Sheriff’s Office verifies the image of the
event constitutes a violation and the vendor prints and mails the citation to the
registered owner. Citations can be paid to the vendor by credit card,
electronically through the internet, or by mailing a check. The vendor is required
to develop automated processes to retrieve and post all daily payment data.
23

--- Page 26 ---
The contract provides that the excess monthly citation revenue would be
disbursed 60 percent to the vendor and 40 percent to the County after the
deduction of a monthly technology fee of $440 per bus from gross citation
revenue.
Finding 8
CCPS awarded a contract to a vendor for a school bus camera system
without documenting that it obtained the best value.
Analysis
CCPS awarded a contract to a vendor for a school bus camera system without
documenting that it obtained the best value. CCPS management advised us that it
learned about the vendor’s school bus safety camera program that was
implemented in other school systems and CCPS approached this vendor to
implement a similar program. Furthermore, CCPS advised it had contacted two
other school systems with existing agreements with this vendor and also contacted
at least one other vendor who offered similar services. Although there was no
formal documented analysis, CCPS advised it obtained and reviewed applicable
information obtained from these contacts, and determined the vendor in question
met their needs and awarded a contract to this vendor using an intergovernmental
cooperative purchasing agreement (ICPA).
However, our review of the ICPA between the vendor and the other LEA noted
the following conditions (several of which were previously noted in finding #1 in
this audit report):
 CCPS did not prepare a written assessment of the benefits for using the
ICPA as required by State law and it did not research or compare other
available ICPAs.
 Although the ICPA included a clause allowing participation by other
governmental entities, the contract between CCPS and the vendor did not
reference the ICPA and an addendum of participation was not executed.
 CCPS did not use any of the key terms and conditions of the existing
ICPA. Instead, it negotiated its own terms and conditions with the
contractor (see comments below).
Our audits of other Maryland local education agencies (LEAs) have disclosed that
other vendors exist and at least one LEA has awarded a similar contract using a
competitive bidding process. In addition, other LEAs have conducted
procurements that have included negotiations of the financial terms (such as
revenue sharing and other fees). Rather, CCPS negotiated with a vendor that had
been previously competitively procured by another local school system; however,
24

--- Page 27 ---
instead of using the original contractual terms the vendor appears to have
unilaterally imposed terms upon CCPS calling into question if CCPS had obtained
the best value.
As a result, we concluded that with the exception of the general service provided,
CCPS essentially procured its own unique contract with the vendor without a
competitive procurement process and assurance that it obtained the best value.
Specifically, CCPS’ contract provided that the monthly citation revenue would be
disbursed 60 percent to the vendor and 40 percent to the County after deduction of
monthly technology fees of $440 per bus from gross citation revenue. However,
CCPS did not have support for how the technology fee was determined by the
vendor or why it was necessary in addition to the revenue sharing.
Although the 60/40 revenue sharing agreement is consistent with the underlying
ICPA used by CCPS, the underlying ICPA had a $250 monthly technology fee
versus the $440 fee charged CCPS. Of the eight local school systems that we
know used this vendor’s camera system, we found that CCPS was paying the
highest fee. The lack of support is significant, because CCPS has not received
any share of the $1.8 million in citation revenue received for the first 27 months
of the program’s operation (from November 1, 2020 through January 31, 2023).
Subsequent to the end of our fieldwork, we were advised by CCPS management
that it had renegotiated the revenue sharing terms of the school bus safety camera
system contract and the vendor agreed to reduce the technology fee from $440 to
$240.
Recommendation 8
We recommend that, in the future, CCPS
a. ensure that it obtains the best value for services received through
competitive procurements or properly considered ICPAs, as appropriate;
and
b. ensure the basis and reasoning for revenue sharing and technology fees
are documented in future school bus safety camera contracts.
25

--- Page 28 ---
We determined that Finding 9 related to “cybersecurity,” as defined by the State
Finance and Procurement Article, Section 3.5-301(b) of the Annotated Code of
Maryland, and therefore is subject to redaction from the publicly available audit
report in accordance with the State Government Article 2-1224(i). Consequently,
the specifics of the following finding, including the analysis, related
recommendation(s), along with CCPS’ responses, have been redacted from this
report copy.
Finding 9
Redacted cybersecurity-related finding.
Food Services
Background
According to CCPS’ audited financial statements, food services operating
expenditures totaled $11.1 million in fiscal year 2022 and were funded with
federal funds totaling $15 million and food sales totaling $725,769. The federal
funds are received from the United States Department of Agriculture based on an
established rate per meals served. CCPS is allowed to retain federal funds it
receives in excess of its annual food service operating costs to be used to offset
future food service operating costs. According to CCPS’ audited financial
statements, the balance in CCPS’ food services fund totaled $9.4 million as of
June 30, 2022. According to MSDE records, in fiscal year 2022, CCPS had 85
food services positions for its 40 schools, consisting of 80 cafeteria positions and
5 administrative positions.
Similar to other Maryland Local Education Agencies, CCPS continued to serve
meals from certain schools during the COVID-19 pandemic health crisis by
providing free meals for parents and students to pick up. The number of meals
increased by 118 percent from 1.7 million in fiscal year 2019 to 3.7 million in
fiscal year 2022. CCPS food service expenditures increased by 71 percent (food
costs and equipment) during the same period, from $6.5 million to $11.1 million.
CCPS indicated that no employees were laid off due to the COVID-19 pandemic.
Conclusion
Based on our current assessment of significance and risk relative to our audit
objectives, our audit did not include a review of policies, procedures, and controls
related to Food Services financial area of operations.
26

--- Page 29 ---
School Board Oversight
Background
The Carroll County Board of Education (the Board) is composed of five elected
members and one non-voting student representative. The Board contracted with a
certified public accounting firm to conduct independent audits of the CCPS
financial statements and federal programs. To assist in its oversight of various
areas of CCPS operation and governance, the Board has established several
committees, such as a Community Advisory Council, an Audit Committee, and an
Ethics Panel.
CCPS Adopted an Ethics Policy
The Board has adopted a detailed ethics policy that is applicable to both Board
members and CCPS employees and includes provisions for conflicts of interest
and financial disclosures by Board members and certain employees. Specifically,
annual financial disclosure statements are required to be filed by Board members,
candidates for the Board, appointed officials (such as the Superintendent), and
other administrators (such as supervisors, school principals, and agency buyers)
by April 30th of each year.
In accordance with the policy, CCPS established an Ethics Panel consisting of
five members appointed by the Board to interpret ethics policies and provide
advice on policy implementation. The Panel also reviews and rules on any
reported complaints of ethics violations. Our review of the records for Board
members and CCPS employees required to submit financial disclosure forms for
calendar year 2021 and 2022 disclosed that all forms were submitted as required.
Finding 10
Certain requirements of State law were not incorporated into CCPS ethics
policies.
Analysis
Certain requirements of State law were not incorporated into CCPS ethics
policies. In a letter dated March 22, 2022, the State Ethics Commission (SEC)
notified CCPS management that changes to its ethics policy were necessary to
comply with State law changes made in 2017 and 2021 related to new conflict of
interest provisions and additional disclosures required from employees of local
boards of education. For example, SEC provided CCPS a list of nine changes to
improve disclosure of gifts, attributable interest in business entities, compensation
from entities doing business with the agency, and to prohibit disclosure of
confidential information by former officials or employees. Prior to these law
27

--- Page 30 ---
changes, SEC notified CCPS that its ethics policies conformed to State law in a
letter dated February 23, 2015.
We were advised by CCPS management that the aforementioned letter dated
March 22, 2022 was not addressed because of turnover in upper management.
After we brought it to their attention, CCPS began work to revise its ethics policy
as required. State law requires that local boards of education establish ethics
policies that conform to ethics requirements in State law.
Recommendation 10
We recommend that CCPS, in conjunction with the Board, revise its ethics
policies to conform with the requirements of State law.
Management of Other Risks
Healthcare Background
CCPS is self-insured and contracts with three third-party administrator firms
(TPAs) for health care claims processing services5 for employee and retiree
medical, prescription, dental, and vision costs. CCPS also contracts with a
consultant to help manage the health plans. The consultant performs data analysis
of health services utilization and costs, provides recommendations on potential
rate changes, and evaluates the merits of health plan proposals. In addition, CCPS
contracts with its TPA for medical insurance for stop-loss insurance, which
indemnifies CCPS against health claim amounts that exceed $700,000 per
participant per plan year.
The health benefit plans for CCPS employees and retirees are financed through
governmental funds, with a fiduciary fund (referred to as the Other
Postemployment Benefits (OPEB) Plan Trust) established as an investment
reserve for future retiree health benefit costs.6
5 CCPS has one TPA for the claims for the medical and prescription plans and two separate TPAs
for the claims of the dental and vision plans.
6 These funds are invested with the Carroll County Master Benefit Retiree Trust and totaled $31.5
million as of June 30, 2022.
28

--- Page 31 ---
Figure 6
According to CCPS records, the
healthcare revenues and CCPS 2022 Healthcare Financing
expenditures for fiscal year (amounts in millions)
2022 totaled $65.3 million and Revenues
Employer/Employee Contributions $53.8
$63.4 million respectively (see
Retiree Contributions 7.9
Figure 6).
OPEB Trust Fund Net Additions 3.6
Total Revenue $65.3
CCPS employs a verification
process in its enrollment Expenditures
procedures whereby employees Claims Payments $60.6
must submit documentation Administrative Fees 1.7
(such as birth certificates) for Stop-loss and Vision Premiums 1.1
Total Expenditures $63.4
dependents they want added to
their health plan. As of June 30,
Source: CCPS Records
2022, CCPS provided health
insurance benefits to approximately
9,038 enrolled employees, dependents, and retirees.
Finding 11
CCPS did not sufficiently ensure the propriety of billings and rebates or
adequately monitor the performance of its third-party administrators that
provide health care claims processing services.
Analysis
CCPS did not sufficiently ensure the propriety of billings and rebates or
adequately monitor the performance of its third-party administrators (TPAs) that
provide health care claims processing services. Specifically, although CCPS
verified the propriety of administrative fees, it did not verify the propriety of TPA
billings for employee and retiree health care claims (including health maintenance
organizations or HMO costs), and the receipt of prescription drug rebates.
Additionally, CCPS did not perform audits of TPA performance measures.
 CCPS did not obtain and review claim data to support the amounts billed by
the three TPAs for healthcare claims (including HMO costs). Rather, CCPS
was provided with invoices that listed individual amounts and dates paid, but
with no details regarding for what and for whom they were paid. CCPS
approved the claim payments based on a review of the invoice data with no
review of supporting documentation or verification that the charges were for
eligible plan participants.
 CCPS did not have a process, and did not audit the pharmacy TPA, to ensure
that it received all the prescription drug rebates the TPA received from drug
29

--- Page 32 ---
manufacturers. Drug rebates are determined based on volume and type of
drug dispensed per agreements with drug manufacturers.
 CCPS did not routinely audit healthcare claims (including HMO costs) paid
by the TPAs to ensure that the billed services were provided solely to
participants, were covered by the health plans, and that amounts paid were
proper. CCPS’ TPA contracts allowed for periodic independent third-party
audits of the accuracy and validity of claim reimbursements paid by CCPS.
 CCPS had not established a process, such as regular audits, to verify the
accuracy of TPAs’ self-reported compliance with performance measures.
Specifically, the medical and pharmacy TPA reported self-assessed penalties
of $84,039 in calendar year 2022 based on its reported compliance with a
maximum penalty of $933,767 (medical) and $300,000 (pharmacy), but CCPS
did not have a process in place to verify the TPA’s reported compliance. The
dental insurance TPA contract included 11 performance measures including
claim time-to-process, financial accuracy, and response timing. Additionally,
the contract allowed for the assessment of penalties (up to $12,111 annually)
if the TPA did not meet the performance measures. However, CCPS had not
determined whether any penalties were self-assessed by this dental TPA.
Finally, the remaining vision coverage TPA included no performance
measures and as such no reporting or verification was conducted.
A similar condition regarding the need to ensure the propriety of healthcare costs
was commented upon in our two preceding audit reports and the need to verify
prescription drug rebates was commented upon in our preceding audit report.
Subsequent to our preceding report, CCPS contracted with an audit firm in March
2022 to conduct an audit of medical claims and prescription drug rebates for fiscal
year 2021, but the related report had not been issued as of April 30, 2023.
Recommendation 11
We recommend that CCPS
a. establish procedures to independently verify the propriety of TPA
billings;
b. conduct periodic pharmacy TPA audits to assess that all prescription
drug rebates due were received (repeat);
c. conduct periodic claims audits to assess the accuracy and validity of claim
reimbursements made by the TPAs (repeat); and
d. establish a process to independently verify, on an annual basis, the TPAs’
compliance with reported performance measures and assess penalties
when performance goals are not met.
30

--- Page 33 ---
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We have conducted a performance audit of the Carroll County Public Schools
(CCPS). We conducted this audit under the authority of the State Government
Article, Section 2-1220(e) of the Annotated Code of Maryland, which generally
requires that every 6 years we audit each of the 24 local school systems to
evaluate the effectiveness and efficiency of financial management practices. This
performance audit was performed in accordance with generally accepted
government auditing standards. Those standards require that we plan and perform
the audit to obtain sufficient, appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis
for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives. We believe that
the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and
conclusions based on our audit objectives.
We had two broad audit objectives:
1. Evaluate whether the CCPS procedures and controls were effective in
accounting for and safeguarding its assets.
2. Evaluate whether the CCPS policies provided for the efficient use of
financial resources.
In planning and conducting our audit of CCPS, we focused on 11 major financial-
related areas of operations as approved on December 6, 2016 by the Joint Audit
and Evaluation Committee of the Maryland General Assembly in accordance with
the enabling legislation. The 11 major financial-related areas included revenue
and billing, federal funds, procurement and disbursements, human resources and
payroll, equipment control, information technology security and control, facilities,
transportation, food service, school board oversight, and the management of other
risks (such as health care). The scope of the work performed in each of these
areas was based on our assessments of significance and risk. Therefore, our
follow-up on the status of findings included in our preceding audit report on
CCPS dated May 16, 2018, was limited to those findings that were applicable to
the current audit scope for each of the 11 areas.
The audit objectives excluded reviewing and assessing student achievement,
curriculum, teacher performance, and other academic-related areas and functions.
Also, we did not evaluate the CCPS Comprehensive Education Master Plan or
related updates, and we did not review the activities, financial or other, of any
parent teacher association, group, or funds not under the local board of
education’s direct control or management.
31

--- Page 34 ---
To accomplish our objectives, we reviewed applicable State laws and regulations
pertaining to public elementary and secondary education, as well as policies and
procedures issued and established by CCPS. We also interviewed personnel at
CCPS and the Maryland State Department of Education (MSDE), and staff at
other local school systems in Maryland (as appropriate). Our audit procedures
included inspections of documents and records, and to the extent practicable,
observations of CCPS operations. We also tested transactions and performed
other auditing procedures that we considered necessary to achieve our objectives,
generally for the period from July 1, 2020 to December 31, 2022.
Generally, transactions were selected for testing based on auditor judgment,
which primarily considers risk, the timing or dollar amount of the transaction, or
the significance of the transaction to the area of operation reviewed. As a matter
of course, we do not normally use sampling in our tests, so unless otherwise
specifically indicated, neither statistical nor non-statistical audit sampling was
used to select the transactions tested. Therefore, unless sampling is specifically
indicated in a finding, the results from any tests conducted or disclosed by us
cannot be used to project those results to the entire population from which the test
items were selected. For certain areas within the scope of the audit, we relied on
the work performed by the independent accounting firm that annually audits
CCPS’ financial statements and conducts the federal Single Audit, as well as the
reviews of student activity funds performed by CCPS’ Internal Audit Department.
We used certain statistical data—including financial and operational—compiled
by MSDE from various informational reports submitted by the Maryland local
school systems. This information was used in this audit report for background or
informational purposes, and was deemed reasonable.
We also extracted data from the CCPS automated financial management system
for the purpose of testing expenditure and payroll transactions. We performed
various audit procedures on the relevant data and determined the data were
sufficiently reliable for the purposes the data were used during the audit.
CCPS’ management is responsible for establishing and maintaining effective
internal control. Internal control is a process designed to provide reasonable
assurance that objectives pertaining to the reliability of financial records;
effectiveness and efficiency of operations including safeguarding of assets; and
compliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations are achieved. As
provided in Government Auditing Standards, there are five components of
internal control: control environment, risk assessment, control activities,
information and communication, and monitoring. Each of the five components,
32

--- Page 35 ---
when significant to the audit objectives, and as applicable to CCPS, were
considered by us during the course of this audit.
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate. In addition
to the conditions included in this report, other findings were communicated to
CCPS that were not deemed significant and, consequently, did not warrant
inclusion in this report.
State Government Article Section 2-1224(i) requires that we redact in a manner
consistent with auditing best practices any cybersecurity findings before a report
is made available to the public. This results in the issuance of two different
versions of an audit report that contains cybersecurity findings – a redacted
version for the public and an unredacted version for government officials
responsible for acting on our audit recommendations.
The State Finance and Procurement Article, Section 3.5-301(b), states that
cybersecurity is defined as “processes or capabilities wherein systems,
communications, and information are protected and defended against damage,
unauthorized use or modification, and exploitation.” Based on that definition, and
in our professional judgment, we concluded that certain findings in this report fall
under that definition. Consequently, for the publicly available audit report all
specifics as to the nature of cybersecurity findings and required corrective actions
have been redacted. We have determined that such aforementioned practices, and
government auditing standards, support the redaction of this information from the
public audit report. The specifics of these cybersecurity findings have been
communicated to CCPS and those parties responsible for acting on our
recommendations in an unredacted audit report.
We conducted our fieldwork from November 2022 to May 2023. CCPS’
response to our findings and recommendations is included as an appendix to this
report. Depending on the version of the audit report, responses to any
cybersecurity findings may be redacted in accordance with State law. As
prescribed in the State Government Article, Section 2-1224 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, we will advise CCPS regarding the results of our review of its
response.
33

--- Page 36 ---
APPENDIX

--- Page 37 ---
Carroll County Public Schools
Agency Response Form
Procurement and Disbursement Cycle
Finding 1
Certain requirements of State law and recognized best practices were not
incorporated into CCPS policies and were not consistently used when
participating in intergovernmental cooperative purchasing agreements
(ICPAs).
We recommend that CCPS incorporate the aforementioned statutory
requirement and other identified and acknowledged best practices into its
procurement policies and ensure that the performance of the requirement
and best practices are documented when evaluating and participating in
ICPAs.
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide N/A
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 1 Agree Estimated Completion Date: 9/20/2024
Please provide details of We will continue to refine our process for using ICPAs, including more
corrective action or detailed procurement policies as recommended and documentation to
explain disagreement. support the process.
Page 1 of 9

--- Page 38 ---
Carroll County Public Schools
Agency Response Form
Finding 2 (Policy Issue)
CCPS did not have a sufficiently comprehensive policy to govern sole source
procurements and did not prepare written justifications for certain sole
source procurements.
We recommend that CCPS establish a comprehensive policy, approved by
the Board, that governs sole source procurements and includes a
requirement for written justifications when this non-competitive
procurement method is used by CCPS.
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide N/A
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 2 Agree Estimated Completion Date: 11/2024
Please provide details of CCPS will update the policies and procedures for sole source
corrective action or procurements to further detail the process including justification. Board
explain disagreement. approval will be obtained.
Page 2 of 9

--- Page 39 ---
Carroll County Public Schools
Agency Response Form
Information Technology
The Office of Legislative Audits (OLA) has determined that the Information
Technology section, including Findings 3 through 7 related to “cybersecurity,” as
defined by the State Finance and Procurement Article, Section 3.5-301(b) of the
Annotated Code of Maryland, and therefore are subject to redaction from the
publicly available audit report in accordance with the State Government Article 2-
1224(i). Although the specifics of the following findings, including the analysis,
related recommendations, along with CCPS’ responses, have been redacted from
this report copy, CCPS’ responses indicated agreement with the findings and
related recommendations.
Finding 3
Redacted cybersecurity-related finding.
Agency Response has been redacted by OLA.
Finding 4
Redacted cybersecurity-related finding.
Agency Response has been redacted by OLA.
Finding 5
Redacted cybersecurity-related finding.
Agency Response has been redacted by OLA.
Finding 6
Redacted cybersecurity-related finding.
Agency Response has been redacted by OLA.
Finding 7
Redacted cybersecurity-related finding.
Agency Response has been redacted by OLA.
Page 3 of 9

--- Page 40 ---
Carroll County Public Schools
Agency Response Form
Transportation Services
Finding 8
CCPS awarded a contract to a vendor for a school bus camera system
without documenting that it obtained the best value.
We recommend that, in the future, CCPS
a. ensure that it obtains the best value for services received through
competitive procurements or properly considered ICPAs, as appropriate;
and
b. ensure the basis and reasoning for revenue sharing and technology fees
are documented in future school bus safety camera contracts.
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide CCPS believes it has obtained the best value for services. Prior to
additional comments as entering into a contract with the selected vendor, CCPS Transportation
deemed necessary. staff contacted the only two external bus camera companies that were
known to be offering external red light violation citations to violators of
the school bus stop law. Our comparison of the two systems clearly
pointed to the selected vendor as being the only vendor who could
ensure that all buses in the fleet would be equipped with external
cameras. In addition, the selected vendor’s 60/40 revenue split exceeded
what was being offered by the second vendor. and only the vendor
selected offered to include coverage for the additional operational
technology required by Transportation management for safety and
efficiency. *
*The CCPS’ Safety and Security Board Committee recommended for
several years that CCPS Transportation improve its emergency
communication and fleet tracking capability of the school bus fleet.
Prior to the inclusion of push-to-talk communication devices and fleet
tracking systems in the five- year agreement with the selected vendor,
CCPS school buses relied on individual cell phones for communication
and there was no live GPS fleet tracking available. The inclusion of
communication devices, fleet tracking, and bus routing technologies as
part of the technology fees within the selected vendor contract provided
CCPS these technologies at no cost to CCPS. The estimated cost of
these technologies to CCPS over the five- year agreement time period
would have been approximately $2.0M. The contract was reviewed by
CCPS Purchasing after finding a similar contract (RFP) obtained by
another Maryland public school district.
Page 4 of 9

--- Page 41 ---
Carroll County Public Schools
Agency Response Form
Recommendation 8a Agree Estimated Completion Date: Ongoing
Please provide details of CCPS will continue to strengthen generally accepted procurement
corrective action or practices including improvement of documentation to obtain the best
explain disagreement. value.
Recommendation 8b Agree Estimated Completion Date: Completed
Please provide details of CCPS and the selected vendor have renegotiated the revenue share
corrective action or coming back to the County and have extended the agreement for an
explain disagreement. additional five- year term. All outstanding technology fees owed to the
vendor as of 9/30/2023 were absolved. The revised agreement has
resulted in a monthly revenue share being returned to the Carroll County
Sheriff’s Office beginning for the month of October 2023.
Page 5 of 9

--- Page 42 ---
Carroll County Public Schools
Agency Response Form
OLA has determined that Finding 9 related to “cybersecurity,” as defined by the
State Finance and Procurement Article, Section 3.5-301(b) of the Annotated Code
of Maryland, and therefore is subject to redaction from the publicly available
audit report in accordance with the State Government Article 2-1224(i). Although
the specifics of the finding, including the analysis, related recommendation(s),
along with CCPS’ responses, have been redacted from this report copy, CCPS’
response indicated agreement with the finding and related recommendations.
Finding 9
Redacted cybersecurity-related finding.
Agency Response has been redacted by OLA.
Page 6 of 9

--- Page 43 ---
Carroll County Public Schools
Agency Response Form
School Board Oversight
Finding 10
Certain requirements of State law were not incorporated into CCPS ethics
policies.
We recommend that CCPS, in conjunction with the Board, revise its ethics
policies to conform with the requirements of State law.
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide N/A
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 10 Agree Estimated Completion Date: Completed
Please provide details of Required state law changes were made to BC Ethics and approved by the
corrective action or Board of Education November 8, 2023.
explain disagreement.
Page 7 of 9

--- Page 44 ---
Carroll County Public Schools
Agency Response Form
Management of Other Risks
Finding 11
CCPS did not sufficiently ensure the propriety of billings and rebates or
adequately monitor the performance of its third-party administrators that
provide health care claims processing services.
We recommend that CCPS
a. establish procedures to independently verify the propriety of TPA
billings;
b. conduct periodic pharmacy TPA audits to assess that all prescription
drug rebates due were received (repeat);
c. conduct periodic claims audits to assess the accuracy and validity of claim
reimbursements made by the TPAs (repeat); and
d. establish a process to independently verify, on an annual basis, the TPAs’
compliance with reported performance measures and assess penalties
when performance goals are not met.
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide N/A
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 11a Agree Estimated Completion Date: Completed
Please provide details of CCPS established a bi-annual independent audit of the TPA for all
corrective action or medical and prescription drug claims.
explain disagreement.
Recommendation 11b Agree Estimated Completion Date: Completed
Please provide details of CCPS established a bi-annual independent audit of TPA prescription
corrective action or drug claims and rebates that began with the 2023 plan year in February
explain disagreement. 2024. It was not completed by the time the legislative audit was
concluded.
Recommendation 11c Agree Estimated Completion Date: Completed
Please provide details of CCPS established a bi-annual independent audit of TPA medical claims
corrective action or that began with the 2023 plan year in February 2024. It was not
explain disagreement. completed by the time the legislative audit was concluded.
Page 8 of 9

--- Page 45 ---
Carroll County Public Schools
Agency Response Form
Recommendation 11d Agree Estimated Completion Date: FY2027 (As
the budget
allows)
Please provide details of The TPA provides reporting on performance measures contained within
corrective action or the guarantees. CCPS has these reviewed by the consultant who assists
explain disagreement. CCPS with their pricing and bids. CCPS will pursue having these
audited with the medical and prescription claims and prescription rebates
by the outside audit firm.
Page 9 of 9

--- Page 46 ---
A T
UDIT EAM
Raymond G. Burton Jr., CPA, CFE
Audit Manager
R. Brendan Coffey, CPA, CISA
Edwin L. Paul, CPA, CISA
Information Systems Audit Managers
Abdullah I. Adam, CFE
Senior Auditor
Edward O. Kendall, CISA
Matthew D. Walbert, CISA
Information Systems Senior Auditors
Daniel G. Johnson, CFE
Jacob M. Kasten
Thomas J. Kraemer
Staff Auditors
Joshua A. Nicodemus
Malcolm J. Woodard
Information Systems Staff Auditors