Title: Maryland Insurance Administration
Date: 05/15/2018
Type: Fiscal Compliance
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5b041e9f4212033db432aa84
Extracted: 2025-06-18T22:15:35.155515
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Audit Report
Maryland Insurance Administration
May 2025
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Senator Shelly L. Hettleman (Senate Chair) Delegate Jared Solomon (House Chair)
Senator Joanne C. Benson Delegate Steven J. Arentz
Senator Benjamin T. Brooks, Sr. Delegate Andrea Fletcher Harrison
Senator Paul D. Corderman Delegate Steven C. Johnson
Senator Katie Fry Hester Delegate Mary A. Lehman
Senator Cheryl C. Kagan Delegate David H. Moon
Senator Clarence K. Lam, M.D. Delegate Julie Palakovich Carr
Senator Cory V. McCray Delegate Emily K. Shetty
Senator Justin D. Ready Delegate Stephanie M. Smith
Senator Bryan W. Simonaire Delegate M. Courtney Watson
To Obtain Further Information
Office of Legislative Audits
The Warehouse at Camden Yards
351 West Camden Street, Suite 400
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Phone: 410-946-5900
Maryland Relay: 711
TTY: 410-946-5401 ꞏ 301-970-5401
E-mail: webmaster@ola.state.md.us
Website: www.ola.state.md.us
To Report Fraud
The Office of Legislative Audits operates a Fraud Hotline to report fraud, waste, or abuse involving State
of Maryland government resources. Reports of fraud, waste, or abuse may be communicated anonymously
by a toll-free call to 1-877-FRAUD-11, by mail to the Fraud Hotline, c/o Office of Legislative Audits, or
through the Office’s website.
Nondiscrimination Statement
The Department of Legislative Services does not discriminate on the basis of age, ancestry, color, creed,
marital status, national origin, race, religion, gender, gender identity, sexual orientation, or disability in the
admission or access to its programs, services, or activities. The Department’s Information Officer has been
designated to coordinate compliance with the nondiscrimination requirements contained in Section 35.107
of the United States Department of Justice Regulations. Requests for assistance should be directed to the
Information Officer at 410-946-5400 or 410-970-5400.

--- Page 3 ---
May 2, 2025
Senator Shelly L. Hettleman, Senate Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Delegate Jared Solomon, House Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Members of Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Annapolis, Maryland
Ladies and Gentlemen:
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the Maryland Insurance
Administration (MIA) for the period beginning January 21, 2020 and ending
November 30, 2023. MIA is responsible for licensing and regulating insurers,
insurance agents, and brokers, who conduct business in the State and for
monitoring the financial solvency of licensed insurers. MIA is also responsible
for collecting taxes levied on all premiums collected by insurance companies
within the State.
Our audit disclosed that MIA’s continued use of electronic spreadsheets to record
and compile premium tax data did not provide sufficient controls to ensure the
propriety of recorded data and the results of premium tax audits. This condition
has been included in our two prior audits dating back to May 2018. In addition,
MIA did not conduct timely reconciliations of its premium tax revenue, did not
ensure they were comprehensive, and did not ensure issues identified in the
reconciliations were corrected, conditions noted but not corrected from our prior
report. MIA also did not always conduct comprehensive supervisory reviews of
premium tax refunds resulting in the failure to identify improper refunds totaling
approximately $800,000.
We also found MIA did not timely transfer all Health Care Access Assessment
revenue to other State agencies as required by law and did not establish proper
controls over certain critical financial transactions. Finally, we reviewed an
allegation regarding the failure to cancel corporate purchasing cards timely when
employees left MIA and were able to substantiate certain aspects of the allegation.

--- Page 4 ---
MIA’s response to this audit is included as an appendix to this report. We
reviewed the response to our findings and related recommendations, and have
concluded that the corrective actions identified are sufficient to address all audit
issues.
We wish to acknowledge the cooperation extended to us during the audit by MIA.
Respectfully submitted,
Brian S. Tanen
Brian S. Tanen, CPA, CFE
Legislative Auditor
2

--- Page 5 ---
Table of Contents
Background Information 5
Agency Responsibilities 5
Referral to Our Fraud, Waste, and Abuse Hotline 6
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report 7
Findings and Recommendations 8
Premium Taxes
* Finding 1 – The Maryland Insurance Administration (MIA) continues 8
to use spreadsheets that did not have adequate controls to track
premium tax payments, premium tax audits, and to calculate penalties
and interest.
* Finding 2 – MIA did not perform timely reconciliations of its premium 9
tax revenue records to the State’s accounting records and did not
correct issues identified in the reconciliations.
Finding 3 – MIA did not always conduct comprehensive supervisory 10
reviews of premium tax refunds resulting in the failure to identify
improper refunds totaling approximately $800,000.
Health Care Access Assessments (HCAA)
Finding 4 – MIA did not timely transfer $657 million in HCAA revenue 12
to other State agencies as required.
Critical Financial Transactions
Finding 5 – MIA could not document and/or did not establish adequate 12
controls over critical transactions such as accounts receivable and
cash receipts.
Corporate Purchasing Cards
Finding 6 – Corporate purchasing cards were not promptly cancelled 14
for employees who separated from MIA.
* Denotes item repeated in full or part from preceding audit report
3

--- Page 6 ---
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology 15
Agency Response Appendix
4

--- Page 7 ---
Background Information
Agency Responsibilities
The Maryland Insurance Administration (MIA) operates under the authority of the
Insurance Article, Title 2, of the Annotated Code of Maryland. MIA is
responsible for licensing and regulating insurers, insurance agents, and brokers
who conduct business in the State and for monitoring the financial solvency of
licensed insurers. MIA is also responsible for collecting taxes levied on all
premiums collected by insurance companies within the State. According to
MIA’s records as of November 30, 2023, there were 1,893 insurers authorized to
conduct business in the State. MIA’s records also indicated that direct premiums
written by domestic (based in Maryland) and foreign (based in other states)
companies operating in Maryland during calendar year 2023 totaled
approximately $48.9 billion.
According to the State’s records, during fiscal year 2023 MIA’s revenues totaled
approximately $888.8 million
(see Figure 1), the majority of
which related to premium and
Health Care Access
Assessment revenue. As
required by State law, MIA
transferred $716.6 million in
revenue to the State’s General
Fund and $37.2 million to the
State’s Insurance Regulation
Fund in fiscal year 2023.
According to the State’s
records, during fiscal year
2023, MIA’s expenditures
totaled approximately $36.2
million (see Figure 2).
5

--- Page 8 ---
Figure 2
MIA Positions, Expenditures, and Funding Sources
Full-Time Equivalent Positions as of June 30, 2023
Positions
Filled 233
Vacant1 27
Total 260
Fiscal Year 2023 Expenditures
Expenditures
Salaries, Wages, and Fringe Benefits $28,381,636
Technical and Special Fees 2,466,898
Operating Expenses 5,315,636
Total $36,164,170
Fiscal Year 2023 Funding Sources
Funding
Special Fund $36,128,604
Federal Fund 35,566
Total $36,164,170
Source: State financial and personnel records
Referral to Our Fraud, Waste, and Abuse Hotline
We received a referral to our fraud, waste, and abuse hotline alleging, in part, that
MIA was not deactivating corporate purchasing cards held by employees who
have left employment with the agency. Based on our review, we were able to
substantiate certain aspects of the allegation (see Finding 6). Our review did not
identify any matters that warranted a referral to the Office of the Attorney
General’s Criminal Division.
1 The majority of the vacancies were for positions that would not have a direct impact on the
findings in this report.
6

--- Page 9 ---
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report
Our audit included a review to determine the status of the eight findings contained
in our preceding audit report of MIA dated March 30, 2021. See Figure 3 for the
results of our review.
Figure 3
Status of Preceding Findings
Preceding Implementation
Finding Description
Finding Status
MIA continued to use premium tax spreadsheets that
Repeated
Finding 1 lacked adequate controls to ensure the propriety of tax data
(Current Finding 1)
recorded and the results of premium tax audits performed.
MIA did not ensure that certain premium tax collections
received from HMOs and MCOs were properly recorded
Finding 2 Not repeated
and transferred to the Maryland Department of Health as
required, and significant recording errors occurred.
Reconciliations of MIA’s premium tax revenue records to
the States accounting records were not conducted timely Repeated
Finding 3
and did not ensure that all tax revenue had been credited to (Current Finding 2)
the appropriate fund.
MIA did not prepare its overall assessment calculation for
the Fund in accordance with its procedures, could not
Finding 4 support certain estimates used in the calculation, and could Not repeated
not document that the calculation was reviewed and
approved by supervisory personnel.
Allocations of assessments to insurance companies were
Finding 5 not always made as required or, when made, were Not repeated
sometimes incorrect.
MIA could not readily explain a growing deficit in the
Finding 6 Health Care Regulatory Fund, which had a deficit balance Not repeated
over $1.3 million as of June 30, 2020.
MIA did not ensure that producer licensing fees collection
Finding 7 by a third party were remitted and deposited into the Not repeated
Insurance Regulation Fund as required.
Intrusion detection and prevention system coverage did not
Finding 8 exist for traffic flowing into the MIA network from certain Not repeated
untrusted origin points.
7

--- Page 10 ---
Findings and Recommendations
Premium Taxes
Background
The Insurance Article of the Annotated Code of Maryland generally provides for
the imposition of an annual tax on insurance companies for premiums derived
from insurance business transacted in the State. The Maryland Insurance
Administration (MIA) assesses the tax on insurance companies at various rates.
Insurance companies are required to make quarterly estimated tax payments to
MIA and submit a tax return by March 15 of each year reporting premiums during
the preceding calendar year along with a payment for any taxes due to the State.
MIA completes approximately 1,600 premium tax audits annually to ensure the
proper premium taxes were remitted.
By law, premium taxes collected are to be credited to the State’s General Fund.
Premium taxes collected from health maintenance organizations (HMOs) and
managed care organizations (MCOs), were historically credited to the State’s
Health Care Provider Rate Stabilization Fund (RSF) administered by MIA.
Effective July 2021, the RSF was repealed and these funds are now directed to the
General Fund. MIA is required to report premium tax revenues quarterly to the
Comptroller of Maryland - Bureau of Revenue Estimates (BRE) for its use in
preparing revenue projections for the State. According to the State’s records,
during fiscal year 2023 MIA collected approximately $715.5 million in premium
tax revenue.
Finding 1
MIA continues to use spreadsheets that did not have adequate controls to
track premium tax payments, premium tax audits, and to calculate penalties
and interest.
Analysis
MIA continues to use spreadsheets that did not have adequate controls to track
premium tax payments, premium audits, and to calculate penalties and interest.
MIA discontinued using its automated premium tax system in November 2014
and since then has used spreadsheets to track the receipt of quarterly estimated
and annual tax payments, document the performance of the annual premium tax
audits, and calculate any penalties and interest. There were 25 employees with
access to one or more of these spreadsheets.
Our review disclosed that the spreadsheets did not have sufficient controls. For
example, formulas used to automatically compile data and perform needed
8

--- Page 11 ---
calculations were not protected and could be modified without any record of the
change or the employee making the change. MIA also did not implement
adequate compensating controls to ensure the integrity of the data. As a result, 23
of the aforementioned employees had the ability to modify the data without
detection, including 18 that did not require modification access for their jobs.
Similar conditions have been noted in our two prior audit reports dating back to
May 15, 2018. In response to our prior audit report, MIA stated that as of July
2020, it had implemented controls, such as password protecting the spreadsheet
files, that fully addressed the deficiencies in our finding and that it was procuring
a new system. However, our current audit noted that these controls had not been
implemented and MIA has not yet implemented a new system.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that MIA take appropriate action to control the propriety of
premium tax data and audit activity. Specifically, we recommend that MIA
implement an automated premium tax system with sufficient control
capabilities or establish adequate controls within its existing use of
spreadsheets (repeat).
Finding 2
MIA did not perform timely reconciliations of its premium tax revenue
records to the State’s accounting records and did not correct issues identified
in the reconciliations.
Analysis
MIA did not perform timely reconciliations of its premium tax revenue records to
the State’s accounting records and did not correct issues identified in the
reconciliations.
 MIA did not complete monthly reconciliations timely and did not have
adequate controls to ensure they were completed properly. Specifically, our
test of 18 of the most recently completed reconciliations as of January 2024
disclosed that 12 reconciliations were conducted 1 to 11 months late. In
addition, 11 of the 18 reconciliations were not reviewed or approved by a
supervisor.
 MIA did not always correct issues noted in its reconciliations. Specifically,
our test of six reconciliations for the period July to December 2023 disclosed
that MIA did not correct a total of $11.8 million in funds identified in five
reconciliations as being improperly credited to the General Fund instead of the
9

--- Page 12 ---
Health Care Access Assessment Fund until we questioned this matter in
March 2024.
Similar conditions were commented upon in our preceding audit report. In
response to that report, MIA stated that as of January 15, 2021, it had
implemented procedural revisions to perform monthly premium tax
reconciliations and that these reconciliations would be subject to supervisory
review. Contrary to these assertions, during our current audit, we were advised
that the revised procedures were not implemented because of insufficient staffing.
Recommendation 2
We recommend that MIA
a. conduct premium tax revenue reconciliations on a timely basis (repeat);
b. ensure premium tax reconciliations are comprehensive (such as by
conducting documented supervisory review), and that tax revenue has
been properly applied to the appropriate funds (repeat); and
c. correct any issues identified during the reconciliations, including those
noted above.
Finding 3
MIA did not always conduct comprehensive supervisory reviews of premium
tax refunds resulting in the failure to identify improper refunds totaling
approximately $800,000.
Analysis
MIA did not always conduct comprehensive supervisory reviews of premium tax
refunds resulting in the failure to identify improper refunds totaling approximately
$800,000. According to MIA’s records, during calendar years 2022 and 2023,
MIA issued 643 refunds totaling $22.5 million. MIA’s Refund and Expense
Reimbursement Procedures Manual requires a supervisor review of all premium
tax refunds to be verified to supporting documentation (refund request form) prior
to the issuance of refunds.
Our review disclosed that the required supervisory reviews were not always
conducted, and did not always include an examination of the supporting
documentation. Our test of 11 refunds2 totaling approximately $1.3 million
during calendar years 2022 and 2023 disclosed a supervisory review was not
performed for 2 refunds resulting in duplicated refunds totaling $30,900 going
undetected. For another refund that was reviewed by a supervisor, the employee
2 These refunds were selected based on risk (such as multiple refunds to the same company) and
materiality.
10

--- Page 13 ---
conducting the review did not identify a significant error resulting in a refund for
an improper amount being refunded to a wrong recipient. Specifically, MIA
refunded approximately $768,700 more to one company when it was supposed to
refund $76,700 to another company.
We brought these improper refunds to the attention of MIA management in May
2024. However, as of March 2025, $17,900 of the improper refunds had not been
recovered.
Recommendation 3
We recommend that MIA
a. ensure required supervisory reviews of premium tax refunds are
performed and include supporting documentation in accordance with its
established written procedures; and
b. take appropriate action to recover any improper refunds, including those
noted above.
Health Care Access Assessments
Background
The Insurance Article of the Annotated Code of Maryland provides for the
imposition of a Health Care Access Assessment (HCAA) on companies for health
insurance premiums derived from business transacted in the State beginning
January 1, 2019. MIA is responsible for administering the HCAA which includes
the annual assessment and the related collection. As of June 2023, the HCAA rate
is one percent3 of gross health insurance premiums. By March 15th of each year,
companies are required to file a final tax return and to remit the HCAA due to
MIA.
State law provides that annually MIA distribute HCAA revenues to the Maryland
Health Benefit Exchange (MHBE), the Maryland Department of Health (MDH),4
and the Community Health Resources Commission (CHRC).5 According to the
agency’s records, MIA collected approximately $803.5 million during fiscal years
2019 through 2023 including $120.3 million from 151 companies during fiscal
year 2023.
3 The rate assessed has fluctuated in that in calendar year 2019 the HCAA was 2.75 percent on
gross health premiums attributable to insurance business in Maryland (Md. Insurance Code Ann.
§ 6-102.1).
4 MDH distributions were required for fiscal years 2021 and 2022.
5 CHRC distributions were required for fiscal years 2023 and 2024.
11

--- Page 14 ---
Finding 4
MIA did not timely transfer $657 million in HCAA revenue to other State
agencies as required.
Analysis
MIA did not timely transfer $657 million of HCAA revenue to other State
agencies, as required. Specifically, our analysis of MIA’s distribution of HCAA
revenue to MHBE, MDH, and CHRC during fiscal years 2019 through 2023
disclosed that, as of September 30, 2023, MIA had not distributed $649 million to
MHBE and $8 million to CHRC, as required. MIA management advised that the
funds were not distributed because MHBE and CHRC had not specifically
requested the funds. However, this explanation is inconsistent with State law and,
during our MHBE audit, we identified multiple requests to transfer the funds
between 2019 and 2021.6
As noted in our audit report of MHBE dated January 28, 2025, subsequent to our
inquiries during that audit, in January 2024, MHBE requested, and MIA
transferred, $641 million in HCAA revenue to MHBE. In addition, $16 million
was subsequently transferred to CHRC for fiscal years 2023 and 2024
distributions. The transfer to MHBE was $8 million less than the amount we
calculated in our analysis because MIA transferred $8 million of fiscal year 2023
HCAA revenue to CHRC for the fiscal 2024 distribution.
Recommendation 4
We recommend that MIA timely transfer all HCAA revenue in accordance
with State law.
Critical Financial Transactions
Finding 5
MIA could not document and/or did not establish adequate controls over
critical financial transactions such as accounts receivable and cash receipts.
Analysis
MIA could not document and/or did not establish adequate controls over critical
financial transactions such as accounts receivable and cash receipts.
6 MHBE submitted at least three requests to MIA for the HCAA revenue between January 2019
and June 2020. In March 2023, the Department of Budget Management instructed MIA to
transfer the HCAA revenue to MHBE after the annual Budget Reconciliation and Financing Act.
12

--- Page 15 ---
 MIA did not always retain supporting documentation for critical financial
transactions, such as adjustments to accounts receivable and cash receipts
records. Accordingly, we were unable to determine the propriety of these
transactions. For example, MIA made $62.4 million in adjustments to its
accounts receivable records during fiscal years 2021 through 2023. Our test
of 20 adjustments7 totaling $11.9 million, disclosed that MIA could not
support the propriety of 12 adjustments totaling $2.4 million, including
support for a $929,000 reduction in one receivable.
 MIA did not conduct independent verifications that recorded collections were
deposited and could not always document the verifications. Specifically, our
test of 10 deposits totaling $17.4 million8 noted 2 deposits totaling $9.3
million lacked documentation of an independent deposit verification, and
another deposit totaling $1.1 million, the employee who verified the deposit to
collections also deposited the related funds. We confirmed that collections
were deposited intact for these deposits.
Recommendation 5
We recommend that MIA
a. maintain adequate documentation for all financial transactions, and
b. conduct independent deposit verifications.
Corporate Purchasing Cards
Background
We received a referral to our fraud, waste, and abuse hotline alleging, in part, that
MIA did not cancel CPCs for employees that separated from MIA. Based on our
review, we were able to substantiate the allegation. We did not identify any
issues that warranted a referral to the Office of the Attorney General’s Criminal
Division but did identify certain deficiencies that require corrective action by
MIA as further described in the finding below.
7 The test items were selected based on the materiality of adjustment amount and/or the risk of
adjustment type (e.g. potential for error in assessment calculation, or error in posting).
8 The test items were selected based on the materiality of deposit in fiscal years 2023 and 2024.
13

--- Page 16 ---
Finding 6
Corporate purchasing cards (CPC) were not promptly cancelled for
employees who separated from MIA.
Analysis
CPCs were not promptly cancelled for employees who separated from MIA.
During the period January 21, 2020 through November 30, 2023, MIA’s corporate
purchasing card transactions totaled approximately $781,000. Our review
identified nine cardholders who separated from MIA during our audit period of
which eight were not cancelled timely. Specifically, six cards were cancelled
between 73 and 467 days after the employee separated from MIA and two cards
were still active as of December 2023, between 81 and 173 days after the
employees’ separation.
Our review further disclosed that three of the cards had been used to process 16
charges totaling approximately $4,000 after the employee separated from MIA.
MIA could not provide supporting documentation for one charge totaling
approximately $1,600. Based on our review of the support provided by MIA for
the remaining transactions, they appeared to be for appropriate business expense
(such as recurring subscription services).
The Comptroller of Maryland’s Corporate Purchasing Card Policies and
Procedures Manual requires the closure of accounts for employees who are
retiring or leaving State service. Timely compliance with this policy helps reduce
the risk that the cards will be used improperly.
Recommendation 6
We recommend that MIA
a. promptly cancel CPCs when employees separate from MIA, including
those noted above; and
b. obtain documentation for the aforementioned unsupported charge and
take any necessary corrective action.
14

--- Page 17 ---
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the Maryland Insurance
Administration (MIA), for the period beginning January 21, 2020 and ending
November 30, 2023. The audit was conducted in accordance with generally
accepted government auditing standards. Those standards require that we plan
and perform the audit to obtain sufficient, appropriate evidence to provide a
reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives.
We believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings
and conclusions based on our audit objectives.
As prescribed by the State Government Article, Section 2-1221 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, the objectives of this audit were to examine MIA’s financial
transactions, records, and internal control, and to evaluate its compliance with
applicable State laws, rules, and regulations.
In planning and conducting our audit, we focused on the major financial-related
areas of operations based on assessments of significance and risk. The areas
addressed by the audit included premium taxes, certain programs associated with
Insurance Regulation and the Health Care Regulatory Funds, procurement and
disbursements, payroll, cash receipts, and accounts receivables. Our information
systems security and control review addressed general controls, personally
identifiable information, system access and authentication, firewall security and
intrusion prevention, malware prevention, and software vulnerability assessment.
We also determined the status of the findings contained in our preceding audit
report.
Our audit did not include an evaluation of internal controls over compliance with
federal laws and regulations for federal financial assistance programs and an
assessment of MIA’s compliance with those laws and regulations because the
State of Maryland engages an independent accounting firm to annually audit such
programs administered by State agencies, including MIA.
Our assessment of internal controls was based on agency procedures and controls
in place at the time of our fieldwork. Our tests of transactions and other auditing
procedures were generally focused on the transactions occurring during our audit
period of January 21, 2020 to November 30, 2023 but may include transactions
before or after this period as we considered necessary to achieve our audit
objectives.
To accomplish our audit objectives, our audit procedures included inquiries of
appropriate personnel, inspections of documents and records, tests of transactions,
15

--- Page 18 ---
and to the extent practicable, observations of MIA’s operations. Generally,
transactions were selected for testing based on auditor judgment, which primarily
considers risk, the timing or dollar amount of the transaction, or the significance
of the transaction to the area of operation reviewed. As a matter of course, we do
not normally use sampling in our tests, so unless otherwise specifically indicated,
neither statistical nor non-statistical audit sampling was used to select the
transactions tested. Therefore, unless sampling is specifically indicated in a
finding, the results from any tests conducted or disclosed by us cannot be used to
project those results to the entire population from which the test items were
selected.
We also performed various data extracts of pertinent information from the State’s
Financial Management Information System (such as revenue and expenditure
data) and the State’s Central Payroll Bureau (payroll data), as well as from the
contractor administering the State’s Corporate Purchasing Card Program (credit
card activity). The extracts are performed as part of ongoing internal processes
established by the Office of Legislative Audits and were subject to various tests to
determine data reliability. We determined that the data extracted from these
sources were sufficiently reliable for the purposes the data were used during this
audit. Finally, we performed other auditing procedures that we considered
necessary to achieve our audit objectives. The reliability of data used in this
report for background or informational purposes was not assessed.
MIA’s management is responsible for establishing and maintaining effective
internal control. Internal control is a process designed to provide reasonable
assurance that objectives pertaining to the reliability of financial records;
effectiveness and efficiency of operations, including safeguarding of assets; and
compliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations are achieved. As
provided in Government Auditing Standards, there are five components of
internal control: control environment, risk assessment, control activities,
information and communication, and monitoring. Each of the five components,
when significant to the audit objectives, and as applicable to MIA, were
considered by us during the course of this audit.
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate.
Our reports are designed to assist the Maryland General Assembly in exercising
its legislative oversight function and to provide constructive recommendations for
16

--- Page 19 ---
improving State operations. As a result, our reports generally do not address
activities we reviewed that are functioning properly.
This report includes findings relating to conditions that we consider to be
significant deficiencies in the design or operation of internal control that could
adversely affect MIA’s ability to maintain reliable financial records, operate
effectively and efficiently, and/or comply with applicable laws, rules, and
regulations. Our report also includes findings regarding significant instances of
noncompliance with applicable laws, rules, or regulations. Other less significant
findings were communicated to MIA that did not warrant inclusion in this report.
MIA’s response to our findings and recommendations is included as an appendix
to this report. As prescribed in the State Government Article, Section 2-1224 of
the Annotated Code of Maryland, we will advise MIA regarding the results of our
review of its response.
17

--- Page 20 ---
APPENDIX
WES MOORE MARIE GRANT
Governor Commissioner
JOY Y. HATCHETTE
ARUNA MILLER Deputy Commissioner
Lt. Governor
SEAN J. MCEVOY
Associate Commissioner
Operations
200 St. Paul Place, Suite 2700, Baltimore, Maryland 21202
Direct Dial: 410-468-2455
Email: sean.mcevoy2@maryland.gov
1-800-492-6116 TTY: 1-800-735-2258
www.insurance.maryland.gov
May 1, 2025
Brian S. Tanen, CPA, CFE
Legislative Auditor
Office of Legislative Audits
The Warehouse at Camden Yards
351 West Camden Street, Suite 400
Baltimore, Maryland 21202
Dear Mr. Tanen,
Thank you for your draft audit report for the Maryland Insurance Administration for the period
beginning January 21, 2020 and ending November 30, 2023. Enclosed is our agency response.
We appreciate the thoughtful and collaborative approach of your team throughout the audit
process. Please do not hesitate to contact Sean McEvoy at 410-468-2455 or
sean.mcevoy2@maryland.gov if you require additional information or clarification.
Sincerely,
Marie Grant
Commissioner
Maryland Insurance Administration
CC: Joy Y. Hatchette, Deputy Commissioner
Sean J. McEvoy, Association Commissioner, Operations

--- Page 21 ---
Maryland Insurance Administration
Agency Response Form
Premium Taxes
Finding 1
MIA continues to use spreadsheets that did not have adequate controls to
track premium tax payments, premium tax audits, and to calculate penalties
and interest.
We recommend that MIA take appropriate action to control the propriety of
premium tax data and audit activity. Specifically, we recommend that MIA
implement an automated premium tax system with sufficient control
capabilities or establish adequate controls within its existing use of
spreadsheets (repeat).
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 1 Agree Estimated Completion Date: No later than
end of Fiscal
Year 2027
Please provide details of
corrective action or MIA has begun a search for a suitable automated premium tax system
explain disagreement. solution. We have prepared a scope of work and have conducted
preliminary due diligence to source an appropriate technology solution
that will control the propriety of premium tax data and audit activity as
identified by the OLA. MIA expects to finalize a technology solution
and to source a qualified vendor and initiate a solution in FY26. We
expect that full implementation will occur by the end of FY27. MIA is
consulting with DBM and Government Finance Officers Association
(GFOA) for their input and advice as a part of our due diligence process.
In the meantime, MIA has limited access to the respective directory for
the Premium Tax Payment Schedule to necessary staff that need access.
We have password protected the three documents identified by the OLA.
We will share the password only with staff requiring access to these
documents for their job duties and we will not allow write access to any
staff responsible for the approval of the work.
Page 1 of 8

--- Page 22 ---
Maryland Insurance Administration
Agency Response Form
Finding 2
MIA did not perform timely reconciliations of its premium tax revenue
records to the State’s accounting records and did not correct issues identified
in the reconciliations.
We recommend that MIA
a. conduct premium tax revenue reconciliations on a timely basis (repeat);
b. ensure premium tax reconciliations are comprehensive (such as by
conducting documented supervisory review), and that tax revenue has
been properly applied to the appropriate funds (repeat); and
c. correct any issues identified during the reconciliations, including those
noted above.
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 2a Agree Estimated Completion Date: April 2025
Please provide details of
corrective action or MIA will conduct premium tax revenue reconciliations on a timely basis.
explain disagreement. Monthly premium tax reconciliation are now being reviewed by the
Fiscal Services supervisor on a monthly basis.
As of April 2025, MIA now performs a daily entry and review of its cash
receipts and has developed separate checklists for paper checks and
electronic fund transfers which will improve the review of the
recordation of those receipts. MIA’s monthly general ledger
reconciliation of the premium tax data will be improved by this process.
Recommendation 2b Agree Estimated Completion Date: April 2025
Please provide details of MIA will ensure that premium tax reconciliations are comprehensive and
corrective action or will conduct documented supervisory reviews. We will also ensure that
explain disagreement. the tax revenue collected will be properly applied to the appropriate
funds.
Recommendation 2c Agree Estimated Completion Date: April 2025
Page 2 of 8

--- Page 23 ---
Maryland Insurance Administration
Agency Response Form
Please provide details of MIA will correct any issues identified during the tax revenue
corrective action or reconciliation process.
explain disagreement.
Page 3 of 8

--- Page 24 ---
Maryland Insurance Administration
Agency Response Form
Finding 3
MIA did not always conduct comprehensive supervisory reviews of premium
tax refunds resulting in the failure to identify improper refunds totaling
approximately $800,000.
We recommend that MIA
a. ensure required supervisory reviews of premium tax refunds are
performed and include supporting documentation in accordance with its
established written procedures; and
b. take appropriate action to recover any improper refunds, including those
noted above.
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 3a Agree Estimated Completion Date: February
2024
Please provide details of
corrective action or MIA will ensure required supervisory reviews of premium tax refunds
explain disagreement. are performed and include supporting documentation in accordance with
its established written procedures. Our procedures include
documentation of a supervisory review and sign off of premium tax
refunds from the Financial Regulation Unit.
In addition there is a further periodic internal audit performed by the
Financial Regulation Unit.
Fiscal Services has also implemented a new recordation process in
accounts payable, which will improve the verification, posting and
tracking and approval of refund transactions in FMIS.
Recommendation 3b Agree Estimated Completion Date: June 2025
Please provide details of MIA has taken appropriate action to recover any improper refunds. As of
corrective action or March 2025, two of the three refunds that were brought to our attention
explain disagreement.
have been recovered ($797,255 and $12,983.18 respectively). The return
of the third and final repayment of $17,930.70 has been complicated by
liens that were processed against each of the duplicate payments that
Page 4 of 8

--- Page 25 ---
Maryland Insurance Administration
Agency Response Form
were made by MIA, but we are currently in the process of collecting this
last payment.
Page 5 of 8

--- Page 26 ---
Maryland Insurance Administration
Agency Response Form
Health Care Access Assessments
Finding 4
MIA did not timely transfer $657 million in HCAA revenue to other State
agencies as required.
We recommend that MIA timely transfer all HCAA revenue in accordance
with State law.
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 4 Agree Estimated Completion Date: January 2024
Please provide details of MIA, as part of our annual fiscal year end (FYE) closing process, has
corrective action or instituted procedures to (a) notify the Maryland Health Benefit Exchange
explain disagreement. (MHBE) of the HCAA revenue balance collected by the MIA and (b)
transfer that balance to the MHBE upon their request. MIA notified the
MHBE of their FY24 balance of $141.2 million and that amount was
subsequently transferred by the MIA to MHBE upon their request in
October 2024.
Page 6 of 8

--- Page 27 ---
Maryland Insurance Administration
Agency Response Form
Critical Financial Transactions
Finding 5
MIA could not document and/or did not establish adequate controls over
critical financial transactions such as accounts receivable and cash receipts.
We recommend that MIA
a. maintain adequate documentation for all financial transactions, and
b. conduct independent deposit verifications.
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 5a Agree Estimated Completion Date: March 2025
Please provide details of MIA will maintain adequate documentation for all financial transactions.
corrective action or MIA reviewed the invoice payment recordation process with
explain disagreement. DBM’s Audit and Financial Compliance Unit and as a result has
changed the ACH recordation process of receipts against FMIS invoices.
We now use a specific transaction code to record these receipts and
include a reference to the Treasurer’s Office Daily ACH report.
Recommendation 5b Agree Estimated Completion Date: March 2025
Please provide details of MIA will conduct independent deposit verifications. We will review
corrective action or transactions for accuracy and a Fiscal Services supervisor, who did not
explain disagreement.
enter the invoice payment transactions, will release those transactions in
FMIS. In addition, we reconcile our cash on a monthly basis.
Page 7 of 8

--- Page 28 ---
Maryland Insurance Administration
Agency Response Form
Corporate Purchasing Cards
Finding 6
Corporate purchasing cards (CPC) were not promptly cancelled for
employees who separated from MIA.
We recommend that MIA
a. promptly cancel CPCs when employees separate from MIA, including
those noted above; and
b. obtain documentation for the aforementioned unsupported charge and
take any necessary corrective action.
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 6a Agree Estimated Completion Date: February
2024
Please provide details of MIA has updated its employee exit procedures in our Human Resources
corrective action or (HR) Unit, to include the following: HR will send the Employee
explain disagreement. Transition list, which identifies any departing employees, to the
Purchasing Card Program Administrator (PCPA) in Fiscal Services. The
PCPA will then compare the Employee Transition List to the CPC
Oversight-Profile Log, which identifies all CPC holders. If, after
comparing these data sources, the PCPA determines that a departing
employee is a CPC holder, the PCPA will cancel the CPC. As a back-up
measure, HR will confirm in the final exit interview if a separating
employee has a CPC, and if so, will record the CPC details, collect the
CPC, and notify the PCPA, who will in turn terminate the CPC.
Recommendation 6b Agree Estimated Completion Date: April 2025
Please provide details of MIA has located the supporting documentation for the $1,637.97
corrective action or expense identified by the OLA. No corrective action is needed.
explain disagreement.
Page 8 of 8

--- Page 29 ---
A T
UDIT EAM
Michael J. Murdzak, CPA
Audit Manager
R. Brendan Coffey, CPA, CISA
Edwin L. Paul, CPA, CISA
Information Systems Audit Managers
Amanda M. Jones
Sandra C. Medeiros
Senior Auditors
Matthew D. Walbert, CISA
Malcolm J. Woodard
Information Systems Senior Auditors
Johanna K. Bachman
Nga T. Nguyen Simmons
Stacey D. Streett
Staff Auditors
Neha S. Tirkey
Information Systems Staff Auditor