Title: Office of the Register of Wills - Carroll County
Date: 05/30/2018
Type: Fiscal Compliance
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5b1675bb4212030e24dc4575
Extracted: 2025-06-18T22:15:43.663049
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Audit Report
Office of the Register of Wills
Carroll County, Maryland
March 2022
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Senator Clarence K. Lam, M.D. (Senate Chair) Delegate Carol L. Krimm (House Chair)
Senator Malcolm L. Augustine Delegate Steven J. Arentz
Senator Adelaide C. Eckardt Delegate Mark S. Chang
Senator George C. Edwards Delegate Nicholas P. Charles II
Senator Katie Fry Hester Delegate Andrea Fletcher Harrison
Senator Cheryl C. Kagan Delegate Trent M. Kittleman
Senator Benjamin F. Kramer Delegate David Moon
Senator Cory V. McCray Delegate Julie Palakovich Carr
Senator Justin D. Ready Delegate Elizabeth G. Proctor
Senator Craig J. Zucker Delegate Geraldine Valentino-Smith
To Obtain Further Information
Office of Legislative Audits
The Warehouse at Camden Yards
351 West Camden Street, Suite 400
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Phone: 410-946-5900
Maryland Relay: 711
TTY: 410-946-5401 ꞏ 301-970-5401
E-mail: OLAWebmaster@ola.state.md.us
Website: www.ola.state.md.us
To Report Fraud
The Office of Legislative Audits operates a Fraud Hotline to report fraud, waste, or abuse involving State
of Maryland government resources. Reports of fraud, waste, or abuse may be communicated anonymously
by a toll-free call to 1-877-FRAUD-11, by mail to the Fraud Hotline, c/o Office of Legislative Audits, or
through the Office’s website.
Nondiscrimination Statement
The Department of Legislative Services does not discriminate on the basis of age, ancestry, color, creed,
marital status, national origin, race, religion, gender, gender identity, sexual orientation, or disability in the
admission or access to its programs, services, or activities. The Department’s Information Officer has been
designated to coordinate compliance with the nondiscrimination requirements contained in Section 35.107
of the United States Department of Justice Regulations. Requests for assistance should be directed to the
Information Officer at 410-946-5400 or 410-970-5400.

--- Page 3 ---
March 23, 2022
Senator Clarence K. Lam, M.D., Senate Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Delegate Carol L. Krimm, House Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Members of Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Annapolis, Maryland
Ladies and Gentlemen:
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the Office of the Register of
Wills for Carroll County, Maryland for the period beginning March 1, 2018 and
ending December 12, 2021. The Office oversees the administration of decedents’
estates within Carroll County and assists individuals who administer estates.
Our audit disclosed the Office had not established adequate accountability and
control over its collections.
The Office’s response to this finding is included as an appendix to this report. We
reviewed the response to our finding and related recommendation, and have
concluded that the corrective actions identified are sufficient to address the audit
issues. While the Office generally agrees with the recommendation in this report,
we identified certain statements in the response that conflict with or disagree with
the report finding. In each instance, we reviewed and reassessed our audit
documentation, and reaffirmed the validity of our finding. In accordance with
generally accepted government auditing standards, we have included an “auditor’s
comment” to further explain our position.

--- Page 4 ---
We wish to acknowledge the cooperation extended to us during the audit by the
Office and its willingness to address the audit issues and implement appropriate
corrective actions.
Respectfully submitted,
Gregory A. Hook, CPA
Legislative Auditor
2

--- Page 5 ---
Background Information
Agency Responsibilities and Financial Information
The Office of the Register of Wills is a public office established under the
Constitution of Maryland. An office is established in each of the 24 Maryland
subdivisions. These offices oversee the administration of decedents’ estates
within their jurisdictions and provide assistance (such as providing the proper
forms) to individuals administering estates. The offices collect inheritance taxes
and other fees as provided by law.
Inheritance tax collections (less the commissions earned by an office on those
collections) are remitted to the State’s General Fund. The fees collected and
commissions earned by an office are first used to finance the operating expenses it
is responsible for paying directly. Generally, the remaining balance of fees and
commissions is periodically remitted to the Comptroller of Maryland to finance
other operating expenses (such as payroll) that the Comptroller pays on behalf of
the offices. On a collective basis, the offices’ fees and commissions that exceed
their operating expenses are credited to the General Fund.
According to the records of the Office of the Register of Wills for Carroll County,
its fiscal year 2021 gross receipts totaled $1,681,609, which consisted of
inheritance tax collections (net of commissions) of $1,054,544 and fees and
commissions of $627,065. The Office’s fiscal year 2021 operating expenses
totaled $782,389.
Status of Finding From Preceding Audit Report
Our audit included a review to determine the status of the finding contained in our
preceding audit report dated May 30, 2018. We determined that the Office did
not satisfactorily address this finding; therefore, it is repeated in this report.
3

--- Page 6 ---
Findings and Recommendations
Cash Receipts
Finding 1
Deposit verifications were not performed by personnel independent of the
collection process, contributing to a lack of accountability over collections.
Analysis
Deposit verifications were not performed by personnel independent of the
collection process. Specifically, the employee responsible for verifying
collections to deposit was also responsible for depositing collections to the bank
and, consequently, was not independent of the cash receipts process. According
to State records, the Office processed collections totaling approximately $1.6
million during fiscal year 2021.
As a result of this condition, errors or other discrepancies could occur without
timely detection. The Comptroller of Maryland’s Accounting Procedures Manual
requires that collections be verified to amounts deposited by an employee
independent of the collection process. A similar condition regarding access to
collections by an employee involved in the deposit verification process was
commented upon in our preceding audit report.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that an employee independent of the collection process
perform the deposit verifications (repeat). We advised the Office on
accomplishing the necessary separation of duties using existing personnel.
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the Office of the Register of
Wills for Carroll County, Maryland for the period beginning March 1, 2018 and
ending December 12, 2021. The audit was conducted in accordance with
generally accepted government auditing standards. Those standards require that
we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient, appropriate evidence to
provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit
objectives. We believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for
our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives.
4

--- Page 7 ---
As prescribed by the State Government Article, Section 2-1221 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, the objectives of this audit were to examine the Office’s
financial transactions, records, and internal control, and to evaluate its compliance
with applicable State laws, rules, and regulations.
In planning and conducting our audit, we focused on the major financial-related
areas of operations based on assessments of significance and risk. The areas
addressed by the audit included cash receipts, disbursements, bank accounts, and
administration of estates. We also determined the status of the finding contained
in our preceding audit report.
Our audit did not include a review of certain support services (such as human
resources, maintenance of accounting records, and related fiscal functions)
provided to the Office by the Comptroller of Maryland – Office of the
Comptroller. These support services are included within the scope of our audits
of the Office of the Comptroller.
Our assessment of internal controls was based on agency procedures and controls
in place at the time of our fieldwork. Our test of transactions and other auditing
procedures were generally focused on the transactions occurring during our audit
period of March 1, 2018, to December 12, 2021, but may include transactions
before or after this period, as we considered necessary to achieve our audit
objectives.
To accomplish our audit objectives, our audit procedures included inquiries of
appropriate personnel, inspections of documents and records, tests of transactions,
and to the extent practicable, observations of the Office’s operations. Generally,
transactions were selected for testing based on auditor judgment, which primarily
considers risk, the timing or dollar amount of the transaction, or the significance
of the transaction to the area of operation reviewed. As a matter of course, we do
not normally use sampling in our tests, so unless otherwise specifically indicated,
neither statistical nor non-statistical audit sampling was used to select the
transactions tested. Therefore, unless sampling is specifically indicated in a
finding, the results from any tests conducted or disclosed by us cannot be used to
project those results to the entire population from which the test items were
selected. We also performed other auditing procedures that we considered
necessary to achieve our audit objectives. The reliability of data used in this
report for background or informational purposes was not assessed.
The Office’s management is responsible for establishing and maintaining
effective internal control. Internal control is a process designed to provide
reasonable assurance that objectives pertaining to the reliability of financial
5

--- Page 8 ---
records; effectiveness and efficiency of operations, including safeguarding of
assets; and compliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations are achieved.
As provided in Government Auditing Standards, there are five components of
internal control: control environment, risk assessment, control activities,
information and communication, and monitoring. Each of the five components,
when significant to the audit objectives, and as applicable to the Office, were
considered by us during the course of this audit.
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate.
Our reports are designed to assist the Maryland General Assembly in exercising
its legislative oversight function and to provide constructive recommendations for
improving State operations. As a result, our reports generally do not address
activities we reviewed that are functioning properly.
This report includes a finding relating to a condition that we consider to be a
significant deficiency in the design or operation of internal control that could
adversely affect the Office’s ability to maintain reliable financial records, operate
effectively and efficiently, and/or comply with applicable laws, rules, and
regulations. This finding is also regarded as a significant instance of
noncompliance with applicable laws, rules, or regulations. A less significant
finding was communicated to the Office that did not warrant inclusion in this
report.
The Office’s response to our finding and recommendation is included as an
appendix to this report. As prescribed in the State Government Article, Section 2-
1224 of the Annotated Code of Maryland, we will advise the Office regarding the
results of our review of its response.
6

--- Page 9 ---
APPENDIX

--- Page 10 ---
Office of the Register of Wills – Carroll County
Agency Response Form
Cash Receipts
Finding 1
Deposit verifications were not performed by personnel independent of the collection
process, contributing to a lack of accountability over collections.
We recommend that an employee independent of the collection process perform the deposit
verifications (repeat). We advised the Office on accomplishing the necessary separation of
duties using existing personnel.
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 1 Disagree Estimated Completion Date:
Please provide details of I disagree with the Finding but I understand the rationale.
corrective action or The reason for the disagreement is that there are only two people
explain disagreement. (including myself) in the office who do not take part in the collection
process. Everyone else in the office collects money and generates
receipts. I take the Deposit to the Bank and the other person reconciles
the bank deposit slip and the deposit, prepared that morning, with the
cash/check total from the night before and the receipt journal, both
prepared the night before. The receipt journal is computer generated,
through the Register of Wills Association's proprietary software. The
suggestion from the auditor was to have the other person, who is female,
take the deposit to the Bank, only because she has the key to the locked
cabinet containing the cashbox. I am not comfortable sending her to
make the deposit because several banks up here have been robbed.
Action taken:
I have moved the key from her possession. I will continue to make the
daily deposit and she will continue to do the daily
reconciliation/verification after the return from deposit. The process that
we had been using was recommended by the previous auditor.
Auditor’s Comment: Although the Office’s response states that it disagrees with our
finding and recommendation, the proposed corrective action satisfactorily addresses our
recommendation. Regarding the reference to “the previous auditor”, we want to clarify
Page 1 of 2

--- Page 11 ---
Office of the Register of Wills – Carroll County
Agency Response Form
that our prior report recommendation was that the employee who performed the deposit
verification should not be involved in the collection process. As noted in the current
finding’s analysis, these incompatible functions were performed by the same employee;
therefore, the Office’s current process was not consistent with our prior recommendation.
Page 2 of 2

--- Page 12 ---
A T
UDIT EAM
Edward A. Rubenstein, CPA
Audit Manager
Matusala Y. Abishe
Senior Auditor