Title: Office of the Clerk of Circuit Court - Talbot County
Date: 07/02/2018
Type: Fiscal Compliance
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5b4672844212032f2035db1d
Extracted: 2025-06-18T22:16:40.572958
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Audit Report
Office of the Clerk of Circuit Court
Talbot County, Maryland
November 2022
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Senator Clarence K. Lam, M.D. (Senate Chair) Delegate Mark S. Chang (House Chair)
Senator Malcolm L. Augustine Delegate Steven J. Arentz
Senator Adelaide C. Eckardt Delegate Nicholas P. Charles II
Senator George C. Edwards Delegate Andrea Fletcher Harrison
Senator Katie Fry Hester Delegate Trent M. Kittleman
Senator Cheryl C. Kagan Delegate Carol L. Krimm
Senator Benjamin F. Kramer Delegate David Moon
Senator Cory V. McCray Delegate Julie Palakovich Carr
Senator Justin D. Ready Delegate Elizabeth G. Proctor
Senator Craig J. Zucker Delegate Geraldine Valentino-Smith
To Obtain Further Information
Office of Legislative Audits
The Warehouse at Camden Yards
351 West Camden Street, Suite 400
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Phone: 410-946-5900
Maryland Relay: 711
TTY: 410-946-5401 · 301-970-5401
E-mail: OLAWebmaster@ola.state.md.us
Website: www.ola.state.md.us
To Report Fraud
The Office of Legislative Audits operates a Fraud Hotline to report fraud, waste, or abuse involving State
of Maryland government resources. Reports of fraud, waste, or abuse may be communicated anonymously
by a toll-free call to 1-877-FRAUD-11, by mail to the Fraud Hotline, c/o Office of Legislative Audits, or
through the Office’s website.
Nondiscrimination Statement
The Department of Legislative Services does not discriminate on the basis of age, ancestry, color, creed,
marital status, national origin, race, religion, gender, gender identity, sexual orientation, or disability in the
admission or access to its programs, services, or activities. The Department’s Information Officer has been
designated to coordinate compliance with the nondiscrimination requirements contained in Section 35.107
of the United States Department of Justice Regulations. Requests for assistance should be directed to the
Information Officer at 410-946-5400 or 410-970-5400.

--- Page 3 ---
November 1, 2022
Senator Clarence K. Lam, M.D., Senate Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Delegate Mark S. Chang, House Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Members of Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Annapolis, Maryland
Ladies and Gentlemen:
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the Office of the Clerk of Circuit
Court for Talbot County, Maryland for the period beginning April 2, 2018 and
ending May 15, 2022. The Office performs various functions for the public,
including maintaining various legal records, recording certain real estate
documents, collecting related fees and taxes, and issuing certain licenses.
Our audit disclosed the Office had not established adequate control over its
collections.
Our audit also included a review to determine the status of the finding contained
in our preceding audit report. We determined that the Office satisfactorily
addressed this finding.
The Judiciary’s response to this audit, on behalf of the Office, is included as an
appendix to this report. We reviewed the response to our finding and related
recommendations, and have concluded that the corrective actions identified are
sufficient to address all audit issues. While the Office agrees with the
recommendations in this report, we identified one statement in the response
requiring an “auditor’s comment” to further explain our position.

--- Page 4 ---
We wish to acknowledge the cooperation extended to us during the audit by the
Office. We also wish to acknowledge the Judiciary’s and the Office’s willingness
to address the audit issues and implement appropriate corrective actions.
Respectfully submitted,
Gregory A. Hook, CPA
Legislative Auditor
2

--- Page 5 ---
Background Information
Agency Responsibilities
The Office performs a variety of functions for the public such as filing, docketing,
and maintaining various legal records; recording documents involving title to real
estate; collecting the related fees, commissions, and taxes; and issuing certain
licenses. In performing these functions, the Office collects funds on behalf of the
State, Talbot County and its incorporated municipalities and others, and
subsequently distributes the funds collected to the applicable entities.
Financial Information
According to the State’s accounting records, the Office’s fiscal year 2021
revenues totaled $18,369,048. These revenues were distributed in the following
manner:
• $8,386,817 was distributed to Talbot County and its incorporated
municipalities,
• $14,853 was distributed to others, and
• $9,967,378 (the remaining amount) represented revenues available to the State
for purposes specified in various provisions of State law.
The Office’s fiscal year 2021 operating expenses, which were paid primarily from
a general fund appropriation, totaled $1,129,333.
The Office also maintained custody of certain trust funds that, according to its
records, had balances totaling $43,127 as of April 30, 2022.
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report
Our audit included a review to determine the status of the finding contained in our
preceding audit report dated July 2, 2018. We determined that the Office
satisfactorily addressed this finding.
3

--- Page 6 ---
Findings and Recommendations
Cash Receipts
Finding 1
Collections were not always controlled and independently verified to
subsequent deposit.
Analysis
Collections were not always adequately controlled and independently verified to
deposit.
• Checks received by mail for land record fees were not restrictively endorsed
or immediately recorded upon receipt. Rather, mail was opened by one
employee who forwarded the checks and related correspondence to the Land
Records Unit for subsequent endorsement and recordation. According to
State records, the Office collected mail, walk-in, and online revenue related to
land record transactions totaling approximately $9.2 million in fiscal year
2021, which included payments made using cash, checks, and credit cards.
• During the period from November 2021 through June 2022 deposit
verifications were not performed by personnel independent of the collection
process. Specifically, the employee responsible for deposit verifications left
the Office in November 2021 and a replacement was not hired until June
2022. During the six-month interim, the employee responsible for preparing
the deposit also assumed the responsibility for performing the deposit
verification. According to State records, the Office deposited collections
totaling approximately $6 million between November 2021 and June 2022.
As a result of these conditions, errors or other discrepancies could occur without
timely detection. The Comptroller of Maryland’s Accounting Procedures Manual
requires that collections be restrictively endorsed and recorded immediately upon
receipt, and adequately safeguarded. The Manual also requires that collections be
verified to amounts deposited by an employee independent of the collection
process.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that the Office
a. initially record and restrictively endorse checks received in the mail
immediately upon receipt, and
4

--- Page 7 ---
b. ensure that deposit verifications are performed by an employee who does
not have access to collections.
We advised the Office on accomplishing the necessary separation of duties
using existing personnel.
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the Office of the Clerk of Circuit
Court for Talbot County, Maryland for the period beginning April 2, 2018 and
ending May 15, 2022. The audit was conducted in accordance with generally
accepted government auditing standards. Those standards require that we plan
and perform the audit to obtain sufficient, appropriate evidence to provide a
reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives.
We believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings
and conclusions based on our audit objectives.
As prescribed by the State Government Article, Section 2-1221 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, the objectives of this audit were to examine the Office’s
financial transactions, records, and internal control, and to evaluate its compliance
with applicable State laws, rules, and regulations.
In planning and conducting our audit, we focused on the major financial-related
areas of operations based on assessments of significance and risk. The areas
addressed by the audit included cash receipts (including taxes and fees collected
for real estate transactions), certain payroll activities, and bank accounts. We also
determined the status of the finding contained in our preceding audit report.
Our audit did not include a review of certain support services provided to the
Office by the Administrative Office of the Courts. These support services (such
as human resources and payroll activities, invoice processing, and maintenance of
budgetary accounting records) are included within the scope of our audits of the
Judiciary.
Our assessment of internal controls was based on agency procedures and controls
in place at the time of our fieldwork. Our tests of transactions and other auditing
procedures were generally focused on the transactions occurring during our audit
period of April 2, 2018 to May 15, 2022, but may include transactions before or
after this period as we considered necessary to achieve our audit objectives.
5

--- Page 8 ---
To accomplish our audit objectives, our audit procedures included inquiries of
appropriate personnel, inspections of documents and records, tests of transactions,
and to the extent practicable, observations of the Office’s operations. Generally,
transactions were selected for testing based on auditor judgment, which primarily
considers risk, the timing or dollar amount of the transaction, or the significance
of the transaction to the area of operation reviewed. As a matter of course, we do
not normally use sampling in our tests, so unless otherwise specifically indicated,
neither statistical nor non-statistical audit sampling was used to select the
transactions tested. Therefore, unless sampling is specifically indicated in a
finding, the results from any tests conducted or disclosed by us cannot be used to
project those results to the entire population from which the test items were
selected. We also performed other auditing procedures that we considered
necessary to achieve our audit objectives. The reliability of data used in this
report for background or informational purposes was not assessed.
The Office’s management is responsible for establishing and maintaining
effective internal control. Internal control is a process designed to provide
reasonable assurance that objectives pertaining to the reliability of financial
records; effectiveness and efficiency of operations, including safeguarding of
assets; and compliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations are achieved.
As provided in Government Auditing Standards, there are five components of
internal control: control environment, risk assessment, control activities,
information and communication, and monitoring. Each of the five components,
when significant to the audit objectives, and as applicable to the Office, were
considered by us during the course of this audit.
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate.
Our reports are designed to assist the Maryland General Assembly in exercising
its legislative oversight function and to provide constructive recommendations for
improving State operations. As a result, our reports generally do not address
activities we reviewed that are functioning properly.
This report includes a finding relating to a condition that we consider to be a
significant deficiency in the design or operation of internal control that could
adversely affect the Office’s ability to maintain reliable financial records, operate
effectively and efficiently, and/or comply with applicable laws, rules, and
regulations. This finding is also regarded as a significant instance of
noncompliance with applicable laws, rules, or regulations.
6

--- Page 9 ---
The response from the Judiciary, on behalf of the Office, to our finding and
recommendations is included as an appendix to this report. As prescribed in the
State Government Article, Section 2-1224 of the Annotated Code of Maryland,
we will advise the Judiciary regarding the results of our review of its response.
7

--- Page 10 ---
APPENDIX

--- Page 11 ---
Office of the Clerk of Circuit Court
Talbot County, Maryland
Agency Response Form
Cash Receipts
Finding 1
Collections were not always controlled and independently verified to subsequent deposit.
We recommend that the Office
a. initially record and restrictively endorse checks received in the mail immediately upon
receipt, and
b. ensure that deposit verifications are performed by an employee who does not have
access to collections.
We advised the Office on accomplishing the necessary separation of duties using existing
personnel.
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide I would state that the dollar amount of checks at risk, which would have
additional comments as been opened by the Clerk of Circuit Court (not just “an employee”), is
deemed necessary. much lower than the $9.2 million stated. Fees that would come in the
mail would be recording fees for Releases and other non-taxable
documents. The amount at risk by having been opened by the Clerk and
delivered directly to Land Records staff would likely be less than
$125,000 for the year.
Auditor’s Comment: The Clerk’s response to the analysis includes a statement that the
amount of cash receipts at risk “would likely be less than $125,000 for the year”. We
acknowledge that the $9.2 million cited in the finding includes funds collected from all
sources, including credit cards, but since the Clerk’s records did not segregate or
differentiate between sources of revenue, we were unable to reasonably estimate the
dollar amount at risk and agree that would be less than the $9.2 million.
Recommendation 1a Agree Estimated Completion Date: 9/2/2022
Please provide details of Mail will now only be opened by the person responsible for processing
corrective action or the work. It will be processed right after opening and will be rang up in
explain disagreement. the cash register system so that the endorsement is placed on the check
immediately after processing. This process was confirmed to be
adequate with the Audit Manager.
Page 1 of 2

--- Page 12 ---
Office of the Clerk of Circuit Court
Talbot County, Maryland
Agency Response Form
Recommendation 1b Agree Estimated Completion Date: 9/2/2022
Please provide details of We hired a Fiscal Clerk in June of 2022, who facilitates recording of the
corrective action or collections and prepares the deposit. The Clerk, or Chief Deputy in her
explain disagreement. absence is now the independent verifier of the collections to the deposit.
Page 2 of 2

--- Page 13 ---
A T
UDIT EAM
Heather A. Warriner, CPA
Audit Manager
Marina I. Bulatova
Senior Auditor
Brian M. Webbert
Staff Auditor