Title: Department of Human Services - Baltimore City Department of Social Services - Allegation Related to Possible Violations of State Procurement Regulations and Certain Payments Made to a Nonprofit Organization
Date: 07/11/2018
Type: Fraud, Waste, and Abuse
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5b4e1a88421203272019197e
Extracted: 2025-06-18T22:17:16.040621
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Special Review
Department of Human Services
Baltimore City Department of Social Services
Allegation Related to Possible Violations of State Procurement Regulations and
Certain Payments Made to a Nonprofit Organization
July 2018
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
For further information concerning this report contact:
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
301 West Preston Street, Room 1202
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Phone: 410-946-5900 · 301-970-5900
Toll Free in Maryland: 1-877-486-9964
Maryland Relay: 711
TTY: 410-946-5401 · 301-970-5401
E-mail: OLAWebmaster@ola.state.md.us
Website: www.ola.state.md.us
The Office of Legislative Audits operates a Fraud Hotline to report fraud, waste, or abuse
involving State of Maryland government resources. Reports of fraud, waste, or abuse
may be communicated anonymously by a toll-free call to 1-877-FRAUD-11, by mail to the
Fraud Hotline, c/o Office of Legislative Audits, or through the Office’s website.
The Department of Legislative Services does not discriminate on the basis of age, ancestry, color,
creed, marital status, national origin, race, religion, gender, gender identity, sexual orientation,
or disability in the admission or access to its programs, services, or activities. The Department’s
Information Officer has been designated to coordinate compliance with the nondiscrimination
requirements contained in Section 35.107 of the Department of Justice Regulations. Requests for
assistance should be directed to the Information Officer at 410-946-5400 or 410-970-5400.

--- Page 5 ---
Table of Contents
Scope, Objectives, and Methodology 4
Background Information 6
Agency Responsibilities 6
Overview 6
Findings and Recommendations 8
Questionable Disbursement
Finding 1 – A former Baltimore City Department of Social Services 8
(BCDSS) management employee directed a nonprofit organization to
invoice BCDSS $500,000 for a cancelled project on which no work
had been performed. This employee also subsequently authorized the
related payment.
Questionable Use of Agreements
Finding 2 – A former BCDSS management employee circumvented State 9
procurement regulations by directing a nonprofit organization to
contract with and pay an out-of-state vendor for work unrelated to its
agreements with the nonprofit organization. Some of the related
payments appeared questionable.
Agreement Oversight
Finding 3 – BCDSS lacked sufficient procedures over the execution, use, 12
and monitoring of two agreements with the nonprofit organization.
Agency Response Appendix
3

--- Page 6 ---
Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We conducted a review of an allegation received through our fraud, waste, and
abuse hotline regarding the Department of Human Services (DHS) – Baltimore
City Department of Social Services (BCDSS). The allegation related to possible
violations of State laws, regulations, and policies by a former BCDSS
management employee and a nonprofit organization that received funds from
BCDSS primarily to provide services to parents of children in foster care. The
BCDSS management employee resigned prior to the start of our review.
The purpose of our review was to determine whether the allegation we received
was valid and to determine if the related activities violated State laws, regulations,
and policies. This review was performed in accordance with State Government
Article, Section 2-1220 of the Annotated Code of Maryland.
BCDSS has had a longstanding relationship with the nonprofit organization dating
back to at least 2009. BCDSS had five active agreements covering the period
from July 1, 2014 through June 30, 2019, with the nonprofit organization with
terms of one to five years and a combined value of approximately $12.6 million,
as reflected in Table 1. The agreements
generally provided that the nonprofit
organization was to provide services (such as,
substance abuse treatment) to parents of
children in foster care.
The scope of our review included the three
agreements for which payments totaling
approximately $7 million had been made as of
December 2017. This review included
payments made by the nonprofit organization
to an out-of-state vendor under one of these agreements. Because of the
questionable nature of these payments, we expanded the scope of our review to
include payments made to this out-of-state vendor under another agreement
between BCDSS and the nonprofit, valued at $8.3 million, which ended in June
2014. Payments to the out-of-state vendor totaled $1.3 million under both
agreements.
Our review consisted of tests, analyses, observations, and discussions with
BCDSS personnel and others, as we deemed necessary, to achieve our objectives.
The results of our review of the allegation are identified in Findings 1 and 2. Our
review also identified issues with the execution, use, and monitoring of the
agreements with the nonprofit organization, which are identified in Finding 3.
4

--- Page 7 ---
Our review did not constitute an audit conducted in accordance with generally
accepted government auditing standards. Our review was conducted during the
period from October through December 2017.
The response from DHS, on behalf of BCDSS, to our findings and
recommendations is included as an appendix to this report. As prescribed in State
Government Article, Section 2-1224 of the Annotated Code of Maryland, we will
advise DHS regarding the results of our review of its response.
5

--- Page 8 ---
Background Information
Agency Responsibilities
The Department of Human Services (DHS) – Baltimore City Department of
Social Services (BCDSS) is one of the State’s 24 local departments of social
services. BCDSS administers activities under policies promulgated by other units
within DHS. These activities include administering public assistance programs,
such as the Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program (formally the food stamp
program) and Temporary Cash Assistance, as well as services for adoption, foster
care, and child protection. BCDSS also works with local organizations (including
nonprofit organizations) to implement programs and provide support services to
children and families in their communities, including education and training
programs, transitional housing, and drug and alcohol rehabilitation programs.
According to the State’s records, BCDSS operating expenditures totaled $175.4
million for fiscal year 2017, of which $134.2 million was for employee salaries
and benefits and $41.2 million was for its remaining operating expenditures.
These expenditures exclude funds disbursed to BCDSS clients under public
assistance programs.
Overview
The hotline allegation we received pertained to a former BCDSS management
employee and a nonprofit organization. BCDSS had five agreements with the
nonprofit that were executed by the former BCDSS management employee. The
agreements had terms of one to five years for various periods from July 2014
through June 2019 with a combined value of $12.6 million. According to State
records, as of December 2017, BCDSS made payments totaling approximately $7
million on three of these agreements; no payments had been made under the two
other agreements valued at $2.5 million.
As a result of our review, we identified certain questionable matters as described
in the findings which follow. Consequently, we referred these matters to the
Office of the Attorney General – Criminal Division, which subsequently referred
the matter to the Office of the State Prosecutor. We also identified possible
violations of State ethics law that may require referral to the State Ethics
Commission, as well as poor grant administration procedures and controls that
require corrective action by BCDSS.
BCDSS should consult with the Office of the State Prosecutor before taking any
actions related to the findings contained in this report. A referral to the Criminal
6

--- Page 9 ---
Division or the Office of the State Prosecutor does not mean that a criminal act
has actually occurred or that criminal charges will be filed.
7

--- Page 10 ---
Findings and Recommendations
Questionable Disbursement
Finding 1
A former Baltimore City Department of Social Services (BCDSS)
management employee directed a nonprofit organization to invoice BCDSS
$500,000 for a cancelled project on which no work had been performed. This
employee also subsequently authorized the related payment.
Analysis
A former Baltimore City Department of Social Services (BCDSS) management
employee directed a nonprofit organization to invoice BCDSS $500,000 for a
cancelled project on which no work had been performed. This employee then
authorized BCDSS to make the related payment to the nonprofit. The project
related to a June 2016 one-year $500,000 agreement with the nonprofit
organization (agreement 3 in Table 1), funded equally by general and federal
funds, to (1) renovate a former Baltimore City school that was to be acquired
from Baltimore City for a foster care program, and (2) implement a plan to
expand the services provided by this foster care program. The agreement
provided that the nonprofit was to be reimbursed for expenses incurred, including
$290,000 for building renovations and equipment, $165,000 for program
implementation costs, and $45,000 for administrative costs.
For reasons unknown to current BCDSS management, on September 14, 2016, the
former BCDSS management employee withdrew BCDSS’ application to obtain
the school building, prior to any work being performed by the nonprofit
organization. Nevertheless, we were informed by the nonprofit organization that
the former BCDSS management employee directed it to invoice BCDSS for the
entire $500,000 in a lump sum. The BCDSS management employee approved the
payment of the invoice on September 30, 2016 even though the nonprofit had not
incurred any costs to warrant a payment or to justify the receipt of the funds.
The actions of the former BCDSS management employee raise serious questions
regarding the intended use of the funds, since the agreed-upon services could not
be performed without the acquisition of the school building. The nonprofit
organization’s management advised us that it was not informed that BCDSS had
withdrawn its proposal to acquire the building until after the invoice had been
paid, and that it retained the funds in its bank account while awaiting instructions
from BCDSS on how the funds were to be expended.
8

--- Page 11 ---
The nonprofit organization was still in possession of the funds when we began our
review in October 2017. Current BCDSS management personnel were aware of
the funds and advised us that they intended to authorize the nonprofit to use the
funds for other initiatives, allowing the nonprofit to retain these funds until they
were used. We subsequently brought this matter to the attention of Department of
Human Services (DHS) management personnel in November 2017 and DHS
recovered the funds in December 2017.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that BCDSS discontinue making payments without ensuring
that the related services have been provided.
Questionable Use of Agreements
Finding 2
A former BCDSS management employee circumvented State procurement
regulations by directing a nonprofit organization to contract with and pay an
out-of-state vendor for work unrelated to its agreements with the nonprofit.
Associated payments to the vendor totaled $1.3 million, some of which
appeared questionable.
Analysis
A former BCDSS management employee circumvented State procurement
regulations by directing the nonprofit organization to contract with and pay an
out-of-state vendor for work unrelated to its agreements with the nonprofit
organization. In addition, certain payments to the vendor appeared questionable.
The services of the out-of-state vendor were obtained under two $8 million
agreements with the nonprofit organization for the period from July 2009 through
June 2019 (agreement 1 in Table 1 and a similar preceding agreement). The
agreements provided that the nonprofit was to provide services to parents (such
as, substance abuse treatment) to help reduce the time that children were in foster
care. As of December 2017, BCDSS had paid the nonprofit $1.3 million for the
out-of-state vendor’s charges under these agreements.
Circumvention of State Procurement Regulations
The former BCDSS management employee directed the nonprofit organization to
contract with and pay an out-of-state vendor under two agreements for unrelated
work. The nonprofit entered into annual contracts with the vendor under these
agreements as directed by the former BCDSS management employee. The owner
and sole employee of this vendor was a previous coworker of the former BCDSS
management employee.
9

--- Page 12 ---
The work performed by the out-of-state vendor was unrelated to the purpose of
the two agreements. Both agreements generally provided that the nonprofit
organization was to provide services to parents (such as, substance abuse
treatment) to help reduce the time that children were in foster care. Management
of the nonprofit advised us that the out-of-state vendor worked directly for the
former BCDSS management employee who directed and monitored the vendor’s
work. Specifically, the majority of the amounts invoiced by the out-of-state
vendor related to labor charges for generating certain reports and providing
technical support directly to BCDSS. In addition, certain of these tasks were
administrative in nature. For example, two of the vendor’s invoices included
charges totaling $4,935 for work performed to analyze BCDSS position
vacancies, and another invoice included charges for work performed to update
BCDSS email and phone listings. The out-of-state vendor submitted its invoices
to the nonprofit which paid the invoices without any review or direct knowledge
of the work performed. The nonprofit then incorporated the out-of-state vendor’s
charges into the invoices it submitted to BCDSS for payment.
The former BCDSS management employee’s control of the selection, work
duties, and oversight of the vendor, and the fact that the work performed was
unrelated to the agreements raise questions as to the propriety of using these
agreements to obtain these services. Because the vendor’s services were procured
in this manner, BCDSS did not use a competitive procurement process, which is
otherwise mandated by State Procurement Regulations for service procurements
greater than $25,000. Accordingly, assurance was lacking that these services
were obtained at the most advantageous prices to the State.
Questionable Contract Terms and Payment Structure and Lack of Deliverables
The contracts provided that the nonprofit would pay the out-of-state vendor up to
$125,000 per year for fiscal years 2010 through 2013. This included an hourly
rate of $75 and reimbursement for expenses (such as hotel and travel) up to
$15,000 per year. For fiscal years 2014 through 2017, the contract values were
increased, at the direction of the former BCDSS management employee, to a
maximum of $175,000 per year, including an hourly rate to $105 and an annual
expense allowance of $20,000.
There was no documentation to support either the initial rates paid to the vendor
or the subsequent increase. In addition, there was no record of the specific tasks
assigned to the out-of-state vendor and the anticipated level of effort (such as the
number of hours needed for each task.)
Finally, current BCDSS management could not confirm or document the specific
services or work products (for example, analysis of vacant positions) provided by
10

--- Page 13 ---
the out-of-state vendor to support the hours charged. While we were able to
locate certain reports and correspondence indicating that some work was
performed, BCDSS had no assurance that the amounts paid were commensurate
with the services performed.
Questionable Purchases
During the period between March 2014 and January 2017, the out-of-state vendor
submitted six invoices to the nonprofit (ultimately paid by BCDSS) that included
questionable purchases of electronic equipment (such as computer tablets)
totaling approximately $22,100. Our review disclosed that the purchases
appeared to have been for the personal use of the former BCDSS management
employee or were given by this employee to others as gifts. Specifically,
although the payments were approved by the contract monitor, we noted the
following conditions:
 All the purchases were shipped to or picked up directly by the former BCDSS
management employee. One purchase was shipped to the employee’s home,
four were shipped to the employee’s work address, and one was picked up at
the store.
 Three tablets were engraved with the former management employee’s name,
one was engraved with what appeared to be the initials of the former
management employee’s close relative, and 10 were engraved with the names
of other BCDSS employees. We spoke with three current BCDSS
management employees whose names were engraved on the tablets. Each
employee individually advised us that the former BCDSS management
employee provided the tablets to them and the other employees as gifts for
their personal use.
 The purchases were not recorded on the equipment inventory listing
maintained by the Department of Human Services on behalf of BCDSS.
Current BCDSS management personnel, certain of which were recipients of these
tablets, advised us that they believed that the tablets were purchased with non-
state funds. However, they could not provide any support for this assertion and,
based on our review, the purchases were paid for with State funds. We were
unable to determine the location of all of the electronic equipment.
11

--- Page 14 ---
Possible Ethics Violation
Legal counsel for the State Ethics Commission advised us that the former BCDSS
management employee’s influence over the nonprofit organization to contract
with and pay the out-of-state vendor, as well as the subsequent receipt of the
aforementioned electronic equipment, could potentially violate several conflict of
interest provisions of State Ethics Laws. Any final decision related to violations
of the State Ethics Laws would ultimately be determined by the State Ethics
Commission.
Termination of Contract
The extent to which current BCDSS management was aware of the
aforementioned conditions was unclear. Nevertheless, on October 25, 2017,
BCDSS management directed the nonprofit to terminate its contract with the out-
of-state vendor because the services could be obtained using existing BCDSS
employees. The nonprofit organization terminated its contract with the out-of-
state vendor effective December 31, 2017.
Recommendation 2
We recommend that BCDSS
a. discontinue using existing agreements to procure unrelated services;
b. ensure goods and services are competitively procured in accordance with
State Procurement Regulations;
c. document the specific tasks assigned under the contract and only pay
invoices after ensuring agreed-upon goods and services were received;
d. after consultation with the Office of the State Prosecutor, refer this
matter to the State Ethics Commission; and
e. locate the electronic equipment and review all payments to the vendor for
propriety after consulting with the State Prosecutor and the Commission.
Agreement Oversight
Finding 3
BCDSS lacked sufficient procedures over the execution, use, and monitoring
of two agreements with the nonprofit organization.
Analysis
BCDSS lacked sufficient procedures and accountability over two agreements.
Our review of procedures and controls for two of the agreements with the
nonprofit organization valued at $9.6 million (agreements 1 and 2 in Table 1)
disclosed the following conditions:
12

--- Page 15 ---
 BCDSS did not independently verify that funds paid under these agreements
were consistent with the approved budgets. Our test of 22 disbursements
totaling $5.5 million related to these agreements (excluding disbursements to
the out-of-state vendor commented upon in Finding 2) disclosed that BCDSS
did not obtain sufficient supporting documentation for any of the payments.
The agreements required the nonprofit to provide expenditure reports with
each invoice indicating the total spent under each of the approved budget line
items. However, BCDSS did not require the nonprofit to provide supporting
documentation, including subcontractor billings, support for labor charges,
and receipts for supply purchases, so that the expenditure reports could be
verified by BCDSS. In all cases, the invoices had been approved by the
contract monitor.
For example, on the June 2017 invoice for $440,000, payments to
subcontractors totaled approximately $364,000. BCDSS did not obtain
supporting documentation for any of these charges.
 BCDSS did not ensure that the nonprofit was providing the agreed-upon
services consistent with the purposes of the agreements. For example, under
one agreement, the nonprofit was to provide emergency support services to 75
families whose children were at risk for entering foster care. Under another
agreement, the nonprofit was to provide substance abuse treatment and
supportive housing to families whose children had been placed in foster care.
BCDSS did not monitor receipt of activity reports (such as reports of the
number of individuals served) required to be submitted by the nonprofit to
substantiate that these services were being provided. Our test of the two
agreements disclosed that none of the 87 activity reports required to be
submitted through September 2017 were on file with BCDSS.
 BCDSS did not execute one of the agreements valued at approximately $1.6
million until approximately nine months after the start of the agreement.
Although the terms of the agreement began on July 1, 2014, the agreement
was not formally executed by BCDSS until April 13, 2015. BCDSS
subsequently approved a $260,000 payment in May 2015, for work the
nonprofit performed prior to execution of the agreement. The Department of
Human Services’ Administrative Procedures Manual requires fully approved
and executed agreements prior to the commencement of services.
 BCDSS paid the nonprofit for work performed by employees who were not
identified in one of the agreements. Our review of fiscal years 2016 and 2017
invoices under this agreement disclosed that the nonprofit paid labor charges,
totaling $52,500, for three individuals who were not included in the
13

--- Page 16 ---
agreement’s approved budget. (Total payments during this timeframe under
this agreement were $1.3 million.) The agreement allowed for changes in
personnel if the changes were approved by BCDSS; however, BCDSS could
not provide any documentation that it approved the use of these employees to
perform work related to the agreement.
Recommendation 3
We recommend that BCDSS
a. obtain documentation to independently verify the propriety of all past
and future payments to the nonprofit, and recover any improper
payments identified;
b. ensure that contractually obligated services are provided and all required
reports are submitted, including the missing reports noted above;
c. ensure that agreements are executed prior to the commencement of
services; and
d. ensure that all personnel changes have been approved prior to payment
for these related services.
14

--- Page 18 ---
Larry Hogan, Governor | Boyd K. Rutherford, Lt. Governor | Lourdes R. Padilla, Secretary
DHS AND BCDSS RESPONSE TO OLA REPORT ON
BALTIMORE CITY DEPARTMENT OF SOCIAL SERVICES
The Department of Human Services (DHS) and Baltimore City Department of Social Services
(BCDSS) takes audit findings very seriously. We seek to operate with the highest level of
integrity and prudent fiscal management. Since receiving the preliminary discussion notes from
the Office of Legislative Audits (OLA) and as recommended by OLA, DHS leadership has been
in contact with the Office of the State Prosecutor (OSP), and based on recent conversations with
the OSP, DHS is now prepared to move forward on the proposed actions in this response.
Nevertheless, as the activities of OSP related to this matter are ongoing, the DHS and BCDSS
response to the OLA findings and recommendations is preliminary.
At this time, we are not contesting any of the factual assertions or conclusions presented in the
OLA review; however, our internal review of this matter is ongoing. Should the DHS/BCDSS
internal review suggest a material issue with or need for clarification of the OLA finding, we will
notify you and update our response.
FINDING 1
A former Baltimore City Department of Social Services (BCSS) management employee directed a
nonprofit organization to invoice BCDSS $500,000 for a cancelled project on which no work had
been performed. This employee also subsequently authorized the related payment.
Recommendation 1
Baltimore City Department of Social Services [should] discontinue making payments
without ensuring that related services have been provided.
Response to Recommendation:
We concur with this recommendation. We will ensure that payments will be
made in accordance with the terms and conditions of the grant, contract, or
agreement and that related services have been provided. As noted, the
Department has already recovered the $500,000 from the nonprofit.
BCDSS will conform to and comply with established and applicable federal and
state laws, regulations, policies, and procedures regarding procurement, including
those related to contract rates and invoicing.
BCDSS will review all of its significant ($100,000 or greater) existing contracts
and grant agreements to ensure that payments have been made based on
confirmation of completion of services and receipt of deliverables. The review of
311 W. Saratoga Street, Baltimore, MD 21201‐3500 | Tel: 1‐800‐332‐6347 | TTY1‐800‐735‐2258 | www.dhs.maryland.gov

--- Page 19 ---
DHS & BCDSS Response to OLA’s BCDSS Review
July 3, 2018
Page 2
the nonprofit organization’s contracts and grants will be completed by August 1,
2018, and the review of all other contracts and grants will be completed by
October 1, 2018.
We are reviewing the business process regarding invoice review, approval, and
payment to ensure appropriate controls are in place to prevent this situation from
reoccurring in the future. We anticipate this review will be completed and, to the
extent necessary, new processes established by September 1, 2018.
To make certain that staff appropriately discharge their duty to ensure that
payments are not made until it is confirmed that the related services have been
provided, all executive and management staff will received ethics training. This
training for BCDSS executive leadership and key procurement and finance staff
will be completed by August 1, 2018, with all BCDSS management staff
receiving training by October 1, 2018; other units of DHS will receive training by
the end of state fiscal year 2019.
Likewise, to re-enforce the importance of operational integrity and ethics, the job
definitions (MS-22s) of the executive and management staff at BCDSS will be
updated by August 1, 2018 to include this job duty:
“Conduct operations ethically; adhere to compliance requirements;
provide discipline and structure that influences the staff awareness
of and respect for operational controls.”
The job descriptions for executive and management staff at DHS central and in
other jurisdictions will be updated on a rolling basis in conjunction with regular
job performance reviews; all job descriptions will be updated by the end of
December, 2018.
311 W. Saratoga Street, Baltimore, MD 21201‐3500 | Tel: 1‐800‐332‐6347 | TTY1‐800‐735‐2258 | www.dhs.maryland.gov

--- Page 20 ---
DHS & BCDSS Response to OLA’s BCDSS Review
July 3, 2018
Page 3
FINDING 2
A former BCDSS management employee circumvented State procurement regulations by
directing a nonprofit to contract with and pay an out-of-state vendor for work unrelated to its
agreements with the nonprofit.
Recommendation 2
Baltimore City Department of Social Services should:
a. Discontinue using existing agreements to procure unrelated services.
Response: We concur with this recommendation. BCDSS will conform to and comply with
established and applicable federal and state laws, regulations, policies, and
procedures regarding procurement, including those related to contract rates and
invoicing. It is our understanding that the nonprofit has terminated the
contractual relationship with the out-of-state vendor discussed in this finding.
BCDSS will review all other existing grants and similar agreements to ensure that
there is no inappropriate subcontracting or other practices which circumvent the
applicable state procurement procedures. This review of contracts should be
completed by September 2018.
b. Ensure that goods and services are competitively procured in accordance with state
procurement regulations.
Response: We concur with this recommendation. BCDSS will conform to and comply with
established and applicable federal and state laws, regulations, policies, and
procedures regarding procurement, including those related to contract rates and
invoicing. In particular, BCDSS will ensure that grants, contracts, and similar
agreements are appropriately focused with regards to the goods or services and
that the scope of work and deliverables are clear and reflect the agreement’s
stated purpose.
To enforce state procurement regulations regarding competition and agreements
for specified services, executive and management staff will receive procurement
training. This training will be completed for BCDSS by September 1, 2018, and
for other jurisdictions by the end of the state fiscal year.
311 W. Saratoga Street, Baltimore, MD 21201‐3500 | Tel: 1‐800‐332‐6347 | TTY1‐800‐735‐2258 | www.dhs.maryland.gov

--- Page 21 ---
DHS & BCDSS Response to OLA’s BCDSS Review
July 3, 2018
Page 4
c. Document the specific tasks assigned under the contract and only pay invoices after
ensuring agreed-upon goods and services were received.
Response: We concur with this recommendation. BCDSS will conform to and comply with
established and applicable federal and state laws, regulations, policies, and
procedures regarding procurement, including those related to contract rates and
invoicing.
For all new contracts and grants issued, specific tasks or deliverables will be
defined through contract or task order (consistent with the nature of the
agreement), and prior to payment invoices will be reviewed against the
established terms and deliverables to ensure that agreed upon goods and services
were received.
d. After consultation with the Office of the State Prosecutor, refer this matter to the
State Ethics Commission.
Response: We concur with this recommendation. We have been in in contact with the State
Ethics Commission and will take appropriate actions based on their guidance.
e. Locate the electronic equipment and review all payments to the vendor for
propriety after consultation with the State Prosecutor and the Commission.
Response: We concur with this recommendation. BCDSS has located the electronic
equipment that is in the possession of current BCDSS employees. This
equipment is now appropriately tagged and included in the state inventory, and in
accordance with state and DHS policy this equipment will only be used for
official state business.
BCDSS will work with the nonprofit organization to review all payments made to
the out-of-state vendor under this and all other active grants between BCDSS and
the nonprofit. This review will be completed by August 1, 2018.
311 W. Saratoga Street, Baltimore, MD 21201‐3500 | Tel: 1‐800‐332‐6347 | TTY1‐800‐735‐2258 | www.dhs.maryland.gov

--- Page 22 ---
DHS & BCDSS Response to OLA’s BCDSS Review
July 3, 2018
Page 5
FINDING 3
BCDSS lacked sufficient procedures over the execution, use, and monitoring of two agreements
with the nonprofit organization.
Recommendation 3
a. Obtain documentation to independently verify the propriety of past and future
payments to the nonprofit and recover any improper payments identified.
Response: We concur with this recommendation. BCDSS will review all of the payments
made to the nonprofit under these agreements and the evidence submitted with
invoices to determine whether adequate documentation was presented in
accordance with the terms of the agreement and state policy to verify the
expenditure reports. This review should be completed by August 1, 2018.
To the extent that the documentation was insufficient, BCDSS will make
reasonable efforts to obtain the supporting documentation from the nonprofit. If
any improper payments are identified, BCDSS will take appropriate steps to
recover those funds. BCDSS will also ensure that appropriate supporting
documentation is provided by the nonprofit prior to any future payments.
b. Ensure that contractually obligated services are provided and all required reports
are submitted, including the missing reports noted above.
Response: We concur with this recommendation. BCDSS will actively monitor that
intended services are being provided under these grant agreements and that the
required activity reports are submitted by the nonprofit and reviewed and
maintained on file by BCDSS.
Further BCDSS make all reasonable efforts to obtain the missing past activity
reports from the nonprofit. Should this prove impractical, BCDSS will seek other
evidence from the nonprofit to demonstrate that intended services were provided.
The request for missing activity reports will be made by August 1, 2018.
311 W. Saratoga Street, Baltimore, MD 21201‐3500 | Tel: 1‐800‐332‐6347 | TTY1‐800‐735‐2258 | www.dhs.maryland.gov

--- Page 23 ---
DHS & BCDSS Response to OLA’s BCDSS Review
July 3, 2018
Page 6
c. Ensure that the agreements are executed prior to the commencement of services.
Response: BCDSS will conform to and comply with established and applicable federal and
state laws, regulations, policies, and procedures regarding procurement, including
those related to contract rates and invoicing. DHS will review (and if necessary,
update) its Administrative Procedures Manual to ensure it is consistent with State
procurement policy. This review should be completed by September 1, 2018.
BCDSS will establish an agency forecast for contracts and procurements,
including timelines, to better manage the awarding to grants and provision of
services. This forecast document should be completed by August 15, 2018.
d. Ensure that all personnel changes have been approved prior to payment for related
services.
Response: We concur with this recommendation. Consistent with the terms of these
agreements, BCDSS will require that any material personnel changes are
approved by BCDSS prior to payment by BCDSS for related services. Likewise,
for all new grants or contracts (or consistent with the terms of existing
agreements, should such terms exist), BCDSS will require that any material
changes related to personnel be formally approved prior to the payment of any
invoice related to that personnel.
311 W. Saratoga Street, Baltimore, MD 21201‐3500 | Tel: 1‐800‐332‐6347 | TTY1‐800‐735‐2258 | www.dhs.maryland.gov