Title: Queen Anne's County Public Schools
Date: 08/01/2018
Type: Local School Systems
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5b6afd284212030cecbf405c
Extracted: 2025-06-18T22:18:16.384012
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Financial Management Practices Audit Report
Queen Anne’s County Public Schools
November 2024
Public Notice
In compliance with the requirements of the State Government Article Section
2-1224(i), of the Annotated Code of Maryland, the Office of Legislative Audits
has redacted cybersecurity findings and related auditee responses
from this public report.
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Senator Clarence K. Lam, M.D. (Senate Chair) Delegate Jared Solomon (House Chair)
Senator Joanne C. Benson Delegate Steven J. Arentz
Senator Paul D. Corderman Delegate Andrea Fletcher Harrison
Senator Katie Fry Hester Delegate Steven C. Johnson
Senator Shelly L. Hettleman Delegate Mary A. Lehman
Senator Cheryl C. Kagan Delegate David H. Moon
Senator Cory V. McCray Delegate Julie Palakovich Carr
Senator Justin D. Ready Delegate Emily K. Shetty
Senator Bryan W. Simonaire Delegate Stephanie M. Smith
Senator Craig J. Zucker Delegate M. Courtney Watson
To Obtain Further Information
Office of Legislative Audits
The Warehouse at Camden Yards
351 West Camden Street, Suite 400
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Phone: 410-946-5900
Maryland Relay: 711
TTY: 410-946-5401 ꞏ 301-970-5401
E-mail: webmaster@ola.state.md.us
Website: www.ola.state.md.us
To Report Fraud
The Office of Legislative Audits operates a Fraud Hotline to report fraud, waste, or abuse involving State
of Maryland government resources. Reports of fraud, waste, or abuse may be communicated anonymously
by a toll-free call to 1-877-FRAUD-11, by mail to the Fraud Hotline, c/o Office of Legislative Audits, or
through the Office’s website.
Nondiscrimination Statement
The Department of Legislative Services does not discriminate on the basis of age, ancestry, color, creed,
marital status, national origin, race, religion, gender, gender identity, sexual orientation, or disability in the
admission or access to its programs, services, or activities. The Department’s Information Officer has been
designated to coordinate compliance with the nondiscrimination requirements contained in Section 35.107
of the United States Department of Justice Regulations. Requests for assistance should be directed to the
Information Officer at 410-946-5400 or 410-970-5400.

--- Page 3 ---
November 22, 2024
Senator Clarence K. Lam, M.D., Senate Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Delegate Jared Solomon, House Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Members of Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Annapolis, Maryland
Ladies and Gentlemen:
We conducted an audit of the financial management practices of the Queen
Anne’s County Public Schools (QACPS) in accordance with the requirements of
the State Government Article, Section 2-1220(e) of the Annotated Code of
Maryland. The objectives of this audit were to evaluate whether QACPS’
procedures and controls were effective in accounting for and safeguarding its
assets and whether its policies provided for the efficient use of financial
resources.
Our audit disclosed that QACPS’ procurement policies were not sufficiently
comprehensive and were not always consistently used when obtaining goods and
services under intergovernmental cooperative purchasing agreements. In
addition, purchase orders were not always prepared and approved prior to
obtaining the related goods or services. QACPS also awarded a sole source
contract for a school bus safety camera system instead of conducting a
competitive procurement. We also noted that certain components of the payments
to bus contractors could not be supported and QACPS did not require its food
service management service contractor to provide support for reimbursable food
and labor cost.
Our audit also disclosed that QACPS needs to improve internal controls and
accountability in several areas, including payroll processing, equipment
inventory, and health care services. For example, QACPS did not obtain Board
approval for certain executive level employees as required by State law.
Additionally, QACPS did not audit or adequately monitor the performance of its
third-party administrator that provides health care claims processing services.

--- Page 4 ---
Furthermore, our audit disclosed cybersecurity-related findings. However, in
accordance with the State Government Article, Section 2-1224(i) of the
Annotated Code of Maryland, we have redacted the findings from this audit
report. Specifically, State law requires the Office of Legislative Audits to redact
cybersecurity findings in a manner consistent with auditing best practices before
the report is made available to the public. The term “cybersecurity” is defined in
the State Finance and Procurement Article, Section 3.5-301(b), and using our
professional judgment we have determined that the redacted findings fall under
the referenced definition. The specifics of the cybersecurity findings were
previously communicated to those parties responsible for acting on our
recommendations.
Finally, based on our current audit assessment of significance and risk to our audit
objectives, our audit included a review to determine the status of 18 of the 19
findings contained in our preceding audit report. For the non-cybersecurity-
related findings, we determined that QACPS satisfactorily addressed 6 of the 12
findings. The remaining 6 findings are repeated in this report.
QACPS’ response to this audit is included as an appendix to this
report. Consistent with State law, we have redacted the elements of QACPS’
response related to the cybersecurity audit findings. We have also edited the
response to remove certain vendor names or products, as allowed by our policy.
In accordance with State law, we have reviewed the response and, while QACPS
generally agrees with the recommendations in this report, we identified certain
instances in which statements in the response conflict with or disagree with the
report findings. In each instance, we reviewed and reassessed our audit
documentation, and reaffirmed the validity of our finding. In accordance with
generally accepted government auditing standards, we have included “auditor
comments” within QACPS’ response to explain our position. We will advise the
Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee of any outstanding issues that we cannot
resolve with QACPS.
Additionally, in a number of instances, although QACPS’ response indicated
agreement, certain actions indicated by QACPS may be insufficient to
comprehensively address all the audit issues. These responses will require further
clarification, but we do not anticipate that these instances will require the
Committee’s attention to resolve.
2

--- Page 5 ---
We wish to acknowledge the cooperation extended to us during the course of this
audit by QACPS. We also wish to acknowledge QACPS’ willingness to address
the audit issues and implement appropriate corrective actions.
Respectfully submitted,
Brian S. Tanen
Brian S. Tanen, CPA, CFE
Legislative Auditor
3

--- Page 6 ---
4

--- Page 7 ---
Table of Contents
Background Information 8
Statistical Overview 8
Oversight 12
External Audits 13
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report 14
Findings and Recommendations 17
Revenue and Billing Cycle 17
Federal Funds 18
Procurement and Disbursement Cycle
* Finding 1 – Certain requirements of State law and recognized best 20
practices were not incorporated into Queen Anne’s County Public
Schools (QACPS) policies and were not consistently used when
participating in an intergovernmental cooperative purchasing
agreement.
Finding 2 – QACPS did not always prepare and approve purchase orders 22
prior to obtaining goods or services and did not have system edits to
prevent payments from exceeding contract maximums.
Finding 3 – QACPS did not properly report vendor payments in aggregate 23
of $25,000 or more to the Department of Budget and Management, as
required to enhance transparency of the procurement process.
Human Resources and Payroll
* Finding 4 – QACPS could not document that the Queen Anne’s 25
County Board of Education reviewed and approved salaries for three
executive-level employees as required by State law.
* Finding 5 – QACPS did not have a documented independent review 25
and approval of other earnings payments which totaled $595,000
during fiscal year 2022.
 Denotes item repeated in full or part from preceding audit report
5

--- Page 8 ---
Finding 6 – QACPS did not always perform a required screening before 26
hiring certain applicants for positions involving direct contact with
minors.
Equipment Control and Accountability
* Finding 7 – QACPS’ equipment record keeping policies were not 27
comprehensive, equipment records were not complete, and equipment
disposals were not properly controlled.
Information Technology
Finding 8 – Redacted cybersecurity-related finding 29
Finding 9 – Redacted cybersecurity-related finding 29
Finding 10 – Redacted cybersecurity-related finding 29
Finding 11 – Redacted cybersecurity-related finding 29
Finding 12 – Redacted cybersecurity-related finding 29
Finding 13 – Redacted cybersecurity-related finding 29
Facilities Construction, Renovation, and Maintenance 29
Transportation Services
Finding 14 – QACPS awarded a sole source contract for a school bus 31
safety camera system instead of conducting a competitive procurement.
Finding 15 – Redacted cybersecurity-related finding 32
* Finding 16 – Certain elements of bus contractor payments could not be 33
supported, did not reflect market conditions, or did not consider
available fuel tax credits.
Food Services
Finding 17 – QACPS did not obtain and review support for 35
reimbursable food and labor costs to ensure amounts invoiced by the
food service management contract vendor were supported and
complied with USDA guidelines.
School Board Oversight 36
 Denotes item repeated in full or part from preceding audit report
6

--- Page 9 ---
Management of Other Risks
* Finding 18 – QACPS did not adequately monitor the performance of its 37
third-party administrator that provides health care claims
processing services.
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology 40
Agency Response Appendix
 Denotes item repeated in full or part from preceding audit report
7

--- Page 10 ---
Background Information
Statistical Overview
Enrollment
According to student enrollment records compiled by the Maryland State
Department of Education (MSDE), Queen Anne's County Public Schools
(QACPS) ranks 17th in student enrollment among the 24 public school systems in
Maryland. Fiscal year 2022 full-time student enrollment was 7,440 students.
QACPS had 14 schools, consisting of 8 elementary, 4 middle schools, and 2 high
schools.
Funding
QACPS revenues consist primarily of funds received from Queen Anne’s County,
the State, and the federal government. According to QACPS’ audited financial
statements, revenues from all sources totaled approximately $125.1 million in
fiscal year 2022; including $43.1 million from the State. According to MSDE’s
records, the State funding included formula funding grants totaling $32.7 million,
Blueprint for Maryland’s Future grants totaling $3.7 million, State-share for
employee pension payments totaling $6 million and other State funding sources
totaling $700,000. See Figure 1 (on the following page) for QACPS’ funding by
source for the six-year period from fiscal year 2017 through fiscal year 2022. See
Figure 2 (on page 8) for revenue sources per enrolled student in fiscal year 2022
according to its audited financial statements.
8

--- Page 11 ---
Figure 1
QACPS Enrollment and Funding by Source
Fiscal Years 2017 through 2022
(dollar amounts in millions)
7,778
7,751 7,749 7,764
7,440
7,395
$60.5 $60.6 $64.8 $64.6 $63.5
$57.4
$40.1 $41.1 $40.7 $42.8 $42.8 $43.1
$18.5
$8.6 $9.2 $10.0 $10.0 $11.3
2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022
Enrollment Local State Federal and Other
State funding for fiscal year 2022 included:
 $32.7 million for Foundation Formula Grants
 $3.7 million for Blueprint Grants
 $6.0 million for the State-share of employee pension costs
 $0.7 million for Other State funding
Source: QACPS’ Fiscal Year 2022 Audited Financial Statements and MSDE Data
9

--- Page 12 ---
Figure 2
QACPS’ Revenue Sources Per Enrolled Student
Fiscal Year 2022
Federal Other
$1,810 $704
11% 4%
Local
State $8,595
$5,831 51%
34%
Source: QACPS’ Fiscal Year 2022 Audited Financial Statements and MSDE Data
Blueprint for Maryland’s Future (Blueprint)
Blueprint is a State-funded grant program based on recommendations of the
Maryland Commission on Innovation and Excellence in Education.1 Chapter 771,
Laws of Maryland, 2019, effective June 1, 2019, established principles of the
Blueprint that are intended to transform Maryland’s early childhood, primary, and
secondary education systems to the levels of the highest-performing systems.
Blueprint specifies how funding is calculated to support programs and initiatives
from prekindergarten through college and career.
Blueprint allocates funding to schools based on a weighted-student formula. The
funding formula provides resources to local education agencies based on the
number of students enrolled at each school (known as Foundation Aid) and the
characteristics of those students (such as, Special Education, Concentration of
Poverty, and Compensatory Education Aid). Blueprint also provides additional
funding for specific programs that schools offer (such as Prekindergarten Aid).
1 The Maryland Commission on Innovation and Excellence in Education was established by
Chapters 701 and 702, Laws of Maryland 2016, effective June 1, 2016 to review the adequacy of
funding for education.
10

--- Page 13 ---
Expenditures
According to QACPS’ audited financial statements, fiscal year 2022 expenditures
were approximately $123.5 million. The largest expenditure category was
salaries and wages, including benefits, which accounted for approximately 73
percent of total expenditures during fiscal year 2022. According to MSDE
records, during the 2021-2022 school year, QACPS had 941 full-time equivalent
positions, which consisted of 694 instructional and 247 non-instructional
positions. Instruction accounted for 66 percent of QACPS’ expenditures on a
categorical basis (see Figure 3).
Figure 3
QACPS Expenditures by Category and Selected Statistical Data
Fiscal Year 2022
(amounts in millions)
$81.7
Instruction
66%
$10.7
Facilities & Capital Projects
9%
Enrollment
$9.1 7,440
Special Education
7%
Employees
$10.3
Administration & Support
8% 941
$8.5
Transportation Cost Per Pupil
7%
$16,606
$3.2
Food Service 3%
Source: QACPS’ Fiscal Year 2022 Audited Financial Statements and MSDE Data
11

--- Page 14 ---
Oversight
QACPS is governed by a local school board, consisting of five elected voting
members and two non-voting student members. MSDE exercises considerable
oversight of QACPS through the establishment and monitoring of various
financial and academic policies and regulations, in accordance with certain
provisions of the Annotated Code of Maryland. MSDE also works with QACPS
to comply with the requirements and mandates of federal law. The Queen Anne’s
County government also exercises authority over QACPS primarily through the
review and approval of QACPS’ annual operating and capital budgets.
Accountability and Implementation Board (AIB)
The AIB was established by State law as an independent unit of State government
in February 2021 and is responsible for holding State and local governments,
including local education agencies, accountable for implementing the Blueprint
State-funded grant program and for evaluating the outcomes. Specifically, the
AIB reviews the use of school-level expenditures and monitors school system
compliance with Blueprint requirements. The AIB consists of a 7-member Board
appointed by the Governor, with advice and consent of the Senate. The Board
Chair is designated by the Governor, the Senate President, and the Speaker of the
House.
Office of the Inspector General for Education (OIGE)
The OIGE was established by State law as an independent unit of State
government effective June 2019. The OIGE is responsible for examining and
investigating complaints or information regarding the management and affairs of
local boards of education, local school systems, public schools, nonpublic schools
that receive State funds, the Maryland State Department of Education, and the
Interagency Commission on School Construction. Specifically, the law provides
that the OIGE may receive and investigate information and complaints concerning
potential fraud, waste, and abuse of public funds and property; civil rights
violations involving students or employees; whether policies and procedures
governing the prevention and reporting of child abuse and neglect comply with
applicable federal and State laws; and compliance with other applicable federal
and State laws.
The OIGE initiates examinations and investigations based on its assessment of
complaints and information it receives from various sources, including State and
outside agencies and through its fraud, waste, and abuse hotline. The OIGE also
conducts an annual review of local school systems to ensure policies and
procedures governing the prevention and reporting of child abuse and neglect
comply with applicable federal and State laws. During the period covered by our
12

--- Page 15 ---
review, the OIGE did not issue any reports related to QACPS reviews and
investigations.
External Audits
As required by State law, QACPS engages a certified public accounting firm to
independently audit its annual financial statements. The firm performs
procedures to verify the amounts and disclosures in the financial statements. The
firm also evaluates the appropriateness of accounting policies used and the
reasonableness of significant accounting estimates made by management. In the
related audit reports, the firm stated that the financial statements presented fairly,
in all material respects, the respective financial position of QACPS as of June 30,
2017, 2018, 2019, 2020, 2021 and 2022, and the respective changes in its
financial position and, where applicable, its cash flows for the years then ended in
accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of
America.
Additionally, in accordance with Government Auditing Standards, as part of the
audited financial statements the accounting firm also issued separate reports on
QACPS’ control over financial reporting and its tests of QACPS’ compliance
with certain provisions of laws, regulations, contracts, grant agreements and other
matters. These reports are an integral part of the annual independently audited
financial statements. The accounting firm also conducts the Single Audit of
QACPS’ federal grant programs. The Single Audit is intended to provide
assurance to the federal government that adequate internal controls are in place,
and the entity is generally in compliance with program requirements.
We reviewed the aforementioned financial statement audits and Single Audit
reports for fiscal years 2017 through 2022 and examined the related work papers
for the fiscal year 2022 audit, which were the latest available during our audit
fieldwork. Our review did not note any deficiencies that warranted inclusion in
this report. In addition, certain work of the independent certified public
accounting firm, which we determined was reliable, covered areas included in the
scope of our audit. As a result, we did not conduct any audit work related to the
following areas:
 State and local government revenues received via electronic funds transfer
 Accounts receivables
 Federal grant activity
13

--- Page 16 ---
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report
Based on our current assessment of significance and risk relative to our audit
objectives, our audit included a review to determine the status of 18 of the 19
findings contained in our preceding audit report dated August 1, 2018. As
disclosed in Figure 4 on the following pages, for the non-cybersecurity-related
findings, we determined that QACPS satisfactorily addressed 6 of the 12 findings.
The remaining 6 findings are repeated in this report.
14

--- Page 17 ---
Figure 4
Status of Preceding Findings
Preceding Implementation
Finding Description
Finding Status
Adequate accountability and control over cash receipts had not been
established, as collections were not always restrictively endorsed and
Finding 1 Not repeated
recorded immediately upon receipt and there was no independent
verification that collections were deposited.
QACPS had not established a process to independently review school
activity fund transactions, verify compliance with established policies
Finding 2 Not repeated
and internal controls, and properly account for receipts and
disbursements.
QACPS’ procurement policies were not sufficiently comprehensive,
as they did not include specific requirements for Board approval, the
Repeated
Finding 3 competitive solicitation of services, or the use of intergovernmental
(Current Finding 1)
cooperative purchasing agreements. QACPS did not always comply
with the existing policies and State law.
Finding 4 QACPS did not always verify amounts billed with contract terms. Not repeated
QACPS had not established adequate internal controls over the
Repeated
Finding 5 processing of certain critical human resource and payroll transactions,
(Current Finding 5)
such as other earnings and salary increases.
QACPS had not executed employment contracts for six central office
employees and there was no evidence that the Board had approved Repeated
Finding 6
their salaries as required by State law, which totaled a combined (Current Finding 4)
$637,000 in fiscal year 2016.
QACPS had not established comprehensive equipment policies and Repeated
Finding 7
adequate record keeping practices and controls over equipment. (Current Finding 7)
Monitoring of security activities and password and account controls
Finding 8 Status Redacted2
over critical systems were not sufficient.
Finding 9 QACPS’ computer network was not adequately secured. Status Redacted2
QACPS had not identified and protected sensitive personally
Finding 10 Status Redacted2
identifiable information maintained on its computer systems.
QACPS had not established procedures to ensure that malware
protection software was installed, current, and operational, on all
Finding 11 Status Redacted2
active computers, administrative rights were properly limited, and
operating system security updates were applied.
2 Specific information on the current status of this cybersecurity-related finding has been redacted
from this publicly available report in accordance with State Government Article, Section 2-
1224(i) of the Annotated Code of Maryland.
15

--- Page 18 ---
Figure 4
Status of Preceding Findings
Preceding Implementation
Finding Description
Finding Status
QACPS lacked assurance that adequate information technology
Finding 12 security and operational controls existed over its financial system that Status Redacted3
is hosted, operated, and maintained by a service provider.
QACPS did not have a complete information technology disaster
Finding 13 Status Redacted3
recovery plan for recovering computer operations.
QACPS executed three 20-year power-purchasing agreements and a
subsequent amendment with a solar provider without a competitive
Not repeated
Finding 14 process or a formal analysis to ensure it received the best value. In
(Not followed up on)
addition, QACPS did not advise the Board of the related fiscal impact
of the amendment, which increased the electricity rate.
QACPS did not establish comprehensive bus routing procedures and
did not periodically perform a system-wide analysis of bus routes and
Finding 15 Not repeated
related bus capacities to maximize the efficiency of its bus routes and
address bus routes with low ridership.
QACPS had not established a formal methodology to calculate its
per-vehicle allotment rate and payments to bus contractors included Repeated
Finding 16
elements that did not consider market conditions, actual costs, or (Current Finding 16)
available discounts.
Financial disclosure statements were not always filed, or filed timely,
Finding 17 Not repeated
as required by QACPS’ ethics policy.
Eligibility documentation was not always obtained to verify that
Finding 18 certain dependents met health insurance enrollment criteria, as Not repeated
required by QACPS policy.
QACPS did not ensure the propriety of employee and retiree health
Repeated
Finding 19 care claims paid and did not verify plan administrative fees were
(Current Finding 18)
properly charged.
3 Specific information on the current status of this cybersecurity-related finding has been redacted
from the publicly available report in accordance with State Government Article, Section 2-
1224(i) of the Annotated Code of Maryland.
16

--- Page 19 ---
Findings and Recommendations
Revenue and Billing Cycle
Background
Queen Anne’s County Public Schools (QACPS) revenues consist primarily of
funds received from Queen Anne’s County, the State, and the federal government.
According to the QACPS audited financial statements, revenues from all sources
totaled approximately $125.1 million during fiscal year 2022, including $43.1
million from the State.
External Audits
There were similarities between the work of the independent certified public
accounting firm (CPA) that audited QACPS’ financial statements and the
objectives of our audit for certain revenue activities. As a result, we relied on this
work to provide audit coverage for State and local government revenues received
via electronic funds transfer and accounts receivable, for which the auditor’s
procedural review (related to the fiscal year 2022 audit) and testing disclosed no
material weaknesses or significant deficiencies.
School Activity Funds
Schools collect funds for other purposes such as student activities, clubs, and
school publications.4 Because they are not considered school revenue, these
school activity funds are accounted for separately by each school and reported in
summary in the audited financial statements. During fiscal year 2022, school
activity collections totaled approximately $1.1 million and the June 30, 2022 fund
balance was $863,000. Based on our assessment of relative significance of this
activity, we did not review the procedures and controls over these funds.
Conclusion
Based on our current assessment of significance and risk relative to our audit
objectives, we relied on the work of the CPA to provide audit coverage in this
area, including procedures and controls related to the accounting for and
safeguarding of cash receipts with respect to revenue and billing.
4 In accordance with Board policy, the school activity funds are intended to promote the general welfare of
students and to facilitate the normal extracurricular activities of the school.
17

--- Page 20 ---
Federal Funds
Background
QACPS receives funds pertaining to federal government programs that are
generally restricted for use for a specific program (such as the School Lunch
Program or Special Education). According to QACPS’ Single Audit, fiscal year
2022 (latest available at the time of our audit) federal expenditures totaled
approximately $13.4 million, not including federally funded fee-for-service
programs such as Medicaid reimbursement for special education services.
According to the audited financial statements, federal fund revenues (excluding
Medicaid) increased, from $5.1 million in fiscal year 2020 to $13.4 million in
fiscal year 2022 (160 percent increase), due to COVID-19 pandemic grant
funding. Specifically, according to QACPS’ records, as of June 30, 2022,
QACPS was awarded federal COVID-19 pandemic grant funds totaling $15.7
million to be distributed over federal fiscal years 2020 to 2024 under the
Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security Act, the Coronavirus Response
and Relief Supplemental Appropriations Act, and the American Rescue Plan.5
As of June 30, 2022, QACPS expenditures related to these COVID-19 grants
totaled $7.4 million, from March 2020 to June 2022, and were primarily
comprised of staffing, laptops, summer enhancement programs, personal
protection equipment, sanitary supplies, and positions associated with learning
loss. QACPS has policies and procedures to ensure federal grant funds are
properly monitored and accounted for to ensure the funds are used to the fullest
extent possible. In addition, reports of grant fund activity are presented monthly
to the Board. QACPS initially funded the expenditures with State and local funds
and will obtain reimbursement from the aforementioned programs to the extent
allowed.
Single Audit Reports
There were similarities in the work performed by the independent CPA that
conducted the Single Audit of QACPS’ federal grants and the objectives of our
audit in this area. In addition to expressing an opinion on QACPS compliance
with the terms of several grant programs, the auditor also considered the existing
internal control structure’s impact on compliance and audited the required
Schedule of Expenditures of Federal Awards (which includes claimed and
5 In addition to the federal grants, QACPS was also awarded State and local COVID-19 grants
totaling $1.1 million, all of which had been spent as of June 30, 2022. State and local grants are
subject to review and testing during our audit.
18

--- Page 21 ---
reported grant expenditures) for fiscal years 2017 through 2022. Our review of the
Single Audits did not identify any issues that warranted inclusion in this report.
Medicaid Funds for Eligible Services
QACPS has established a procedure to identify children eligible for Medicaid-
subsidized services and the services rendered. Medicaid is an entitlement
program for which certain service costs can be reimbursed to QACPS. Medicaid
activity is not covered by the Single Audit of federal grants.
The Maryland State Department of Education’s Interagency Medicaid Monitoring
Team issued a report in June 2022 of the results of its review of 41 student case
files for 78 criteria. The report did not specifically address the propriety of
Medicaid billing but overall concluded that QACPS was generally compliant with
most criteria. For example, QACPS was 100 percent compliant with 58 criteria,
and between 90 and 99 percent compliant with 8 criteria. According to QACPS
records, fiscal year 2022 State and federal reimbursements for Medicaid-
subsidized services totaled approximately $714,000, which was consistent with
the previous fiscal year. Based on our current assessment of significance and risk
relative to our audit objectives, our audit did not include a review of Medicaid-
subsidized services.
Conclusion
We relied on the work of the independent CPA that conducted the Single Audits
for the work in this area, including policies, procedures, and controls with respect
to federal grants and expenditures.
Procurement and Disbursement Cycle
Background
According to the audited financial statements and QACPS’ records,
disbursements (excluding payroll) totaled $33.3 million during fiscal year 2022.
QACPS uses a financial management system for purchases and disbursements.
Requisitions are created in the system by departments and are subject to online
departmental approvals. Purchase orders are prepared in the system by the
purchasing department based on approved requisitions. The purchasing
department also generally handles the solicitation, bid evaluation, and
establishment of contracts.
Invoices are submitted by vendors directly to the accounts payable department for
entry into the financial management system. Generally, the system matches
invoices to appropriate purchasing documents and the verification of receipt
entered by the receiving school or department. When invoices are received that
19

--- Page 22 ---
do not relate to an established purchase order, the accounts payable department
enters the invoices into the financial management system and manually approves
the related payment. The system then prints vendor checks or processes an
electronic payment and posts the payment to the financial records.
QACPS written procurement policies require that procurements equal to or
exceeding $25,000 be competitively bid in accordance with Section 5-112 of the
Education Article of the Annotated Code of Maryland. Procurements of contracts
and agreements valued at $25,000 or more, are to be approved by the Queen
Anne’s County Board of Education.
Finding 1
Certain requirements of State law and recognized best practices were not
incorporated into QACPS policies and were not consistently used when
participating in an intergovernmental cooperative purchasing agreement
(ICPA).
Analysis
Certain requirements of State law and recognized best practices were not
incorporated into QACPS policies and were not consistently used by QACPS
when participating in an ICPA. State law, which legal counsel to the Maryland
General Assembly advised us is applicable to local education agencies, allows the
use of ICPAs only after the using entity has met the statutory requirement of
determining (or assessing) in writing that the use of such arrangements will
provide cost benefits, promote administrative efficiencies, or promote
intergovernmental cooperation.6
According to QACPS records, QACPS used the ICPA procurement method for 15
procurements with awards totaling approximately $2.4 million during fiscal year
2023. Our review of QACPS procurement policies disclosed that the above
6 Section 13-110 of the State Finance and Procurement Article of the Annotated Code of
Maryland, in part, defines an ICPA as a contract that is entered into by at least one governmental
entity in a certain manner, that is available for use by the governmental entity entering the
contract and at least one additional governmental entity, and that is intended to promote
efficiency and savings that can result from intergovernmental cooperative purchasing. The
aforementioned law applies to all ICPAs regardless of the services, goods, or commodities
purchased. In addition, Section 5-112(a)(3) of the Education Article, of the Code provides that
local education agencies do not need to conduct competitive procurements for goods and
commodities if they use a contract awarded by public agencies or intergovernmental purchasing
organizations and the originating procuring agency followed public bidding procedures.
20

--- Page 23 ---
statutory requirement as well as the following critical best practices were not
included.
 Analyze all costs of conducting competitive solicitations;
 Research, compare, and evaluate available ICPAs;
 Verify ICPA has a clause allowing utilization by other parties;
 Verify the ICPA solicitation was competitively bid and publicly
advertised. Obtain originating agency’s competitive procurement
documentation (including public advertisements and proposal
evaluations);
 Verify terms, scope of services, specifications and price meet our needs;
 Execute an addendum of participation with lead agency and remove or
incorporate necessary local terms and conditions; and
 Obtain a copy of ICPA and related price lists for invoice verification.
In addition, we tested QACPS’ participation in seven ICPAs (selected based on
significance), awarded during fiscal years 2020 through 2023, totaling
approximately $2.8 million. Our review disclosed that QACPS did not adhere to
three best practices for three ICPAs tested (preparing a written assessment of the
benefits of using the ICPAs, analyzing the costs of conducting competitive
solicitations, and researching, comparing, and evaluating other available ICPAs).
A similar condition was commented upon in our preceding audit report, dated
August 1, 2018. In response to that audit report, QACPS indicated that it would
document analysis of the benefits of all ICPAs and, when necessary, submit to the
Board for approval. However, QACPS did not take the corrective actions as
indicated.
We did find that other best practices were performed despite not being included in
QACPS’ policies. For example, QACPS verified the terms, scope of services,
specifications, and overall price met its needs for the three ICPAs noted above.
QACPS also ensured the amounts invoiced by the three ICPA vendors tested
agreed with the original contract pricing. Incorporating ICPA best practices into
QACPS procurement policies could help ensure they are consistently used.
The Institute for Public Procurement, formerly known as the National Institute of
Government Purchasing, as well as other public and educational organizations
have published ICPA best practices. These practices include comprehensive
multi-step checklists that require, among other things (as per the list above), that
prospective ICPA users verify that the contract allows other entities to participate.
In addition, the practices also require that ICPA users ensure that the contract was
awarded through a competitive procurement process, that addendums be executed
21

--- Page 24 ---
documenting their participation, and that all local required terms and conditions
are incorporated.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that QACPS incorporate the aforementioned statutory
requirements and other identified and acknowledged best practices into its
procurement policies and ensure that the performance of the requirements
and best practices are documented when evaluating and participating in
ICPAs (repeat).
Finding 2
QACPS did not always prepare and approve purchase orders prior to
obtaining goods or services and did not have system edits to prevent
payments from exceeding contract maximums.
Analysis
QACPS did not always prepare and approve purchase orders prior to obtaining the
related goods or services and did not have system edits to prevent payments from
exceeding contract maximums. Establishing purchase orders helps QACPS
control invoice payments by electronically matching the approved invoice
payments to the established purchase order.
Our analysis of certain invoice payments over $10,000 during the period from
July 2019 to May 2023 disclosed that payments to 200 vendors totaling
approximately $100 million did not have an established purchase order.7 For
example, QACPS paid its food service vendor $8.2 million and its healthcare
vendor $43.8 million without a related purchase order being recorded in its
financial management system.
Furthermore, when purchase orders were prepared, the financial management
system did not contain an automated edit to prevent the related payments from
exceeding the purchase order. Our analysis of purchase orders and related invoice
payments during the period from July 2019 to May 2023 disclosed that 47
purchase orders totaling $12.8 million had invoice payments totaling $13.4
million that exceeded the approved purchase order amount by $600,000. For
example, QACPS paid two bus contractors $4.74 million when the related
purchase orders totaled $4.46 million, a difference of $280,000. Our review of
these payments determined that the bus contractors were paid for appropriate
7 Our analysis excluded payments for utilities and corporate purchasing card transactions since
QACPS advised us that it does not establish purchase orders for these transactions since they are
reoccurring, or the expenses are variable.
22

--- Page 25 ---
services (such as, routine monthly payments for approved routes and payments for
fuel cost adjustments and transporting students to athletic games) but the
established purchase orders were only for the routine monthly payments for
routes.
This condition was caused, at least in part, because QACPS’ Procurement Policy
only required purchase orders for the purchase of goods and services under
$25,000. In this regard, QACPS advised us that its practice was to prepare
purchase orders for the majority of its contracts regardless of the dollar amount.
Given the benefits of using purchase orders as described above and QACPS’
practice for preparing purchase orders for all contracts, QACPS should consider
revising its Procurement Policy to include controls that prevent payments from
exceeding the related purchase order.
Recommendation 2
We recommend that QACPS
a. ensure purchase orders are prepared and approved prior to obtaining the
related goods or services,
b. consider revising the procurement policy to require purchase orders for
all contracts consistent with its practice, and
c. establish controls to prevent invoice payments from exceeding the related
purchase order.
Finding 3
QACPS did not properly report vendor payments in aggregate of $25,000 or
more to the Department of Budget and Management (DBM), as required to
enhance transparency of the procurement process.
Analysis
QACPS did not report all vendor payments in aggregate of $25,000 or more to
DBM. Effective July 1, 2019, Chapter 541, Laws of Maryland 2019 requires
local education agencies to annually report specified information for the
immediately preceding fiscal year to DBM beginning January 1, 2020. DBM uses
the information to report the procurements on the Maryland Transparency Portal,
a public website that allows the public to search and view information about
payments to vendors to enhance transparency over the procurement process.
Local education agencies must report all vendor payments in aggregate of
$25,000, including the name of the vendor receiving a payment, the location of
the vendor by zip code, and the amount of the payment. Certain payments are
23

--- Page 26 ---
excluded from this requirement including a public school employee’s
compensation and a public school retiree’s retirement allowance.
Our review of amounts reported by QACPS to DBM for fiscal year 2022
disclosed that it only reported $10.1 million of the $43.2 million in vendor
payments that were required to be reported, a difference of $33.1 million. For
example, QACPS did not report payments related to certain healthcare and food
services vendors. We were advised by QACPS management that this was an
oversight.
Recommendation 3
We recommend that QACPS
a. establish procedures to ensure all vendor payments in aggregate of
$25,000 or greater are reported to DBM, as required; and
b. retroactively report the vendor payments that were not reported to DBM
for fiscal year 2022.
Human Resources and Payroll
Background
Payroll expense represents the largest single cost component in the QACPS
budget. According to QACPS’ records, fiscal year 2022 salary, wage, and benefit
costs totaled approximately $90.2 million, representing 73 percent of the total
expenditures. According to Maryland State Department of Education reports,
during the 2021-2022 school year QACPS had 941 full-time positions, which
consisted of 694 instructional and 247 non-instructional positions.
QACPS uses automated systems to maintain human resources information, record
employee time, track employee leave usage, and process and record payroll
transactions. The system generates payroll checks and direct deposit advices.
Payroll processing involves both automated processes (such as compiling leave
and running edit reports) and manual processes (such as data entry of new
employee information).
24

--- Page 27 ---
Finding 4
QACPS could not document that the Queen Anne’s County Board of
Education (the Board) reviewed and approved salaries for three executive-
level employees as required by State law.
Analysis
QACPS could not document that the Board reviewed and approved salaries for
three of the eight executive-level employees tested, as required by State law.
According to the employment contracts for these three employees, their collective
salaries (excluding fringe benefits) totaled $446,000 during fiscal year 2022.
These three employees were not covered by union contracts and as such the
salaries were not regulated. Our test of payroll payments totaling $11,100 to two
of the three employees disclosed that they were consistent with the related
contracts.
State law requires that the Board appoints all system employees and set their
salaries based on the recommendation of the county superintendent. A similar
condition was commented upon in our three preceding audit reports dating back to
October 2006. In response to our preceding audit report, QACPS agreed to obtain
Board approval for appointments and salaries. However, QACPS did not take the
corrective actions as agreed.
Recommendation 4
We recommend that QACPS obtain Board approval for executive-level
salaries, as required by State law (repeat).
Finding 5
QACPS did not have a documented independent review and approval of
other earnings payments which totaled $595,000 during fiscal year 2022.
Analysis
QACPS did not have a documented independent review and approval of other
earnings payments (including final leave payouts, extra-duty pay, sick leave pay,
retroactive pay, and workshop pay) which totaled $595,000 during fiscal year
2022. Our review of 15 other earnings payments totaling approximately $163,000
processed from July 2021 to January 2023 disclosed that while they appeared to
be proper and accurate, there was no evidence of independent supervisory review.
Similar conditions regarding the lack of an independent review of payroll
transactions were commented upon in our two preceding audit reports. In
response to our audit report dated August 1, 2018, QACPS indicated that it would
25

--- Page 28 ---
perform a documented independent review of critical transactions. However,
QACPS did not take the corrective actions as indicated.
Recommendation 5
We recommend that QACPS perform a documented independent review and
approval of other earnings payroll transactions (repeat).
Finding 6
QACPS did not always perform a required screening before hiring certain
applicants for positions involving direct contact with minors.
Analysis
QACPS did not always perform a required screening before hiring certain
applicants for positions involving direct contact with minors (such as, care,
supervision, guidance, control, or routine interaction). State law effective July 1,
2019 (and updated July 1, 2021) requires local education agencies to provide
screening of certain applicants. Specifically, the schools must obtain information
from an applicant for positions that involve direct contact with a minor including
a written statement whether they were the subject of a child sexual abuse or
sexual misconduct investigation by any employer that resulted in a finding.8 The
law also requires local education agencies to contact the applicant’s current or
prior employers and obtain the same information.
According to QACPS’ records, during fiscal year 2022, QACPS hired 136
individuals that were assigned to schools or student programs that would have
contact with minors. Our test of 15 individuals having direct contact with minors,
who were hired after the law went into effect, disclosed that QACPS had not
performed the required screening for 11 employees. Without a proper screening,
QACPS lacks assurance regarding the conduct of individuals it hired.
Recommendation 6
We recommend that QACPS perform and document the required screening
for positions involving direct contact with minors, including those noted
above, in compliance with State law.
8 This is in addition to existing requirements to obtain a criminal background check.
26

--- Page 29 ---
Equipment Control and Accountability
Background
According to QACPS’ audited financial statements, the undepreciated value of its
capital equipment inventory (furniture, fixtures, and equipment) totaled $18.9
million as of June 30, 2022. QACPS maintains centralized automated records for
equipment with a cost of $1,000 or more for financial statement purposes. In
addition, QACPS' Department of Information Technology maintains an inventory
database of laptops issued to staff, teachers, and students. As of April 2023, the
database listed 11,977 laptops with a total recorded cost of $5.9 million. QACPS
has established written equipment policies and coordinated a physical inventory at
each school annually.
Finding 7
QACPS’ equipment record keeping policies were not comprehensive,
equipment records were not complete, and equipment disposals were not
properly controlled.
Analysis
QACPS’ equipment record keeping policies were not comprehensive, equipment
records were not complete, and equipment disposals were not properly controlled.
 QACPS’ equipment record keeping policies did not include critical controls
including record keeping and physical inventory requirements, the processes
for investigating missing items, reporting lost or stolen items, approving
disposals, and specifying the items that should be treated as sensitive (items
being subject to theft). Due to the lack of a formal policy and the distributed
nature of inventory recordkeeping there is a lack of assurance that all sensitive
equipment items were being consistently tracked and to ensure proper control
and accountability.
 Although QACPS’ Department of Information Technology maintained a
database listing all computers issued to staff, teachers, and students; other
sensitive electronic items (such as, digital cameras, projectors, and smart
boards) were not accounted for. Additionally, our review disclosed that 286
laptops each with a value over $1,000 and an aggregate value of
approximately $355,000 were not recorded in the centralized equipment
records as required by QACPS’ policy.
 For QACPS' Department of Information Technology, one employee was
primarily responsible for recording disposals of QACPS’ laptops without
27

--- Page 30 ---
maintaining a record of the deletion and without any independent review and
approval.
As a result of these conditions, equipment could be lost or misappropriated
without detection. Similar conditions regarding the lack of adequate policies and
procedures governing sensitive equipment records, and the authorization of
disposals and maintenance of complete records were commented upon in our
three preceding audit reports dating back to October 2006. In response to the
preceding report, QACPS stated that individual departments that purchased
sensitive equipment costing less than $1,000 were expected to track their
equipment and that QACPS would revise the procedures regarding information to
be maintained for sensitive equipment to be distributed to all departments.
However, QACPS did not implement the corrective actions as indicated in its
response.
Recommendation 7
We recommend that QACPS
a. establish a policy defining sensitive equipment items that requires them to
be recorded in the inventory records (repeat);
b. establish requirements for conducting physical inventory counts of
equipment, investigating missing items, reporting lost or stolen items and
approving disposals (repeat);
c. ensure that disposals are properly supported, independently approved,
and that disposal records are maintained (repeat); and
d. ensure inventory records are properly maintained, including recording
the aforementioned laptops (repeat).
Information Technology
We determined that the Information Technology section, including Findings 8
through 13 related to “cybersecurity”, as defined by the State Finance and
Procurement Article, Section 3.5-301(b) of the Annotated Code of Maryland, and
therefore are subject to redaction from the publicly available audit report in
accordance with the State Government Article 2-1224(i). Consequently, the
specifics of the following findings, including the analysis, related
recommendations, along with QACPS’ responses, have been redacted from this
report copy.
28

--- Page 31 ---
Finding 8
Redacted cybersecurity-related finding.
Finding 9
Redacted cybersecurity-related finding.
Finding 10
Redacted cybersecurity-related finding.
Finding 11
Redacted cybersecurity-related finding.
Finding 12
Redacted cybersecurity-related finding.
Finding 13
Redacted cybersecurity-related finding.
Facilities Construction, Renovation, and Maintenance
Background
QACPS employs a staff of 79 employees to maintain its 14 schools and 2 other
administrative and support facilities. According to its fiscal year 2023 Capital
Improvement Plan, necessary construction, major renovations, and systemic
improvements to QACPS’ facilities over the next five years are estimated to cost
$28.4 million.
QACPS Capital Projects Were Competitively Procured and Approved by the
Board and Related Expenditures Were Properly Supported
Our review of five construction-related procurements (selected based on
materiality) awarded during fiscal years 2020 to 2023 totaling $3.9 million
disclosed that the contracts were competitively procured and approved by the
Board. In addition, out test of 14 invoices totaling $1.8 million for these contracts
disclosed that the invoices were properly reviewed and approved, and the amounts
invoiced were in accordance with the related contract terms.
29

--- Page 32 ---
Processes are in Place to Promote Ongoing Facility Maintenance and to
Minimize Energy Costs
QACPS has processes in place to promote ongoing facility maintenance and to
minimize energy costs. For example, QACPS provides scheduled maintenance of
its buildings and equipment with the goal of preventing emergency repairs. In
addition, QACPS participates in a consortium with other Eastern Shore area
entities to purchase energy at the best possible terms for members of the
consortium. QACPS also uses a vendor energy management program to monitor
and control heating and air conditioning usage and a utility bill management
program to monitor related costs. QACPS has written policies that include best
practices that encourage both students and employees to be aware of and limit
their energy use and conducts internal on-site reviews of building energy
efficiency. Further, QACPS makes limited use of solar and geothermal
alternative energy sources.
Conclusion
Our audit did not disclose any significant deficiencies in the design or operation
of QACPS’ internal control over the facilities construction, maintenance, and
energy management financial-related areas of operations reviewed. Our audit
also did not disclose any significant instances of noncompliance with applicable
laws, rules, or regulations.
Transportation Services
Background
According to statistics compiled by the Maryland State Department of Education
(MSDE), QACPS has approximately 7,500 students eligible to receive student
transportation services. These students were transported using 73 contractor-
owned buses and 19 system-owned buses. QACPS reported that 2.2 million route
miles were traveled to transport students for the 2021-2022 school year.
During school year 2022-2023, QACPS had contracts with four bus contractors
for student transportation. The contracts are for three-year terms subject to the
Board’s right to terminate the contract for various reasons (such as for cause or
termination of routes to reduce or consolidate routes). According to QACPS’
financial records, fiscal year 2022 transportation costs totaled $8.5 million, of
which $6.4 million (75 percent) were payments for the contracted bus services for
various costs. Payments to bus contractors consist of amounts for the purchase of
a bus (known as a per-vehicle allotment or PVA, intended as reimbursement for
the cost of a bus and a flat rate for return on investment), hourly reimbursements
30

--- Page 33 ---
for drivers, a per mile operation (fuel) and maintenance fee, and an administrative
fee.
School Bus Safety Camera Program
As allowed by State and County law, QACPS contracted for the use of school bus
safety cameras to monitor drivers who illegally pass a stopped school bus. In July
2020, the Queen Anne’s County Board of Education approved a five-year sole-
source contract (with a five-year renewal option) to a vendor to install and operate
bus safety cameras that would be owned and maintained by the vendor on
QACPS’ owned and contracted school buses. The contract also provided for
cameras to monitor the conduct of drivers and students inside the bus.
As of the date of the contract, vehicles that are caught on camera illegally passing
a school bus are assessed a $250 fine. The cameras take videos and still images
of vehicles (and license plates) passing a bus that is operating its alternating
flashing red lights. The registered owner(s) of the vehicle are identified by
vendor employees. In accordance with a Queen Anne’s County ordinance, the
County Sheriff’s Office verifies the image of the event constitutes a violation and
the vendor prints and mails the citation to the registered owner(s). Citations can
be paid to the vendor by credit card, electronically through the internet, or by
mailing a check. The vendor is required to develop automated processes to
retrieve and post all daily payment data.
The contract provides that the monthly citation revenue would be disbursed 60
percent to the vendor and 40 percent to QACPS once revenue exceeded a monthly
technology fee of $325 per bus from gross citation revenue.
Finding 14
QACPS awarded a sole source contract for a school bus safety camera
system instead of conducting a competitive procurement.
Analysis
QACPS awarded a sole source contract with a vendor for a school bus camera
system instead of conducting a competitive procurement. Specifically, QACPS
did not solicit bids for the contract or consider other similar contracts
competitively procured by other school systems. Our audits of other Maryland
local education agencies (LEAs) have noted other vendors exist and at least one
LEA has awarded a similar contract using a competitive bidding process. In
addition, other LEAs have conducted procurements that included negotiations of
the financial terms (such as revenue sharing and other fees).
31

--- Page 34 ---
QACPS management advised us that it learned about the vendor’s school bus
safety camera program that was implemented in other school systems and
approached this vendor to implement a similar program. QACPS management
further advised that it had conversations with other LEAs that had contracts with
the vendor but did not perform a documented comparison of key financial terms
between those contracts and its contract. In this regard, the contract provided that
the monthly citation revenue would be disbursed 60 percent to the vendor and 40
percent to QACPS after deduction of monthly technology fees of $325 per bus
from gross citation revenue. While the revenue sharing percentage was consistent
with other LEAs, the monthly technology fees was the second highest of the eight
LEAs we know used this vendor’s camera system which ranged from $85 to
$400.
The lack of competitive procurement and comparison of the terms is significant,
because QACPS has not received any of the approximately $166,000 in citation
revenue received for the first 27 months of the program’s operation (from
February 2021 to April 2023). Since the citation revenue was not sufficient to
cover the amount owed to the vendor, the outstanding balance of the technology
fees due from future revenues totaled approximately $789,000 as of April 2023.
Recommendation 14
We recommend that QACPS
a. adhere to statutory requirements for competitive bidding, where
appropriate; and
b. ensure the basis and reasoning for revenue sharing and technology fees
are documented in future school bus safety camera contracts.
We determined that Finding 15 related to “cybersecurity,” as defined by the State
Finance and Procurement Article, Section 3.5-301(b) of the Annotated Code of
Maryland, and therefore is subject to redaction from the publicly available audit
report in accordance with the State Government Article 2-1224(i). Consequently,
the specifics of the following finding, including the analysis, related
recommendation(s), along with QACPS’ responses, have been redacted from this
report copy.
Finding 15
Redacted cybersecurity-related finding.
32

--- Page 35 ---
Finding 16
Certain elements of bus contractor payments could not be supported, did not
reflect market conditions, or did not consider available fuel tax credits.
Analysis
Certain elements used to determine payment amounts to bus contractors did not
reflect market conditions, could not be supported, or did not consider available
fuel tax credits. Although for fiscal year 2022, QACPS has the 12th lowest cost
per rider, 13th lowest cost per bus, and 3rd lowest cost per mile among the 24
local school systems, the basis for these cost elements should be adequately
documented and justified to provide assurance that the cost structure is
appropriate (and costs are reasonable). Our review of the contract payments
disclosed the following conditions:
 The negotiated methodology used to calculate the per-vehicle allotment
(PVA) paid to its four bus contractors could not be supported and may not
have been in the best interest of QACPS. A primary component of the PVA
payment is the allowable return on investment (ROI). There is no generally
agreed upon formula or method for determining ROI; however, a consultant
hired by another school system in 2012 recommended the prime rate plus two
percent.
QACPS used an ROI rate of 8.0 percent in its payment formula for the 29
buses placed into service by contractors from school year 2017 through 2022.
QACPS could not document the basis for the ROI used. In this regard, if
QACPS would have used the prime rate plus two percent for the ROI
calculation (which ranged from 5.25 to 7.35 percent during fiscal years 2017
to 2022 at the time the buses were initially placed into service), we estimate
that QACPS could have saved approximately $805,000 over the 12-year life
of those buses.
 QACPS could not support the propriety of the estimated $2.6 million it paid to
bus contractors for per-mile bus operation and maintenance costs ($1.63 per
mile) during fiscal year 2022. This rate is intended to fund the expenses
incurred by the bus contractors for maintaining the bus and for fuel cost.
QACPS did not review any data to ensure the propriety of amounts invoiced.
 QACPS did not document a comparison of the contractor’s reported mileage
to its mapping software application to ensure the amounts reported were
accurate. Mileage is utilized to calculate the fuel and maintenance
components of the contractor’s monthly payment. Our review of six bus
routes from the 2022 school year did not disclose any significant variances.
33

--- Page 36 ---
 QACPS did not exclude federal excise and State fuel taxes from payments to
bus contractors. QACPS pays contractors for fuel using the operation and
maintenance rate, which is adjusted when fuel costs increase or decrease
based upon amounts stated in the contract. The fuel adjustments are based
upon the actual fuel cost during the middle of the month. However, according
to federal and State law, QACPS contractors are exempt from the federal
excise tax and State fuel tax and are able to receive a credit for fuel taxes paid
when they file their income tax returns. If QACPS had considered the
exemption amount in its calculation, payments to the contractors would have
been approximately $139,000 lower in fiscal year 2022.
Similar conditions regarding the payment of PVA and operation and maintenance
cost components were commented upon in our two preceding audit reports and a
similar condition regarding fuel excise tax was commented upon in our preceding
audit report. QACPS’ response to our preceding report indicated that corrective
actions would be implemented to address our recommendations; however,
QACPS did not take the corrective actions as indicated.
Recommendation 16
We recommend that QACPS
a. consider using an ROI to calculate the PVA payments to bus contractors
that provides a reasonable rate of return consistent with the study from
2012 (repeat),
b. develop supportable cost estimates as the basis for per-mile bus operation
and maintenance rates (repeat),
c. independently verify and retain documentation that bus contractor’s
mileage reported on the manifests to ensure that the payments to be made
to the contractors accurately reflect the actual bus services provided, and
d. exclude fuel excise taxes from contractor payments (repeat).
Food Services
Background
According to QACPS’ audited financial statements, food services operating
expenditures totaled $3.2 million in fiscal year 2022 and were funded with federal
funds totaling $4.3 million and food sales totaling $133,500. The federal funds
are received from the United States Department of Agriculture (USDA) based on
an established rate per meals served. QACPS is allowed to retain federal funds it
receives in excess of its annual food service operating costs to be used to offset
certain future food service operating costs. According to QACPS’ audited
34

--- Page 37 ---
financial statements, the balance in QACPS’ Food Services Fund totaled $2
million as of June 30, 2022.
Similar to other Maryland local education agencies, QACPS continued to serve
meals from certain schools during the COVID-19 pandemic health crisis by
providing free meals for parents and students to pick up. The number of meals
served increased by 94 percent from 549,304 in fiscal year 2020 to 1,063,367 in
fiscal year 2022. QACPS advised us that the increase was the results of students
returning to in-person classes after the COVID-19 pandemic, and because meals
were provided to all students at no cost during the 2021-2022 school year.
Food Service Management Contract
QACPS had a food services management contract (FSMC) with a third-party
vendor to manage its food service operations providing meal services to all 14
schools and the central office. In July 2019, QACPS entered into a one-year
contract with its incumbent FSMC vendor, which included four additional one-
year renewal options. These options were exercised which extended the contract
through June 2024.
During fiscal years 2020 to 2023, QACPS paid the FSMC vendor approximately
$8.6 million, which included reimbursable costs related to food ($3.2 million),
labor ($3.8 million), supplies and other miscellaneous expenses ($800,000), and
fixed management fees ($753,000). The fixed management fee, which includes
any vendor profit, was established and approved by MSDE at the beginning of
each contract year in accordance with USDA guidelines. The USDA guidelines
for schools contracting with food services management companies prohibit
vendors from receiving payments exceeding the vendor’s actual, net allowable
costs, plus any fixed fee.
Finding 17
QACPS did not obtain and review support for reimbursable food and labor
costs to ensure amounts invoiced by the FSMC vendor were supported and
complied with USDA guidelines.
Analysis
QACPS did not obtain and review support for reimbursable food and labor costs
to ensure amounts invoiced by the FSMC vendor were supported and complied
with USDA guidelines. We reviewed five material FSMC vendor invoices
totaling $1.4 million ($601,000 in reimbursable food costs, $623,000 in labor
costs, $137,000 in miscellaneous expenses, and $75,000 in net management fees)
paid to the FSMC vendor during the 2021-2022 and 2022-2023 school years.
35

--- Page 38 ---
Our review disclosed that QACPS could not provide us with documentation to
support the amounts invoiced. Rather, QACPS’ verification of the labor charges
was generally limited to reviewing system-wide monthly operating statements to
ensure that the amounts invoiced were comparable to prior periods and consistent
with staffing plans established for QACPS’ schools.
This condition was caused in part because the contract with the vendor did not
require the vendor to provide detailed documentation to support these charges.
We requested that QACPS obtain the detailed documentation (such as payroll
reports and supplier invoices) from the FSMC vendor, but as of April 2024
QACPS was unable to obtain the requested documentation.
Recommendation 17
We recommend that QACPS
a. establish contract requirements for the FSMC vendor to provide support
of reimbursable costs, and
b. perform a documented review of labor and food charges to ensure they
are supported and allowable in accordance with USDA guidelines.
School Board Oversight
Background
The Queen Anne’s County Board of Education (the Board) is composed of five
elected members and two non-voting student representatives. The Board
contracted with a certified public accounting firm to conduct independent audits
of the QACPS financial statements and federal programs.
QACPS Adopted an Ethics Policy that Met the Requirements of State Law
The Board has adopted a detailed ethics policy that conforms to State Law and
was approved by the State Ethics Commission. The policy is applicable to both
Board members and QACPS employees and includes provisions for conflicts of
interest and financial disclosures by Board members and certain employees.
Specifically, annual financial disclosure statements are required to be filed by
Board members, candidates for the Board, the Superintendent, and other
administrators (such as supervisors, school principals, and agency buyers) by
April 30th of each year.
In accordance with the policy, QACPS established an Ethics Panel consisting of
three members appointed by the Board to interpret ethics policies and provide
advice on policy implementation. The Panel also reviews and rules on any
reported complaints of ethics violations. Our review of the records for Board
36

--- Page 39 ---
members and QACPS employees required to submit financial disclosure forms for
calendar year 2021 disclosed that all forms were submitted as required.
Conclusion
Our audit did not disclose any reportable conditions related to school board
oversight.
Management of Other Risks
Healthcare Background
QACPS is a member of the Eastern Shore of Maryland Consortium for employee
and retiree health care. The Consortium members are self-insured for healthcare
costs up to a designated stop-loss amount of $250,000 per participant per plan
year. The Consortium contracts with a third-party administrator (TPA) for health
care claims processing services for employee medical (including prescription
costs), dental and vision, and for stop-loss insurance coverage. The TPA bills
QACPS monthly subscription charges based on the number of participants and
their medical coverage. Medical providers submit claims to the TPA who pays
them on behalf of QACPS. QACPS pays its TPA an administrative fee for these
services.
In a year-end settlement process, the TPA compares the medical claims it paid
against the monthly subscription charges paid by QACPS to determine any excess
amount due from or to be reimbursed. According to the TPA’s records for the
plan year ended August 31, 2022, QACPS health care expenditures totaled
approximately $11 million, administrative fees totaled $469,000, and stop-loss
insurance coverage totaled $1.1 million.
QACPS employees must submit documentation (such as birth certificates) for
dependents they want added to their health plan. As of June 30, 2023, QACPS
provided health insurance benefits to 3,098 enrolled employees, dependents, and
retirees.
Finding 18
QACPS did not adequately monitor the performance of its third-party
administrator that provides health care claims processing services.
Analysis
QACPS did not adequately monitor the performance of its third-party
administrator (TPA) that provides health care claims processing services.
Specifically, QACPS did not adequately verify the propriety of administrative
37

--- Page 40 ---
fees and monthly subscription fees billed by the TPA for medical coverage.
Additionally, QACPS did not verify the TPA’s self-reported performance
measures or ensure the accuracy and propriety of the year-end settlement process.
 QACPS did not verify that administrative fees and monthly subscription fees
billed by the TPA for medical coverage agreed with its payroll records for
enrolled employees. In addition, the monthly rates charged for the various
medical coverage categories were not verified for agreement with the related
available contracts maintained on file. We were advised that the only
verification performed was to ensure changes in coverage reported by the
QACPS’ human resources office were reflected on the monthly invoice. Our
review, based on the listed participant counts on certain monthly invoices and
the related contract rates, did not disclose significant variances. A similar
condition was commented upon in our preceding audit report. In its response
to that report, QACPS indicated that it would verify enrolled employees in the
payroll system and contract rates to ensure the accuracy of TPA invoices.
However, this process was not implemented and as noted above, an alternate
process was implemented that was not adequate.
 QACPS did not obtain support for the 2022 annual settlement to the TPA
which totaled $550,000. Specifically, QACPS did not receive detailed claims
data from the TPA to verify the propriety of the settlement amount. A similar
condition was commented upon in our preceding audit report. In its response
to that report, QACPS indicated that it would present the recommendation to
the Consortium and support the need for a claims audit. However, the
Consortium did not implement this recommendation.
 QACPS did not audit, or otherwise verify, the accuracy of TPA self-reported
compliance with performance measures. The TPA health care contract
included 18 performance measures relating to implementation, network
maintenance, customer service, and claims processing. Additionally, the
contract allowed for the assessment of penalties up to $303,552 annually, if
the TPA did not meet the performance measures. The medical TPA reported
self-assessed penalties of $16,864 in calendar year 2022 based on its reported
compliance, but QACPS did not have a process to verify the TPA’s reported
compliance.
Recommendation 18
We recommend that QACPS
a. compare its records of enrolled employees to TPA invoices and contract
rates to determine the propriety of related administrative fees and
monthly subscription fees billed (repeat);
38

--- Page 41 ---
b. obtain documentation to support actual claim payments and any
additional information on the end of year settlement (repeat); and
c. establish a process to independently verify, on an annual basis, the TPA’s
compliance with required performance measures and assess penalties
when performance goals are not met.
39

--- Page 42 ---
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We have conducted a performance audit of the Queen Anne’s County Public
Schools (QACPS). We conducted this audit under the authority of the State
Government Article, Section 2-1220(e) of the Annotated Code of Maryland,
which generally requires that every 6 years we audit each of the 24 local school
systems to evaluate the effectiveness and efficiency of financial management
practices. This performance audit was performed in accordance with generally
accepted government auditing standards. Those standards require that we plan
and perform the audit to obtain sufficient, appropriate evidence to provide a
reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives.
We believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings
and conclusions based on our audit objectives.
We had two broad audit objectives:
1. Evaluate whether the QACPS procedures and controls were effective in
accounting for and safeguarding its assets.
2. Evaluate whether the QACPS policies provided for the efficient use of
financial resources.
In planning and conducting our audit of QACPS, we focused on 11 major
financial-related areas of operations as approved on December 6, 2016 by the
Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee of the Maryland General Assembly in
accordance with the enabling legislation. The 11 major financial-related areas
included revenue and billing, federal funds, procurement and disbursements,
human resources and payroll, equipment control, information technology security
and control, facilities, transportation, food service, school board oversight, and the
management of other risks (such as health care).
The scope of the work performed in each of these areas was based on our
assessments of significance and risk. Therefore, our follow-up on the status of
findings included in our preceding audit report on QACPS dated August 1, 2018,
was limited to those findings that were applicable to the current audit scope for
each of the 11 areas.
The audit objectives excluded reviewing and assessing student achievement,
curriculum, teacher performance, and other academic-related areas and functions.
Also, we did not evaluate the QACPS Comprehensive Education Master Plan or
related updates, and we did not review the activities, financial or other, of any
40

--- Page 43 ---
parent teacher association, group, or funds not under the local board of
education’s direct control or management.
To accomplish our objectives, we reviewed applicable State laws and regulations
pertaining to public elementary and secondary education, as well as policies and
procedures issued and established by QACPS. We also interviewed personnel at
QACPS and the Maryland State Department of Education (MSDE), and staff at
other local school systems in Maryland (as appropriate). Our audit procedures
included inspections of documents and records, and to the extent practicable,
observations of QACPS operations. We also tested transactions and performed
other auditing procedures that we considered necessary to achieve our objectives,
generally for the period from July 1, 2020 to February 28, 2023.
Generally, transactions were selected for testing based on auditor judgment,
which primarily considers risk, the timing or dollar amount of the transaction, or
the significance of the transaction to the area of operation reviewed. As a matter
of course, we do not normally use sampling in our tests, so unless otherwise
specifically indicated, neither statistical nor non-statistical audit sampling was
used to select the transactions tested. Therefore, unless sampling is specifically
indicated in a finding, the results from any tests conducted or disclosed by us
cannot be used to project those results to the entire population from which the test
items were selected. For certain areas within the scope of the audit, we relied on
the work performed by the independent accounting firm that annually audits
QACPS’ financial statements and conducts the federal Single Audit, as well as the
reviews of school activity funds performed by QACPS’ Finance Department.
We used certain statistical data—including financial and operational—compiled
by MSDE from various informational reports submitted by the Maryland local
school systems. This information was used in this audit report for background or
informational purposes, and was deemed reasonable.
We also extracted data from the QACPS automated financial management system
for the purpose of testing expenditure and payroll transactions. We performed
various audit procedures on the relevant data and determined the data were
sufficiently reliable for the purposes the data were used during the audit.
QACPS’ management is responsible for establishing and maintaining effective
internal control. Internal control is a process designed to provide reasonable
assurance that objectives pertaining to the reliability of financial records;
effectiveness and efficiency of operations including safeguarding of assets; and
compliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations are achieved. As
provided in Government Auditing Standards, there are five components of
41

--- Page 44 ---
internal control: control environment, risk assessment, control activities,
information and communication, and monitoring. Each of the five components,
when significant to the audit objectives, and as applicable to QACPS, were
considered by us during the course of this audit.
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate. In addition
to the conditions included in this report, other findings were communicated to
QACPS that were not deemed significant and, consequently, did not warrant
inclusion in this report.
State Government Article Section 2-1224(i) requires that we redact in a manner
consistent with auditing best practices any cybersecurity findings before a report
is made available to the public. This results in the issuance of two different
versions of an audit report that contains cybersecurity findings – a redacted
version for the public and an unredacted version for government officials
responsible for acting on our audit recommendations.
The State Finance and Procurement Article, Section 3.5-301(b), states that
cybersecurity is defined as “processes or capabilities wherein systems,
communications, and information are protected and defended against damage,
unauthorized use or modification, and exploitation.” Based on that definition, and
in our professional judgment, we concluded that certain findings in this report fall
under that definition. Consequently, for the publicly available audit report all
specifics as to the nature of cybersecurity findings and required corrective actions
have been redacted. We have determined that such aforementioned practices, and
government auditing standards, support the redaction of this information from the
public audit report. The specifics of these cybersecurity findings have been
communicated to QACPS and those parties responsible for acting on our
recommendations in an unredacted audit report.
We conducted our fieldwork from March 2023 to October 2023. QACPS’
response to our findings and recommendations is included as an appendix to this
report. Depending on the version of the audit report, responses to any
cybersecurity findings may be redacted in accordance with State law. As
prescribed in the State Government Article, Section 2-1224 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, we will advise QACPS regarding the results of our review of
its response.
42

--- Page 45 ---
APPENDIX
November 21, 2024
Brian S. Tanen, CPA, CFE
Legislative Auditor
Office of Legislative Audits
The Warehouse at Camden Yards
351 West Camden Street, Suite 400
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Dear Mr. Tanen,
Enclosed are the responses to the recommendations made in the Financial Management Practices
Audit Report for Queen Anne’s County Public Schools. This response has also been emailed to
response@ola.state.md.usas requested.
If you have any questions regarding this submission, please contact me atpatricia.saelens@qacps.org.
Very truly yours,
Dr. Patricia Saelens, Superintendent
Enclosures
cc: Dr. Matthew Kibler, Assistant Superintendent
Ms. Whitney Gast, Chief Financial Officer
202 Chesterfield Ave. Centreville, MD 21617 410-758-2403 www.qacps.org

--- Page 46 ---
Queen Anne’s County Public Schools
Agency Response Form
Procurement and Disbursement Cycle
Finding 1
Certain requirements of State law and recognized best practices were not
incorporated into QACPS policies and were not consistently used when
participating in an intergovernmental cooperative purchasing agreement
(ICPA).
We recommend that QACPS incorporate the aforementioned statutory
requirements and other identified and acknowledged best practices into its
procurement policies and ensure that the performance of the requirements
and best practices are documented when evaluating and participating in
ICPAs (repeat).
Agency Response
Analysis Factually Accurate
Please provide
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 1 Agree Estimated Completion Date: 2025
Please provide details of For Operations and Facilities, the regulation will be formally updated
corrective action or and approved by the board to the following: Projects over $50,000 will
explain disagreement. be bid utilizing an advertised and competitive bid process. Projects over
$25,000, but less than $50,000, will have at least three separate vendors
solicited with quotes sought and provided for evaluation. In these
instances, per COMAR, QACPS will select the lowest responsive,
responsible bidder or quote.
Page 1 of 19

--- Page 47 ---
Queen Anne’s County Public Schools
Agency Response Form
Finding 2
QACPS did not always prepare and approve purchase orders prior to
obtaining goods or services and did not have system edits to prevent
payments from exceeding contract maximums.
We recommend that QACPS
a. ensure purchase orders are prepared and approved prior to obtaining the
related goods or services,
b. consider revising the procurement policy to require purchase orders for
all contracts consistent with its practice, and
c. establish controls to prevent invoice payments from exceeding the related
purchase order.
Agency Response
Analysis Factually Accurate
Please provide
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 2a Agree Estimated Completion Date: 2025
Please provide details of QACPS does have an approved process for non-PO purchases in
corrective action or addition to PO’s. All Non-PO invoices are approved by a Department
explain disagreement. manager before payment. For the period of this audit, the CFO also
approved Non-PO Accounts Payable batches. QACPS is working to
update its policy to better clarify when the Executive Team requires a
PO vs. a non-PO payment.
Recommendation 2b Agree Estimated Completion Date: 2025
Please provide details of Although QACPS will make attempts and adjust policy to limit non-PO
corrective action or purchases, some instances will still take place due to the nature of the
explain disagreement. purchase.
Recommendation 2c Agree Estimated Completion Date: 2025
Please provide details of Certain PO amounts will always be adjusted when paid, including the
corrective action or mentioned bus contractors. The PO captures the estimated cost, while
explain disagreement. the amount paid captures the true cost of the item. Change orders are
processed for PO’s if the final payment amount is known ahead of time.
Page 2 of 19

--- Page 48 ---
Queen Anne’s County Public Schools
Agency Response Form
Auditor’s Comment: QACPS agrees with the findings and recommendations
but indicates that it has an approval process for paying invoices without a
purchase order. Approving invoices for payment does not ensure the purchase of
goods and services was properly authorized or the related controls provided by
using a purchase order. As noted in the analysis, establishing purchase orders
helps QACPS control invoice payments by electronically matching the approved
invoice payments to the established purchase order. Therefore, we continue to
believe our recommendation is both accurate and appropriate.
Page 3 of 19

--- Page 49 ---
Queen Anne’s County Public Schools
Agency Response Form
Finding 3
QACPS did not properly report vendor payments in aggregate of $25,000 or
more to the Department of Budget and Management (DBM), as required to
enhance transparency of the procurement process.
We recommend that QACPS
a. establish procedures to ensure all vendor payments in aggregate of
$25,000 or greater are reported to DBM, as required; and
b. retroactively report the vendor payments that were not reported to DBM
for fiscal year 2022.
Agency Response
Analysis Factually Accurate
Please provide
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 3a Agree Estimated Completion Date: 12/2024
Please provide details of QACPS will report for FY 2024.
corrective action or
explain disagreement.
Recommendation 3b Agree Estimated Completion Date: 12/2024
Please provide details of QACPS will report retroactively report for FY 2022 and FY 2023.
corrective action or
explain disagreement.
Page 4 of 19

--- Page 50 ---
Queen Anne’s County Public Schools
Agency Response Form
Human Resources and Payroll
Finding 4
QACPS could not document that the Queen Anne’s County Board of
Education (the Board) reviewed and approved salaries for three executive-
level employees as required by State law.
We recommend that QACPS obtain Board approval for executive-level
salaries, as required by State law (repeat).
Agency Response
Analysis Factually Accurate
Please provide Factually accurate for executive level members prior to FY2022 only.
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 4 Agree Estimated Completion Date: N/A
Please provide details of QACPS obtained board approval for all executive level employees, both
corrective action or new employees and employees given new contracts, in 2022, 2023 and
explain disagreement. 2024. In addition, QACPS will continue this process going forward.
Page 5 of 19

--- Page 51 ---
Queen Anne’s County Public Schools
Agency Response Form
Finding 5
QACPS did not have a documented independent review and approval of
other earnings payments which totaled $595,000 during fiscal year 2022.
We recommend that QACPS perform a documented independent review and
approval of other earnings payroll transactions (repeat).
Agency Response
Analysis Factually Accurate
Please provide
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 5 Agree Estimated Completion Date: 12/2024
Please provide details of Prior to other earnings transactions being prepared, a supervisor must
corrective action or sign off on all other earnings transactions. Final leave payouts, sick
explain disagreement. leave, pay, and retroactive pay are all signed by the direct supervisor and
the Director of HR prior to being sent to finance to process. Independent
reviews are built into multiple steps of the process of other earnings
transactions.
In addition to the supervisory approvals throughout approval of other
earnings, the CFO will review and approval final transactions to ensure
correctness.
Page 6 of 19

--- Page 52 ---
Queen Anne’s County Public Schools
Agency Response Form
Finding 6
QACPS did not always perform a required screening before hiring certain
applicants for positions involving direct contact with minors.
We recommend that QACPS perform and document the required screening
for positions involving direct contact with minors, including those noted
above, in compliance with State law.
Agency Response
Analysis Factually Accurate
Please provide In the very few instances found, HR had not formally approved these
additional comments as individuals for employment, due to pending background checks. Most of
deemed necessary. these instances were part time employees that had direct supervision
while working with minors This has been addressed repeatedly with
school principals to ensure this practice does not continue.
Recommendation 6 Agree Estimated Completion Date: Ongoing
Please provide details of QACPS performs required background investigations for all employees,
corrective action or including individuals with direct contract with minors. All employees
explain disagreement. require a signed contract before employment. To continue to reinforce
this policy, employees are also not paid until a signed contract is in
place, even if they have worked prior to the date of their contract
signature.
Page 7 of 19

--- Page 53 ---
Queen Anne’s County Public Schools
Agency Response Form
Equipment Control and Accountability
Finding 7
QACPS’ equipment record keeping policies were not comprehensive,
equipment records were not complete, and equipment disposals were not
properly controlled.
We recommend that QACPS
a. establish a policy defining sensitive equipment items that requires them to
be recorded in the inventory records (repeat);
b. establish requirements for conducting physical inventory counts of
equipment, investigating missing items, reporting lost or stolen items and
approving disposals (repeat);
c. ensure that disposals are properly supported, independently approved,
and that disposal records are maintained (repeat); and
d. ensure inventory records are properly maintained, including recording
the aforementioned laptops (repeat).
Agency Response
Analysis Factually Accurate
Please provide
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 7a Agree Estimated Completion Date: 2025
Please provide details of QACPS does allow each school to determine what is considered
corrective action or sensitive and necessary to track. This allows for each school to maintain
explain disagreement. records for the items they feel are the most sensitive. Items that are
sensitive at a high school level may be different from items at an
elementary school. QACPS will look into creating a standard procedure
that clearly lists sensitive items.
Recommendation 7b Agree Estimated Completion Date: 2025
Please provide details of QACPS will provide a more detailed policy for conducting inventory of
corrective action or sensitive equipment, investigating missing items, reporting lost or stolen
explain disagreement. items, and approving disposals of non-capital assets.
Recommendation 7c Agree Estimated Completion Date: 2025
Page 8 of 19

--- Page 54 ---
Queen Anne’s County Public Schools
Agency Response Form
Please provide details of The IT department and the finance department will work together to
corrective action or establish a more detailed disposal procedure.
explain disagreement.
Recommendation 7d Agree Estimated Completion Date: 2025
Please provide details of QACPS will review their fixed asset policies and procedures.
corrective action or
explain disagreement.
Page 9 of 19

--- Page 55 ---
Queen Anne’s County Public Schools
Agency Response Form
Information Technology
The Office of Legislative Audits (OLA) has determined that the Information
Technology section, including Findings 8 through 13 related to “cybersecurity,”
as defined by the State Finance and Procurement Article, Section 3.5-301(b) of
the Annotated Code of Maryland, and therefore is subject to redaction from the
publicly available audit report in accordance with the State Government Article 2-
1224(i). Consequently, the specifics of the following findings, including the
analysis, related recommendations, along with QACPS’ responses, have been
redacted from this report copy.
Finding 8
Redacted cybersecurity-related finding.
Agency Response has been redacted by OLA.
Finding 9
Redacted cybersecurity-related finding.
Agency Response has been redacted by OLA.
Finding 10
Redacted cybersecurity-related finding.
Agency Response has been redacted by OLA.
Finding 11
Redacted cybersecurity-related finding.
Agency Response has been redacted by OLA.
Page 10 of 19

--- Page 56 ---
Queen Anne’s County Public Schools
Agency Response Form
Finding 12
Redacted cybersecurity-related finding.
Agency Response has been redacted by OLA.
Finding 13
Redacted cybersecurity-related finding.
Agency Response has been redacted by OLA.
Page 11 of 19

--- Page 57 ---
Queen Anne’s County Public Schools
Agency Response Form
Transportation Services
Finding 14
QACPS awarded a sole source contract for a school bus safety camera
system instead of conducting a competitive procurement.
We recommend that QACPS
a. adhere to statutory requirements for competitive bidding, where
appropriate; and
b. ensure the basis and reasoning for revenue sharing and technology fees
are documented in future school bus safety camera contracts.
Agency Response
Analysis Factually Accurate
Please provide
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 14a Agree Estimated Completion Date:
Please provide details of QACPS will work to develop a standard practice for documenting piggy-
corrective action or backing contract documentation relate to the initial procurement.
explain disagreement.
Recommendation 14b Agree Estimated Completion Date:
Please provide details of QACPS will review and document how services fees are established to
corrective action or ensure they are reasonable.
explain disagreement.
Page 12 of 19

--- Page 58 ---
Queen Anne’s County Public Schools
Agency Response Form
OLA has determined that Finding 15 related to “cybersecurity,” as defined by the
State Finance and Procurement Article, Section 3.5-301(b) of the Annotated Code
of Maryland, and therefore is subject to redaction from the publicly available
audit report in accordance with the State Government Article 2-1224(i).
Consequently the specifics of the finding, including the analysis, related
recommendation(s), along with QACPS’ responses, have been redacted from this
report copy.
Finding 15
Redacted cybersecurity-related finding.
Agency Response has been redacted by OLA.
Page 13 of 19

--- Page 59 ---
Queen Anne’s County Public Schools
Agency Response Form
Finding 16
Certain elements of bus contractor payments could not be supported, did not
reflect market conditions, or did not consider available fuel tax credits.
We recommend that QACPS
a. consider using an ROI to calculate the PVA payments to bus contractors
that provides a reasonable rate of return consistent with the study from
2012 (repeat),
b. develop supportable cost estimates as the basis for per-mile bus operation
and maintenance rates (repeat),
c. independently verify and retain documentation that bus contractor’s
mileage reported on the manifests to ensure that the payments to be made
to the contractors accurately reflect the actual bus services provided, and
d. exclude fuel excise taxes from contractor payments (repeat).
Agency Response
Analysis Factually Accurate
Please provide Please see information in responses to recommendations.
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 16a Agree Estimated Completion Date: 2025
Please provide details of QACPS will consider using ROI when developing PVA costs if able.
corrective action or
explain disagreement.
Recommendation 16b Agree Estimated Completion Date: 2025
Please provide details of QACPS will work to establish formal processes to document cost
corrective action or estimates used in bus contracts.
explain disagreement.
Recommendation 16c Agree Estimated Completion Date: 2025
Please provide details of QACPS automated routing software generates the actual route that each
corrective action or bus contractor is assigned. All manifests are then compared to the
explain disagreement. software-generated route for a comparison. QACPS recommends
performing 25% ride-along audits of all contractor bus routes to assure
the accuracy of the information. QACPS will work to develop
procedures for supporting documentation surrounding ride-along audits.
Additionally, QACPS will work to performing audits closer to 25%.
Recommendation 16d Agree Estimated Completion Date: 2025
Page 14 of 19

--- Page 60 ---
Queen Anne’s County Public Schools
Agency Response Form
Please provide details of QACPS will develop specific language in the next Contract pertaining to
corrective action or Federal Excise and State Fuel taxes.
explain disagreement.
Page 15 of 19

--- Page 61 ---
Queen Anne’s County Public Schools
Agency Response Form
Food Services
Finding 17
QACPS did not obtain and review support for reimbursable food and labor
costs to ensure amounts invoiced by the FSMC vendor were supported and
complied with USDA guidelines.
We recommend that QACPS
a. establish contract requirements for the FSMC vendor to provide support
of reimbursable costs, and
b. perform a documented review of labor and food charges to ensure they
are supported and allowable in accordance with USDA guidelines.
Agency Response
Analysis Factually Accurate
Please provide Although QACPS did not review its invoices from its FSMC vendor to
additional comments as the level stated, QACPS does not believe that we are unable to ensure
deemed necessary. the amounts invoiced and paid meet the USDA guidelines.
Recommendation 17a Agree Estimated Completion Date: 2025
Please provide details of Until SY 2025, QACPS hired a contract FSMC to manage the counties
corrective action or resources in regards to food service labor and product cost. Weekly labor
explain disagreement. reports and vendor invoices are not reviewed but the monthly operating
statement is reviewed in detail before being approved. This operating
report provides a detailed breakdown of labor and product cost, as well
as any discounts or rebates received. The report is reviewed and any
expense in question or discrepancies in labor or product cost require the
FSMC to provide documentation backing up these expenses or a written
explanation for the expense in question.
If QACPS outsources food services in the future, we will develop
procedures to confirm and document reimbursable costs.
Recommendation 17b Agree Estimated Completion Date: 2025
Please provide details of Until SY 2025, QACPS did not have access to the FSMC payroll
corrective action or systems and reports. If labor charges are in question, then a report can be
explain disagreement. requested. Our contractor runs a weekly report and adjusts staffing
schedules accordingly based on this report. If labor charges are higher
than prior months or labor in relation to total sales is off, then a written
response supporting that increased labor is requested from the contractor
prior to the approval of the monthly invoice.
Page 16 of 19

--- Page 62 ---
Queen Anne’s County Public Schools
Agency Response Form
If QACPS outsources food services in the future, we will develop
procedures to confirm all costs are allowable.
Page 17 of 19

--- Page 63 ---
Queen Anne’s County Public Schools
Agency Response Form
Management of Other Risks
Finding 18
QACPS did not adequately monitor the performance of its third-party
administrator that provides health care claims processing services.
We recommend that QACPS
a. compare its records of enrolled employees to TPA invoices and contract
rates to determine the propriety of related administrative fees and
monthly subscription fees billed (repeat);
b. obtain documentation to support actual claim payments and any
additional information on the end of year settlement (repeat); and
c. establish a process to independently verify, on an annual basis, the TPA’s
compliance with required performance measures and assess penalties
when performance goals are not met.
Agency Response
Analysis Factually Accurate
Please provide As a member for the Eastern Shore of Maryland Consortium (ESMEC),
additional comments as a consulting firm monitors the performance of its TPAs on our behalf for
deemed necessary. most transactions. QACPS did not go above the consulting firm review,
as we felt their review was adequate.
Recommendation 18a Disagree Estimated Completion Date:
Please provide details of This is performed by the consulting firm on our behalf.
corrective action or
explain disagreement.
Recommendation 18b Agree Estimated Completion Date: 2025
Please provide details of QACPS will request additional information supporting documentation
corrective action or from the consulting firm in regards to end of year settlement data.
explain disagreement.
Recommendation 18c Agree Estimated Completion Date: 2025
Please provide details of Finance and HR will work with the consulting firm to establish best
corrective action or practices for QACPS to independently verify these items.
explain disagreement.
Page 18 of 19

--- Page 64 ---
Queen Anne’s County Public Schools
Agency Response Form
Auditor’s Comment: QACPS disagreed with our recommendation and indicated
that its vendor is verifying the accuracy of TPA invoiced contract rates,
administrative fees, and monthly subscription fees. However, QACPS could not
provide us evidence that this occurred. In addition, the vendor is not independent
of the TPA since it helps establish the TPA’s billable rates. Therefore, we
continue to believe our recommendation is both accurate and appropriate.
Page 19 of 19

--- Page 65 ---
A T
UDIT EAM
Bekana Edossa, CPA, CFE
Raymond G. Burton, Jr., CPA, CFE
Audit Managers
R. Brendan Coffey, CPA, CISA
Edwin L. Paul, CPA, CISA
Information Systems Audit Managers
James M. Fowler, CFE
Walter L. Horan, IV
Edward J. Welsh, CFE
Senior Auditors
Charles O. Price
Malcolm J. Woodard
Information Systems Senior Auditors
Mya N. Cofield
Daniel G. Johnson, CFE
Timothy Moon
Staff Auditors