Title: Office of the Register of Wills - Baltimore City
Date: 09/19/2018
Type: Fiscal Compliance
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5ba4060aa1ce580d6c05ee72
Extracted: 2025-06-18T22:19:04.029213
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Audit Report
Office of the Register of Wills
Baltimore City, Maryland
January 2023
Public Notice
In compliance with the requirements of the State Government Article Section
2-1224(i), of the Annotated Code of Maryland, the Office of Legislative
Audits has redacted a cybersecurity finding and related auditee response
from this public report.
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Senator Clarence K. Lam, M.D. (Senate Chair) Delegate Mark S. Chang (House Chair)
Senator Malcolm L. Augustine Delegate Steven J. Arentz
Senator Adelaide C. Eckardt Delegate Nicholas P. Charles II
Senator George C. Edwards Delegate Andrea Fletcher Harrison
Senator Katie Fry Hester Delegate Trent M. Kittleman
Senator Cheryl C. Kagan Delegate Carol L. Krimm
Senator Benjamin F. Kramer Delegate David Moon
Senator Cory V. McCray Delegate Julie Palakovich Carr
Senator Justin D. Ready Delegate Elizabeth G. Proctor
Senator Craig J. Zucker Delegate Geraldine Valentino-Smith
To Obtain Further Information
Office of Legislative Audits
The Warehouse at Camden Yards
351 West Camden Street, Suite 400
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Phone: 410-946-5900
Maryland Relay: 711
TTY: 410-946-5401 · 301-970-5401
E-mail: OLAWebmaster@ola.state.md.us
Website: www.ola.state.md.us
To Report Fraud
The Office of Legislative Audits operates a Fraud Hotline to report fraud, waste, or abuse involving State
of Maryland government resources. Reports of fraud, waste, or abuse may be communicated anonymously
by a toll-free call to 1-877-FRAUD-11, by mail to the Fraud Hotline, c/o Office of Legislative Audits, or
through the Office’s website.
Nondiscrimination Statement
The Department of Legislative Services does not discriminate on the basis of age, ancestry, color, creed,
marital status, national origin, race, religion, gender, gender identity, sexual orientation, or disability in the
admission or access to its programs, services, or activities. The Department’s Information Officer has been
designated to coordinate compliance with the nondiscrimination requirements contained in Section 35.107
of the United States Department of Justice Regulations. Requests for assistance should be directed to the
Information Officer at 410-946-5400 or 410-970-5400.

--- Page 3 ---
January 3, 2023
Senator Clarence K. Lam, M.D., Senate Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Delegate Mark S. Chang, House Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Members of Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Annapolis, Maryland
Ladies and Gentlemen:
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the Office of the Register of
Wills for Baltimore City, Maryland for the period beginning May 22, 2018 and
ending June 15, 2022. The Office oversees the administration of decedents’
estates within Baltimore City and assists individuals who administer estates.
Our audit disclosed certain risks in the Office’s information system. However in
accordance with the State Government Article, Section 2-1224(i) of the
Annotated Code of Maryland, we have redacted this finding from this audit
report. Specifically, State law requires the Office of Legislative Audits to redact
cybersecurity findings in a manner consistent with auditing best practices before
the report is made available to the public. The term “cybersecurity” is defined in
the State Finance and Procurement Article, Section 3A-301(b), and using our
professional judgment we have determined that the redacted finding falls under
the referenced definition. The specifics of the cybersecurity finding were
previously communicated to the Office as well as those parties responsible for
acting on our recommendations.
The Office’s response to this audit is included as an appendix to this report;
however, consistent with the requirements of State law, we have redacted most

--- Page 4 ---
elements of the Office’s response since it is related to the cybersecurity audit
finding. We reviewed the response and noted general agreement to our finding
and related recommendations. Subsequent to the response receipt, but prior to the
issuance of the final report, we contacted the Office and obtained additional
clarification from the Register that satisfactorily resolved all outstanding
questions and issues. Consequently, we have concluded that the written response
and additional clarification together indicate that the Office’s corrective actions
identified are sufficient to address all audit issues.
We wish to acknowledge the cooperation extended to us during the audit by the
Office and its willingness to address the audit issues and implement appropriate
corrective actions.
Respectfully submitted,
Gregory A. Hook, CPA
Legislative Auditor
2

--- Page 5 ---
Background Information
Agency Responsibilities and Financial Information
The Office of the Register of Wills is a public office established under the
Constitution of Maryland. An office is established in each of the 24 Maryland
subdivisions. These offices oversee the administration of decedents’ estates
within their jurisdictions and provide assistance (such as providing the proper
forms) to individuals administering estates. The offices collect inheritance taxes
and other fees as provided by law.
Inheritance tax collections (less the commissions earned by an office on those
collections) are remitted to the State’s General Fund. The fees collected and
commissions earned by an office are first used to finance the operating expenses it
is responsible for paying directly. Generally, the remaining balance of fees and
commissions is periodically remitted to the Comptroller of Maryland to finance
other operating expenses (such as payroll) that the Comptroller pays on behalf of
the offices. On a collective basis, the offices’ fees and commissions that exceed
their operating expenses are credited to the General Fund.
According to the records of the Office of Register of Wills for Baltimore City, its
fiscal year 2021 gross receipts totaled $3,979,335, which consisted of inheritance
tax collections (net of commissions) of $2,606,278 and fees and commissions of
$1,373,057. The Office’s fiscal year 2021 operating expenses totaled $4,326,258,
the majority of which represents costs paid directly by the Comptroller, as noted
above.
Findings and Recommendations
Information System Security and Control
We determined that Finding 1 related to “cybersecurity”, as defined by the State
Finance and Procurement Article, Section 3A-301(b) of the Annotated Code of
Maryland, and therefore is subject to redaction from the publicly available audit
report in accordance with the State Government Article 2-1224(i). Consequently,
the specifics of the following finding, including the analysis, related
recommendation(s), along with the Office’s responses, have been redacted from
this report copy.
3

--- Page 6 ---
Finding 1
Redacted cybersecurity-related finding.
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the Office of the Register of
Wills for Baltimore City, Maryland for the period beginning May 22, 2018 and
ending June 15, 2022. The audit was conducted in accordance with generally
accepted government auditing standards. Those standards require that we plan
and perform the audit to obtain sufficient, appropriate evidence to provide a
reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives.
We believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings
and conclusions based on our audit objectives.
As prescribed by the State Government Article, Section 2-1221 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, the objectives of this audit were to examine the Office’s
financial transactions, records, and internal control, and to evaluate its compliance
with applicable State laws, rules, and regulations.
In planning and conducting our audit, we focused on the major financial-related
areas of operations based on assessments of significance and risk. The areas
addressed by the audit included cash receipts, disbursements, bank accounts, and
administration of estates.
Our audit did not include a review of certain support services (such as human
resources, maintenance of accounting records, and related fiscal functions)
provided to the Office by the Comptroller of Maryland – Office of the
Comptroller. These support services are included within the scope of our audits
of the Office of the Comptroller.
Our assessment of internal controls was based on agency procedures and controls
in place at the time of our fieldwork. Our test of transactions and other auditing
procedures were generally focused on the transactions occurring during our audit
period of May 22, 2018 to June 15, 2022, but may include transactions before or
after this period as we considered necessary to achieve our audit objectives.
To accomplish our audit objectives, our audit procedures included inquiries of
appropriate personnel, inspections of documents and records, tests of transactions,
and to the extent practicable, observations of the Office’s operations. Generally,
transactions were selected for testing based on auditor judgment, which primarily
considers risk, the timing or dollar amount of the transaction, or the significance
4

--- Page 7 ---
of the transaction to the area of operation reviewed. As a matter of course, we do
not normally use sampling in our tests, so unless otherwise specifically indicated,
neither statistical nor non-statistical audit sampling was used to select the
transactions tested. Therefore, unless sampling is specifically indicated in a
finding, the results from any tests conducted or disclosed by us cannot be used to
project those results to the entire population from which the test items were
selected. We also performed other auditing procedures that we considered
necessary to achieve our audit objectives. The reliability of data used in this
report for background or informational purposes was not assessed.
The Office’s management is responsible for establishing and maintaining
effective internal control. Internal control is a process designed to provide
reasonable assurance that objectives pertaining to the reliability of financial
records; effectiveness and efficiency of operations, including safeguarding of
assets; and compliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations are achieved.
As provided in Government Auditing Standards, there are five components of
internal control: control environment, risk assessment, control activities,
information and communication, and monitoring. Each of the five components,
when significant to the audit objectives, and as applicable to the Office, were
considered by us during the course of this audit.
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate.
Our reports are designed to assist the Maryland General Assembly in exercising
its legislative oversight function and to provide constructive recommendations for
improving State operations. As a result, our reports generally do not address
activities we reviewed that are functioning properly.
This report includes a finding relating to a condition that we consider to be a
significant deficiency in the design or operation of internal control that could
adversely affect the Office’s ability to maintain reliable financial records, operate
effectively and efficiently, and/or comply with applicable laws, rules, and
regulations. This finding is also considered a significant instance of
noncompliance with applicable laws, rules, or regulations. Other less significant
findings were communicated to the Office that did not warrant inclusion in this
report.
State Government Article Section 2-1224(i) requires that we redact in a manner
consistent with auditing best practices any cybersecurity findings before a report
5

--- Page 8 ---
is made available to the public. This results in the issuance of two different
versions of an audit report that contains cybersecurity findings – a redacted
version for the public and an unredacted version for government officials
responsible for acting on our audit recommendations.
The State Finance and Procurement Article, Section 3A-301(b), states that
cybersecurity is defined as “processes or capabilities wherein systems,
communications, and information are protected and defended against damage,
unauthorized use or modification, and exploitation”. Based on that definition, and
in our professional judgment, we concluded that certain findings in this report fall
under that definition. Consequently, for the publicly available audit report all
specifics as to the nature of cybersecurity findings and required corrective actions
have been redacted. We have determined that such aforementioned practices, and
government auditing standards, support the redaction of this information from the
public audit report. The specifics of these cybersecurity findings have been
communicated to the Office and those parties responsible for acting on our
recommendations in an unredacted audit report.
The Office’s response to our finding and recommendations is included as an
appendix to this report. Depending on the version of the audit report, responses to
any cybersecurity findings may be redacted in accordance with State law. As
prescribed in the State Government Article, Section 2-1224 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, we will advise the Office regarding the results of our review
of its response.
6

--- Page 10 ---
Office of the Register of Wills
Baltimore City, Maryland
Agency Response Form
Information System Security and Control
The Office of Legislative Audits (OLA) has determined that Finding 1 related to “cybersecurity”
as defined by the State Finance and Procurement Article, Section 3A-301(b) of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, and therefore is subject to redaction from the publicly available audit report
in accordance with State Government Article 2-1224(i). Although OLA redacted from this
report copy the specifics of the finding, including the analysis, related recommendation(s), along
with the Office’s response, the Office’s response indicated agreement with the finding and
related recommendation(s).
Finding 1
Redacted cybersecurity-related finding.
Agency Response has been redacted by OLA.
Page 1 of 1

--- Page 11 ---
A T
UDIT EAM
Heather A. Warriner, CPA
Audit Manager
Anthony V. Calcagno
Senior Auditor
Keli R. Edmonds
Staff Auditor