Title: Department of Budget and Management’s Oversight of Training Offered to Management Employees
Date: 09/25/2018
Type: Performance
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5bae482ba1ce5805f48b334d
Extracted: 2025-06-18T22:19:25.622847
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Performance Audit Report
Management Training
Department of Budget and Management’s Oversight
of Training Offered to Management Employees
September 2018
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
For further information concerning this report contact:
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
301 West Preston Street, Room 1202
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Phone: 410-946-5900 · 301-970-5900
Toll Free in Maryland: 1-877-486-9964
Maryland Relay: 711
TTY: 410-946-5401 · 301-970-5401
E-mail: OLAWebmaster@ola.state.md.us
Website: www.ola.state.md.us
The Office of Legislative Audits operates a Fraud Hotline to report fraud, waste, or abuse
involving State of Maryland government resources. Reports of fraud, waste, or abuse may
be communicated anonymously by a toll-free call to 1-877-FRAUD-11, by mail to the Fraud
Hotline, c/o Office of Legislative Audits, or through the Office’s website.
The Department of Legislative Services does not discriminate on the basis of age, ancestry,
color, creed, marital status, national origin, race, religion, gender, gender identity, sexual
orientation, or disability in the admission or access to its programs, services, or activities. The
Department’s Information Officer has been designated to coordinate compliance with the
nondiscrimination requirements contained in Section 35.107 of the Department of Justice
Regulations. Requests for assistance should be directed to the Information Officer at 410-946-
5400 or 410-970-5400.

--- Page 5 ---
Table of Contents
Background Information 4
Overview 4
Department of Budget and Management’s (DBM) Training 5
Responsibilities
Audit Scope, Objective, and Methodology 7
Audit Scope 7
Objective and Methodology 7
Advice of Counsel Requested to Interpret Governing Laws 9
Excluded from Scope 10
Fieldwork and Agency Response 10
Conclusions 11
Findings and Recommendations 13
DBM Oversight of Management Training
Finding 1 – DBM had not established a formal Statewide training 13
program for management employees in the State Personnel
Management System (SPMS) to help them develop their skills and
perform their duties efficiently.
Management Training – State Agency Programs
Finding 2 – DBM had not established regulations or policies that 16
would provide guidance to and oversight of State agencies that
separately established training programs, to help ensure their
managers had access to quality training.
Exhibit 1 – Management Training Programs Offered By Other Selected 19
States and the District of Columbia
Exhibit 2 – SPMS Agency Training Programs Course Content Summary 20
Agency Response Appendix
3

--- Page 6 ---
Background Information
Overview
According to a United States Government Accountability Office report1,
strategic human capital management centers on viewing people as assets
whose value to an organization can be enhanced through investment.
Investing in people includes providing training programs to employees to
assist an organization in achieving its mission and goals. Ultimately,
improving employee performance leads to improved organizational
performance.
While establishing training programs for all employees is desirable, in our
opinion, it is particularly essential for management employees. Managers are
responsible for motivating, teaching, and developing subordinates. Therefore,
organizations need to make sure managers, especially new managers, receive
the training necessary to develop skills to effectively lead and direct their
subordinates and create a productive and supportive work environment.
A critical outcome of appropriate management training should be improving
employee engagement and trust, which are critical factors affecting employee
productivity and turnover. Specifically, a 2012 study by a global professional
services firm surveyed over 32,000 employees and found a direct relationship
between employee engagement and productivity2. Furthermore, a 2014 study
by the same firm found that leadership is the key driver for sustainable
engagement, and only 40 percent of workers surveyed were highly engaged3.
The 2012 study also found that workers who are not highly engaged are more
likely to leave employment.
Generally, in both the public and private sectors, management training
programs are provided in an on-site classroom setting or through web-based
instruction, and often include mentorship and development activities, and
peer networking opportunities to improve leadership skills and provide
training and experience in core competencies deemed essential for effective
managers.
1 United States General Accounting Office, High-Risk Series: Strategic Human Capital
Management (GAO-03-120), 7 and 15.
2 Towers Watson 2012 Global Workforce Study, Engagement at Risk: Driving Strong
performance in a Volatile Global Environment, 9.
3 Towers Watson 2014 Global Workforce Study, Driving Engagement Through a Consumer-
like Experience, 3.
4

--- Page 7 ---
The issue of management training appears to be particularly relevant given
certain State trends. For example, rapidly changing technology, including the
ability to work remotely, and the continual increase in State program
expenditures while the number of government workers has remained
relatively constant present challenges to State agency operations.
Specifically, according to State budget documents, the State operating budget
has doubled from $21 billion in fiscal year 2002 to $42 billion in fiscal year
2017, while the count of full-time-equivalent employee positions decreased
during this period from 81,105 to 80,565. Consequently, maximizing State
employee efficiency in performing their duties through effective management
should be an essential goal of State government.
Finally, it follows that providing management training to employees to ensure
that they will be ready to replace their leaders when they eventually leave
State service, will aid in minimizing operational disruption. During the five-
year period from July 1, 2012 through June 30, 2017, approximately 22,000
SPMS employees departed State agencies (primarily through resignation,
retirement, and removal), and the annual employee turnover rate ranged from
8 percent to 13 percent during this period. The number of management
employees that departed during this timeframe was not readily available.
Department of Budget and Management’s (DBM) Training
Responsibilities
The State Personnel and Pensions Article of the Annotated Code of Maryland,
Title 10, Subtitle 1, requires DBM to administer an employee training program
for all employees in the State Personnel Management System (SPMS), which
is under the authority of the Secretary of DBM. The statutory purposes of this
program are to:
1) develop the capabilities of employees;
2) train employees to perform their duties with maximum efficiency;
3) attract individuals to State employment; and
4) train managers and supervisors to be knowledgeable and skilled in the
fair application of laws, rules, and guidelines.
In addition, State law requires DBM to supervise all employee development
and training and the training is to be carried out in accordance with policies
and regulations to be established by DBM. DBM’s Office of Personnel
Services and Benefits (OPSB) is the State agency responsible for overseeing
State personnel functions. According to DBM records, the total number of
regular, full-time SPMS employees was 39,000 as of June 30, 2017, including
5

--- Page 8 ---
3,200 management employees and an additional 4,200 lower-level
supervisors.
In 2005, DBM’s Employee Development and Training Division was eliminated
(we were advised that this decision was taken in response to budget cuts) and
OPSB lost the related employee positions dedicated to overseeing Statewide
training programs, which were also eliminated or significantly reduced.
Currently, OPSB provides optional in-person or on-line training to SPMS
agency personnel administrators who are expected to provide similar training
to others in their agencies. Also, DBM has established an on-line learning
system for State employees and agencies. Since September 2014, DBM has
operated the State’s Learning Management System, referred to by DBM as
“The Hub”. The Hub uses cloud-based software to provide employees within
the SPMS the ability to browse a catalog of offered courses approved by DBM,
register for, and receive training.
DBM believes that a number of courses that currently are available on The
Hub aid in the development of the capabilities of employees and assist them
in improving efficiency. For example, DBM cited customer service training
that is available to all employees, as well as a number of supervisor-specific
training modules. These supervisor-specific modules include the performance
evaluation process, familiarizing employees with the interview process,
managing medical absences, and several modules that are offered to
increase awareness of issues like dealing with disabilities in the workplace,
sexual harassment, and bullying. DBM believes that these types of elective
self-paced training modules are the best way to reach a State employee
population that is diverse in education levels, geographical proximity, and
functions.
6

--- Page 9 ---
Audit Scope, Objective, and Methodology
Audit Scope
We conducted a performance audit of the formal training provided to State
management employees within the State Personnel Management System
(SPMS)4 to develop leadership skills, improve performance and efficiency, and
to promote consistency in the application of State laws, policies, and
procedures. The primary focus of our audit was on the actions and
responsibilities of the Maryland Department of Budget and Management
(DBM), and its Office of Personnel Services and Benefits (OPSB), which by
statute is responsible for administering an employee training program for
employees in the SPMS.
Our audit was performed in accordance with generally accepted government
auditing standards. Those standards require that we plan and perform the
audit to obtain sufficient, appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis
for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives. We believe
that the evidence obtained for our findings and conclusions met those
standards.
Objective and Methodology
Our audit objective was to assess the existence and comprehensiveness of
formal training provided to Maryland State government management
employees in the SPMS to aid in the development of relevant skills to assist
them in carrying out their supervisory duties.
To accomplish our objective, we reviewed applicable State laws relevant to
management training, OPSB policies and procedures, and interviewed OPSB
staff to determine the extent of OPSB’s development and oversight of
Statewide management training programs. The information and conclusions
contained in this report, was primarily based on interviews of appropriate staff
who were knowledgeable in the subject matter of the audit, which also
included officials from a number of Maryland State agencies, and relevant
agencies from other states and the District of Columbia.
4 All executive branch employees are in the SPMS, with the exception of those employee
positions in a unit with an independent personnel system. Consequently, entities such as
the University System of Maryland, Maryland Department of Transportation, Morgan State
University, and St. Mary’s College employees are not in the SPMS, and DBM’s cited
authority does not apply.
7

--- Page 10 ---
We obtained a data file from OPSB of all current State employees from DBM’s
State Personnel System (SPS), which we deemed reliable for our purposes.
We used this file for various purposes during the audit, including to obtain
statistics detailing the number of managerial positions in State government
and to determine the potential impact of any findings or recommendations
derived from this audit (including an attempt to determine the number of
management employees who had received any relevant training). From this
file, we also identified the number of management employees in the SPMS,
using position descriptions, who would be the subject population for
management training. As of July 17, 2017, we estimated that there were
approximately 3,200 SPMS management employees in the SPS (the adequacy
of training provided to them was the focus of this audit).5
We reviewed available research about management training programs to
identify common practices and curriculum. The sources included university
level research and training programs offered by such institutions. Our work in
this area was generally limited to publicly available research publications,
textbooks, and periodicals. This research, as well as our review of information
gathered from other states (and the District of Columbia) and certain
Maryland State agencies, were used to identify core subjects for a
comprehensive management training program.
We contacted human resources personnel of five states (Delaware,
Pennsylvania, Tennessee, Virginia, and West Virginia), and the District of
Columbia to identify management training programs offered on a centralized
basis by those jurisdictions. We obtained course curriculums and other
materials describing the content and participation rates for management
training provided. We also attempted to determine the satisfaction level of
participants in these programs.
Based on our inquiries of State agencies’ human resources management, we
became aware that four large SPMS agencies each having over 1,000
employees had developed their own training programs for supervisors and/or
managers without DBM involvement. These agencies (Maryland Departments
of Health, Human Services, and Public Safety and Correctional Services, and
the Comptroller of Maryland) had approximately 1,400 management
employees.
5 We identified approximately 3,200 employees included in SPS with a “management level”
of Manager, Director, Agency Executive Management, or State Executive Management. We
were advised by OPSB management that employees in these categories were considered
management employees. Consequently, we judged that these employees would be the
intended recipients of any management training courses or programs, and the subject of
this audit.
8

--- Page 11 ---
We therefore obtained, reviewed, and summarized, when available, any
course curriculums and other materials describing the subject matter and
participation rates for formal management training provided to those
agencies’ employees. These programs, in many cases, were offered to both
managers and supervisors. We then compared the offerings for those
programs to the core subjects of a comprehensive management training
curriculum. We also attempted to identify participant satisfaction, when
measured by the State agencies.
Advice of Counsel Requested to Interpret Governing Laws
As part of our review of State law, we sought clarification about DBM’s
statutory training responsibilities from counsel to the Maryland General
Assembly (MGA). Specifically, the State Personnel and Pensions Article of the
Annotated Code of Maryland, Title 10, Subtitle 1, requires DBM to administer
an employee training program for all employees in the SPMS, which is under
the authority of the Secretary of DBM (as discussed in the Background
Information section of this report). Below, we include the questions we
submitted and our summary of the responses received from MGA counsel.
1. Does the State Personnel and Pensions Article, Title 10, Subtitle 1,
cover training programs for developing the capabilities of
management-level employees in State units?
Response: Yes, the State Personnel and Pensions Article Title 10,
Subtitle 1, generally applies to all SPMS employees and is quite broad.
Except for those instances for which a statute provides otherwise, the
DBM Secretary is responsible for “the staff supervision of all
development and training” of SPMS employees, including
management-level employees.
2. If the State Personnel and Pensions Article Title 10, Subtitle 1, covers
management training programs, does DBM have a statutory obligation
to develop management training programs to be used by State units?
Response: The State Personnel and Pensions Article Title 10, Subtitle
1, does not impose an obligation on DBM to develop any specific
training programs, including management-level programs. Title 10,
Subtitle 1, grants the DBM Secretary broad authority over employee
development and training; however, it does not require that the
Secretary develop specific training courses or programs.
9

--- Page 12 ---
3. To the extent that State units have the authority to develop their own
management training programs, does DBM have the authority to
mandate some degree of standardization across those programs?
Response: It is counsel’s view that State units have the authority to
develop and implement management training programs for SPMS
employees so long as the programs are consistent with DBM policies
and regulations and any statutory requirements. It is also the view of
counsel that DBM, pursuant to broad authority in the State Personnel
and Pensions Article Title 10, Subtitle 1, may adopt policies and
regulations that provide for the standardization of management
training programs across State units.
Excluded from Scope
Regarding other governments’ or State agencies’ established managerial
training programs, although we identified some characteristics of the
programs and related subject matters included in the programs, we did not
review the course content or perform other procedures to assess the quality
of those offerings. Also, given our scope was focused on DBM’s
responsibilities, we did not evaluate the training efforts administered by the
four SPMS agencies.
Fieldwork and Agency Response
Our fieldwork was completed during the period from July 2017 through March
2018. A copy of the draft report was provided to DBM – OPSB. The response
to our findings and recommendations from DBM – OPSB appears as an
appendix to this report. As prescribed in State Government Article, Section 2-
1224 of the Annotated Code of Maryland, we will advise DBM – OPSB
regarding the results of our review of its response.
10

--- Page 13 ---
Conclusions
We conducted a performance audit of training offered to management
employees of agencies under the authority of the Department of Budget and
Management (DBM). State law specifies that DBM is the responsible agency
for administering an employee training program and adopting the necessary
policies and regulations, which includes responsibility for management
training.
Investing in people includes providing training programs to employees to
assist an organization in achieving its mission and goals. It is particularly
essential to establish training programs for management employees
considering the key role management plays in motivating, teaching, and
developing subordinates.
We found that DBM had not established a formal training program for the
approximately 3,200 employees in management positions in agencies under
the State’s Personnel Management System (SPMS). A formal management
training program could help further develop their skills and abilities and train
them to perform their duties as efficiently as possible.
Although DBM offered certain training to personnel administrators in SPMS
as well as on-line courses on various topics that are available to management
employees, neither the training nor the courses focused on all of the eight
core subjects of a comprehensive management training program we identified
during our research. The eight subjects are leadership, ethics,
communication, coaching and motivation, delegation, critical thinking, conflict
resolution, and planning.
Six governments outside of Maryland we contacted offered management
training programs that were generally administered on a centralized basis for
the benefit of employees in their various agencies. The programs offered by
four of these governments addressed at least seven of the eight core
subjects. The programs offered by the remaining two governments
individually addressed at least four core subjects.
Although authorized by State law, DBM had not established regulations or
policies for administering management training programs. Such regulations
or policies would provide guidance to and oversight of State agencies under
SPMS that had unilaterally established training programs for their employees
to ensure managers at those agencies had access to quality training
opportunities. It could perhaps lead to consistency and comprehensive
program content for the training provided across differing agencies. At the
11

--- Page 14 ---
time of our review, DBM was generally unaware of management training
programs unilaterally established by agencies in SPMS.
We determined during the course of the audit that four SPMS agencies had
collectively established eight training programs for managers or supervisors.
Those four agencies individually recognized the need to ensure their
managers and/or supervisors received instruction in a variety of topics to
improve skills and performance. One training program offered by one agency
was mandatory and provided training in seven of the eight core subjects. The
training programs offered by the other three agencies covered at least four
core subjects. Furthermore, our review of participant survey responses
(obtained by agencies after employee participation) from three training
programs noted generally positive impressions and stated that the programs
were beneficial and would be recommended to peers.
According to formal advice we obtained from counsel to the Maryland General
Assembly, the Secretary of DBM, in general, is responsible for the staff
supervision of all development and training of employees in the SPMS,
including management-level employees, which is to be carried out in
accordance with policies and regulations adopted by the Secretary.
Although the law makes DBM responsible, we were advised that it does not
impose an obligation on DBM to develop any specific management training
courses nor require DBM to adopt policies and regulations for the
standardization of management training courses across State agencies. In
other words, although DBM is responsible for training, including for
management employees, there is no expectation or requirement that a formal
management training program be established, as this action is left to the
discretion of DBM.
Nevertheless, because of the benefits that could accrue to State agencies
who are led by properly trained managers, we believe that DBM, under its
statutory authority, should establish and oversee a Statewide management
training program, subject to regulations and policies that address and define
its responsibilities and those of the affected agencies. Such a program could
be administered either centrally or by individual SPMS agencies, and should
consider the best practices and content of other management training
programs.
12

--- Page 15 ---
Findings and Recommendations
Department of Budget and Management Oversight of Management
Training
Finding 1
The Department of Budget and Management (DBM) had not established a
formal Statewide training program for management employees in the State
Personnel Management System (SPMS) to help them develop their skills and
perform their duties efficiently.
Analysis
DBM has not established a formal management training program for agencies
under its authority to help managers develop their skills and perform their
duties efficiently. Although State law does not specifically require DBM to
establish a management training program, it does impose responsibility for
the training of all employees in the State’s Personnel Management System
(SPMS), which includes management employees, and adopting the necessary
policies and regulations (see Finding 2). To varying degrees, certain other
governments outside of Maryland have recognized the value of administering,
on a centralized basis, managerial training programs.
We found the training courses offered by DBM’s Office of Personnel Services
and Benefits (OPSB) to personnel administrators and to others through its
online system do not address certain typical managerial training subject
matter. In addition, a record of who attended OPSB’s courses was not
maintained. Consequently, Maryland government lacks assurance that the
approximately 3,200 State employees6 in leadership positions under SPMS
have received appropriate or necessary training to aid in the development of
management skills.
DBM’s Training Efforts
DBM had not established a formal curriculum with mandatory management
training requirements, although the Statewide training courses offered by
OPSB do meet certain particular needs. During our review, we noted two
primary avenues for training individuals in management positions – in-person
classroom training offered to SPMS personnel administrators and on-line
training offered through The Hub. Based on our research, these training
sources do not provide certain core subjects of a comprehensive
management training curriculum.
6 See footnote 5 for an explanation of how we determined the 3,200 State employees.
13

--- Page 16 ---
After comparing management courses offered by selected State agencies
under SPMS (see Finding 2), governments outside of Maryland, and from
research of authoritative literature, we identified eight subjects that we
believe should form the core of a comprehensive management training
curriculum. These eight core subjects are as follows:
1. Leadership – act of influencing others toward a goal
2. Ethics – moral principles that govern behavior
3. Communication – process to exchange information
4. Coaching and Motivation – helping employees improve their
performance to reach their full potential
5. Delegation – assignment of responsibility or authority to another
6. Critical Thinking – objective analysis and evaluation of an issue to form
a judgment
7. Conflict Resolution – process of resolving disputes or disagreements
8. Planning – setting objectives and determining a course of action to
achieve those objectives
OPSB provides SPMS agency personnel administrators with optional in-person
or on-line training in separate courses focused primarily on human resources
topics such as supervision, communication, performance evaluations,
employee leave issues, and collective bargaining. According to OPSB
management, those personnel administrators who receive this optional
training are then expected to provide similar training, using the knowledge
they obtained, to their agency employees who they think would benefit. While
the courses address certain issues relevant to human resource employees,
they do not address many of the core management subjects noted above.
Furthermore, the extent of participation is unknown since OPSB had not
retained records of those personnel administrators receiving and/or
completing its training, nor any State agency employees who received the
training second-hand from their agency’s personnel administrators.
At our request, OPSB provided a report of what it contended were suitable
management courses available on The Hub as of July 2, 2018. Our review of
the related report identified 428 training courses, which included 96 courses
available Statewide to all employees and 332 courses available to individual
agency employees.7 Our review of the titles and descriptions of those 96
Statewide courses found that each course was either in subject areas of
human resource processes (78 courses in areas such as timekeeping and
7 Certain courses placed on The Hub are developed by OPSB and made available to all SPMS
agencies through the general SPS logon process, other courses are developed by individual
agencies and are available only to the employees of each individual agency through the
employee’s assigned SPS user access.
14

--- Page 17 ---
benefits recordkeeping) or basic knowledge (18 courses in areas such as
computer training), rather than managerial skill sets related to the eight core
subjects we had identified. In addition, our cursory review of the list of the
332 course titles on The Hub for individual agencies identified some courses
in leadership, communication, coaching, and ethics, but these courses were
not available to employees of all agencies.
Management Training Programs Offered by Other Governments
We contacted five state governments and the District of Columbia, which
offered management training programs that were generally administered on a
centralized basis by agencies responsible for personnel functions. The
programs varied significantly in terms of subject matter offered, delivery
methods, and duration. In addition, participation in the programs was either
mandatory or voluntary; with some voluntary programs having a participant
selection process. See Exhibit 1 for a brief description of the programs.
For example, based on the information supplied by those governments, the
programs offered by three states and the District of Columbia addressed at
least seven of the eight core subjects. The programs offered by the remaining
two states individually addressed at least four core subjects. The courses
were primarily taught in person with durations ranging from several
consecutive days to a variety of courses taught weekly or monthly over the
course of years. Courses included group project work or field trips with
activities to encourage team building and networking.
Two of the six governments, West Virginia and Pennsylvania, had established
a mandatory government-wide program for management employees in state
employment. The remaining four governments surveyed (Virginia, Delaware,
Tennessee, and the District of Columbia) did not have a mandatory
management training program for their employees. Rather, these
governments had established management training programs for qualified
applicants among current management or supervisors who were deemed to
have management advancement potential and/or provided training to
managers and supervisors at the individual agency level.
Despite inconsistency in program subjects and format, representatives of
those organizations individually expressed to us their belief that their specific
statewide program was useful and provided value to their management
employees who had completed the program.
15

--- Page 18 ---
Recommendation 1
We recommend that DBM
a. establish and oversee a statewide management training program to help
ensure management employees in the State Personnel Management
System receive consistent and appropriate training to aid in the
development of management skills. This program could be administered
either centrally or by individual SPMS agencies;
b. consider consulting with other governments and State of Maryland
agencies to help identify best practices concerning management training
program content and participation; and
c. consider addressing the aforementioned core subjects, decide whether
participation should be mandatory or voluntary, offer a variety of delivery
methods, and require attendance records.
Management Training - State Agency Programs
Finding 2
DBM had not established regulations or policies that would provide guidance
to and oversight of State agencies that separately established training
programs, to help ensure their managers had access to quality training.
Analysis
Although authorized by State law, DBM had not established regulations or
policies for administering management training programs. Such regulations
or policies would provide guidance to and oversight of State agencies under
SPMS that had unilaterally established training programs for their employees
to ensure managers at those agencies had access to quality training
opportunities. It could perhaps lead to consistency and comprehensive
program content for the training provided across differing agencies. At the
time of our review, DBM was generally unaware of management training
programs unilaterally established by agencies in SPMS.
Four SPMS agencies reviewed (Comptroller of Maryland, Department of
Human Services or DHS, Department of Public Safety and Correctional
Services, and Maryland Department of Health) had collectively established
eight training programs for managers or supervisors. For the purpose of our
audit, we also reviewed supervisory training programs that addressed
management core subject matter as discussed in Finding 1. Those four
agencies individually recognized the need to ensure their managers and/or
supervisors receive instruction in a variety of topics to improve skills and
performance.
16

--- Page 19 ---
From our review, it appears that DHS’ Supervisory Training Program, which
was originally designed for supervisors but became mandatory for managers,
was the most comprehensive. Our assessment was based primarily on the
extent of the subject matter being taught, whether employee participation was
mandatory, and the duration of the program, in terms of the hours/days of
training provided. DHS established this Program in the summer of 2017 to
provide eight days of training (over several months) to all supervisors and
management employees in seven of the eight core curriculum subjects we
identified. Specifically, the DHS training covered the seven core subjects of
leadership, ethics, communication, coaching, delegation, conflict resolution,
and planning, plus an eighth non-core subject of performance evaluations.
We were advised by DHS management that the program was also cost
beneficial because it was taught by their training staff at DHS facilities. The
program was the only one of the eight programs, for which attendance was
mandatory, and as of April 6, 2018, DHS records showed that 911 of its
1,152 supervisors and managers (consisting of 902 supervisors and 250
managers) had participated (see Exhibit 2 for available participation and
attendance numbers for the four agencies under SPMS).
While the training provided by the other three SPMS agencies to their
management and supervisory employees was not mandatory for all managers
and was of limited duration, the training programs covered at least four of the
core curriculum subjects we identified. In addition, according to those
agencies, hundreds of management and supervisory employees voluntarily
participated in the various training programs offered by these agencies. See
further details in Exhibit 2 where we assessed the number of core curriculum
subjects taught and provided the number of training participants.
Our review of participant survey responses (obtained by agencies after
employee participation) from three training programs offered by these four
SPMS agencies, noted generally positive impressions. We also noted that the
participants believed that the programs were beneficial and that they would
recommend them to their peers.
While there are differences in the program offerings, it is apparent that the
four agencies believe there is value to offering training that addresses topics
focused on management skills. In our opinion, these agencies as well as
other SPMS agencies could benefit from DBM’s guidance and oversight as the
State’s primary personnel agency.
17

--- Page 20 ---
Recommendation 2
We recommend that DBM establish policies and regulations that address and
define its responsibilities and the responsibilities of State agencies in
connection with offering management training.
18

--- Page 21 ---
Exhibit 1
Management Training Programs Offered By Other Selected States and the District of Columbia
Page 1 of 1
Government Number of Office of Legislative Audits (OLA) Comments
Programs
Delaware 1 The Management Development Certificate program is a program for existing management employees that consists of
19 courses taken at the student’s own pace over a period of up to five years. We were advised that this program has
been in effect since 2003 and that, to date, eight employees had graduated from this program.
District of Columbia 1 The Certified Public Manager (CPM) program is for qualified approved applicants through a partnership with George
Washington University. The program consists of 300 hours of graduate level instruction over the course of one year.
Approximately 700 employees have graduated from the CPM program since inception 20 years ago, including 200 who
are still with DC government. CPM program participants are required to sign a continuance in service agreement to stay
employed with DC government for two years after completion or repay the cost of the training.
Pennsylvania 3 The first program provides basic training to all new employees in ethics along with other personnel topics, through its
Keystone Academy. In addition, all supervisors and managers are required to receive training in labor relations,
performance management, supervision, and other personnel topics.
The other two programs are more selective from a participant perspective and include an online learning system that
provides optional training to management employees, with a variety of courses on more advanced management topics.
Tennessee 3 The “LEAD Tennessee Program” is a leadership development program for qualified applicants established in 2011 to
provide experiential learning to improve job performance (that is, supervisory skills). Participants work with an
experienced coach to develop an individual development plan that serves as a guide throughout the program, and they
complete pre-and post-assessments based on core competencies to gauge their progress.
The other two programs are intended for higher-level managerial development.
Virginia 2 Two executive and management training programs through a partnership with Virginia Commonwealth University.
These programs are available only to qualified applicants nominated by their agency heads. Approximately 2,800
Virginia management employees have graduated from these programs.
West Virginia 1 Requires all supervisors and management employees to take 60 hours of course work upon appointment to their
position. Course material covers personnel topics (such as preventing harassment and workplace safety) and
management topics (such as supervision, performance appraisals, and the discipline process). In addition, supervisors
and managers must obtain 12 hours of training per year on topics like conflict resolution and leading change in difficult
times. Courses are taught by instructors from the state’s centralized human resources department.
Source: OLA discussions with officials (from noted governments) with knowledge of the management training programs.
19

--- Page 22 ---
Exhibit 2
SPMS Agency Training Programs Course Content Summary
Page 1 of 2
Management Core Subjects Covered in Training Program
(based on OLA’s determination)
Agency Program Number of Number of Number / Leadership Ethics Communication Coaching Delegation Critical Conflict Planning Total
Description Management Supervisory Category of and Thinking Resolution Skills
Employees Employees Training Motivation Covered
Participants*
1 COMP Comptroller's 75 65 104       5
Supervisory (since inception)
Training
Managers and
Program
supervisors
2 DHS Supervisory 250 902 911         7
Training (since inception)
Program
Managers and
supervisors
3 DHS Leadership 250 902 24       6
Program (since inception)
Available to all
employees
4 DHS Leadership 250 902 28      5
Development (annual)
Program
Managers and
supervisors
5 DPSCS First Line 419 838 275        7
Supervisor (annual)
Supervisors
6 DPSCS First Line 419 838 120       6
Administrator (annual)
Managers
7 DPSCS Leadership 419 838 538         8
Development (annual)
Institute
Managers
8 MDH Leadership 671 1,109 35     4
Development (since inception)
Program
Managers and
supervisors
Frequency of Specific Management Core Subjects Found in the Eight State 8 5 8 7 2 5 8 5 n/a
Agency Programs
Note: The SPMS Agency Training Program Course Content Summary key is located on the next page.
20

--- Page 23 ---
Exhibit 2
SPMS Agency Training Programs Course Content Summary
Page 2 of 2
Key:
* The number of training participants provided by agency officials were either since inception of the program or on an annual basis.
The number and category of training participants (managers or supervisors) was based upon verbal representations by the agencies.
 This training course addressed this particular management training topic. Note: the courses may have addressed topics other than the eight core
subjects.
Grey This training course did not address this topic.
Bold font These training courses addressed at least 7 of the 8 core subjects for management training, leading OLA to consider the programs to be
comprehensive.
COMP Comptroller of Maryland
DHS Department of Human Services
DPSCS Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services
MDH Maryland Department of Health
Source: OLA discussions with officials (from noted agencies) with knowledge of the training program course content.
21

--- Page 25 ---
Department of Budget and Management
Office of Personnel Services and Benefits (OPSB)
Response to Legislative Audits Findings and Recommendations
Performance Audit on DBM’s Oversight
of Training Offered to Management Employees
Finding 1
The Department of Budget and Management (DBM) had not established a formal Statewide
training program for management employees in the State Personnel Management System
(SPMS) to help them develop their skills and perform their duties efficiently.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that DBM
a. establish and oversee a statewide management training program to help ensure
management employees in the State Personnel Management System receive consistent and
appropriate training to aid in the development of management skills. This program could
be administered either centrally or by individual SPMS agencies;
b. consider consulting with other governments and State of Maryland agencies to help
identify best practices concerning management training program content and
participation; and
c. consider addressing the aforementioned core subjects, decide whether participation should
be mandatory or voluntary, offer a variety of delivery methods, and require attendance
records.
DBM OPSB Response 1:
Establishing a formal Statewide management training program for agencies under its authority, as
recommended by OLA, is not required by State law. As the responsible agency for administering an
employee training program and adopting the necessary policies and regulations, OPSB currently
does offer several training options in key areas and where it is believed to be most effective and
beneficial, as described below.
Although the report describes the training courses offered by OPSB as “limited”, we respectfully
disagree with this characterization. The report acknowledges that we provide training on
supervision, communication (which addresses two of the eight subjects identified by the audit as
necessary to a comprehensive management training curriculum, communication and conflict
resolution), performance evaluations, employee leave issues and collective bargaining. It notes,
however, that our courses do not address the other core components (i.e., leadership, ethics, coaching
and motivation, delegation, critical thinking, and planning).
Our “peer-to-supervisor” training heavily emphasizes a number of the “core” components of a
comprehensive training curriculum, as identified by OLA, including leadership, communication,

--- Page 26 ---
managing conflict, delegation and planning. A separate supervisor training that we offer similarly
incorporates a number of these “core” components, including leadership, communication, coaching
and motivation, and conflict resolution. Our performance evaluation and disciplinary action training
modules also incorporate soft skills elements relating to leadership, coaching and motivation, and
conflict resolution.
Additionally, when The Hub went live, we worked with the Maryland Ethics Commission to acquire
a training module to provide State employees with a basic understanding of the current Maryland
State Public Ethics Law. This training module instructs employees on their special obligations as
public servants.
According to this finding, the Office of Personnel Services and Benefits offers training that is
insufficient to meet what is described as “core components of a comprehensive management training
program.” The audit identified eight subjects believed to be necessary to a comprehensive
management training curriculum; these are: leadership; ethics; communication; coaching and
motivation; delegation; critical thinking; conflict resolution; and planning.
In the analysis that accompanies Finding 1, there is a fair amount of discussion about the
management training programs offered by five other state governments and the District of Columbia.
According to the report, some of the programs were voluntary and the majority established programs
that trained only selected managers.
It would be impossible to agree that these programs are useful models as the report indicates that
OLA did not assess the relevance or the thoroughness of the content of training courses provided by
these entities. In order to agree that these programs are useful models, the State would have to
know, at a minimum: whether the participants’ supervisors were satisfied that the training improved
employee performance; whether employee morale increased as a result of the training; and, did
employee retention rates rise?
Furthermore, while OLA reports that state representatives individually expressed their belief that
their specific statewide program was useful and provided value to their management employees who
had completed the program, one could hardly expect that they would say otherwise. According to
Exhibit 1, in the 15 years since the inception of the Delaware program, only eight employees have
graduated from it. It seems unlikely that the program has much value if less than one person a year
has graduated from it.
Notwithstanding these comments, we agree that it would be beneficial to review our training
offerings for managers and supervisors. We plan to update the performance evaluation and
disciplinary in-person and online training modules to include additional leadership elements.
We agree with the recommendation that DBM analyze existing management training programs and
identify best practices for course content and employee participation with the goal of enhancing our

--- Page 27 ---
training offerings. We already have begun to examine the work that is being done in agencies that
have dedicated training units, with a special emphasis on the work that DHS is doing with its’
Supervisory Training Program. We are in the process of gathering materials from agencies and
analyzing the information to determine if it is adequate. We will not offer DBM-led training to the
staff of agencies where the training is adequate.
We also will consider whether supervisor and manager training should be available to selected
employees or all employees, and whether it should be mandatory. On one hand, selecting only
certain managers or supervisors for training raises issues of fairness and equal opportunity for
advancement, but on the other hand, resource limitations may make it impossible to provide every
member of management with training, especially in-person training.
Lastly, we agree that it is important to maintain attendance records to track training participation.
We will work with The Hub’s administrator to leverage the functionality within that system to
permit attendees to sign up for training and to track actual attendance. The system also permits
customer satisfaction surveys, and we intend to utilize that functionality, as well.

--- Page 28 ---
Management Training - State Agency Programs
Finding 2
DBM had not established regulations or policies that would provide guidance to and oversight
of State agencies that separately established training programs, to help ensure their managers
had access to quality training.
Recommendation 2
We recommend that DBM establish policies and regulations that address and define its
responsibilities and the responsibilities of State agencies in connection with offering
management training.
DBM OPSB Response 2:
We agree with the recommendation. The Department of Budget and Management (DBM) will begin
to take steps to provide guidance and oversight regarding management training for State employees,
especially to State agencies that have provided training to their employees independent of the
training provided by DBM.1
The OLA assessed the value of training provided by SPMS agencies by reviewing participant survey
responses and determined that the participant responses were indicative of the general value of
management training.2 We agree that participant survey results may indicate that participants value
training, but their responses do not necessarily mean that the training is valuable.
In order to assess the value of the training, we believe that it would be necessary to delve into
existing training programs. This deep dive would aid in determining not only whether participants
find the programs to be helpful, but to find out if these training programs tend to enhance
performance, positively affect morale, increase chances for promotion, and have a positive impact on
retention efforts. We will assess the viability of performing these measurements in the near future
using a variety of means. Most likely, this would include conducting trainee surveys before and
after training sessions and sending questionnaires to the supervisors of trainees to determine whether
there is a noticeable difference in the employee’s performance post-training. If feasible, we also
may consider conducting an annual review of promotion and retention data to determine if there is a
correlation between training and promotional outcomes and retention.
1 We cannot agree that the Department had a responsibility to ensure that the training included all “critical training
topics” since what OLA considers a critical training topic is making its debut in this audit report.
2 According to OLA, the survey responses noted “generally positive impressions”, responses indicating that the programs
were beneficial and would be recommended to peers.

--- Page 29 ---
A T
UDIT EAM
Raymond G. Burton, Jr., CPA, CFE
Audit Manager
Abdullah I. Adam, CFE
Senior Auditor
Christopher J. Fowler
Timothy S. Rice
Staff Auditors