Title: University System of Maryland - University of Maryland, College Park
Date: 10/11/2018
Type: Fiscal Compliance
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5bc4e209a1ce581268b7c542
Extracted: 2025-06-18T22:19:34.083220
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Audit Report
University System of Maryland
University of Maryland, College Park
June 2025
Public Notice:
In compliance with the requirements of the State Government Article Section
2-1224(i), of the Annotated Code of Maryland, the Office of Legislative Audits
has redacted cybersecurity findings and related auditee responses
from this public report.
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Senator Shelly L. Hettleman (Senate Chair) Delegate Jared Solomon (House Chair)
Senator Joanne C. Benson Delegate Steven J. Arentz
Senator Benjamin T. Brooks, Sr. Delegate Andrea Fletcher Harrison
Senator Paul D. Corderman Delegate Steven C. Johnson
Senator Katie Fry Hester Delegate Mary A. Lehman
Senator Cheryl C. Kagan Delegate David H. Moon
Senator Clarence K. Lam, M.D. Delegate Julie Palakovich Carr
Senator Cory V. McCray Delegate Emily K. Shetty
Senator Justin D. Ready Delegate Stephanie M. Smith
Senator Bryan W. Simonaire Delegate M. Courtney Watson
To Obtain Further Information
Office of Legislative Audits
The Warehouse at Camden Yards
351 West Camden Street, Suite 400
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Phone: 410-946-5900
Maryland Relay: 711
TTY: 410-946-5401 ꞏ 301-970-5401
E-mail: webmaster@ola.state.md.us
Website: www.ola.state.md.us
To Report Fraud
The Office of Legislative Audits operates a Fraud Hotline to report fraud, waste, or abuse involving State
of Maryland government resources. Reports of fraud, waste, or abuse may be communicated anonymously
by a toll-free call to 1-877-FRAUD-11, by mail to the Fraud Hotline, c/o Office of Legislative Audits, or
through the Office’s website.
Nondiscrimination Statement
The Department of Legislative Services does not discriminate on the basis of age, ancestry, color, creed,
marital status, national origin, race, religion, gender, gender identity, sexual orientation, or disability in the
admission or access to its programs, services, or activities. The Department’s Information Officer has been
designated to coordinate compliance with the nondiscrimination requirements contained in Section 35.107
of the United States Department of Justice Regulations. Requests for assistance should be directed to the
Information Officer at 410-946-5400 or 410-970-5400.

--- Page 3 ---
June 6, 2025
Senator Shelly L. Hettleman, Senate Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Delegate Jared Solomon, House Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Members of Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Annapolis, Maryland
Ladies and Gentlemen:
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the University System of
Maryland (USM) – University of Maryland, College Park (UMCP) for the period
beginning January 1, 2021 and ending January 31, 2024. UMCP is a
comprehensive public institution of USM and operates under the jurisdiction of
USM’s Board of Regents. UMCP offers a broad range of baccalaureate, master’s,
and doctoral programs in the liberal arts and sciences and selected professional
fields.
Our audit disclosed UMCP did not consolidate procurements of certain goods and
services circumventing oversight and transparency requirements and its leverage
as a high-volume purchaser and did not always review the purchases to ensure
they were proper. Specifically, our review of corporate purchasing card
purchases during the period from January 1, 2021 through December 31, 2023
disclosed that UMCP made 4,056 purchases from five vendors totaling
approximately $2.3 million without a formal procurement process. Additionally,
cardholder transaction logs were not always reviewed and approved by
supervisory personnel.
Our audit also disclosed cybersecurity-related findings. However, in accordance
with the State Government Article, Section 2-1224(i) of the Annotated Code of
Maryland, we have redacted the findings from this audit report. Specifically,
State law requires the Office of Legislative Audits to redact cybersecurity
findings in a manner consistent with auditing best practices before the report is
made available to the public. The term “cybersecurity” is defined in the State
Finance and Procurement Article, Section 3.5-301(b), and using our professional
judgment we have determined that the redacted findings fall under the referenced

--- Page 4 ---
definition. The specifics of the cybersecurity findings were previously
communicated to those parties responsible for acting on our recommendations.
Our audit further disclosed that procedures and controls over research grants were
not sufficiently comprehensive. According to UMCP records, as of June 2024,
there were approximately 5,300 open research grants with cumulative
expenditures totaling $763.5 million. UMCP policy and procedures did not
require a written justification when a non-competitive process was used to select
individuals and entities to work on the grants. In addition, UMCP did not ensure
that amounts invoiced by individuals and entities working on the research grants
were proper and in accordance with the grant agreement. Our test of invoices on
certain grants disclosed that UMCP did not obtain documentation to support the
charges and that labor rates were not consistent with the related agreements.
Finally, our audit disclosed that timesheets were not always signed by employees
and approved by supervisory personnel as required by USM policy, a condition
commented upon in our two preceding audit reports dating back to 2018. From
January 3, 2021 through January 27, 2024, there were 6,073 instances (related to
1,112 employees) of timesheets with no employee signature and documented
supervisory approval.
USM’s response to this audit, on behalf of UMCP, is included as an appendix to
this report. Consistent with State law, we have redacted the elements of USM’s
response related to the cybersecurity audit findings. We reviewed the response
and noted agreement to our findings and related recommendations, and while
there are other aspects of USM’s response which will require further clarification,
we do not anticipate that these will require the Joint Audit and Evaluation
Committee’s attention to resolve.
We wish to acknowledge the cooperation extended to us during the audit by
UMCP.
Respectfully submitted,
Brian S. Tanen
Brian S. Tanen, CPA, CFE
Legislative Auditor
2

--- Page 5 ---
Table of Contents
Background Information 5
Agency Responsibilities 5
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report 6
Findings and Recommendations 8
Corporate Purchasing Cards
Finding 1 – The University of Maryland, College Park (UMCP) did not 8
consolidate procurements of certain goods and services, circumventing
oversight and transparency requirements and its leverage as a high-
volume purchaser and did not always review the purchases to ensure
they were proper.
Information Systems Security and Control
Finding 2 – Redacted cybersecurity-related finding. 10
Finding 3 – Redacted cybersecurity-related finding. 10
Finding 4 – Redacted cybersecurity-related finding. 10
Research Grants and Contracts
Finding 5 (Policy Issue) – UMCP policy and procedures did not require 11
a written justification when a non-competitive process was used to
select individuals and entities to work on research grants.
Finding 6 – UMCP did not ensure that amounts invoiced by individuals 12
and entities working on the research grants were proper and in
accordance with the grant agreement.
Payroll
* Finding 7 – Timesheets were not always signed by employees and 13
approved by supervisory personnel as required by University System
of Maryland policy.
 Denotes item repeated in full or part from preceding audit report
3

--- Page 6 ---
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology 15
Agency Response Appendix
4

--- Page 7 ---
Background Information
Agency Responsibilities
The University of Maryland, College Park (UMCP) is a comprehensive research
university for the State of Maryland and is the flagship institution of the
University System of Maryland (USM). It offers baccalaureate, masters, and
doctoral programs in the liberal arts and sciences and selected professional fields.
According to UMCP’s records, student enrollment for the fall 2023 semester
totaled 40,813, including 30,608 undergraduate students and 10,205 graduate
students.
UMCP’s budget is funded by unrestricted revenues, such as tuition and fees and a
State general fund appropriation, and restricted revenues, such as federal grants
and contracts. According to the State’s accounting records, fiscal year 2024
revenues totaled approximately $2.8 billion, including a State general fund
appropriation of approximately $769.4 million (See Figure 1).
5

--- Page 8 ---
Figure 1
UMCP Positions, Expenditures, and Funding Sources
Full-Time Equivalent Positions as of June 30, 2024
Positions
Filled 9,521
Vacant 497
Total 10,018
Fiscal Year 2024 Expenditures
Expenditures
Salaries, Wages, and Fringe Benefits $1,837,258,986
Technical and Special Fees 22,748,081
Operating Expenses 983,404,405
Total $2,843,411,472
Fiscal Year 2024 Funding Sources
Funding
Unrestricted
General Fund $ 769,390,213
Tuition and Fees 708,622,095
Other University Revenues1 718,968,842
$2,196,981,150
Restricted
Federal Grants and Contracts $ 456,211,815
Other Gifts, Grants, and Contracts 190,218,507
$ 646,430,322
Total $2,843,411,472
Source: State financial records and UMCP personnel records
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report
Our audit included a review to determine the status of the seven findings
contained in our preceding audit report dated September 27, 2022. See Figure 2
for the results of our review.
1 Includes revenues from Auxiliary Services ($384.1M) and from the Higher Education
Investment Fund ($63.1M).
6

--- Page 9 ---
Figure 2
Status of Preceding Findings
Preceding Implementation
Finding Description
Finding Status
The University of Maryland College Park (UMCP)
Finding 1 did not ensure that all changes made to students’ Not repeated
residency status were subject to independent review.
Finding 2 Redacted cybersecurity-related finding. Status Redacted2
Finding 3 Redacted cybersecurity-related finding. Status Redacted2
Finding 4 Redacted cybersecurity-related finding. Status Redacted2
UMCP procured services from two companies
owned by UMCP employees or their respective
spouses. In addition, UMCP could not document
Finding 5 Not repeated
that certain procurements from these companies
were competitively procured and the related
deliverables were received.
UMCP did not have a process to ensure all
employees terminated for improper activities were
Finding 6 properly recorded in the UMCP automated Not repeated
personnel system and the Statewide listing of banned
employees to ensure they were not rehired.
Timesheets were not always signed by employees
Repeated
Finding 7 and approved by supervisory personnel as required
(Current Finding 7)
by University System of Maryland policy.
2 Specific information on the current status of this cybersecurity–related finding has been redacted
from the publicly available report in accordance with State Government Article, Section 2-
1244(i) of the Annotated Code of Maryland.
7

--- Page 10 ---
Findings and Recommendations
Corporate Purchasing Cards
Finding 1
The University of Maryland, College Park (UMCP) did not consolidate
procurements of certain goods and services, circumventing oversight and
transparency requirements and its leverage as a high-volume purchaser and
did not always review the purchases to ensure they were proper.
Analysis
UMCP did not consolidate procurements of certain goods and services
circumventing certain oversight and transparency requirements and its leverage as
a high-volume purchaser and did not always review the purchases to ensure they
were proper. According to UMCP’s records, during fiscal year 2023, corporate
purchasing cards (CPC) transactions totaled $52.6 million for 2,263 cardholders.
Our review disclosed the following conditions:
UMCP Did Not Consolidate Certain Procurements
UMCP did not consolidate procurements of certain purchases. Specifically, our
review of CPC purchases during the period from January 1, 2021 through
December 31, 2023 disclosed that UMCP made 4,056 purchases from five
vendors totaling approximately $2.3 million (ranging from $275,000 to $858,000)
without a formal competitive procurement process. For example, UMCP made
697 purchases totaling $496,000 for medical supplies during the aforementioned
period, such as flu test kits from one vendor. Since the individual purchases were
not consolidated, UMCP circumvented certain competitive procurement and
approval requirements and did not maximize its benefits as a high-volume
purchaser. For example, these procurements would not have been subject to
requirements for publishing the solicitation and awards to enhance transparency,
and competitive procurement and oversight by the UMCP Office of Procurement
and Business Services.
In addition, our review of 10 transactions from other vendors totaling $37,400
made by 4 cardholders from the same vendor on the same dates, disclosed that the
transactions appeared to be artificially split, each under the applicable
cardholder’s single transaction limit of $5,000. We were advised by UMCP
management that employees who split purchases should have their cards
immediately suspended for 45-days. Although UMCP monitored CPC purchases
for infractions including split purchases, UMCP only suspended two of the
aforementioned four cardholder’s CPCs.
8

--- Page 11 ---
USM’s Procurement Policies and Procedures requires formal solicitation and
competition for procurements greater than $200,000 as well as publishing the
solicitation and award, such as on eMaryland Marketplace Advantage. In
addition, the Comptroller of Maryland’s Corporate Purchasing Card Policy and
Procedures Manual and State procurement regulations prohibit procurements
from being artificially divided to circumvent competition.
Purchases Were Not Always Reviewed as Required
Cardholder transaction logs were not always reviewed and approved by
supervisory personnel. The Manual requires that cardholder activity logs be
reviewed and approved by the cardholder’s supervisor on a monthly basis. Our
test of 25 cardholders’ monthly activity logs3 totaling $511,174 disclosed that
supervisors did not timely review and approve 8 logs with purchases totaling
$110,903. Specifically, as of our review in June 2024, 4 of the logs were not
approved for periods ranging from 20 months to three years after the billing cycle.
The remaining 4 logs were not approved until we requested the records, which
was 5 to 16 months after the billing cycle.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that UMCP
a. consolidate procurements of similar goods and services to maximize
purchasing power and to comply with requirements for competition,
increased transparency, oversight and control;
b. ensure transactions are not artificially split and suspend any purchasing
cards used to process split purchases, including those noted above; and
c. ensure supervisors approve purchasing card activity logs in a timely
manner.
Information Systems Security and Control
We determined that the Information Systems Security and Control section,
including Findings 2 through 4 related to “cybersecurity,” as defined by the State
Finance and Procurement Article, Section 3.5-301(b) of the Annotated Code of
Maryland, and therefore are subject to redaction from the publicly available audit
report in accordance with the State Government Article 2-1224(i). Consequently,
the specifics of the following findings, including the analysis, related
recommendations, along with USM’s responses, have been redacted from this
report copy.
3 The test items were selected from the period of May 2021 to December 2023 and were selected
based on materiality and unusual purchases.
9

--- Page 12 ---
Finding 2
Redacted cybersecurity-related finding.
Finding 3
Redacted cybersecurity-related finding.
Finding 4
Redacted cybersecurity-related finding.
Research Grants and Contracts
Background
UMCP is engaged in a broad variety of research areas addressing regional,
national, and global challenges ranging from science, engineering, business,
social sciences, arts and humanities, and other disciplines. For example, UMCP
performs research in areas such as climate change, quantum research, artificial
intelligence and data science. UMCP relies upon grants, collaboration and
partnerships with government, for-profit and non-profit entities to further
UMCP’s mission, promote innovation and discovery, commercialize intellectual
property and continue UMCP’s reputation as a premier research institution.
UMCP also invests its own resources and funds into the research activities.
Research Grant Process
Research grants are generally obtained through a grant proposal which generally
includes a description of the intended research being funded, key personnel
working on the research, and a listing of any subrecipients to be funded with the
grant. Each grant has a faculty member who acts as the Principal Investigator (PI)
who is responsible for all aspects of research projects, including scholarly activity
and proper stewardship of awards. PI’s work with department and central
administration staff to develop grant proposals.
PIs will often collaborate on research with individuals and/or entities based on
their experience or perceived contributions to the research with or without a
competitive selection process. This may include individuals or entities with
whom the PI has a relationship, including ownership, which may be considered a
conflict of interest. In this regard, State law provides exemptions from conflict of
interest standards under the State Ethics law for public senior higher education
institutions personnel engaged in research and development activities. The law
10

--- Page 13 ---
was intended to limit obstacles to commercialization of academic research
activities.
To address the risks associated with these possible conflicts, State law requires
the institutions to adopt policies and procedures to ensure the integrity of the
grants. In this regard, UMCP’s Policy on Conflict of Interest and Conflict of
Commitment requires annual disclosure of potential conflicts of interest, including
grants, and may require a management plan to monitor the relationship.
According to UMCP records, as of June 2024, there were approximately 5,300
open grant awards with cumulative expenditures totaling $763.5 million.
Finding 5 (Policy Issue)
UMCP policy and procedures did not require a written justification when a
non-competitive process was used to select individuals and entities to work
on research grants.
Analysis
UMCP policy and procedures did not require a written justification when a non-
competitive process was used to select individuals and entities to work on
research grants. UMCP management advised us that PIs on the grant were
responsible for making the selection, which often used a non-competitive process
due to the unique expertise in relation to the grant. These individuals and entities
were often included in grant proposals.
Our review disclosed that UMCP did not require a written justification when a
non-competitive method was used to select individuals or entities working on the
grant. This is critical to ensure transparency and integrity of the process,
especially when it involves individuals or entities that have conflicting
relationships. Specifically, our test of three non-competitive awards to entities
totaling approximately $5.2 million on three research grants disclosed there was
no written justification for the selection to justify the use of a non-competitive
process. One of these awards totaling $2.2 million was to an entity owned by a
UMCP faculty member, thereby having a direct financial relationship.
State laws and regulations, as well as USM policy, generally require a written
justification and independent approval when a non-competitive process is used to
obtain goods and services. Given UMCP’s substantial research funding from
other parties, exclusions from USM’s Procurement Policies and Procedures, and
exemptions from State Ethics law for conflicts of interest, we believe written
11

--- Page 14 ---
justifications should be required to enhance transparency, accountability, and the
integrity of the process.
Recommendation 5
We recommend that UMCP enhance its existing policies and procedures by
requiring documented written justification and independent review and
approval when a non-competitive process is used.
Finding 6
UMCP did not ensure that amounts invoiced by individuals and entities
working on the research grants were proper and in accordance with the
grant agreement.
Analysis
UMCP did not ensure that amounts invoiced by individuals and entities working
on the research grants were proper and in accordance with the grant agreement.
The agreements generally provided that UMCP would reimburse for the actual
costs of personnel and supplies and allowed UMCP to request additional
information to support the amounts included in the invoice. Our test of six
invoices totaling approximately $3.1 million from entities work on three research
grants disclosed that UMCP did not obtain and review documentation to support
the invoices. Specifically, the invoices were primarily for labor charges, but
UMCP did not obtain documentation, such as timesheets, to support the propriety
of the charges.
In addition, for two of these invoices totaling $1.3 million, UMCP could not
sufficiently explain variances between the billed labor rates and the grant
agreement. For example, one invoice included $57,388 in direct labor for one
employee at an hourly rate of $243.17 while the grant agreement hourly rate was
$117.58. UMCP advised the difference in the aforementioned rates were due to
salary increases over two years. However, UMCP could not support these
assertions, and the amounts did not seem reasonable given the amount of the
aforementioned increase.
Recommendation 6
We recommend that UMCP obtain and review documentation to support the
propriety of invoices and verify that the rates are consistent with the related
grant agreements, including those noted above.
12

--- Page 15 ---
Payroll
Finding 7
Timesheets were not always signed by employees and approved by
supervisory personnel as required by University System of Maryland (USM)
policy.
Analysis
Timesheets were not always signed by employees and approved by supervisory
personnel as required by USM policy. UMCP utilized electronic timesheets
requiring on-line signature and approval. According to the State’s records,
UMCP’s payroll expenditures totaled approximately $1.8 billion during fiscal
year 2024, and there were 10,018 regular employees.
Based on a report generated from UMCP’s payroll system for the period from
January 3, 2021 through January 27, 2024, there were 6,073 instances (related to
1,112 employees) of timesheets with no employee signature and documented
supervisory approval. This included 53 employees for whom there was no signed
and approved timesheet for 26 to 78 pay periods in these years (accounting for
2,203 instances).
UMCP’s Policy on Procedures for Sick Leave and Positive Time Reporting by
Faculty Members requires faculty members to complete positive time reports and
that those records be signed by the employees and their supervisors. In addition,
Board of Regents’ Policy on Work Schedules for Regular Non-Exempt and
Exempt Staff Employees requires that work days and leave hours be recorded for
all exempt staff employees via a positive or exception based timekeeping method,
and that all nonexempt employees record all hours worked and leave hours on
their timesheets. The aforementioned delays are contrary to UMCP’s policy
requiring timely submission and approval of employee time and restrict the ability
of supervisory personnel to ensure that time recorded by employees is accurate
and valid. In all of these cases, the employee was paid in accordance with
UMCP’s regular payroll payment schedule. The untimely submission of the
timesheets raises questions as to the validity of the time recorded and resulting
payroll payments and leave balances.
A similar condition regarding timesheets not always being signed and approved
was commented upon in our two preceding audit reports dating back to October
2018. In response to our preceding audit report, UMCP advised that it planned to
implement a new human resource management system in July 2023 to replace the
current timekeeping system. During our current audit, we were advised that the
new system implementation was delayed until November 2024 because of
13

--- Page 16 ---
changes to the project’s scope of work. Accordingly, the aforementioned
corrective action was not implemented.
Recommendation 7
We recommend that UMCP establish adequate monitoring procedures and
controls to ensure that all timesheets are signed by the applicable employee
and approved by appropriate supervisory personnel (repeat).
14

--- Page 17 ---
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the University System of
Maryland (USM) – University of Maryland, College Park (UMCP) for the period
beginning January 1, 2021 and ending January 31, 2024. The audit was
conducted in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards.
Those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient,
appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and
conclusions based on our audit objectives. We believe that the evidence obtained
provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit
objectives.
As prescribed by the State Government Article, Section 2-1221 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, the objectives of this audit were to examine UMCP’s financial
transactions, records, and internal control, and to evaluate its compliance with
applicable State laws, rules, and regulations.
In planning and conducting our audit, we focused on the major financial-related
areas of operations based on assessments of significance and risk. The areas
addressed by the audit included procurements and disbursements, student
accounts receivable, cash receipts, student financial aid, payroll, corporate
purchasing cards, construction, grants, and information systems security and
control. Our audit included certain support services (such as certain construction
vendor payments) provided on a centralized basis for several other units of USM.
Furthermore, while the University System of Maryland – Shady Grove became its
own budgetary unit effective July 1, 2022, its activity was considered during our
audit of UMCP. We also determined the status of the findings contained in our
preceding audit report.
Our audit did not include certain support services provided to UMCP by the USM
Office, such as bond financing. These support services are included within the
scope of our audits of the USM Office. In addition, our audit did not include an
evaluation of internal controls over compliance with federal laws and regulations
for federal financial assistance programs and an assessment of UMCP’s
compliance with those laws and regulations because the State of Maryland
engages an independent accounting firm to annually audit such programs
administered by State agencies, including the components of the USM.
Our assessment of internal controls was based on agency procedures and controls
in place at the time of our fieldwork. Our tests of transactions and other auditing
procedures were generally focused on the transactions occurring during our audit
period of January 1, 2021 to January 31, 2024, but may include transactions
15

--- Page 18 ---
before or after this period as we considered necessary to achieve our audit
objectives.
To accomplish our audit objectives, our audit procedures included inquiries of
appropriate personnel, inspections of documents and records, tests of transactions,
and to the extent practicable, observations of UMCP’s operations. Generally,
transactions were selected for testing based on auditor judgment, which primarily
considers risk, the timing or dollar amount of the transaction, or the significance
of the transaction to the area of operation reviewed. As a matter of course, we do
not normally use sampling in our tests, so unless otherwise specifically indicated,
neither statistical nor non-statistical audit sampling was used to select the
transactions tested. Therefore, unless sampling is specifically indicated in a
finding, the results from any tests conducted or disclosed by us cannot be used to
project those results to the entire population from which the test items were
selected.
We also performed various data extracts of pertinent information from the State’s
Financial Management Information System (such as revenue and expenditure
data) and the State’s Central Payroll Bureau (payroll data), as well as from the
contractor administering the State’s Corporate Purchasing Card Program (credit
card activity). The extracts are performed as part of ongoing internal processes
established by the Office of Legislative Audits and were subject to various tests to
determine data reliability. We determined that the data extracted from these
sources were sufficiently reliable for the purposes the data were used during this
audit.
We also extracted data from UMCP’s financial systems for the purpose of testing
certain areas such as student accounts receivable and financial aid. We performed
various tests of the relevant data and determined that the data were sufficiently
reliable for the purposes the data were used during the audit. Finally, we
performed other auditing procedures that we considered necessary to achieve our
audit objectives. The reliability of data used in this report for background or
informational purposes was not assessed.
UMCP’s management is responsible for establishing and maintaining effective
internal control. Internal control is a process designed to provide reasonable
assurance that objectives pertaining to the reliability of financial records;
effectiveness and efficiency of operations, including safeguarding of assets; and
compliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations are achieved. As
provided in Government Auditing Standards, there are five components of
internal control: control environment, risk assessment, control activities,
information and communication, and monitoring. Each of the five components,
16

--- Page 19 ---
when significant to the audit objectives, and as applicable to UMCP, were
considered by us during the course of this audit.
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate.
Our reports are designed to assist the Maryland General Assembly in exercising
its legislative oversight function and to provide constructive recommendations for
improving State operations. As a result, our reports generally do not address
activities we reviewed that are functioning properly.
This report includes findings relating to conditions that we consider to be
significant deficiencies in the design or operation of internal control that could
adversely affect UMCP’s ability to maintain reliable financial records, operate
effectively and efficiently, and/or comply with applicable laws, rules, and
regulations. Our report also includes findings regarding significant instances of
noncompliance with applicable laws, rules, or regulations. Other less significant
findings were communicated to UMCP that did not warrant inclusion in this
report.
State Government Article Section 2-1224(i) requires that we redact in a manner
consistent with auditing best practices any cybersecurity findings before a report
is made available to the public. This results in the issuance of two different
versions of an audit report that contains cybersecurity findings – a redacted
version for the public and an unredacted version for government officials
responsible for acting on our audit recommendations.
The State Finance and Procurement Article, Section 3.5-301(b), states that
cybersecurity is defined as “processes or capabilities wherein systems,
communications, and information are protected and defended against damage,
unauthorized use or modification, and exploitation.” Based on that definition, and
in our professional judgment, we concluded that certain findings in this report fall
under that definition. Consequently, for the publicly available audit report all
specifics as to the nature of cybersecurity findings and required corrective actions
have been redacted. We have determined that such aforementioned practices, and
government auditing standards, support the redaction of this information from the
public audit report. The specifics of these cybersecurity findings have been
communicated to UMCP and those parties responsible for acting on our
recommendations in an unredacted audit report.
17

--- Page 20 ---
The response from the USM Office, on behalf of UMCP, to our findings and
recommendations is included as an appendix to this report. Depending on the
version of the audit report, responses to any cybersecurity findings may be
redacted in accordance with State law. As prescribed in the State Government
Article, Section 2-1224 of the Annotated Code of Maryland, we will advise
UMCP regarding the results of our review of its response.
18

--- Page 21 ---
APPENDIX
3300 METZEROTT ROAD // ADELPHI, MD 20783
WWW.USMD.EDU // 301.445.1923
OFFICE OF ADMINISTRATION AND FINANCE
June 4, 2025
Mr. Brian S. Tanen, CPA, CFE
Legislative Auditor
Office of Legislative Audits
The Warehouse at Camden Yards
351 West Camden Street, Suite 400
Baltimore, MD 21201
Re: University System of Maryland – University of Maryland, College Park
Period of Audit: January 1, 2021 through January 31, 2024
Dear Mr. Tanen,
Thank you for the work of your team and the recommendations you provided. I have enclosed the
University System of Maryland’s responses to your draft report covering the examination of the accounts
and records of the University System of Maryland – University of Maryland, College Park. Our comments
refer to the individual items in the report.
Sincerely,
Ellen Herbst
Senior Vice Chancellor for Administration and Finance
Enclosures
cc: Dr. Darryl J. Pines, President, UMCP
Ms. Linda R. Gooden, Chair, University System of Maryland Board of Regents
Mr. Louis M. Pope, University System of Maryland Board of Regents
Dr. Jay A. Perman, Chancellor, University System of Maryland
Ms. Celeste Denson, Associate Vice Chancellor for Financial Affairs, USM Office
Mr. David Mosca, Vice Chancellor for Accountability, USM Office
Mr. Michael C. Eismeier, Associate Vice Chancellor and CIO, USM Office
Ms. Samantha Norris, Director, Financial Planning and Analysis, USM Office
Ms. Susanne Anaker, Director, Management Advisory Services, UMCP
Mr. Gregory S. Oler, Vice President, Finance and Chief Financial Officer, UMCP

--- Page 22 ---
University System of Maryland
University of Maryland, College Park
Agency Response Form
Corporate Purchasing Cards
Finding 1
The University of Maryland, College Park (UMCP) did not consolidate
procurements of certain goods and services, circumventing oversight and
transparency requirements and its leverage as a high-volume purchaser and
did not always review the purchases to ensure they were proper.
We recommend that UMCP
a. consolidate procurements of similar goods and services to maximize
purchasing power and to comply with requirements for competition,
increased transparency, oversight and control;
b. ensure transactions are not artificially split and suspend any purchasing
cards used to process split purchases, including those noted above; and
c. ensure supervisors approve purchasing card activity logs in a timely
manner.
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 1a Agree Estimated Completion Date: January 2026
Please provide details of
corrective action or UMCP will perform an annual analysis of purchasing card transactions
explain disagreement. and purchase orders to identify opportunities where more strategic
procurement methods could be used. These methods—such as
competitive solicitations, cooperative agreements, or state contracts—
will align with allowable practices under the USM Procurement Policies
and Procedures (PPP) and will be selected based on what best serves the
interests of the institution and the State of Maryland.
Recommendation 1b Agree Estimated Completion Date: January 2026
Please provide details of
corrective action or UMCP’s Travel & Card Services office conducts regular reviews to
explain disagreement. identify and address instances of splitting or stringing. UMCP has a
defined process for monitoring purchasing card transactions and
addressing violations of the purchasing card program.
Page 1 of 6

--- Page 23 ---
University System of Maryland
University of Maryland, College Park
Agency Response Form
We are committed to compliance with the CPC Manual. Given the size
and complexity of our organization, there may be instances we do not
immediately identify a split purchase violation. However, we continue to
strengthen our review processes to minimize the occurrence of such
instances.
Recommendation 1c Agree Estimated Completion Date: January 2026
Please provide details of
corrective action or The University has transitioned to a new financial system and is actively
explain disagreement. working to implement tools and processes that will facilitate the timely
review, approval, and monitoring of purchasing card activity.
Information Systems Security and Control
The Office of Legislative Audits (OLA) has determined that the Information
Systems Security and Control section, including Findings 2 through 4 related to
“cybersecurity,” as defined by the State Finance and Procurement Article, Section
3.5-301(b) of the Annotated Code of Maryland, and therefore are subject to
redaction from the publicly available audit report in accordance with the State
Government Article 2-1224(i). Although the specifics of the following findings,
including the analysis, related recommendations, along with USM’s responses,
have been redacted from this report copy, USM’s responses indicated agreement
with the findings and related recommendations.
Finding 2
Redacted cybersecurity-related finding.
Agency Response has been redacted by OLA.
Finding 3
Redacted cybersecurity-related finding.
Agency Response has been redacted by OLA.
Page 2 of 6

--- Page 24 ---
University System of Maryland
University of Maryland, College Park
Agency Response Form
Finding 4
Redacted cybersecurity-related finding.
Agency Response has been redacted by OLA.
Page 3 of 6

--- Page 25 ---
University System of Maryland
University of Maryland, College Park
Agency Response Form
Research Grants and Contracts
Finding 5 (Policy Issue)
UMCP policy and procedures did not require a written justification when a
non-competitive process was used to select individuals and entities to work
on research grants.
We recommend that UMCP enhance its existing policies and procedures by
requiring documented written justification and independent review and
approval when a non-competitive process is used.
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide The selection of subrecipients is based on their ability to carry out a
additional comments as portion of the federal program and achieve its objectives. This involves
deemed necessary. evaluating their qualifications, experience, and capability to perform the
work required under the federal award. Subrecipients are included in the
proposal and subject to review by the sponsor, which ultimately
determines whether to grant the award.
Recommendation 5 Agree Estimated Completion Date: November 2025
Please provide details of The University agrees to enhance the Procedures for the Administration of
corrective action or Sponsored Projects Subcontracts and utilize the Subaward Request form
explain disagreement. Section VII for subawards. In addition, we will enhance the Subaward
Request form to justify the qualifications of the subaward.
The University intends to engage a consultant to review our sponsored
research processes and procedures to ensure we are aligned with Uniform
Guidance and other large research institutions.
Page 4 of 6

--- Page 26 ---
University System of Maryland
University of Maryland, College Park
Agency Response Form
Finding 6
UMCP did not ensure that amounts invoiced by individuals and entities
working on the research grants were proper and in accordance with the
grant agreement.
We recommend that UMCP obtain and review documentation to support the
propriety of invoices and verify that the rates are consistent with the related
grant agreements, including those noted above.
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide
additional comments as
deemed necessary. The university acknowledges that we were not able to clearly
communicate that the variance in rates resulted from the application of
the appropriate fringe benefit and overhead rate (i.e., fully burdened
rate). The rate of $117.58 represented the raw rate and $243.17
represented the fully burdened rate. We recognize that this caused
confusion, and we regret that the subject matter experts best positioned
to explain this detail were not part of the initial discussion.
Recommendation 6 Agree Estimated Completion Date: November 2025
Please provide details of To enhance our sponsored research operations, UMCP will engage a
corrective action or consultant to review our processes and procedures, with a focus on
explain disagreement. identifying improvements in invoice monitoring that align with Uniform
Guidance and best practices from peer research institutions.
Page 5 of 6

--- Page 27 ---
University System of Maryland
University of Maryland, College Park
Agency Response Form
Payroll
Finding 7
Timesheets were not always signed by employees and approved by
supervisory personnel as required by University System of Maryland (USM)
policy.
We recommend that UMCP establish adequate monitoring procedures and
controls to ensure that all timesheets are signed by the applicable employee
and approved by appropriate supervisory personnel (repeat).
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 7 Agree Estimated Completion Date: November 2024
Please provide details of The new Workday Financial and HR System went live on November 15,
corrective action or 2024. Therefore, we now operate an exception-based timekeeping
explain disagreement. system. USM’s Policy II-2.30 Policy on Sick and Safe leave for faculty
was amended in September 2022 to allow for exception-based
timekeeping.
We have shown significant improvements over the last two audit cycles.
The purpose of timesheets is to accurately reflect leave, especially as it
relates to leave payouts and retirement. It should be noted that the 53
employees without any timesheets are employees whose leave is
governed by a contract and not eligible for leave payout or retirement.
Page 6 of 6

--- Page 28 ---
A T
UDIT EAM
Robert A. Wells, Jr., CPA
Audit Manager
R. Brendan Coffey, CPA, CISA
Edwin L. Paul, CPA, CISA
Information Systems Audit Managers
Abdullah I. Adam
Walter L. Horan, IV
Senior Auditors
Michael K. Bliss, CISA
Matthew D. Walbert, CISA
Information Systems Senior Auditors
Kevin M. Billard
Anna M. Charocopos
Ashley D. Farlow, CFE
Chau D. Mai
Jessica G. McRobie
Justin M. Mills
Samantha J. Rhea
Stacey D. Streett
Staff Auditors
Joshua A. Nicodemus, CISA
Charles O. Price
Neha S. Tirkey
Information Systems Staff Auditors