Title: Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services - Criminal Injuries Compensation Board
Date: 11/02/2018
Type: Fiscal Compliance
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5be0b267a1ce580f40793e0c
Extracted: 2025-06-18T22:20:21.570655
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Audit Report
Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services
Criminal Injuries Compensation Board
November 2018
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
For further information concerning this report contact:
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
301 West Preston Street, Room 1202
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Phone: 410-946-5900 ꞏ 301-970-5900
Toll Free in Maryland: 1-877-486-9964
Maryland Relay: 711
TTY: 410-946-5401 ꞏ 301-970-5401
E-mail: OLAWebmaster@ola.state.md.us
Website: www.ola.state.md.us
The Office of Legislative Audits operates a Fraud Hotline to report fraud, waste, or abuse
involving State of Maryland government resources. Reports of fraud, waste, or abuse
may be communicated anonymously by a toll-free call to 1-877-FRAUD-11, by mail to the
Fraud Hotline, c/o Office of Legislative Audits, or through the Office’s website.
The Department of Legislative Services does not discriminate on the basis of age, ancestry, color,
creed, marital status, national origin, race, religion, gender, gender identity, sexual orientation,
or disability in the admission or access to its programs, services, or activities. The Department’s
Information Officer has been designated to coordinate compliance with the nondiscrimination
requirements contained in Section 35.107 of the Department of Justice Regulations. Requests for
assistance should be directed to the Information Officer at 410-946-5400 or 410-970-5400.

--- Page 4 ---
2

--- Page 5 ---
Background Information
Agency Responsibilities
The Criminal Injuries Compensation Board (CICB) makes financial aid awards to
innocent victims of crime or to their families. To be eligible for such aid, the
victim must have sustained a physical injury or death or suffered psychological
injury as a direct result of a crime, and must have had a minimum of $100 in
unreimbursed expenses and/or lost at least two continuous weeks of earnings or
support.
State law established the Criminal Injuries Compensation Fund as a special non-
lapsing fund to be used for the payment of criminal injury awards and related
administrative costs. The Fund is administered by CICB. Awards are granted
based on available funding received primarily through fees collected by the State
courts and through federal funds. CICB makes awards in accordance with the
schedule of benefits and the degree of disability specified in State law. The
awards granted to claimants may be settled by lump sum or paid in periodic
installments that generally cannot exceed $45,000. In instances where the
claimant is determined to be permanently and totally disabled, the claimant is
eligible for an additional $25,000 award at the discretion of the Board. The Board
consists of five members whose primary responsibility is to make award
decisions.
According to CICB records, approximately 665 claims were approved in fiscal
year 2018. Additionally, during that period, deposits into the Fund totaled
approximately $4.1 million and disbursements (which included claim payments
and CICB operating expenditures) totaled approximately $3.6 million. According
to CICB’s records, as of June 30, 2018, the Fund had unexpended funds totaling
$500,965.
Organizational Change
Chapter 515, Laws of Maryland 2016, required the Governor’s Office of Crime
Control and Prevention (GOCCP) to study restitution due crime victims and make
recommendations concerning the restitution process, including determining which
State unit should assume the duties regarding collection of restitution. In its
December 2016 Report on Restitution Study, GOCCP recommended that a new
unit called the Victim Services Unit (VSU) be formed within GOCCP to collect
data, develop best practices, and coordinate with State and local entities regarding
restitution. As a result of that study, Chapter 422, Laws of Maryland 2018,
effective July 1, 2018, created the VSU under GOCCP to coordinate the State’s
3

--- Page 6 ---
responsibilities concerning services to victims. This law also transferred the
existing oversight functions and operations of CICB from the Department of
Public Safety and Correctional Services to the VSU.
Status of Finding from Preceding Audit Report
Our audit included a review to determine the status of the finding contained in our
preceding audit report dated October 27, 2014. We determined that CICB did not
satisfactorily address this finding; therefore, it is repeated in this report.
4

--- Page 7 ---
Findings and Recommendations
Claims Processing
Finding 1
Determinations for award claims were not always made within 90 days, as
required.
Analysis
The Criminal Injuries Compensation Board (CICB) did not always make award
determinations within the required time frame. Our review of the case files for 25
initial claims made during fiscal years 2014 through 2018, which resulted in
awards totaling $261,664, disclosed that 3 determinations (two awards totaling
$14,833 and one award denial) had delays which ranged from 43 to 287 days
beyond the 90-day statutory time limit. Our additional review of 27 supplemental
claims made during the same period, resulting in awards totaling $329,869,
disclosed that 5 determinations for awards totaling $71,449 were made 23 to 246
days beyond the 90-day time limit. A supplemental award may occur after an
award determination if the claimant requests that CICB reopen the claim to
consider additional unreimbursed losses related to the same crime. A similar
condition regarding determination delays was commented upon in our preceding
audit report.
Upon receipt of a claim application, a claims examiner is responsible for
reviewing the submission for required documentation, such as a police report,
medical bills, and proof of wages, in accordance with CICB’s procedures manual
and the related State law. According to State law, once a completed claim
application is received, including all the necessary supporting documentation,
CICB is required to make a determination to award or deny the claim within 90
days. State regulations stipulate that the process for supplemental awards is the
same as that established for an initial claim.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that CICB make award determinations within 90 days, as
required (repeat).
5

--- Page 8 ---
Cash Receipts
Finding 2
CICB did not adequately control and account for collections.
Analysis
CICB did not adequately control and account for its collections, which consisted
primarily of restitution and subrogation payments received for cases in which a
claim had been awarded. Collections received were recorded by CICB on a check
log as well as in CICB’s automated records of claim activity, which included the
amount of restitution due and received from offenders. CICB subsequently
forwarded all collections to the Department of Public Safety and Correctional
Service’s (DPSCS) Information Technology and Communication Division
(ITCD) for deposit. According to the State’s records, collections received directly
by CICB during the period July 1, 2014 to February 28, 2018 totaled
approximately $267,000.
 The employee responsible for recording collections received in offender
accounts in CICB’s automated records had access to collections since this
employee was also responsible for delivering the collections to ITCD for
deposit. In addition, CICB did not verify that all collections had been
properly transferred for deposit. To ensure that all collections are transferred
and deposited intact, the CICB employee who prepares the initial check log
should provide a copy directly to an independent employee for comparison to
proof of transfer to ITCD or to the bank deposit.
 Collections were not always transferred to ITCD for deposit in a timely
manner. Specifically, our test of 10 checks totaling $39,866 received over 10
days disclosed that 4 checks totaling $25,627 were transferred to ITCD 11 to
29 business days after receipt.
 CICB did not take certain steps to properly record a restitution payment in the
related offender’s account when that account could not be immediately
identified. From the aforementioned 10 checks tested in May 2018, we
identified 4 checks totaling $23,896, which, although deposited, had not been
credited to the offender accounts in CICB’s automated records to reduce the
amounts owed. These collections were received during the period between
November 2016 and April 2018. According to CICB, access to DPSCS’
offender database would be pursued to facilitate its efforts.
6

--- Page 9 ---
According to the Comptroller of Maryland’s Accounting Procedures Manual,
agencies are required to separate cash receipts handling duties from the cash
receipts and account receivable record keeping functions. Additionally, the
Manual requires an independent verification of collections to deposit, which
should be performed using the initial record of checks received. Furthermore, the
Manual requires agencies with nominal receipts to make deposits at least weekly
or whenever receipts accumulate to $5,000.
Recommendation 2
We recommend that CICB
a. ensure that employees who post payments to offender accounts do not
have access to the related collections,
b. provide the initial record of collections directly to an independent
employee responsible for verifying that all collections received were
properly transferred for deposit or deposited directly,
c. ensure that collections are transferred for deposit on a timely basis, and
d. use all available information to properly record all restitution payments
in the offenders’ accounts.
7

--- Page 10 ---
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the Criminal Injuries
Compensation Board (CICB) of the Department of Public Safety and Correctional
Services (DPSCS) for the period beginning April 2, 2014 and ending June 30,
2018. The audit was conducted in accordance with generally accepted
government auditing standards. Those standards require that we plan and perform
the audit to obtain sufficient, appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis
for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives. We believe that
the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and
conclusions based on our audit objectives.
As prescribed by the State Government Article, Section 2-1221 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, the objectives of this audit were to examine CICB’s financial
transactions, records, and internal control, and to evaluate its compliance with
applicable State laws, rules, and regulations.
In planning and conducting our audit, we focused on the major financial-related
areas of operations based on assessments of significance and risk. The areas
addressed by the audit included claims processing and revenue recovery. We also
determined the status of the finding included in our preceding audit report.
Our audit did not include certain support services provided to CICB by DPSCS.
These support services (such as payroll, purchasing, maintenance of accounting
records, and related fiscal functions) are included within the scope of our fiscal
compliance audits of DPSCS’ Office of the Secretary.
To accomplish our audit objectives, our audit procedures included inquiries of
appropriate personnel, inspections of documents and records, observations of
CICB’s operations, and tests of transactions. Generally, transactions were
selected for testing based on auditor judgment, which primarily considers risk.
Unless otherwise specifically indicated, neither statistical nor non-statistical audit
sampling was used to select the transactions tested. Therefore, the results of the
tests cannot be used to project those results to the entire population from which
the test items were selected.
We also performed various data extracts of pertinent information from the State’s
Financial Management Information System (such as revenue and expenditure
data) and the State’s Central Payroll Bureau (payroll data). The extracts are
performed as part of ongoing internal processes established by the Office of
Legislative Audits and were subject to various tests to determine data reliability.
8

--- Page 11 ---
We determined that the data extracted from these sources were sufficiently
reliable for the purposes the data were used during this audit.
We also extracted data from CICB’s automated claims records for the purpose of
testing claims processed. We performed various tests of the relevant data and
determined that the data were sufficiently reliable for the purposes the data were
used during the audit. Finally, we performed other auditing procedures that we
considered necessary to achieve our audit objectives. The reliability of data used
in this report for background or informational purposes was not assessed.
CICB’s management is responsible for establishing and maintaining effective
internal control. Internal control is a process designed to provide reasonable
assurance that objectives pertaining to the reliability of financial records;
effectiveness and efficiency of operations, including safeguarding of assets; and
compliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations are achieved.
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate.
Our reports are designed to assist the Maryland General Assembly in exercising
its legislative oversight function and to provide constructive recommendations for
improving State operations. As a result, our reports generally do not address
activities we reviewed that are functioning properly.
This report includes a finding relating to conditions that we consider to be
significant deficiencies in the design or operation of internal control that could
adversely affect CICB’s ability to maintain reliable financial records, operate
effectively and efficiently, and/or comply with applicable laws, rules, and
regulations. Our audit also disclosed a significant instance of noncompliance with
applicable laws, rules, or regulations.
CICB’s response to our findings and recommendations is included as an appendix
to this report. As prescribed in the State Government Article, Section 2-1224 of
the Annotated Code of Maryland, we will advise CICB regarding the results of
our review of its response.
9

--- Page 15 ---
In the interim, the CICB has improved its software generated claims tracking report which alerts
Claims Examiners of pending workloads and promotes increased accountability. Though not in
compliance at the time of this Finding, previous methods used to correct this problem have
proven to annually decrease processing times towards the 90 day goal. Anticipated Completion:
June 30, 2019.
Finding 2
CICB did not adequately control and account for collections.
Recommendation 2
We recommend that CICB
a. ensure that employees who post payments to offender accounts do not have access to the
related collections;
b. provide the initial record of collections directly to an independent employee responsible
for verifying that all collections received were properly transferred for deposit or
deposited directly;
c. ensure that collections are transferred for deposit on a timely basis; and
d. use all available information to properly record all restitution payments in the
offenders’ accounts.
We agree.
a. The duties of posting payments to ‘offender accounts’ and ‘collecting incoming payments’
have been separated. Currently, posting of payments to ‘offender accounts’ is handled by the
Financial Manager. ‘Collecting incoming payments’ is handled by the Claims Processor.
Anticipated Completion: Completed.
b. Initial collection of cash receipts has been assigned to the Claims Processor, who will be
responsible for verifying that all collections received are properly transferred for deposit or
deposited directly. Anticipated Completion: Completed.
c. The CICB has established a new process of depositing checks with GOCCP and Governor’s
Office of Finance (GOFA). Upon receipt of a check, the Claims Processor:
1) endorses the check for deposit;
2) identifies checks as Restitution, Subrogation, or Refund;
3) prepares copies of the checks;
4) prepares the Check Transmittal Log for signature by the Financial Manager; and
5) ships the checks, check copies, and signed Check Transmittal Log to GOFA.
This new process adheres to the financial internal control standards as set forth in
Comptroller of Maryland’s, Accounting Procedures Manual, Section 3.2 Cash Receipts.
Anticipated Completion: Completed.
d. The CICB has established a point of contact within the Department of Public Safety and
Correctional Services (DPSCS) Office of Grants, Policy, and Statistics (GPS) that is able to
2

--- Page 17 ---
A T
UDIT EAM
William R. Smith, CPA
Audit Manager
Tu N. Vuong
Senior Auditor
Sporthi J. Carnelio
Staff Auditor