Title: Maryland Department of Transportation - Maryland Transit Administration
Date: 11/20/2018
Type: Fiscal Compliance
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5bfc59dea1ce580c6c4f8ab4
Extracted: 2025-06-18T22:20:58.075652
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Audit Report
Maryland Department of Transportation
Maryland Transit Administration
May 2025
Public Notice:
In compliance with the requirements of the State Government Article Section
2-1224(i), of the Annotated Code of Maryland, the Office of Legislative Audits
has redacted cybersecurity findings and related auditee responses
from this public report.
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Senator Shelly L. Hettleman (Senate Chair) Delegate Jared Solomon (House Chair)
Senator Joanne C. Benson Delegate Steven J. Arentz
Senator Benjamin T. Brooks, Sr. Delegate Andrea Fletcher Harrison
Senator Paul D. Corderman Delegate Steven C. Johnson
Senator Katie Fry Hester Delegate Mary A. Lehman
Senator Cheryl C. Kagan Delegate David H. Moon
Senator Clarence K. Lam, M.D. Delegate Julie Palakovich Carr
Senator Cory V. McCray Delegate Emily K. Shetty
Senator Justin D. Ready Delegate Stephanie M. Smith
Senator Bryan W. Simonaire Delegate M. Courtney Watson
To Obtain Further Information
Office of Legislative Audits
The Warehouse at Camden Yards
351 West Camden Street, Suite 400
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Phone: 410-946-5900
Maryland Relay: 711
TTY: 410-946-5401 · 301-970-5401
E-mail: webmaster@ola.state.md.us
Website: www.ola.state.md.us
To Report Fraud
The Office of Legislative Audits operates a Fraud Hotline to report fraud, waste, or abuse involving State
of Maryland government resources. Reports of fraud, waste, or abuse may be communicated anonymously
by a toll-free call to 1-877-FRAUD-11, by mail to the Fraud Hotline, c/o Office of Legislative Audits, or
through the Office’s website.
Nondiscrimination Statement
The Department of Legislative Services does not discriminate on the basis of age, ancestry, color, creed,
marital status, national origin, race, religion, gender, gender identity, sexual orientation, or disability in the
admission or access to its programs, services, or activities. The Department’s Information Officer has been
designated to coordinate compliance with the nondiscrimination requirements contained in Section 35.107
of the United States Department of Justice Regulations. Requests for assistance should be directed to the
Information Officer at 410-946-5400 or 410-970-5400.

--- Page 3 ---
May 16, 2025
Senator Shelly L. Hettleman, Senate Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Delegate Jared Solomon, House Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Members of Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Annapolis, Maryland
Ladies and Gentlemen:
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the Maryland Department of
Transportation – Maryland Transit Administration (MTA) for the period
beginning July 1, 2020 and ending June 30, 2023. MTA is responsible for the
construction, operation, and maintenance of the Baltimore metropolitan area
transit system and for commuter services in suburban areas of the State.
Our audit disclosed MTA did not ensure that critical personnel and payroll
transactions were subject to documented independent supervisory review and did
not remove terminated employees from the payroll timely, including some who
remained on the payroll for between 14 days and 3 years after their termination.
These conditions were commented upon in our two preceding audit reports dating
back to November 2018 but not sufficiently corrected. In addition, MTA did not
ensure the propriety of payments to its third-party administrator for employee and
retiree healthcare costs, which totaled $174.7 million during fiscal years 2021
through 2023.
Our audit also disclosed that MTA did not always publish contract awards on
eMaryland Marketplace Advantage (eMMA) within 30 days as required by State
regulations. Additionally, MTA increased the maximum amount it would
reimburse a vendor for rides provided to individuals under its Call-a-Ride service
for individuals in the Mobility Paratransit Program without a formal contract
modification and did not obtain required customer signatures to support the
propriety of ride sharing charges. MTA paid the vendor responsible for managing
this program an additional $600,000 from January to August 2023 due to the
increased maximum reimbursement.

--- Page 4 ---
Furthermore, our audit disclosed cybersecurity-related findings. However, in
accordance with the State Government Article, Section 2-1224(i) of the
Annotated Code of Maryland, we have redacted the findings from this audit
report. Specifically, State law requires the Office of Legislative Audits to redact
cybersecurity findings in a manner consistent with auditing best practices before
the report is made available to the public. The term “cybersecurity” is defined in
the State Finance and Procurement Article, Section 3.5-301(b), and using our
professional judgment we have determined that the redacted findings fall under
the referenced definition. The specifics of the cybersecurity findings were
previously communicated to those parties responsible for acting on our
recommendations.
MTA’s response to this audit is included as an appendix to this report. Consistent
with State law, we have redacted the elements of MTA’s response related to the
cybersecurity audit findings. In accordance with State law, we have reviewed the
response and, while MTA generally agrees with the recommendations in this
report, we identified certain instances in which statements in the response
disagree with a report finding and recommendations. In each instance, we
reviewed and reassessed our audit documentation, and reaffirmed the validity of
our finding. In accordance with generally accepted government auditing
standards, we have included “auditor’s comments” within MTA’s response to
explain our position. Finally, there are other aspects of MTA’s response which
will require further clarification, but we do not anticipate that these will require
the Committee’s attention to resolve.
We wish to acknowledge the cooperation extended to us during our audit by
MTA.
Respectfully submitted,
Brian S. Tanen
Brian S. Tanen, CPA, CFE
Legislative Auditor
2

--- Page 5 ---
Table of Contents
Background Information 4
Agency Responsibilities 4
Referral of Contract to the Office of Attorney General 5
Purple Line Project 6
Referral to Our Fraud, Waste, and Abuse Hotline 6
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report 7
Findings and Recommendations 8
Union Payroll
* Finding 1 – The Maryland Transit Administration (MTA) did not 9
establish adequate controls over certain aspects of its union personnel,
payroll, and pension transactions.
Health Care Third Party Administrator
Finding 2 – MTA did not ensure the propriety of payments to its 10
third-party administrator for employee and retiree healthcare costs.
Procurement
Finding 3 – MTA did not timely publish contract awards on 11
eMaryland Marketplace Advantage as required.
Call-a-Ride
Finding 4 – MTA increased the maximum amount it would reimburse 12
the vendor for rides provided by taxi companies without a formal
contract modification and did not obtain required customer signatures
to support the propriety of the ride sharing charges.
Information Systems Security and Control
Finding 5 – Redacted cybersecurity-related finding. 13
Finding 6 – Redacted cybersecurity-related finding. 13
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology 14
Agency Response Appendix
∗ Denotes item repeated in full or part from preceding audit report
3

--- Page 6 ---
Background Information
Agency Responsibilities
The Maryland Transit Administration (MTA), a modal administration of the
Maryland Department of Transportation, is responsible for the construction,
operation, and maintenance of the Baltimore metropolitan area transit system and
for commuter services in suburban areas of the State. Transit modes in operation
primarily include the Metro subway, bus, light rail, and the Maryland Area
Regional Commuter service. MTA is headquartered in Baltimore City and
maintains a workforce of approximately 3,400 employees.
According to State records, during fiscal year 2023, MTA’s operating and capital
expenditures totaled approximately $1.56 billion. These expenditures were
funded by special funds (Transportation Trust Fund) totaling approximately
$920.5 million, and federal funds totaling approximately $640.2 million1 (see
Figure 1).
1 Federal funds included $369.9 million in COVID-related grant funds (Coronavirus Aid, Relief,
and Economic Security Act, Coronavirus Response and Relief Supplement Act, and the
American Rescue Plan Act).
4

--- Page 7 ---
Figure 1
MTA Positions, Expenditures, and Funding Sources
Full-Time Equivalent Positions as of June 30, 2023
Positions
Filled 3,089
Vacant 278
Total 3,367
Fiscal Year 2023 Expenditures
Expenditures
Salaries, Wages, and Fringe Benefits $ 447,580,747
Technical and Special Fees 1,088,270
Operating Expenses 1,111,997,514
Total $1,560,666,531
Fiscal Year 2023 Expenditure Funding Sources
Funding
Special Fund $ 920,451,002
Federal Fund 640,215,529
Total $1,560,666,531
Source: State financial and personnel records
Referral of Contract to the Office of Attorney General
In February 2021, as a result of concerns noted by MTA’s Office of Procurement,
the Office of Audits (OA) was tasked to perform a review of a 5-year contract for
environmental services. At the time of OA’s review, MTA had paid the vendor
approximately $2.7 million of the $3.3 million contract value within the first three
years of the contract.
MTA’s OA performed a review of the contract and related payments and issued a
report dated March 31, 2022 which concluded that the vendor invoiced exorbitant
prices and invalid rates that resulted in overpayments totaling $1.7 million. OA
advised us that it referred the contract issues to its legal counsel in March 2022
for review. As of April 2025, we were advised that legal actions are still pending.
5

--- Page 8 ---
Purple Line Project
Background
The Purple Line project is a 16.2-mile light rail line that will extend from
Bethesda in Montgomery County to New Carrollton in Prince George’s County,
with 21 stations. In April 2016, MTA entered into a public-private partnership
agreement with a consortium of private equity vendors to serve as the
concessionaire with responsibility for the design, construction, operation, and
maintenance of the Purple Line. The concessionaire contracted with one vendor
for the design-build phase and another vendor for the operations phase of the
project.
In September 2020, the design-build vendor terminated its contract and MTA
assumed control of over 150 contracts and purchase orders. In January 2022, the
concessionaire entered into a $3.4 billion contract with a new design-build vendor
with approval from MTA and BPW. MTA advised that the new design-build
vendor had assumed control of the 150 contracts by December 2023.
As of December 2023, MTA’s payments for the Purple Line project totaled
approximately $1.6 billion ($1.2 billion to the concessionaire and $423.6 million
paid directly to the contract vendors it assumed from the former design-build
vendor). As of March 2024, the estimated cost of the Purple Line project was
approximately $9.8 billion comprised of design/build costs totaling $4.1 billion
and operational costs totaling $5.7 billion.
We conducted a review of MTA’s procedures for monitoring performance and
making payments on the concessionaire and certain of the 150 contracts. Our
review did not identify any findings that warranted inclusion in this report.
Referral to Our Fraud, Waste, and Abuse Hotline
We received a referral to our fraud, waste, and abuse hotline alleging that MTA’s
Call-a-Ride (a service for individuals eligible for the Mobility Paratransit
Program) taxis were charging the maximum allowable amount, regardless of
miles driven. We reviewed the monitoring and payment procedures for the Call-
a-Ride contract. Although our review did not substantiate the allegation, we
identified other issues that require corrective actions by MTA (see Finding 4).
6

--- Page 9 ---
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report
Our audit included a review to determine the status of the five findings contained
in our preceding audit report dated March 11, 2022. See Figure 2 for the results
of our review.
Figure 2
Status of Preceding Findings
Preceding Implementation
Finding Description
Finding Status
MTA had not established adequate controls over
Repeated
Finding 1 certain aspects of its union personnel, payroll, and
(Current Finding 1)
pension processes.
MTA did not ensure that programming errors in its
Finding 2 new cloud-based system were corrected or recover Status Redacted2
related overpayments.
MTA did not have sufficient procedures to ensure
pension payments were not made to deceased
Finding 3 individuals. We identified payments to 14 Not repeated
individuals totaling $81,610 subsequent to their
reported date of death.
MTA lacked assurance that adequate information
technology security and operational controls
Finding 4 existed over its union payroll and pension Status Redacted2
processing system that was hosted, operated, and
maintained by a service provider.
MTA did not perform an independent verification
Finding 5 that all bus fare collections were subsequently Not repeated
deposited.
2 Specific information on the current status of this cybersecurity-related finding has been redacted
for the publicly available report in accordance with State Government Article, Section 2-1224(i)
of the Annotated Code of Maryland.
7

--- Page 10 ---
Findings and Recommendations
Union Payroll
Background
The Maryland Transit Administration (MTA) maintains labor agreements with
each of its three labor unions, which set forth employment terms for these
employees (including wages and pension benefit calculations). MTA is
responsible for all aspects of its union payroll and pensions, including tracking
employee pay rates and hours worked, maintaining pension and leave records,
posting adjustments to the payroll and pension records, and processing weekly
payroll payments via check or direct deposit. As noted in Figure 3, during
calendar year 2023, union payroll and pension expenditures totaled approximately
$292.2 million.
Figure 3
Union Payroll and Pension Expenditures
Calendar Year 2023
Number of Total
Labor Union Employees Expenditures
(as of 12/31/23) (in Millions)
Local 1300 – Bus and Rail Operators and
2,480 $215.2
Maintenance Employees
Local 1859 – MTA Police 167 15.1
Local 2 – Clerical Support Employees 189 9.7
Total Union Payroll 2,836 $240.0
Pensions (Local 2 and Local 1300)* 2,155 52.2
Total Union Payroll and Pension 4,991 $292.2
Source: MTA Payroll Reports
* Pension payments excludes Local 1859 sworn officers, since MTA police participate in
the Law Enforcement Officers’ Pension System administered by the Maryland State
Retirement Agency. The employers’ pension contribution is billed by the Agency to MTA,
and not processed through MTA’s union payroll system.
MTA contracts with a vendor to operate and maintain a cloud-based system used
to process payroll and pension payments for the MTA union employees and
pensioners. During the period July 1, 2020 through June 30, 2023, MTA paid the
vendor approximately $1.7 million.
8

--- Page 11 ---
Finding 1
MTA did not establish adequate controls over certain aspects of its union
personnel, payroll, and pension transactions.
Analysis
MTA did not establish adequate controls over certain aspects of its union
personnel, payroll, and pension transactions.
• MTA did not ensure that critical personnel and payroll transactions were
subject to documented independent supervisory review and approval. For
example, during fiscal year 2023, MTA did not review any of the 2,604
manual personnel transactions, (such as new hires and changes to pay rates).
• Terminated employees3 were not always removed from the payroll system
timely, resulting in certain individuals continuing to receive unwarranted
payments after their termination dates. Our test of 15 arbitrarily selected
terminations from calendar year 2022 and 2023 disclosed 11 employees were
not removed timely4 resulting in 9 being paid $5,461 after their effective
termination date. According to a report of employees terminated during fiscal
year 2023, 91 of the 268 terminated employees remained on the payroll for
between 14 days and 3 years after their termination date.
Similar conditions were commented upon in our two preceding audit reports
dating back to November 2018. In response to our prior report, MTA indicated
that it would implement monthly audits of critical changes in the payroll system
by January 2022 and would ensure timely notification and documentation of
terminations by March 2022. According to MTA management the audits of
critical changes were not conducted primarily due to lack of staffing and, as noted
above, MTA did not take sufficient action to ensure terminated employees were
removed timely.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that MTA
a. ensure that independent supervisory personnel perform a documented
review to verify the propriety of critical personnel and payroll
transactions (repeat), including those noted above; and
3 Terminated employees includes employees who were no longer on the union payroll, such as
employees who resigned or were terminated.
4 These 11 employees were removed from the payroll between 24 and 191 days after their
termination date.
9

--- Page 12 ---
b. ensure that terminated employees are immediately removed from the
payroll system and take appropriate action to recover any related
improper payments, including those noted above (repeat).
Healthcare Third Party Administrator
Finding 2
MTA did not ensure the propriety of payments to its third-party
administrator (TPA) for employee and retiree healthcare costs.
Analysis
MTA did not ensure the propriety of payments to its TPA for employee and
retiree healthcare costs. MTA contracted with a TPA to administer and pay
healthcare claims on behalf of its union employees and retirees. The TPA
provides medical coverage options that include medical plans, and prescription
drug, dental, and vision plans. According to State records, MTA paid the TPA
$174.7 million during fiscal years 2021 through 2023.
Our review disclosed that MTA did not ensure the amounts invoiced by the TPA
for claim reimbursements and administrative fees were proper. For example,
MTA paid a September 2023 invoice totaling $2.3 million without obtaining and
reviewing a list of claims paid by enrolled employees, retirees, and dependents to
ensure it was only billed for eligible plan participants.
MTA also did not conduct claims audits to ensure that the TPA only paid claims
in accordance with the contract terms, and to ensure that services were actually
provided. In this regard, the Department of Budget Management, which has
similar claims processing contracts for State employees, contracted with a third-
party vendor (other than the TPA processing the claims) to conduct audits of
claims paid.
Recommendation 2
We recommend that MTA
a. verify the propriety of claims reimbursements and administrative fees
invoiced by the TPA,
b. conduct comprehensive claims audits to ensure that only valid claims
were paid for services actually provided for covered members, and
c. recover any improper payments identified.
10

--- Page 13 ---
Procurements
Finding 3
MTA did not timely publish contract awards on eMaryland Marketplace
Advantage (eMMA) as required.
Analysis
MTA did not timely publish contract awards on eMMA5 as required. According
to MTA’s records, during the period fiscal year 2021 through fiscal year 2023,
MTA awarded $1.8 billion in operational, architectural and engineering, and
construction contracts.6 Based on risk and materiality, we tested certain
procurement attributes for 16 contracts totaling approximately $1 billion. MTA
procured these contracts between December 2020 and March 2023.
Our review disclosed that MTA did not publish 11 of the contract awards totaling
approximately $495 million on eMMA for between 2 and 28 months after the
contract execution. State regulations require contract awards to be published on
eMMA not more than 30 days after the execution and approval of the contract.
MTA advised that these delays occurred due to employees’ unfamiliarity with the
award posting process and inadequate supervisory review to ensure timely award
posting. Publishing awards on eMMA provides potentially greater reach to the
vendor community and improved transparency over State procurements including
information about winning bidders and the amount of the related awards.
Recommendation 3
We recommend that MTA publish contract awards in eMMA in a timely
manner, as required.
Call-a-Ride
Background
MTA offers Call-a-Ride services for individuals enrolled in the Mobility
Paratransit Program and subsidizes the ride costs. MTA contracts with a vendor
to provide management and monitoring of the Call-a-Ride service, which allows
the vendor to subcontract with transportation vendors, such as taxi companies and
a transportation network company (also referred to as a ride sharing company).
This contract was procured in March 2018 with an original cost of $48.7 million
5 eMMA is an internet-based, interactive procurement system managed by the Department of
General Services.
6 Excludes Purple Line contracts.
11

--- Page 14 ---
and has been extended through December 31, 2025 with a total contract cost of
$105.7 million.
The vendor submits invoices each month for the cost of the ride subsidy. For taxi
rides the rates are based on the Public Service Commission approved rates –
primarily on the trip distance and time elapsed. According to MTA records, as of
June 30, 2023 there were 21,700 certified Call-a-Ride participants, and payments
to the vendor totaled approximately $31 million during the period from July 2020
and June 2023.
We received a referral on our fraud, waste, and abuse hotline alleging taxi
companies were charging the maximum allowed, regardless of the mileage driven.
As a result, we conducted a review of the Call-a-Ride procedures, to include
MTA’s contract monitoring and payment processes. Although our review did not
substantiate the allegation, we identified other issues that require corrective
actions by MTA, as further described below.
Finding 4
MTA increased the maximum amount it would reimburse the vendor for
rides provided by taxi companies without a formal contract modification and
did not obtain required customer signatures to support the propriety of the
ride sharing charges.
Analysis
MTA increased the maximum amount it would reimburse the vendor for rides
provided by taxi companies without processing a contract modification and did
not collect required customer signatures to support the propriety of ride sharing
invoices.
• In October 2021, MTA increased the maximum amount it would reimburse
the vendor from $25 to $40 per trip without a formal contract modification.
MTA management advised us that this was due to difficulty in maintaining
services during the COVID-19 pandemic. During the period from January to
August 2023, MTA paid the vendor an additional $600,000 due to the
increased maximum reimbursement.
• MTA did not obtain customer signatures as required by the contract to support
the propriety of ride sharing company charges totaling $2 million for the
period January through August 2023. MTA requires customer signatures to
ensure payments are made only for rides provided to eligible individuals.
12

--- Page 15 ---
Recommendation 4
We recommend that MTA
a. execute formal contract modifications for significant changes in contract
terms, including the aforementioned increase in reimbursement amounts;
and
b. ensure customers signatures are collected as required.
Information Systems Security and Control
We determined that the Information Systems Security and Control section,
including Findings 5 and 6 related to “cybersecurity,” as defined by the State
Finance and Procurement Article, Section 3.5-301(b) of the Annotated Code of
Maryland, and therefore are subject to redaction from the publicly available audit
report in accordance with the State Government Article 2-1224(i). Consequently,
the specifics of the following findings, including the analysis, related
recommendations, along with MTA’s responses, have been redacted from this
report copy.
Finding 5
Redacted cybersecurity-related finding.
Finding 6
Redacted cybersecurity-related finding.
13

--- Page 16 ---
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the Maryland Department of
Transportation (MDOT) – Maryland Transit Administration (MTA) for the period
beginning July 1, 2020 and ending June 30, 2023. The audit was conducted in
accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards. Those
standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient,
appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and
conclusions based on our audit objectives. We believe that the evidence obtained
provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit
objectives.
As prescribed by the State Government Article, Section 2-1221 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, the objectives of this audit were to examine MTA’s financial
transactions, records, and internal control, and to evaluate its compliance with
applicable State laws, rules, and regulations.
In planning and conducting our audit, we focused on the major financial-related
areas of operations based on assessments of significance and risk. The areas
addressed by the audit included procurements and disbursements for capital
projects and operating expenditures, cash receipts, payroll, federal funds, State
grants, and information systems security and control. In addition, we reviewed
certain activities related to Call-a-Ride services based on a referral to our fraud,
waste, and abuse hotline. We also determined the status of the findings contained
in our preceding audit report.
Our audit did not include certain payroll support services (such as processing of
personnel transactions and maintenance of employee leave records) provided by
MDOT – The Secretary’s Office to MTA for its non-union management payroll.
These payroll support services are included within the scope of our audit of
MDOT. Our audit also did not include an evaluation of internal controls over
compliance with federal laws and regulations for federal financial assistance
programs and an assessment of MTA’s compliance with those laws and
regulations because the State of Maryland engages an independent accounting
vendor to annually audit such programs administered by State agencies, including
MTA.
Our assessment of internal controls was based on agency procedures and controls
in place at the time of our fieldwork. Our tests of transactions and other auditing
procedures were generally focused on the transactions occurring during our audit
period of July 1, 2020 to June 30, 2023, but may include transactions before or
after this period as we considered necessary to achieve our audit objectives.
14

--- Page 17 ---
To accomplish our audit objectives, our audit procedures included inquiries of
appropriate personnel, inspections of documents and records, tests of transactions,
and to the extent practicable, observations of MTA’s operations. Generally,
transactions were selected for testing based on auditor judgment, which primarily
considers risk, the timing or dollar amount of the transaction, or the significance
of the transaction to the area of operation reviewed. As a matter of course, we do
not normally use sampling in our tests, so unless otherwise specifically indicated,
neither statistical nor non-statistical audit sampling was used to select the
transactions tested. Therefore, unless sampling is specifically indicated in a
finding, the results from any tests conducted or disclosed by us cannot be used to
project those results to the entire population from which the test items were
selected.
We also performed various data extracts of pertinent information from the State’s
Financial Management Information System and MDOT’s Financial Management
Information System (such as revenue and expenditure data), as well as from the
contractor administering the State’s Corporate Purchasing Card Program (credit
card activity). The extracts are performed as part of ongoing internal processes
established by the Office of Legislative Audits and were subject to various tests to
determine data reliability. We determined that the data extracted from these
sources were sufficiently reliable for the purposes the data were used during this
audit.
We also extracted data from MTA’s automated union personnel, payroll, and
pension system for the purpose of testing payroll and pension transactions. We
also extracted data from MTA’s Driver’s License Monitoring System for the
purpose of testing driver’s license suspensions. We also extracted data from
MTA’s Call-a-Ride system for taxi trip data for the purpose of testing taxi trip
accuracy and reasonableness. We performed various tests of the relevant data and
determined that the data was sufficiently reliable for the purposes the data were
used during the audit. Finally, we performed other auditing procedures that we
considered necessary to achieve our objectives. The reliability of data used in this
report for background or informational purposes was not assessed.
MTA’s management is responsible for establishing and maintaining effective
internal control. Internal control is a process designed to provide reasonable
assurance that objectives pertaining to the reliability of financial records;
effectiveness and efficiency of operations, including safeguarding of assets; and
compliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations are achieved. As
provided in Government Auditing Standards, there are five components of
internal control: control environment, risk assessment, control activities,
information and communication, and monitoring. Each of the five components,
15

--- Page 18 ---
when significant to the audit objectives, and as applicable to MTA, were
considered by us during the course of this audit.
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate.
Our reports are designed to assist the Maryland General Assembly in exercising
its legislative oversight function and to provide constructive recommendations for
improving State operations. As a result, our reports generally do not address
activities we reviewed that are functioning properly.
This report includes findings relating to conditions that we consider to be
significant deficiencies in the design or operation of internal control that could
adversely affect MTA’s ability to maintain reliable financial records, operate
effectively and efficiently, and/or comply with applicable laws, rules, and
regulations. Our report also includes findings regarding significant instances of
noncompliance with applicable laws, rules, or regulations. Other less significant
findings were communicated to MTA that did not warrant inclusion in this report.
State Government Article Section 2-1224(i) requires that we redact in a manner
consistent with auditing best practices any cybersecurity findings before a report
is made available to the public. This results in the issuance of two different
versions of an audit report that contains cybersecurity findings – a redacted
version for the public and an unredacted version for government officials
responsible for acting on our audit recommendations.
The State Finance and Procurement Article, Section 3.5-301(b), states that
cybersecurity is defined as “processes or capabilities wherein systems,
communications, and information are protected and defended against damage,
unauthorized use or modification, and exploitation”. Based on that definition, and
in our professional judgment, we concluded that certain findings in this report fall
under that definition. Consequently, for the publicly available audit report all
specifics as to the nature of cybersecurity findings and required corrective actions
have been redacted. We have determined that such aforementioned practices, and
government auditing standards, support the redaction of this information from the
public audit report. The specifics of these cybersecurity findings have been
communicated to MTA and those parties responsible for acting on our
recommendations in an unredacted audit report.
16

--- Page 19 ---
The response from MDOT, on behalf of MTA, to our findings and
recommendations is included as an appendix to this report. Depending on the
version of the audit report, responses to any cybersecurity findings may be
redacted in accordance with State law. As prescribed in the State Government
Article, Section 2-1224 of the Annotated Code of Maryland, we will advise
MDOT regarding the results of our review of its response.
17

--- Page 20 ---
APPENDIX
Wes Moore
Governor
Aruna Miller
Lieutenant Governor
Paul J. Wiedefeld
Office of the Secretary Secretary
May 13, 2025
Brian S. Tanen, CPA, CFE
Legislative Auditor
Office of Legislative Audits
The Warehouse at Camden Yards
3 51 West Camden Street, Suite 400
Baltimore MD 21201
Dear Mr. Tanen:
Attached please find responses to the audit report from the Office of Legislative Audits for the
Maryland Department of Transportation (MDOT) Maryland Transit Administration (MTA) for
the period beginning July 1, 2020, and ending June 30, 2023.
If you have any additional questions or concerns, please contact Ms. Jaclyn D. Hartman, MDOT
Assistant Secretary of Transportation Investments, atjhartmanl@mdot.maryland.gov or at
410-865-1005. You may also contact Ms. Loyda Sequeira, MDOT Chief of Audits and Rail
Safety, at lsequeira@mdot.maryland.gov or at 410-865-1168. Ms. Hartman and Ms. Sequeira
will be happy to assist you. Of course, you may always contact me directly.
Sincerely,
Paul J. Wiedefeld
Secretary
Attachment
cc: Ms. Holly Arnold, Administrator, MTA
Ms. Samantha Biddle, Deputy Secretary, MDOT
Ms. Jaclyn Hartman, Assistant Secretary of Transportation Investments, MDOT
Ms. Tecla D. Kellum, Director of Audits, MTA
Mr. Joe McAndrew, Assistant Secretary of Planning, Project Development and
Delivery, MDOT
Ms. Octavia Robinson, Chief Financial Officer, MDOT
Ms. Dianna Rosborough, Assistant Secretary of Administration, MDOT
Ms. Loyda Sequeira, Chief of Audits and Rail Safety, MDOT
7201 Corporate Center Drive, Hanover, Maryland 21076 I 410.865.1000 I 888.713.1414 I Maryland Relay TTY 410.859.7227 I mdot.maryland.gov

--- Page 21 ---
Maryland Department of Transportation
Maryland Transit Administration
Agency Response Form
Union Payroll
Finding 1
MTA did not establish adequate controls over certain aspects of its union
personnel, payroll, and pension transactions.
We recommend that MTA
a. ensure that independent supervisory personnel perform a documented
review to verify the propriety of critical personnel and payroll
transactions (repeat), including those noted above; and
b. ensure that terminated employees are immediately removed from the
payroll system and take appropriate action to recover any related
improper payments, including those noted above (repeat).
Agency Response
Analysis Factually Accurate
Please provide N/A
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 1a Agree Estimated Completion Date: June 30, 2025
Please provide details of MTA will implement a monthly review process of critical personnel and
corrective action or payroll transactions which will be formally documented. Additional
explain disagreement. resources were allocated and management will continue to evaluate the
process to ensure reviews are consistently completed.
Recommendation 1b Agree Estimated Completion Date: Sept 30, 2025
Please provide details of MTA HR processes terminations when personnel action forms (AS-1s)
corrective action or are received from supervisors. Training and a monitoring process will be
explain disagreement. implemented to ensure timely submission of forms. Additionally, MTA
will implement a process to review monthly terminations to include
termination dates and payments made and owed to employees to
formally close out employee terminations including those noted.
Page 1 of 6

--- Page 22 ---
Maryland Department of Transportation
Maryland Transit Administration
Agency Response Form
Healthcare Third Party Administrator
Finding 2
MTA did not ensure the propriety of payments to its third-party
administrator (TPA) for employee and retiree healthcare costs.
We recommend that MTA
a. verify the propriety of claims reimbursements and administrative fees
invoiced by the TPA,
b. conduct comprehensive claims audits to ensure that only valid claims
were paid for services actually provided for covered members, and
c. recover any improper payments identified.
Agency Response
Analysis Factually Accurate
Please provide N/A
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 2a Agree Estimated Completion Date: June 30, 2025
Please provide details of MTA will establish a process to verify the propriety of claims
corrective action or reimbursed and administrative fees invoiced for all active and retired
explain disagreement. union employees. Additional documentation and/or reports from the
TPA will be requested to assist with the verification process as
determined necessary.
Recommendation 2b Agree Estimated Completion Date: Dec 30, 2026
Please provide details of MTA will utilize services with a TPA who will conduct ongoing
corrective action or comprehensive claims audits of all healthcare TPA claims paid and
explain disagreement. services provided.
Recommendation 2c Agree Estimated Completion Date: June 30, 2025
Please provide details of MTA will seek to recover payments identified by notifying the TPA
corrective action or immediately and taking the appropriate actions as determined necessary.
explain disagreement.
Page 2 of 6

--- Page 23 ---
Maryland Department of Transportation
Maryland Transit Administration
Agency Response Form
Procurements
Finding 3
MTA did not timely publish contract awards on eMaryland Marketplace
Advantage (eMMA) as required.
We recommend that MTA publish contract awards in eMMA in a timely
manner, as required.
Agency Response
Analysis Factually Accurate
Please provide N/A
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 3 Agree Estimated Completion Date: Jan 31, 2025
Please provide details of MTA updated its procurement operational checklists and reporting tools
corrective action or to include a mechanism for tracking the closeout process and mandated
explain disagreement. eMMA reporting requirement for applicable awards.
Page 3 of 6

--- Page 24 ---
Maryland Department of Transportation
Maryland Transit Administration
Agency Response Form
Call-a-Ride
Finding 4
MTA increased taxi company reimbursement rates without a formal
contract modification and did not obtain required customer signatures to
support the propriety of the ride sharing charges.
We recommend that MTA
a. execute formal contract modifications for significant changes in contract
terms, including the aforementioned increase in reimbursement rates;
and
b. ensure customers signatures are collected as required.
Agency Response
Analysis Not Factually Accurate
Please provide MTA did not increase taxi company reimbursement rates. The maximum
additional comments as amount subsidy rate was increased from $25.00 to $40.00 per trip during
deemed necessary. the COVID-19 pandemic.
Ride sharing companies do not use written receipts. They use technology
to collect the same information in lieu of written receipts.
Recommendation 4a Disagree Estimated Completion Date: Not Applicable
Please provide details of The change in subsidy from $25.00 to $40.00 did not constitute a change
corrective action or in contract terms and did not change the reimbursement rates. This did
explain disagreement. not constitute a significant change in the scope, schedule or contract
amount and thus did not require a formal contract modification or
approval by the Board of Public Works in accordance with COMAR
21.02.01.04C (1)(f).
Recommendation 4b Disagree Estimated Completion Date: Not Applicable
Please provide details of Ride share companies are technology based and utilize technology to
corrective action or collect the same information in lieu of written receipts; therefore, there
explain disagreement. are no written receipts to collect.
Auditor’s Comment: MTA indicates our analysis is not factually accurate and
disagrees with the related recommendations. We reviewed the responses and
stand by the accuracy of our findings and recommendations. Specifically, in
Page 4 of 6

--- Page 25 ---
Maryland Department of Transportation
Maryland Transit Administration
Agency Response Form
regard to the change in the maximum reimbursement from $25 to $40, the
response indicates it did not constitute a change in contract terms, did not change
the reimbursement rates, and did not constitute a significant change in the scope,
schedule or contract amount. While the rate charged did not change, the
maximum reimbursed for these rates increased by 60 percent resulting in an
additional $600,000 being paid to the vendor over eight months, a fact that was
not disputed in the response. As such, and contrary to MTA’s assertion, OLA
does consider this to be a significant change in the contract amount and continues
to believe a formal contract modification should have been prepared and approved
by the Board of Public Works. We have modified the language in the report to
clarify that the change was not to the rate but to the maximum reimbursement.
In regard to lack of customer signatures, the response indicates that the ride share
companies are technology based and utilize technology to collect the same
information in lieu of written receipts; therefore, there are no written receipts to
collect. The assertion that the technology collects the same information in lieu of
written receipts was not previously raised by MTA during or subsequent to the
audit, and no additional support has been provided to document how the
contract’s requirements have been satisfied by the vendor’s use of technology. As
such, based on the documentation provided during and subsequent to the audit, we
stand by the factual accuracy of our analysis and related recommendation.
Page 5 of 6

--- Page 26 ---
Maryland Department of Transportation
Maryland Transit Administration
Agency Response Form
Information Systems Security and Control
The Office of Legislative Audits (OLA) has determined that Findings 5 and 6
related to “cybersecurity,” as defined by the State Finance and Procurement
Article, Section 3.5-301(b) of the Annotated Code of Maryland, and therefore are
subject to redaction from the publicly available audit report in accordance with
the State Government Article 2-1224(i). Although the specifics of the following
findings, including the analysis, related recommendations, along with MDOT’s
responses, have been redacted from this report copy, MDOT’s responses indicated
agreement with the findings and related recommendations.
Finding 5
Redacted cybersecurity-related finding.
Agency Response has been redacted by OLA.
Finding 6
Redacted cybersecurity-related finding.
Agency Response has been redacted by OLA.
Page 6 of 6

--- Page 27 ---
AUDIT TEAM
Mark S. Hagenbuch, CPA
Audit Manager
R. Brendan Coffey, CPA, CISA
Edwin L. Paul, CPA, CISA
Information Systems Audit Managers
Lauren E. Franchak, CPA
Oluwafemi E. Ogundolie
Senior Auditors
Michael K. Bliss, CISA
Vickey K. Micah
Information Systems Senior Auditors
Thea A. Chimento, CFE
Paul A. McGrew
Jillian A. Novak, CPA
Samantha J. Rhea
Etai D. Stern
Staff Auditors