Title: Maryland Department of Health - Eastern Shore Hospital Center
Date: 11/19/2018
Type: Fiscal Compliance
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5bfc02a1a1ce580c6c4f62bb
Extracted: 2025-06-18T22:20:49.371870
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Audit Report
Maryland Department of Health
Eastern Shore Hospital Center
November 2018
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
For further information concerning this report contact:
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
301 West Preston Street, Room 1202
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Phone: 410-946-5900 ꞏ 301-970-5900
Toll Free in Maryland: 1-877-486-9964
Maryland Relay: 711
TTY: 410-946-5401 ꞏ 301-970-5401
E-mail: OLAWebmaster@ola.state.md.us
Website: www.ola.state.md.us
The Office of Legislative Audits operates a Fraud Hotline to report fraud, waste, or abuse
involving State of Maryland government resources. Reports of fraud, waste, or abuse
may be communicated anonymously by a toll-free call to 1-877-FRAUD-11, by mail to the
Fraud Hotline, c/o Office of Legislative Audits, or through the Office’s website.
The Department of Legislative Services does not discriminate on the basis of age, ancestry, color,
creed, marital status, national origin, race, religion, gender, gender identity, sexual orientation,
or disability in the admission or access to its programs, services, or activities. The Department’s
Information Officer has been designated to coordinate compliance with the nondiscrimination
requirements contained in Section 35.107 of the Department of Justice Regulations. Requests for
assistance should be directed to the Information Officer at 410-946-5400 or 410-970-5400.

--- Page 4 ---
2

--- Page 5 ---
Background Information
Agency Responsibilities
The Eastern Shore Hospital Center (ESHC), located in Cambridge, Maryland,
provides comprehensive psychiatric care and related services to patients from the
nine counties on Maryland’s Eastern Shore. The services provided include
inpatient treatment and community service programs. During fiscal year 2017,
ESHC, which is accredited by The Joint Commission, had a licensed capacity of
80 inpatients, a budgeted average daily population of 71 inpatients, and an actual
daily population of 66 inpatients. In March 2018, ESHC converted its assisted
living unit to an acute care unit which increased its licensed capacity to 84
inpatients. According to the State’s records, ESHC’s fiscal year 2017 operating
expenditures totaled approximately $19.8 million.
Status of Finding From Preceding Audit Report
Our audit included a review to determine the status of the finding contained in our
preceding audit report dated July 25, 2014. We determined that ESHC
satisfactorily addressed this finding.
Findings and Recommendations
Payroll
Finding 1
ESHC did not have adequate procedures in place to ensure the propriety of
time recorded by one individual into the Statewide Personnel System on
behalf of numerous other employees.
Analysis
ESHC did not have adequate procedures in place to ensure the propriety of time
recorded into the Statewide Personnel System (SPS) by a designated timekeeper
on behalf of numerous other employees (nurses). Specifically, the work time
recorded by the timekeeper was based on staffing schedules, rather than actual
time worked, and was not subject to adequate review and approval.
While ESHC management advised us that employees were required to record
their actual work time directly in SPS, the timekeeper entered work time into SPS
for employees who failed to do so when due. For example, during April 2018, the
3

--- Page 6 ---
timekeeper recorded time for 87 employees. However, the timekeeper entered
time into SPS based on staffing schedules, which did not necessarily reflect the
actual hours worked by the employees, and these employees did not prepare
timesheets.
Furthermore, the time entered by the timekeeper was not subject to adequate
review and approval. Specifically, the respective employees were to review the
time entered in SPS and make any necessary adjustments to reflect the actual
hours worked. However, our review of 1 SPS timesheet for 11 employees in 4
pay periods with related payments of $33,915 disclosed that 7 SPS timesheets
were not subsequently reviewed by the respective employees. ESHC
management advised us that the time entered in SPS was also reviewed by
another independent ESHC employee. However, this employee had no direct
knowledge of the employees’ actual work time and did not ensure the times
entered into SPS were proper.
As a result, there is a lack of assurance that the time used to calculate payroll
payments reflected the actual hours worked by the employees. According to State
records, during calendar year 2017 there were 247 ESHC employees with payroll
costs totaling approximately $9.4 million.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that ESHC ensure that time entered into SPS by the
employee or timekeeper reflects actual hours worked and is subject to review
and approval by appropriate supervisory personnel.
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the Eastern Shore Hospital
Center (ESHC) of the Maryland Department of Health (MDH) for the period
beginning March 31, 2014 and ending May 20, 2018. The audit was conducted in
accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards. Those
standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient,
appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and
conclusions based on our audit objectives. We believe that the evidence obtained
provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit
objectives.
As prescribed by the State Government Article, Section 2-1221 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, the objectives of this audit were to examine ESHC’s financial
4

--- Page 7 ---
transactions, records, and internal control, and to evaluate its compliance with
applicable State laws, rules, and regulations.
In planning and conducting our audit, we focused on the major financial-related
areas of operations based on assessments of significance and risk. The areas
addressed by the audit included patient funds, procurements and disbursements,
corporate purchasing cards, and payroll. We also determined the status of the
finding included in our preceding audit report.
Our audit did not include certain support services provided to ESHC by MDH.
These support services (such as certain payroll and purchasing functions,
maintenance of accounting records, and related fiscal functions) are included
within the scope of our audit of MDH’s Office of the Secretary and Other Units.
To accomplish our audit objectives, our audit procedures included inquiries of
appropriate personnel, inspections of documents and records, observations of
ESHC’s operations, and tests of transactions. Generally, transactions were
selected for testing based on auditor judgment, which primarily considers risk.
Unless otherwise specifically indicated, neither statistical nor non-statistical audit
sampling was used to select the transactions tested. Therefore, the results of the
tests cannot be used to project those results to the entire population from which
the test items were selected.
We also performed various data extracts of pertinent information from the State’s
Financial Management Information System (such as revenue and expenditure
data) and the State’s Central Payroll Bureau (payroll data), as well as from the
contractor administering the State’s Corporate Purchasing Card Program (credit
card activity). The extracts are performed as part of ongoing internal processes
established by the Office of Legislative Audits and were subject to various tests to
determine data reliability. We determined that the data extracted from these
various sources were sufficiently reliable for the purposes the data were used
during this audit. Finally, we performed other auditing procedures that we
considered necessary to achieve our objectives. The reliability of data used in this
report for background or informational purposes was not assessed.
ESHC’s management is responsible for establishing and maintaining effective
internal control. Internal control is a process designed to provide reasonable
assurance that objectives pertaining to the reliability of financial records;
effectiveness and efficiency of operations, including safeguarding of assets; and
compliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations are achieved.
5

--- Page 8 ---
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate.
Our reports are designed to assist the Maryland General Assembly in exercising
its legislative oversight function and to provide constructive recommendations for
improving State operations. As a result, our reports generally do not address
activities we reviewed that are functioning properly.
This report includes a finding relating to conditions that we consider to be
significant deficiencies in the design or operation of internal control that could
adversely affect ESHC’s ability to maintain reliable financial records, operate
effectively and efficiently, and/or comply with applicable laws, rules, and
regulations. Our audit did not disclose any significant instances of
noncompliance with applicable laws, rules, or regulations. Other less significant
findings were communicated to ESHC that did not warrant inclusion in this
report.
The response from MDH, on behalf of ESHC, to our findings and
recommendations is included as an appendix to this report. As prescribed in the
State Government Article, Section 2-1224 of the Annotated Code of Maryland,
we will advise MDH regarding the results of our review of its response.
6

--- Page 10 ---
RESPONSE TO THE OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DRAFT AUDIT REPORT
EASTERN SHORE HOSPITAL CENTER (2018)
November 5, 2018
Finding 1
ESHC did not have adequate procedures in place to ensure the propriety of time recorded
by one individual into the Statewide Personnel System on behalf of numerous other
employees.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that ESHC ensure that time entered into SPS by the employee or
timekeeper reflects actual hours worked and is subject to review and approval by
appropriate supervisory personnel.
ESHC’s Response
The Eastern Shore Hospital Center (ESHC) concurs with the audit finding and will
immediately implement corrective actions. ESHC will work with the Maryland Department
of Health’s Office of Human Resources to implement a time entry and submission process
that is consistent with the requirements of the State’s accounting standards. ESHC will
correct the deficiency by devising a paper-based system that will augment the limitations of
the computerized system that created the finding. Using paper forms, clerical staff, and
Human Resources specialists ESHC will assume responsibility for entry, submission, and
approval of timesheet data in the Statewide Personnel System to reflect the actual hours
worked. These corrective actions will initially focus on addressing deficiencies with the 24/7
Nursing Staff scrutinized by OLA. This process will replicate systems at other Behavioral
Health Administration facilities previously audited by OLA. ESHC anticipates the new
process will be fully implemented starting on January 30, 2019.

--- Page 11 ---
A T
UDIT EAM
Adam J. Westover, CPA
Audit Manager
Lauren E. Franchak, CPA
Senior Auditor
Patrick J. Cavanaugh
Dianne P. Ramirez
Staff Auditors