Title: Maryland Department of Health - Springfield Hospital Center
Date: 12/06/2018
Type: Fiscal Compliance
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5c111986a1ce580bfc2ce0f8
Extracted: 2025-06-18T22:21:17.174619
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Audit Report
Maryland Department of Health
Springfield Hospital Center
December 2018
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
For further information concerning this report contact:
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
301 West Preston Street, Room 1202
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Phone: 410-946-5900 ꞏ 301-970-5900
Toll Free in Maryland: 1-877-486-9964
Maryland Relay: 711
TTY: 410-946-5401 ꞏ 301-970-5401
E-mail: OLAWebmaster@ola.state.md.us
Website: www.ola.state.md.us
The Office of Legislative Audits operates a Fraud Hotline to report fraud, waste, or abuse
involving State of Maryland government resources. Reports of fraud, waste, or abuse
may be communicated anonymously by a toll-free call to 1-877-FRAUD-11, by mail to the
Fraud Hotline, c/o Office of Legislative Audits, or through the Office’s website.
The Department of Legislative Services does not discriminate on the basis of age, ancestry, color,
creed, marital status, national origin, race, religion, gender, gender identity, sexual orientation,
or disability in the admission or access to its programs, services, or activities. The Department’s
Information Officer has been designated to coordinate compliance with the nondiscrimination
requirements contained in Section 35.107 of the Department of Justice Regulations. Requests for
assistance should be directed to the Information Officer at 410-946-5400 or 410-970-5400.

--- Page 4 ---
2

--- Page 5 ---
Background Information
Agency Responsibilities
Springfield Hospital Center (SHC) is a state-operated psychiatric facility located
in Sykesville, Maryland. SHC operates as a unit of the Maryland Department of
Health’s (MDH) Behavioral Health Administration and provides acute, sub-acute,
and long-term inpatient services for persons with mental illness throughout the
State. SHC is accredited by The Joint Commission, which evaluates and monitors
health care organizations nationwide to promote safe, high-quality care, treatment,
and services. During fiscal year 2018, SHC had a licensed capacity of 522
inpatients, a budgeted averaged daily population of 229, and an actual average
daily population of 218. According to the State's records, SHC's operating
expenditures totaled approximately $74.8 million during fiscal year 2018.
Status of Finding From Preceding Audit Report
Our audit included a review to determine the status of the finding contained in our
preceding audit report dated October 6, 2015. We determined that SHC
satisfactorily addressed this finding.
Findings and Recommendations
Purchases and Disbursements
Finding 1
SHC did not procure fresh produce and certain medical supplies in
accordance with State procurement regulations and MDH policies.
Analysis
SHC did not procure fresh produce and certain medical supplies in accordance
with State procurement regulations and MDH policies.
 During the period from January 2015 through April 2018, SHC made repeated
purchases of fresh produce from one vendor, totaling $253,734 without any
public solicitation, competitive bids, written contracts, or control agency
approval as required by State regulations. Consequently, there is a lack of
assurance that the State obtained these items at the lowest cost. State
procurement regulations generally require a formal written competitive
procurement and publication of the solicitation on eMaryland Marketplace for
3

--- Page 6 ---
procurements exceeding $15,000 and control agency approval, such as by the
Board of Public Works, for larger procurements.
 SHC did not obtain Department of General Services (DGS) and MDH
approval for the purchases of medical supplies from two vendors through
Intergovernmental Cooperative Purchasing Agreements (ICPA) as required by
State regulations and MDH policies. SHC also did not prepare a
determination that using the ICPA was in the best interest of the State. During
our audit period, SHC purchased medical supplies from two vendors through
ICPAs totaling $197,675, and $73,273. State regulations only authorize
primary procurement units, such as DGS, to participate in an ICPA. In
addition, once procured by DGS, MDH written policy requires its facilities to
obtain MDH approval to use an ICPA and to prepare a determination that
purchases from an ICPA are in the best interest of the State. Our test of one
purchase from each of these vendors, totaling $9,587 and $6,256, disclosed
that the prices paid appeared reasonable based on an Internet search of current
market pricing.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that SHC
a. comply with State procurement regulations by publicly soliciting
competitive bids, executing written contracts, and obtaining control
agency approval for procurements, where applicable; and
b. refrain from purchasing goods through ICPAs that have not been
procured or approved in accordance with State regulations and MDH
policies, including those noted above.
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the Springfield Hospital Center
(SHC) of the Maryland Department of Health (MDH) for the period beginning
January 28, 2015 and ending May 29, 2018. The audit was conducted in
accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards. Those
standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient,
appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and
conclusions based on our audit objectives. We believe that the evidence obtained
provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit
objectives.
As prescribed by the State Government Article, Section 2-1221 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, the objectives of this audit were to examine SHC’s financial
4

--- Page 7 ---
transactions, records, and internal control, and to evaluate its compliance with
applicable State laws, rules, and regulations.
In planning and conducting our audit, we focused on the major financial-related
areas of operations based on assessments of significance and risk. The areas
addressed by the audit included procurements and disbursements, corporate
purchasing cards, and payroll. We also determined the status of the finding
included in our preceding audit report.
Our audit did not include certain support services provided to SHC by MDH.
These support services (such as certain payroll and purchasing functions,
maintenance of accounting records, and related fiscal functions) are included
within the scope of our audit of MDH’s Office of the Secretary and Other Units.
To accomplish our audit objectives, our audit procedures included inquiries of
appropriate personnel, inspections of documents and records, observations of
SHC’s operations, and tests of transactions. Generally, transactions were selected
for testing based on auditor judgment, which primarily considers risk. Unless
otherwise specifically indicated, neither statistical nor non-statistical audit
sampling was used to select the transactions tested. Therefore, the results of the
tests cannot be used to project those results to the entire population from which
the test items were selected.
We also performed various data extracts of pertinent information from the State’s
Financial Management Information System (such as revenue and expenditure
data) and the State’s Central Payroll Bureau (payroll data), as well as from the
contractor administering the State’s Corporate Purchasing Card Program (credit
card activity). The extracts are performed as part of ongoing internal processes
established by the Office of Legislative Audits and were subject to various tests to
determine data reliability. We determined that the data extracted from these
various sources were sufficiently reliable for the purposes the data were used
during this audit. Finally, we performed other auditing procedures that we
considered necessary to achieve our objectives. The reliability of data used in this
report for background or informational purposes was not assessed.
SHC’s management is responsible for establishing and maintaining effective
internal control. Internal control is a process designed to provide reasonable
assurance that objectives pertaining to the reliability of financial records;
effectiveness and efficiency of operations, including safeguarding of assets; and
compliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations are achieved.
5

--- Page 8 ---
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate.
Our reports are designed to assist the Maryland General Assembly in exercising
its legislative oversight function and to provide constructive recommendations for
improving State operations. As a result, our reports generally do not address
activities we reviewed that are functioning properly.
This report includes a finding relating to conditions that we consider to be
significant instances of noncompliance with applicable laws, rules, or regulations.
Our audit did not disclose any significant deficiencies in the design or operation
of internal control that could adversely affect SHC’s ability to maintain reliable
financial records, operate effectively and efficiently, and/or comply with
applicable laws, rules, and regulations. Other less significant findings were
communicated to SHC that did not warrant inclusion in this report.
The response from MDH, on behalf of SHC, to our findings and
recommendations is included as an appendix to this report. As prescribed in the
State Government Article, Section 2-1224 of the Annotated Code of Maryland,
we will advise MDH regarding the results of our review of its response.
6

--- Page 10 ---
Maryland Department of Health
Springfield Hospital Center
January 28, 2015 to May 29, 2018
Agency Response Form
Background Information
Agency Response
Analysis Factually Accurate
Please explain any No concerns with factual accuracy.
concerns with factual
accuracy.
Finding 1
SHC did not procure fresh produce and certain medical supplies in accordance with State
procurement laws and regulations, and MDH policies.
We recommend that SHC
a. comply with State procurement regulations by publicly soliciting competitive bids,
executing written contracts, and obtaining control agency approval for procurements,
where applicable;
b. refrain from purchasing goods through ICPAs that have not been procured or
approved in accordance with State regulations, including those noted above.
Agency Response
Analysis Factually Accurate
Please explain any No concerns with factual accuracy.
concerns with factual
accuracy.
Recommendation a Agree Estimated Completion Date: 12/31/2018
Please provide details of We concur with the auditor’s recommendation. Our corrective action
corrective action or plan is to identify at least two to three vendors to publicly solicit
explain disagreement. competitive bids for fresh produce on a less than annual basis due to the
unique commodity and daily price changes. Our timetable to implement
this plan is 12/31/2018
Recommendation b Agree Estimated Completion Date: 06/30/2019
Please provide details of We concur with the auditor’s recommendation. Once DGS has procured
corrective action or medical supplies, our corrective action plan is to obtain MDH approval
explain disagreement. to use an ICPA and to prepare a determination letter that states that
purchases from an ICPA are in the best interest of the State. Our
timetable to implement this plan is 06/30/2019.
Page 1 of 1

--- Page 11 ---
A T
UDIT EAM
Mark S. Hagenbuch, CPA
Audit Manager
Tu N. Vuong
Senior Auditor
Keli R. Edmonds
Staff Auditor