Title: University System of Maryland - University of Maryland Eastern Shore
Date: 01/04/2019
Type: Fiscal Compliance
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5c362af7a1ce5806d0b80b5c
Extracted: 2025-06-18T22:21:45.469566
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Audit Report
University System of Maryland
University of Maryland Eastern Shore
December 2022
Public Notice
In compliance with the requirements of the State Government Article Section
2-1224(i), of the Annotated Code of Maryland, the Office of Legislative
Audits has redacted cybersecurity findings and related auditee responses
from this public report.
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Senator Clarence K. Lam, M.D. (Senate Chair) Delegate Mark S. Chang (House Chair)
Senator Malcom L. Augustine Delegate Steven J. Arentz
Senator Adelaide C. Eckardt Delegate Nicholas P. Charles II
Senator George C. Edwards Delegate Andrea Fletcher Harrison
Senator Katie Fry Hester Delegate Trent M. Kittleman
Senator Cheryl C. Kagan Delegate Carol L. Krimm
Senator Benjamin F. Kramer Delegate David Moon
Senator Cory V. McCray Delegate Julie Palakovich Carr
Senator Justin D. Ready Delegate Elizabeth G. Proctor
Senator Craig J. Zucker Delegate Geraldine Valentino-Smith
To Obtain Further Information
Office of Legislative Audits
The Warehouse at Camden Yards
351 West Camden Street, Suite 400
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Phone: 410-946-5900 ·
Maryland Relay: 711
TTY: 410-946-5401 · 301-970-5401
E-mail: OLAWebmaster@ola.state.md.us
Website: www.ola.state.md.us
To Report Fraud
The Office of Legislative Audits operates a Fraud Hotline to report fraud, waste, or abuse involving State
of Maryland government resources. Reports of fraud, waste, or abuse may be communicated anonymously
by a toll-free call to 1-877-FRAUD-11, by mail to the Fraud Hotline, c/o Office of Legislative Audits, or
through the Office’s website.
Nondiscrimination Statement
The Department of Legislative Services does not discriminate on the basis of age, ancestry, color, creed,
marital status, national origin, race, religion, gender, gender identity, sexual orientation, or disability in the
admission or access to its programs, services, or activities. The Department’s Information Officer has been
designated to coordinate compliance with the nondiscrimination requirements contained in Section 35.107
of the United States Department of Justice Regulations. Requests for assistance should be directed to the
Information Officer at 410-946-5400 or 410-970-5400.

--- Page 3 ---
December 15, 2022
Senator Clarence K. Lam, M.D., Senate Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Delegate Mark S. Chang, House Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Members of Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Annapolis, Maryland
Ladies and Gentlemen:
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the University System of
Maryland (USM) – University of Maryland Eastern Shore (UMES) for the period
beginning July 17, 2017 and ending September 15, 2021. UMES is a
comprehensive public institution offering an array of baccalaureate programs in
both traditional arts and sciences, and in applied professional fields, as well as
select professionally oriented master’s and doctoral programs.
Our audit disclosed that UMES did not adequately monitor its food service vendor
to ensure required facility upgrades and operational investments were made and
proper sales commissions were received. The vendor’s contract required that it
invest approximately $4.1 million in UMES facility upgrades and $913,000 in
operational investments, such as wellness education, over the ten-year contract
term. Additionally, we noted several internal control deficiencies relating to
student accounts receivable and cash receipts. For example, UMES had not
established sufficient controls over initial student residency determinations and
subsequent changes, and did not ensure that all electronic collections, which
totaled $6.5 million in fiscal year 2021, were deposited in the State’s bank
account.
Our audit also disclosed certain risks in UMES’ information systems. However in
accordance with the State Government Article, Section 2-1224(i) of the
Annotated Code of Maryland, we have redacted these findings from this audit

--- Page 4 ---
report. Specifically, State law requires the Office of Legislative Audits to redact
cybersecurity findings in a manner consistent with auditing best practices before
the report is made available to the public. The term “cybersecurity” is defined in
the State Finance and Procurement Article, Section 3A-301(b), and using our
professional judgment we have determined that the redacted findings falls under
the referenced definition. The specifics of the cybersecurity findings were
previously communicated to UMES as well as those parties responsible for acting
on our recommendations.
Finally, our audit included a review to determine the status of the nine findings
contained in our preceding report. For the non-cybersecurity-related findings we
determined that UMES satisfactorily addressed three of those six findings. The
remaining three findings are repeated in this report.
The USM Office’s response to this audit, on behalf of UMES, is included as an
appendix to this report. In accordance with State law, we have reviewed the
response and, while UMES agrees with the recommendations in this report, we
identified an instance in which statements in the response indicate one of our
report findings is not factually accurate. In this instance, we reviewed and
reassessed our audit documentation, and reaffirmed the validity of our finding,
including its factual accuracy. In accordance with generally accepted government
auditing standards, we have included an “auditor’s comment” within USM’s
response to explain our position. Finally, we will advise the Joint Audit and
Evaluation Committee of any outstanding issues that we cannot resolve with
UMES. Consistent with the requirements of State law, we have redacted the
elements of UMES’ response related to cybersecurity audit findings.
We wish to acknowledge the cooperation extended to us during the audit by
UMES. We also wish to acknowledge USM’s and UMES’ willingness to address
the audit issues and implement appropriate corrective actions.
Respectfully submitted,
Gregory A. Hook, CPA
Legislative Auditor
2

--- Page 5 ---
Table of Contents
Background Information 4
Agency Responsibilities 4
Affiliated Foundation 4
Hawk Plaza Student Housing Complex 5
Grant Funds Disbursed to Foundation 5
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report 6
Findings and Recommendations 8
Food Service Vendor
∗ Finding 1 – The University of Maryland Eastern Shore (UMES) did not 8
adequately monitor its food service vendor to ensure required facility
upgrades, investments, and commissions were received.
Student Accounts Receivable
* Finding 2 – UMES had not established sufficient controls over student 9
residency determinations and subsequent changes, and certain non-
cash credits recorded in student accounts.
Cash Receipts
* Finding 3 – UMES did not adequately control and account for mail 11
collections, and did not ensure electronic collections were properly
deposited into the State’s bank account.
Information Systems Security and Control
Finding 4 – Redacted cybersecurity-related finding 12
Finding 5 – Redacted cybersecurity-related finding 12
Finding 6 – Redacted cybersecurity-related finding 12
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology 13
Agency Response Appendix
* Denotes item repeated in full or part from preceding audit report
3

--- Page 6 ---
Background Information
Agency Responsibilities
The University of Maryland Eastern Shore (UMES) is a comprehensive public
institution of the University System of Maryland (USM) and operates under the
jurisdiction of USM’s Board of Regents. UMES offers an array of baccalaureate
programs in both traditional arts and sciences, and in applied professional fields,
as well as select professionally oriented master’s and doctoral programs. Student
enrollment for the fall 2021 semester totaled 2,384, including 1,811
undergraduate students and 573 graduate students.
The UMES budget is funded by unrestricted revenues, such as tuition and fees
and a State general fund appropriation, and restricted revenues, such as federal
grants and contracts. According to the State’s accounting records, UMES’
revenues for fiscal year 2021 totaled approximately $122 million, including a
State general fund appropriation of approximately $45 million.
Affiliated Foundation
In September 2003, the USM Board of Regents approved the creation of the
Maryland Hawk Corporation as an Affiliated Foundation and Business Entity
under the Board of Regents’ Policy on Affiliated Foundations and its Policy on
Business Entities. The purpose of the Foundation included furthering and
promoting charitable, educational, and scientific purposes that foster and promote
the general welfare of UMES through receipt and management of gifts and other
activity in the furtherance of the mission of UMES.
In a past audit report dated November 7, 2014, we disclosed several findings
relating to the Foundation including, for example, questionable use of grant funds
and possible violations of the Public Ethics Law. Our preceding audit report
dated January 4, 2019 noted that the Regents instructed the UMES President in
October 2014 to deactivate the Foundation from operations other than for activity
relating to Hawk Plaza; a student housing complex (addressed below). During
our current audit, we noted that in May 2021, UMES completed its deactivation
from the Foundation, and in February 2022, the Foundation’s legal counsel
notified UMES that the Foundation intended to self-liquidate by April 30, 2022, a
date since extended to June 30, 2023.
4

--- Page 7 ---
Hawk Plaza Student Housing Complex
As stated in our preceding audit report in 2013 the Foundation obtained financing
to build Hawk Plaza, a three-building student housing complex, which opened in
2015. A subsequent decline in enrollment and a corresponding decline in demand
for housing created a serious financial shortfall for the Foundation, as Hawk Plaza
was to be the Foundation’s revenue source for meeting debt service obligations
and operating expenses. In October 2016, the USM Board of Regents’ Finance
Committee recommended to the USM Chancellor that UMES assume both the
ownership and the related obligations of Hawk Plaza from the Foundation.
Although this action was approved, ongoing litigation with a third party continued
to delay the transfer and in December 2020 UMES legal counsel advised the
Foundation that UMES would no longer pursue the transfer due to numerous
ongoing title issues.
However, because of the Foundation’s financial condition with regard to Hawk
Plaza, UMES entered into a series of lease agreements with the Foundation
whereby UMES was responsible for all operating expenses, as well as leasing a
specified number of the facility’s 180 beds (88 beds were leased for the Spring
2022 semester). According to UMES records, the value of those agreements,
which covered the period between August 2017 and May 2022, totaled
approximately $4.5 million. During the Spring 2022 semester, Hawk Plaza
provided housing to 68 students. According to the Foundation’s legal counsel, the
Foundation is attempting to sell Hawk Plaza by June 30, 2023, otherwise it will be
placed for auction.
Grant Funds Disbursed to Foundation
In our preceding audit report, we noted that UMES had not complied with an
OLA recommendation to seek reimbursement from the Foundation for federal
grant funds totaling $385,000 that it had disbursed to the Foundation for purposes
inconsistent with applicable federal regulations. Our preceding report also noted
that the USM’s Office of Internal Audits performed an expanded review of grant
funds advanced to the Foundation and identified an additional $479,000 disbursed
in a manner inconsistent with the purposes of the grant funding.
As of March 9, 2022, the Foundation had not reimbursed the $385,000 identified
by OLA and UMES management advised that the Foundation continues to
disagree with the additional $479,000 identified by the USM auditors and
accordingly, has not reimbursed those funds. As noted above, the Foundation has
been deactivated and the most recent audit report provided to UMES for the
period ending June 30, 2019 expressed uncertainty as to whether the Foundation
5

--- Page 8 ---
can continue as a going concern without the rental or sale of Hawk Plaza.
Consequently, we determined that there is uncertainty as to the Foundation’s
ability to repay some or all of the aforementioned grant funds to UMES.
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report
Our audit included a review to determine the status of the nine findings contained
in our preceding audit report dated January 4, 2019. As noted in Figure 1 below,
for the non-cybersecurity-related findings, we determined that UMES
satisfactorily addressed three of those six findings. The remaining three findings
are repeated in this report.
6

--- Page 9 ---
Figure 1
Status of Preceding Findings
Preceding Implementation
Finding Description
Finding Status
The University of Maryland Eastern Shore (UMES) improperly
Finding 1 deposited income from its food services vendor, totaling $1.3 Not repeated
million, with the University System of Maryland (USM)
Foundation.
Finding 2 UMES did not comply with USM policies, or circumvented these Not repeated
policies, for procurement transactions totaling $1.5 million.
UMES did not adequately monitor its food service vendor to
Repeated
Finding 3 ensure required operational investments were made and proper
(Current Finding 1)
commissions were received. UMES also did not verify certain
vendor prices under other contracts.
UMES had not established sufficient controls over student
Repeated
Finding 4
residency determinations and changes, certain non-cash credits, (Current Finding 2)
and financial aid awards recorded in student accounts.
UMES’ procedure for identifying and transferring delinquent
Finding 5 student accounts to the State’s Central Collection Unit did not Not repeated
include an independent supervisory review to ensure adequate
and timely follow-up on all such accounts.
UMES had not reconciled its credit card and electronic Repeated
Finding 6
collections records with the State’s bank account to ensure their (Current Finding 3)
deposit since December 2016.
Monitoring of student administration system security was not
Finding 7 adequate as database security-related events were not logged, and Status Redacted1
certain key application security reports were either not generated
or reviewed.
Finding 8 UMES lacked intrusion detection prevention system coverage for Status Redacted1
encrypted traffic entering the UMES network.
UMES did not ensure that user access capabilities assigned to
Finding 9 employees on its financial management systems were adequately Status Redacted1
restricted.
1 Specific information on the current status of cybersecurity-related findings 7 through 9 has been
redacted from this publicly available audit report in accordance with State Government Article,
Section 2-1224(i) of the Annotated Code of Maryland.
7

--- Page 10 ---
Findings and Recommendations
Food Service Vendor
Finding 1
The University of Maryland Eastern Shore (UMES) did not adequately
monitor its food service vendor to ensure required facility upgrades,
investments, and commissions were received.
Analysis
UMES did not adequately monitor its food service vendor to ensure required
facility upgrades, investments, and commissions were received. The food service
contract provided that the vendor was to invest approximately $4.1 million in
UMES facility upgrades and $913,000 in operational investments (such as
wellness education and marketing) over the ten-year contract term, beginning July
2014 and ending June 2023. The contract also provided for a monthly sales
commission to be remitted by the vendor to UMES ranging from 6 to 20 percent
of food sales depending on the type of sale.
Our review disclosed that UMES did not obtain or review vendor contractor
invoices or take any steps to verify that the vendor made all required upgrades and
operational investments. In our preceding audit report we noted that we were able
to obtain invoices directly from the vendor to support certain investments made.
However, our current audit disclosed that neither UMES nor the vendor could
provide us with support for the total amounts invested. UMES management
advised that a portion of the required investment had been deferred due to the
COVID-19 pandemic, but could not provide a contract modification or other
documentation to support this assertion or the actual amount deferred.
Furthermore, UMES did not verify the reported sales (such as by reviewing cash
register reports) to ensure the vendor submitted the required commissions.
During fiscal year 2019 through 2021, the vendor reported food sales of
approximately $1,653,000 with related commissions totaling $184,000. UMES
was unable to produce sales reports to support the commission payments reported
during our audit.
Due to the aforementioned conditions, there was a lack of assurance that UMES
received all the facility upgrades, investments, and commissions required by the
contract. Similar conditions were commented upon in our preceding audit report.
In its response to that report, UMES stated that it would conduct annual reviews
of the vendor’s capital and operational investments required by the contract terms,
8

--- Page 11 ---
and that steps had been taken to verify sales on a monthly basis to ensure that
commissions are properly remitted.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that UMES
a. verify that its food service vendor provides the capital and operational
investments required by the contract terms (repeat), and
b. verify reported food service sales and ensure that the proper commissions
are remitted (repeat).
Student Accounts Receivable
Finding 2
UMES had not established sufficient controls over student residency
determinations and subsequent changes, and certain non-cash credits
recorded in student accounts.
Analysis
UMES had not established sufficient controls over initial student residency
determinations and subsequent changes, and certain non-cash credits recorded in
student accounts. Accurate student residency determinations are critical because
of the significant differences between in-state and out-of-state student tuition
rates. For example, the undergraduate tuition for Maryland residents was $2,763
for the spring 2022 semester, whereas the undergraduate tuition rate for out-of-
state students was $8,073. According to UMES’ records, as of June 30, 2021,
student accounts receivable totaled approximately $2.2 million.
• Our review disclosed that independent reviews of residency determinations to
ensure their propriety were either not adequately documented or were not
conducted at all. Our review of three units that made almost all of the initial
residency determinations and subsequent changes disclosed that one unit
could not document that it had conducted reviews of the initial determinations,
another unit’s review documentation did not include the date and person
conducting the reviews, and the third unit did not conduct any reviews. All
three units did not document supervisory reviews of changes to students’
residency.
9

--- Page 12 ---
In addition, our test of five initial residency determinations and seven
residency changes2 made by these units disclosed that one student was
improperly charged in-state tuition rather than out-of-state tuition for multiple
semesters, resulting in lost tuition revenue of approximately $15,600 for the
applicable academic years. According to UMES’ records, there were 237
residency status changes from out-of-state to in-state processed during fiscal
year 2021.
• As of February 2022, certain non-cash credit adjustments posted to student
accounts (such as credits processed due to the student’s withdrawal from
school) had not been reviewed since June 2021. Furthermore, UMES did not
have a written policy regarding the review of non-cash credit adjustments. As
a result, unauthorized or inaccurate non-cash credit adjustments could be
made without detection. According to UMES’ records, non-cash credit
adjustments totaling approximately $2.1 million were recorded from June 1,
2021 through the end of the audit period that were not subject to independent
review.
Similar conditions were commented upon in our preceding audit report.
Recommendation 2
We recommend that UMES
a. ensure that independent supervisory reviews of initial student residency
status determinations and residency status changes recorded in the
student accounts receivable system are conducted and adequately
documented (repeat);
b. correct the student account records of the aforementioned student to
reflect the proper residency status; and
c. establish and implement a written policy requiring that an independent
verification of non-cash credit adjustments to source documents be
performed, at least on a test basis (repeat).
2 Test selection was based on auditor judgment, and considerations included students with out-of-
state addresses charged in-state tuition and students changed to an in-state tuition rate.
10

--- Page 13 ---
Cash Receipts
Finding 3
UMES did not adequately control and account for mail collections, and did
not ensure electronic collections were properly deposited into the State’s
bank account.
Analysis
UMES did not adequately control and account for mail collections, and did not
ensure electronic collections were properly deposited into the State’s bank
account. According to UMES’ records, during fiscal year 2021, collections
deposited totaled approximately $6.7 million, consisting of $4.5 million from
walk-in receipts and $2.2 million in mail collections. There was an additional
$6.5 million in electronic collections, which consisted primarily of credit card
payments.
• UMES did not independently verify that all mail collections were deposited.
Specifically, the employee conducting the verification also made the related
deposits and did not use the initial record of collections (a check log) when
performing the verification.
• UMES did not ensure all electronic collections were deposited in the State’s
bank account. Specifically, as of December 2021, UMES had not reconciled
its record of electronic payments processed with receipt of the funds in the
State’s bank account since June 2020.
As a result of the aforementioned conditions, UMES lacked assurance that all
mail collections and electronic payments were properly received and deposited.
Similar conditions regarding the failure to reconcile electronic records with the
State’s bank account were commented upon in our preceding audit report. The
Comptroller of Maryland’s Accounting Procedures Manual requires an
independent verification of collections from the initial point of recordation to
deposit. USM’s Accounting Practices states that, for cash held at the State
Treasurer’s Office (STO), reconciliations must be completed at least quarterly.
Recommendation 3
We recommend that UMES
a. ensure that the initial record of collections received through the mail is
independently agreed to validated bank deposit documentation; and
b. reconcile its record of electronic collections with the receipt of the funds
by the STO, at least quarterly, as required (repeat).
11

--- Page 14 ---
We advised UMES on accomplishing the necessary separation of duties using
existing personnel.
Information Systems Security and Control
We determined that the Information Systems Security and Control section,
including Findings 4 through 6, related to “cybersecurity”, as defined by the State
Finance and Procurement Article, Section 3A-301(b) of the Annotated Code of
Maryland, and therefore are subject to redaction from the publicly available report
in accordance with the State Government Article, Section 2-1224(i).
Consequently, the specifics of cybersecurity-related background information as
well as the following findings, including the analysis, related recommendations,
along with USM’s responses, have been redacted from this report copy.
Finding 4
Redacted cybersecurity-related finding.
Finding 5
Redacted cybersecurity-related finding.
Finding 6
Redacted cybersecurity-related finding.
12

--- Page 15 ---
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the University System of
Maryland (USM) – University of Maryland Eastern Shore (UMES) for the period
beginning July 17, 2017 and ending September 15, 2021. The audit was
conducted in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards.
Those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient,
appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and
conclusions based on our audit objectives. We believe that the evidence obtained
provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit
objectives.
As prescribed by the State Government Article, Section 2-1221 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, the objectives of this audit were to examine UMES’ financial
transactions, records, and internal control, and to evaluate its compliance with
applicable State laws, rules, and regulations.
In planning and conducting our audit, we focused on the major financial-related
areas of operations based on assessments of significance and risk. The areas
addressed by the audit included purchases and disbursements, student accounts
receivable, cash receipts, information systems security and control, and corporate
purchasing cards. We also determined the status of the findings contained in our
preceding audit report.
Our audit did not include certain support services provided to UMES by the USM
Office, such as bond financing and endowment accounting, and by the University
System of Maryland, College Park (UMCP), such as processing vendor payment
transmittals and payroll, and capital project management. These support services
are included within the scope of our audits of the USM Office and UMCP,
respectively. In addition, our audit did not include an evaluation of internal
controls over compliance with federal laws and regulations for federal financial
assistance programs and an assessment of UMES’ compliance with those laws
and regulations because the State of Maryland engages an independent accounting
firm to annually audit such programs administered by State agencies, including
the components of the USM.
Our assessment of internal controls was based on agency procedures and controls
in place at the time of our fieldwork. Our tests of transactions and other auditing
procedures were generally focused on the transactions occurring during our audit
period of July 17, 2017 to September 15, 2021, but may include transactions
before or after this period as we considered necessary to achieve our audit
objectives.
13

--- Page 16 ---
To accomplish our audit objectives, our audit procedures included inquiries of
appropriate personnel, inspections of documents and records, tests of transactions,
and to the extent practicable, observations of UMES’ operations. Generally,
transactions were selected for testing based on auditor judgment, which primarily
considers risk, the timing or dollar amount of the transaction, or the significance
of the transaction to the area of operation reviewed. As a matter of course, we do
not normally use sampling in our tests, so unless otherwise specifically indicated,
neither statistical nor non-statistical audit sampling was used to select the
transactions tested. Therefore, unless sampling is specifically indicated in a
finding, the results from any tests conducted or disclosed by us cannot be used to
project those results to the entire population from which the test items were
selected.
We also performed various data extracts of pertinent information from the State’s
Financial Management Information System (such as revenue and expenditure
data), as well as from the contractor administering the State’s Corporate
Purchasing Card Program (credit card activity). The extracts are performed as
part of ongoing internal processes established by the Office of Legislative Audits
and were subject to various tests to determine data reliability. We determined that
the data extracted from these sources were sufficiently reliable for the purposes
the data were used during this audit. We also extracted data from UMES’
financial systems for the purpose of testing certain areas such as student accounts
receivable. We performed various tests of the relevant data and determined that
the data were sufficiently reliable for the purposes the data were used during the
audit. Finally, we performed other auditing procedures that we considered
necessary to achieve our audit objectives. The reliability of data used in this
report for background or informational purposes was not assessed.
UMES’ management is responsible for establishing and maintaining effective
internal control. Internal control is a process designed to provide reasonable
assurance that objectives pertaining to the reliability of financial records;
effectiveness and efficiency of operations, including safeguarding of assets; and
compliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations are achieved. As
provided in Government Auditing Standards, there are five components of
internal control: control environment, risk assessment, control activities,
information and communication, and monitoring. Each of the five components,
when significant to the audit objectives, and as applicable to UMES, were
considered by us during the course of this audit.
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
14

--- Page 17 ---
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate.
Our reports are designed to assist the Maryland General Assembly in exercising
its legislative oversight function and to provide constructive recommendations for
improving State operations. As a result, our reports generally do not address
activities we reviewed that are functioning properly.
This report includes findings relating to conditions that we consider to be
significant deficiencies in the design or operation of internal control that could
adversely affect UMES’ ability to maintain reliable financial records, operate
effectively and efficiently, and/or comply with applicable laws, rules, and
regulations. Our report also includes findings regarding significant instances of
noncompliance with applicable laws, rules, or regulations. Other less significant
findings were communicated to UMES that did not warrant inclusion in this
report.
State Government Article Section 2-1224(i) requires that we redact in a manner
consistent with auditing best practices any cybersecurity findings before a report
is made available to the public. This results in the issuance of two different
versions of an audit report that contains cybersecurity findings – a redacted
version for the public and an unredacted version for government officials
responsible for acting on our audit recommendations.
The State Finance and Procurement Article, Section 3A-301(b), states that
cybersecurity is defined as the “processes or capabilities wherein systems,
communications, and information are protected and defended against damage,
unauthorized use or modification, and exploitation”. Based on that definition, and
in our professional judgement, we concluded that certain findings in this report
fall under that definition. Consequently, for the publicly available audit report all
specifics as to the nature of cybersecurity findings and required corrective actions
have been redacted. We have determined that such aforementioned practices, and
government auditing standards, support the redaction of this information from the
public audit report. The specifics of these cybersecurity findings have been
communicated to the USM Office and those parties responsible for acting on our
recommendations in an unredacted audit report.
The response from the USM Office, on behalf of UMES, to our findings and
recommendations is included as an appendix to this report. Depending on the
version of the audit report, responses to any cybersecurity findings may be
redacted in accordance with State law. As prescribed in the State Government
15

--- Page 18 ---
Article, Section 2-1224 of the Annotated Code of Maryland, we will advise the
USM Office regarding the results of our review of its response.
16

--- Page 19 ---
APPENDIX
3300 METZEROTT ROAD // ADELPHI, MD 20783
WWW.USMD.EDU // 301.445.1923
OFFICE OF ADMINISTRATION AND FINANCE
December 1, 2022
Mr. Gregory A. Hook, CPA
Legislative Auditor
Office of Legislative Audits
The Warehouse at Camden Yards
351 West Camden Street, Suite 400
Baltimore, MD 21201
Re: University System of Maryland – University of Maryland Eastern Shore
Period of Audit: July 17, 2017 through September 15, 2021
Dear Mr. Hook,
Thank you for the work of your team and the recommendations you provided. I have enclosed the
University System of Maryland’s responses to your draft report covering the examination of the accounts
and records of the University System of Maryland – University of Maryland Eastern Shore. Our comments
refer to the individual items in the report.
Sincerely,
Ellen Herbst
Senior Vice Chancellor for Administration and Finance
Enclosures
cc: Dr. Heidi M. Anderson, President, University of Maryland Eastern Shore
Ms. Linda R. Gooden, Chair, University System of Maryland Board of Regents
Ms. Ellen Fish, University System of Maryland Board of Regents
Dr. Jay A. Perman, Chancellor, University System of Maryland
Ms. Celeste Denson, Associate Vice Chancellor for Financial Affairs, USM Office
Mr. David Mosca, Vice Chancellor for Accountability, USM Office
Mr. Michael C. Eismeier, Associate Vice Chancellor and CIO, USM Office
Ms. Samantha Norris, Director – Financial Planning and Analysis, USM Office
Ms. Anastasia Rodriguez, Vice President, University of Maryland Eastern Shore

--- Page 20 ---
University System of Maryland
University of Maryland Eastern Shore
Agency Response Form
Food Service Vendor
Finding 1
The University of Maryland Eastern Shore (UMES) did not adequately monitor its food
service vendor to ensure required facility upgrades, investments, and commissions were
received.
We recommend that UMES
a. verify that its food service vendor provides the capital and operational investments
required by the contract terms (repeat), and
b. verify reported food service sales and ensure that the proper commissions are remitted
(repeat).
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 1a Agree Estimated Completion Date: Implementation
began July11, 2022
and will continue
through the
duration of the
contract
Please provide details The University has taken the following corrective actions with regard to
of corrective action or recommendation a to ensure future actions are properly complied with and
explain disagreement. documented:
1. Hired a Director of Auxiliary Enterprises who has Six Sigma
credentials and he will serve as the contract administrator of the food
service management contract.
2. Agreed to bi-weekly meetings between the contractor and UMES staff
that will include status reports on contract compliance
3. Requested monthly submissions of costs incurred, along with invoices
and other pertinent documentation, related to capital and operational
investments.
4. The actual costs of investments vs. proposed investments will be
tracked on a spreadsheet that will be maintained by the contract
administrator and reviewed by the AVP monthly.
5. The Director has requested current information on the renovations
proposed by the contractor
Page 1 of 6

--- Page 21 ---
University System of Maryland
University of Maryland Eastern Shore
Agency Response Form
Recommendation 1b Agree Estimated Completion Date: 8/31/2022
Please provide details The University has taken the following corrective action with regard to
of corrective action or recommendation b.
explain disagreement. 1. The University is reviewing and updating its procedures for
verifying reported food service sales and ensuring that the proper
commissions are remitted.
2. The University implemented these updated procedures as of
August 31, 2022.
Page 2 of 6

--- Page 22 ---
University System of Maryland
University of Maryland Eastern Shore
Agency Response Form
Student Accounts Receivable
Finding 2
UMES had not established sufficient controls over student residency determinations and
subsequent changes, and certain non-cash credits recorded in student accounts.
We recommend that UMES
a. ensure that independent supervisory reviews of initial student residency status
determinations and residency status changes recorded in the student accounts
receivable system are conducted and adequately documented (repeat);
b. correct the student account records of the aforementioned student to reflect the proper
residency status; and
c. establish and implement a written policy requiring that an independent verification of
non-cash credit adjustments to source documents be performed, at least on a test basis
(repeat).
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 2a Agree Estimated Completion Date: Jan 2023
Please provide details of Finance, Admissions, and the Registrar met regarding this issue and plan
corrective action or to review exception reports to look for potential issues of incorrect
explain disagreement. residency status. In addition, UMES will formalize the process of
changing a student’s permanent address to ensure changes that effect
residency status are not made in error.
Recommendation 2b Agree Estimated Completion Date: Jan 2023
Please provide details of UMES is determining if the student charges based on residency were
corrective action or incorrect and if so will determine the appropriate adjustment required.
explain disagreement.
Recommendation 2c Agree Estimated Completion Date: Jan 2023
Please provide details of UMES will prepare and implement a written policy requiring that an
corrective action or independent verification of non-cash credit adjustments to source
explain disagreement. documents be performed, on a test basis once per month.
Page 3 of 6

--- Page 23 ---
University System of Maryland
University of Maryland Eastern Shore
Agency Response Form
Cash Receipts
Finding 3
UMES did not adequately control and account for mail collections, and did not ensure
electronic collections were properly deposited into the State’s bank account.
We recommend that UMES
a. ensure that the initial record of collections received through the mail is independently
agreed to validated bank deposit documentation; and
b. reconcile its record of electronic collections with the receipt of the funds by the STO, at
least quarterly, as required (repeat).
We advised UMES on accomplishing the necessary separation of duties using existing
personnel.
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide There are concerns with the factual accuracy pertaining to the adequate control
additional comments as and the accounting for mail collections. The auditors stated the same employee
deemed necessary. conducting the verification also made the related deposits. This is not factual
as there are separation of duties.
There are no concerns with factual accuracy concerning reconciling the
electronic collections with the receipt of the funds by the STO, however, we
note the following: The UMES Comptroller’s Office has been understaffed by
a general ledger accountant (responsible for preparation of the bank
reconciliation) since January 2017 due to hiring freezes and other budget
deficits at the university. In addition, the AP accountant position has been
vacant and was eliminated as well as the IT (general ledger) Data Entry Clerk.
The workload of these three vacant positions has mainly been assumed by the
Assistant Comptroller while still maintaining the existing responsibilities of
that position.
Reconciliations were resumed and prepared monthly for the period
March 2019 through June 2020 by the Asst Comptroller but due to
COVID and the commencement of the Workday financial system
conversion project in November 2020, subsequent reconciliations were unable
to be completed.
Page 4 of 6

--- Page 24 ---
University System of Maryland
University of Maryland Eastern Shore
Agency Response Form
Auditor’s Comment: UMES’ response indicates that our finding of no independent
verification of collections is not factually accurate, and that there is a separation of duties.
During the course of our fieldwork and our discussion of preliminary findings, there was
agreement on the factual accuracy of the finding and the related recommendation. The
report response disagreement was unexpected, and provides no specificity as to how the
current process provides the necessary separation of duties. Subsequently, we contacted
UMES management in an attempt to understand its changed position and were provided
with no additional information that would lead us to conclude that this finding is factually
inaccurate as claimed. UMES management’s position appears to rest on an erroneous
conclusion that certain subsequent procedures performed serve to ensure that all
collections were deposited. However, the procedures described to us by UMES do not
mitigate the internal control deficiency addressed by this finding because, for example,
the individual performing the procedure was not independent of the collection function.
As a consequence, we continue to believe that this finding is factually accurate and our
recommendations are appropriate.
Recommendation 3a Agree Estimated Completion Date: 12/31/2022
Please provide details of The University feels we are adequately controlling and accounting for the mail
corrective action or collections coming into our office. An Account Clerk receives the mail at the
explain disagreement. front desk, logs it in the check log, stamps the checks then turns them over to
two other Account Clerks working as cashiers for the Office. Note all checks
received are logged however all may not belong to Student Accounts
Receivable. UMES will implement a procedure to ensure all logged checks are
deposited.
Recommendation 3b Agree Estimated Completion Date: 12/31/2022
Please provide details of The University will take the following corrective action with regard
corrective action or to the recommendation: UMES has hired a General Ledger Accountant as of
explain disagreement. May 2022. The Comptroller’s office will train the new accountant on the
responsibility of reconciling the electronic collections with the receipts of the
funds by the STO. We estimate being current as of December 31, 2022.
Following this, the reconciliation will be completed at least quarterly.
Page 5 of 6

--- Page 25 ---
University System of Maryland
University of Maryland Eastern Shore
Agency Response Form
Information Systems Security and Control
OLA has determined that the Information Systems Security and Control section, including
Findings 4 through 6, related to “cybersecurity”, as defined by the State Finance and
Procurement Article, Section 3A-301(b) of the Annotated Code of Maryland, and therefore are
subject to redaction from the publicly available report in accordance with the State Government
Article, Section 2-1224(i). Although the specifics of the cybersecurity-related background
information as well as the findings, including the analysis, related recommendations, along with
USM’s responses, have been redacted from this report copy, USM’s responses indicated
agreement with the findings and recommendations.
Finding 4
Redacted cybersecurity-related finding.
Agency Response has been redacted by OLA.
Finding 5
Redacted cybersecurity-related finding.
Agency Response has been redacted by OLA.
Finding 6
Redacted cybersecurity-related finding.
Agency Response has been redacted by OLA.
Page 6 of 6

--- Page 26 ---
A T
UDIT EAM
Robert A. Wells, Jr., CPA
Audit Manager
R. Brendan Coffey, CPA, CISA
Edwin L. Paul, CPA, CISA
Information Systems Audit Managers
Joel E. Kleiman, CPA
Senior Auditor
Eric Alexander, CPA, CISA
Edward O. Kendall, CISA
Information Systems Senior Auditors
Daniel G. Johnson
Timothy Moon
Staff Auditors
Dominick R. Abril
Malcolm J. Woodard
Information Systems Staff Auditors