Title: Developmental Disabilities Administration - Monitoring of Coordination of Community Services Agencies
Date: 01/02/2019
Type: Performance
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5c361b9aa1ce5806d0b6c100
Extracted: 2025-06-18T22:21:35.456900
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Performance Audit Report
Developmental Disabilities Administration
Monitoring of Coordination of Community Services Agencies
January 2019
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
For further information concerning this report contact:
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
301 West Preston Street, Room 1202
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Phone: 410-946-5900 · 301-970-5900
Toll Free in Maryland: 1-877-486-9964
Maryland Relay: 711
TTY: 410-946-5401 · 301-970-5401
E-mail: OLAWebmaster@ola.state.md.us
Website: www.ola.state.md.us
The Office of Legislative Audits operates a Fraud Hotline to report fraud, waste, or abuse
involving State of Maryland government resources. Reports of fraud, waste, or abuse may
be communicated anonymously by a toll-free call to 1-877-FRAUD-11, by mail to the Fraud
Hotline, c/o Office of Legislative Audits, or through the Office’s website.
The Department of Legislative Services does not discriminate on the basis of age, ancestry,
color, creed, marital status, national origin, race, religion, gender, gender identity, sexual
orientation, or disability in the admission or access to its programs, services, or activities. The
Department’s Information Officer has been designated to coordinate compliance with the
nondiscrimination requirements contained in Section 35.107 of the Department of Justice
Regulations. Requests for assistance should be directed to the Information Officer at 410-946-
5400 or 410-970-5400.

--- Page 5 ---
Table of Contents
Background Information 5
Developmental Disabilities Administration (DDA) Overview and 5
Responsibilities
Service Delivery Process 6
Roles and Responsibilities of Coordination of Community Services 8
(CCS) Agencies
Utilization Reviews Required by DDA’s Approved Medicaid Waiver 10
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology 12
Audit Scope 12
Audit Objectives and Methodology 12
Findings and Recommendations 14
Objective 1 – To determine if consumer individual plans (IPs) were 14
prepared and updated in accordance with State regulations.
Objective and Methodology 14
Conclusion 15
Objective 2 – To determine if DDA had established appropriate guidance 15
for CCS agencies related to their monitoring of consumers.
Objective and Methodology 15
Conclusion 15
Finding 1 – DDA’s guidance to, and training of, CCS agencies on consumer 16
monitoring responsibilities did not contain clear instruction about the
level of detail required to complete the monitoring forms and did not
address specific documentation the CCS agencies should obtain when
conducting the reviews.
Objective 3 – To determine if DDA effectively monitored its CCS agencies 17
to ensure that the agencies were verifying that consumers were receiving
the required services in accordance with their IPs.
Objective and Methodology 17
Conclusion 18
3

--- Page 6 ---
Finding 2 – DDA did not adequately monitor its CCS agencies’ efforts to 19
determine whether the CCS agencies were ensuring that consumers
received the required services from service providers.
Exhibit 1 – Definitions of Developmentally Disabled Services 23
Agency Response Appendix
4

--- Page 7 ---
Background Information
Developmental Disabilities Administration Overview and
Responsibilities
The Developmental Disabilities Administration (DDA) is an agency within the
Maryland Department of Health (MDH). The mission of DDA is to provide
leadership to assure the full participation of individuals with developmental
disabilities and their families in all aspects of community life, and to promote
their access to quality supports and services necessary to foster personal
growth, independence, and productivity. DDA consists of a headquarters unit,
four regional offices (located in Central, Eastern, Southern, and Western
Maryland) which administer community-based services, two forensic
residential centers, and two residential centers — the Holly Center and the
Potomac Center.
For individuals with developmental disabilities (consumers) and their families,
DDA plans, develops policies and regulations, and funds a Statewide system
of services. DDA coordinates its work with other government, voluntary, and
private health, education, and welfare agencies. DDA funds services to
consumers through a combination of private licensed Medicaid providers, not-
for-profit licensed Medicaid providers, local health departments, and Fiscal
Management Agencies (entities that assist consumers in a self-directed
support services delivery system). These services include an array of options,
such as residential living arrangements and support, and supported
employment. According to MDH’s records, DDA’s payments to service
providers totaled $1.03 billion during fiscal year 2017. As of December 31,
2017, 22,557 consumers were receiving services from DDA, including 5,955
consumers on a waiting list who received consultative services from DDA’s
Coordination of Community Services (CCS) agencies.
DDA uses CCS agencies to perform targeted case management for
consumers. Case management includes working with individuals, families,
service providers, and other agencies to create an individualized plan based
on a comprehensive assessment of needs for each consumer and navigating
the support service options. CCS agencies are instrumental in supporting
consumers and their families. DDA uses the CCS agencies to oversee its
programs and to ensure consumers are receiving high quality services, and
that consumers’ health and welfare are protected. As of December 31, 2017,
DDA had contracts with 17 CCS agencies to service all regions of the State.
Five CCS agencies were private companies and 12 CCS agencies were local
health departments. DDA paid the CCS agencies $48.3 million related to
5

--- Page 8 ---
calendar year 2017. As shown in Table 1, a majority of the consumers were
collectively assigned to one of five private companies functioning as CCS
agencies.
_________________________________________________________________
Table 1
Summary of Consumers Served by CCS Agencies
as of December 31, 2017
($ amounts in millions)
Fiscal Year
CY 2017 2018
Count and
Payments Provider
CCS Agency Percentage of
to CCS Services
Consumers
Agency Budget for
Consumers
Private Company 1 11,730 52% $28.2 $625.1
Private Company 2 2,436 11% 5.1 127.6
Private Company 3 2,485 11% 4.3 98.1
Private Company 4 1,811 8% 4.1 64.4
Private Company 5 591 3% 1.1 12.9
12 Local Health Departments 3,504 16% 5.5 167.4
22,557 $48.3 $1,095.5
Source: DDA’s Records
Note: The population of 22,557 consumers consisted of the following: 16,555 consumers
that were receiving community coordination services for on-going developmentally
disabled services (such as, residential, supported employment, day habilitative), 5,955
consumers that were on the waiting list, and 47 consumers that were receiving transition
coordination services to transition from a facility to the community.
__________________________________________________________________
Services Delivery Process
In general, consumers obtain services from DDA through the following
process:
1. A consumer submits an application for services to a DDA regional office,
which is staffed by State employees.
2. Consumers are interviewed by DDA staff and evaluated for eligibility, which
is documented in a letter that advises them of their eligibility status. If
deemed eligible for DDA service, they are assigned to one of three priority
categories as established in State regulations - Crisis Resolution; Crisis
Prevention; and Current Request. However, being eligible for services
does not mean that the DDA is able to provide funding to address the
6

--- Page 9 ---
consumer’s needs. Instead, eligible consumers for whom funding is not
available are placed on a waiting list. When designated funding for the
consumer’s priority category becomes available and based on a DDA
ranking of consumers within each category for those consumers with the
greatest need, DDA will help explore services and provider options.
3. Once a consumer is selected to receive services, they are required to apply
for a Medicaid Waiver. This particular waiver, called the Community
Pathways Waiver, from the federal Centers on Medicare and Medicaid
allows Maryland to waive the usual rules to allow Medicaid and other
services to be delivered in a non-institutional setting, to people with
different needs, or different income levels. Specifically, DDA offers a
home and community-based services waiver to provide services in the
community as an alternative to receiving them in an institution.
4. Consumers choose a DDA-approved CCS agency that will work with the
consumer to learn about the types of available services and service
providers. Specifically, CCS agencies work with the consumer to develop,
revise, and implement an Individual Plan1 (IP) based on the consumer’s
goals, strengths, and needs to help a consumer be more independent. IPs
describe the particular care that the consumer is to receive from a
provider as required by State regulations.
5. Consumers receive one or more types of services from various service
providers in accordance with their unique IP. The CCS agencies are
responsible for monitoring consumers to ensure each person is receiving
services appropriately and the consumer is satisfied with the providers
delivering the services. As shown in Table 2, the majority of the $1.1
billion of fiscal year 2018 budgeted services were for residential, day
habilitative, personal supports, and supported employment2.
1 Effective August 1, 2018, DDA changed the term “Individual Plan” to “Person‐Centered Plan”.
We will continue to use the term Individual Plan throughout the audit report since it was the
term in use at the time of our audit.
2 See Exhibit 1 for definitions of the service types.
7

--- Page 10 ---
__________________________________________________________________
Table 2
Budgeted Service Expenditures of $1.1 Billion by Service Type for
Fiscal Year 2018
(budgeted amount in millions of dollars)
Source: DDA’s Records
__________________________________________________________________
Roles and Responsibilities of Coordination of Community Services
(CCS) Agencies
CCS agencies help consumers and their families learn about and gain access
to resources in their community, to plan for their future, and to access needed
services and supports. The CCS agencies ensure that consumer’s needs are
met, preferences are honored, and that IPs are updated and services changed
to correspond with the needs of the consumer.
The CCS agencies are responsible for staying in contact with the consumer
through scheduling in-person visits, calling, and emailing. DDA requires CCS
agencies to maintain acceptable caseworker-to-client ratios between 1:40
and 1:50. According to DDA’s records, 15 of the 17 CCS agencies had
caseworker-to-client ratios within the acceptable range or better as of
December 31, 2017. The 2 CCS agencies that did not have acceptable
caseworker-to-client ratios were deemed to be temporary conditions, the
result of staff turnover at two small local health departments.
8

--- Page 11 ---
Each CCS agency, under contract to DDA, is to perform the following specific
functions to provide the checks and balances necessary for a consumer’s
health, welfare, and overall program integrity:
 Assess a consumer’s needs, help with person-centered planning, and
assist with the development of the initial and annual individual plan (IP)
and budget (the cost of implementing the IP);
 Identify community resources to help the consumer;
 Verify that all services anticipated by the IP are eligible for the Community
Pathways Waiver;
 Assist with required annual Medicaid eligibility reassessments (such as,
obtaining financial information from consumers to enable the
reassessments);
 Verify that all services are important for the consumer’s outcomes and
goals; and
 Monitor that services (as per the IP) are being delivered appropriately and
that funds are being spent correctly.
The results of CCS agency monitoring efforts are documented on DDA
provided forms, which are prepared for either a comprehensive quarterly
review or a selective focused review (see descriptions of these reviews on the
next page), and supported by case notes taken by the CCS agency employee
and the time worked with each consumer as recorded in DDA’s Provider
Consumer Information System II (PCIS2)3. CCS agencies are paid based on
rates established in State regulations and there is a maximum number of
units (defined as 15 minutes of service) that can be billed annually unless
otherwise authorized by DDA. During fiscal year 2017 and 2018, the
established billing rates were $17.99 and $18.61 per unit, respectively.
CCS agency activities are categorized as either, 1) development and periodic
revision of the IP; 2) monitoring and follow-up activity; or 3) referral and
related activities; with monitoring and follow-up activities comprising the
majority of the activities performed by the CCS agencies. The primary purpose
of these activities is to assess whether required services are being rendered
and whether consumers are making progress towards the goals and intended
outcomes identified in their IPs. State regulations require monitoring and
3 DDA is in the process of replacing PCIS2 with MDH’s Long Term Services and Supports
(LTSS) System. LTSS is an integrated care management tracking system to improve DDA’s
financial platform and oversight of providers. LTSS will transition DDA from a prospective to
a reimbursement payment model and it is intended to enhance DDA’s ability to monitor
providers’ (including CCS agencies) efforts to help ensure that consumers’ needs are
adequately met. Implementation of the LTSS began in August 2018.
9

--- Page 12 ---
follow-up activities to include at least one face-to-face contact per quarter in
the consumer’s service delivery settings. The CCS agency makes additional
contacts with each consumer throughout the year, as the agency deems
necessary.
CCS agencies complete a monitoring form in PCIS2 to document the results of
each monitoring and follow-up activity. These monitoring forms are
designated as either a comprehensive (a term used to describe the quarterly
face-to-face meetings) review or a focused review.
 Comprehensive (Quarterly) Reviews – These reviews are designed to
satisfy the aforementioned quarterly review requirement established by
State regulations and, according to DDA, are to include an evaluation of
whether the individual has received all services identified in the IP;
whether the goals have been implemented as identified in the IP; whether
progress has been made towards the goals; and whether the consumer is
receiving the staffing ratios identified in the IP. During these reviews the
CCS will also assess other areas, such as the consumers’ health and
welfare, Medicaid eligibility, and any unexpected events reported by the
consumer or service providers since the prior contact that had not been
previously addressed by the CCS agencies.
 Focused Reviews – These reviews are narrower in scope than the
quarterly reviews. They would be initiated by, and primarily document,
changes in consumers’ current circumstances, such as changes in
services or demographics. CCS agencies are not required to verify the
provision of services or comment on consumers’ progress during focused
reviews.
Utilization Reviews Required by DDA’s Approved Medicaid Waiver
The Community Pathways Waiver requires DDA to implement billing validation
processes to ensure that only valid billings, which would include those from
CCS agencies and service providers, are included in its claims for federal
funds. DDA’s billing processes are beyond the scope of this performance
audit, but subject to review during our regular fiscal compliance audit.
Nevertheless, we did note during the course of this audit that, although DDA
stated in its July 2013 waiver application that it contracted with an
independent third party to conduct performance utilization audits, no
utilization review audits have been performed since fiscal year 2013. DDA
advised us that it planned to hire a vendor to conduct these utilization audits,
which will consist of reviewing documentation from service providers to
ensure that services were provided in support of the billings included in the
10

--- Page 13 ---
claims for federal funds. DDA issued a request for proposal for these services
on June 7, 2018.
11

--- Page 14 ---
Audit Scope, Objectives and Methodology
Audit Scope
We conducted a performance audit of the Developmental Disabilities
Administration’s (DDA) monitoring of its Coordination of Community Service
(CCS) agencies for the purpose of assessing whether the CCS agencies were
ensuring that individuals with developmental disabilities (consumers) received
the required services from providers.
This audit was initiated as a result of concerns identified during our past three
fiscal compliance audits of DDA regarding inadequate monitoring of CCS
agencies. Specifically, we determined that DDA was not adequately
monitoring the CCS agencies who were to ensure that consumers received the
required services from providers of developmental disabled services (such as,
residential, supported employment, day habilitative). These audits disclosed
there was a lack of evidence (such as, case notes) from the CCS agencies that
they had verified the delivery of required services to consumers.
The scope of our current audit was limited to DDA’s monitoring of CCS
agencies who were to ensure that consumers received the required services
(based on a consumer’s individual plan (IP) of services to be provided) from
providers. We did not assess the necessity or appropriateness of the services
identified in the IPs and we did not assess the propriety of amounts billed by
service providers for these services.
We conducted this audit under the authority of the State Government Article,
Section 2-1221 of the Annotated Code of Maryland and performed it in
accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards. Those
standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient,
appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and
conclusions based on our audit objectives. We believe that the evidence
obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based
on our audit objectives.
Audit Objectives and Methodology
Our audit included the following three objectives:
1. To determine if consumer IPs were prepared and updated in accordance
with State regulations.
12

--- Page 15 ---
2. To determine if DDA had established appropriate guidance for CCS
agencies related to their monitoring of consumers.
3. To determine if DDA effectively monitored its CCS agencies to ensure that
those agencies were verifying that consumers were receiving the required
services in accordance with their IPs.
To accomplish our objectives, we conducted interviews of DDA employees, as
well as employees at certain CCS agencies. In addition, we reviewed DDA’s
Provider Consumer Information System II records, including consumer IPs and
documentation related to CCS agency monitoring activities (such as
monitoring forms, case notes, and certain documentation from service
providers). We conducted our audit fieldwork from December 2017 to April
2018.
More detailed descriptions of the specific objectives and related
methodologies, including the time periods covered by our test work, are
discussed in the Findings and Recommendations section of this report.
13

--- Page 16 ---
Findings and Recommendations
Objective 1 — Individual Plan Preparation and Updates
Objective and Methodology
Our objective was to determine if consumer individual plans (IPs) were
prepared and updated in accordance with State regulations.
To accomplish this objective, we reviewed State laws and regulations to
determine the requirements for consumer IPs and, from DDA staff, obtained
an understanding of the related requirements for completing and updating
consumer IPs based on the requirements of the Coordination of Community
Services (CCS) agencies contracts. Additionally, we interviewed personnel at
six CCS agencies (consisting of five private CCS agencies and one of the local
health department CCS agencies) to determine their respective procedures for
completing and updating consumer IPs. Finally, we performed a test of 50
consumers using the IP records contained within DDA’s Provider Consumer
Information System II (PCIS2) to determine if DDA effectively ensured that
consumer IPs were prepared and updated in accordance with State
regulations. We randomly selected the 50 consumers from PCIS2 records of
active consumers as of December 31, 2017. These 50 consumers were
serviced by 6 of the 17 CCS agencies under contract as of December 31,
2017.
Our specific test attributes were to determine if, at the time of our test, each
IP was updated within one year of the previous IP date and adequately
addressed the CCS agency’s performance of the following requirements
contained in State regulations4:
 Consumer’s strengths and needs are identified
 Consumer’s preferences and desires identified
 Specific services to be received are identified
 Behavior plan is included (if applicable)
 Staffing ratios for each service are identified
 Measurable goals for the completion of outcomes are identified
 Goals have target completion dates
 Goals include implementation strategies and dates
 Goals include a description of how it will be monitored
4 State regulations (COMAR 10.22.05.02(B)) details the fourteen Individual Plan requirements.
We tested 13 of the 14 requirements in Objective 1. The other requirement – documentation
of progress toward the achievement of goals – was tested in Objective 3.
14

--- Page 17 ---
 Identification of individuals responsible for providing supports, services,
implementation, and monitoring of the plan
 Documentation that the consumer was involved in the development of the
plan and agrees with the plan
 Determination of whether the needs of the consumer could be met in a
more integrated setting
 If applicable, for consumers residing in a State residential center, the
written plan of habilitation consists of certain requirements
Conclusion
Our test results disclosed only minor issues with timely updates to 5 of the 50
tested consumer’s IPs, while for 45 of the test items all attributes were
addressed and updated timely. Therefore, we concluded that the tested
consumer IPs were generally prepared and updated in accordance with State
regulations.
Objective 2 — Monitoring Policies and Procedures
Objective and Methodology
Our objective was to determine if DDA had established appropriate guidance
for CCS agencies related to their monitoring of consumers.
To accomplish this objective, we interviewed DDA staff to obtain an
understanding of its expectation for CCS agency monitoring and reviewed the
guidance DDA had issued to the CCS agencies to direct this monitoring. This
included a review of DDA’s standard contract with CCS agencies, applicable
State regulations, and various policy manuals issued by DDA. Finally, we
interviewed personnel from 5 private CCS agencies and 1 of the 12 local
health department CCS agencies (selected based on the material number of
consumers served and the related budget for the services provided) to
determine their processes for ensuring consumers received the required
services in accordance with DDA’s guidance.
Conclusion
DDA did not establish appropriate guidance in its policies and procedures on
the monitoring responsibilities of CCS agencies regarding the sufficiency of
quarterly comprehensive monitoring forms, which serve as evidence of
monitoring actions and are required by State regulations.
15

--- Page 18 ---
Finding 1
DDA’s guidance to and training of CCS agencies on consumer monitoring
responsibilities did not contain clear instruction about the level of detail
required to complete the monitoring forms and did not address specific
documentation the CCS agencies should obtain when conducting the reviews.
Analysis
Although DDA has issued guidance and provided training to CCS agencies on
completing quarterly monitoring visits, this guidance did not provide clear
instruction about the amount of supporting detail required to complete the
related quarterly comprehensive monitoring forms. The guidance also did not
describe the specific documentation the CCS agencies should review and/or
obtain (such as, service provider records) when conducting the reviews.
Additionally, this guidance did not include a requirement for CCS agencies to
refer issues or concerns noted during these reviews to DDA (such as,
consumers not receiving services).
We noted that similar issues regarding the need for clarification of CCS
agencies’ responsibilities have been previously brought to DDA’s attention.
Specifically, the National Association of State Directors of Developmental
Disabilities Services issued a report in March 2015 on its review of DDA’s
functions and processes for coordination of community services (also known
as targeted case management). This report contained a number of
recommendations, including the need to establish a comprehensive CCS
operations manual detailing the CCS agencies’ specific administrative and
operational responsibilities, and to clarify the CCS agencies’ relationship to
other stakeholders (including DDA, consumers, and service providers) to
ensure that services are of good quality and that the consumer is healthy and
safe.
Although DDA took certain actions in response to the report’s
recommendations to help ensure that quality services are delivered to
consumers, these actions did not sufficiently address the aforementioned
issues with the existing guidance to CCS agencies. Additional clarification and
specificity regarding DDA’s documentation requirements would enable DDA to
readily determine if CCS agencies are complying with consumer monitoring
requirements. As noted in Finding 2, our tests of CCS agency documentation
(including quarterly monitoring forms) found a lack of evidence that CCS
agencies were monitoring the delivery of consumer services in accordance
with IPs.
16

--- Page 19 ---
Recommendation 1
We recommend that DDA develop clear and specific guidance for CCS
agencies on the monitoring of consumer services and the completion of the
related quarterly monitoring forms. For example, this guidance should identify
specific documentation to be obtained during the reviews, the detail required
to be included on the monitoring forms, and when to refer issues of concern
to DDA.
Objective 3 — Monitoring of Coordination of Community Service
Providers
Objective and Methodology
Our objective was to determine if DDA effectively monitored its CCS agencies
to ensure that those agencies were verifying that consumers were receiving
the required services in accordance with their IPs.
To accomplish this objective, we obtained an understanding of DDA’s
procedures to monitor the CCS agencies’ oversight of consumer services and
we performed a test using consumer IPs and the related quarterly monitoring
visit documentation (as identified during work performed under Objective 2) to
determine if CCS agencies verified that consumers received the required
services identified in their IPs. For the purposes of completing this objective,
DDA provided us with copies of the consumer files from PCIS2 (which we
reviewed and found to be reliable for our audit purposes), and we obtained
documentation from the service providers as needed.
Specifically, we used the PCIS2 consumer files to determine the dates that
each quarterly comprehensive monitoring event was performed for all
consumers receiving community coordination services as of December 31,
2017 in order to quantify the number of related monitoring forms completed.
We then compared that result with the expected number of forms, which was
calculated based on the number of consumers (each of whom under State
regulations annually should have received four comprehensive monitoring
visits by CCS agencies). We confirmed that these files were accurate and
reliable for our audit purposes by comparing (on a test basis) the monitoring
dates from the PCIS2 consumer files, on which we based our conclusions, to
the actual quarterly comprehensive monitoring forms also recorded in PCIS2.
Our review under this objective focused on consumer services received during
calendar years 2016 and 2017.
17

--- Page 20 ---
Finally, we selected 30 current consumers for testing. Specifically, we
reviewed the most recent quarterly monitoring visit for the appropriateness
and evidence of actual service delivery. The consumers were judgmentally
selected based on consumers with fiscal year 2018 budgeted services less
than $200,000 (most consumers had annual budgeted services less than
$200,000) and ensured that our selection represented the majority of CCS
agencies and service types.
Conclusion
We determined that DDA did not adequately monitor the CCS agencies’ efforts
to determine whether the CCS agencies were ensuring that consumers
received the required services from service providers. Nevertheless, when we
reviewed service providers’ support, we concluded that there appeared to be
sufficient documentation to support the delivery of services.
DDA did not ensure that CCS agencies routinely completed quarterly
comprehensive monitoring forms in PCIS2 to document face-to-face visits with
consumers that are required by State regulations. Our analysis found that,
over a two-year period, CCS agencies did not complete all eight quarterly
monitoring forms for 97 percent of the approximately 15,000 applicable
consumers. Over 50 percent of those consumers had 4 or fewer quarterly
forms recorded. DDA advised that the majority of these monitoring forms
were likely completed but not documented in PCIS2, but the CCS agencies
could not supply the unrecorded quarterly forms for any of the 40 consumers
we selected.
Although DDA implemented a limited review of completed monitoring forms to
assess whether consumers received the required services, this review was not
sufficiently comprehensive because DDA did not obtain service provider
records. Furthermore, although DDA’s review identified monitoring problems,
DDA did not take immediate action to ensure the CCS agencies addressed the
problems.
Our tests identified many instances in which the information recorded by CCS
agencies on the quarterly comprehensive monitoring forms was insufficient to
document the delivery of provider services. From our testing of 30 consumers
with service budgets totaling $1.8 million for fiscal year 2018, we determined,
and DDA agreed, that the CCS agencies’ documentation on the related
monitoring forms for 22 consumers (with service budgets totaling $1.3
million) was inadequate to support that consumers received services and/or
were progressing toward achieving IP goals.
18

--- Page 21 ---
Finding 2
DDA did not adequately monitor CCS agencies’ efforts to determine whether
they were ensuring that consumers received the required services from
providers.
Analysis
DDA did not adequately monitor CCS agencies’ efforts to determine whether
they were ensuring that consumers received the required services from
providers as stipulated in their IPs. Specifically, DDA did not ensure that CCS
agencies completed all quarterly comprehensive monitoring forms in PCIS2 to
document face-to-face visits with consumers that are required by State
regulations. We found that, for virtually all consumers tested over a two-year
period, monitoring forms for at least one quarter were not recorded in PCIS2.
Additionally, although DDA implemented a limited review of completed
monitoring forms to assess whether consumers received the required
services, this review was not sufficiently comprehensive. Furthermore,
although DDA’s review identified monitoring problems, DDA did not take
immediate action to ensure the CCS agencies addressed the problems.
Nevertheless, our test of 30 consumers generally indicated that required
services were being rendered based on available documentation, including
information we obtained from the service providers.
DDA relies on its CCS agencies completing the comprehensive quarterly
monitoring forms, which are to be posted to PCIS2 by the agencies, to help
verify that consumers received the required services since the forms are
supposed to contain extensive details regarding the services provided to
consumers. For example, the CCS agencies are required to report whether
the consumers received all specified services and whether progress was
made on meeting the consumers’ goals.
CCS Agencies Did Not Record Many Required Quarterly Monitoring Forms in
PCIS2 to Document Consumer Visitations
Based on our analysis of monitoring data recorded in PCIS2 by the CCS
agencies, we concluded that CCS agencies failed to record all eight required
quarterly monitoring forms for 14,551 (97 percent) of the 15,024 consumers
who received services continually during the two-year period ended December
31, 2017. As shown in Table 3, over 50 percent of the consumers had 4 or
fewer quarterly forms recorded (8,618 of the 15,024 consumers tested,
representing those with 4 to 8 missing forms).
19

--- Page 22 ---
Table 3
Quarterly Monitoring Forms Recordation for 15,024 Consumers
During Calendar Years 2016 and 2017
Source: DDA’s Records from PCIS2
DDA advised us that the majority of the missing quarterly monitoring forms
were likely completed but never recorded in PCIS2. To assess the
reasonableness of this explanation, we requested that DDA investigate 40
consumers with no quarterly monitoring forms recorded in PCIS2 to determine
if the CCS agencies could locate any of the missing forms. We judgmentally
selected these 40 consumers since they had the most material fiscal year
2018 service budgets of the consumers with no monitoring forms (and likely
would have been receiving multiple services) and were receiving monitoring at
four of the private CCS agencies5. Ultimately, none of the four CCS agencies
were able to provide any of the requested documentation.
5 The fifth private CCS agency did not have any consumers with all 8 quarterly monitoring
forms missing; therefore, they were not included in this selection.
20

--- Page 23 ---
Assessment of DDA’s Limited Review of Service Delivery
We were advised that in response to our prior fiscal compliance audit report,
DDA implemented a limited quarterly review process of CCS agencies’ service
delivery monitoring efforts. DDA further advised that its first such review to
determine whether 100 consumers (less than 1 percent of the consumer
population) received the services identified in their IP only focused on the
information recorded by the CCS agencies in PCIS2 for their quarterly
monitoring efforts. DDA did not obtain service provider records (which are
primarily in the service providers’ custody) to assess whether the services had
actually been provided, even though these records were readily attainable
from providers for review. Additionally, DDA advised us that its review found
that quarterly monitoring forms recorded in PCIS2 were not sufficiently
detailed, but there was no evidence that immediate action had been taken,
such as contacting the CCS agencies about the results and requiring
corrective actions. At the time of our review, DDA also advised us it intended
to schedule CCS agency training at a future date.
Assessment of Completed Monitoring Forms
We performed a test of the most recently completed quarterly monitoring form
(generally during the period from October 2016 to January 2018) for 30
judgmentally-selected consumers (related to 6 CCS agencies), with fiscal year
2018 service budgets totaling approximately $1.8 million. The service
budgets for these 30 consumers were primarily for residential, personal
supports, day habilitative, and supported employment services. We
concluded that the monitoring forms for 22 consumers, with service budgets
totaling $1.3 million, did not contain sufficient detail to support the CCS
agencies’ conclusions that the consumers received the required services or
made progress on their identified goals.
In most of the 22 cases, the forms simply had boxes checked off as “Yes or
No” to indicate that services were or were not being provided in accordance
with the consumer’s IP and that the consumer was or was not making
progress on their goals. However, these forms did not provide detailed
comments or explanation regarding these overall assessments made by the
CCS agencies or if changes should be made to help the consumers achieve
their goals. DDA management agreed with our assessment that these
monitoring forms were not adequately completed and that the forms should
have contained detailed comments regarding the consumer’s progress on
achieving the personal outcomes and goals identified in their IP, as well as the
pertinent information obtained supporting these assessments. This situation
may have been avoidable if, as noted in Finding 1, the CCS agency guidance
contained clear instructions regarding the amount of detail and support
required to be obtained and recorded in PCIS2.
21

--- Page 24 ---
Nevertheless, we subsequently obtained documentation (such as service logs
and time records) from the service providers for these 22 consumers to
support that the required services were provided. Therefore, we concluded
that these 22 consumers were receiving the required services even though
the CCS agencies’ quarterly monitoring forms did not contain sufficient detail
to support this fact.
Finally, from our test we found that service-delivery issues noted during these
comprehensive reviews were not referred to DDA. For example, one CCS
agency identified that a consumer had not attended day habilitative services
for two months. However, the CCS agency did not provide an explanation as
to the cause or document that it had notified DDA for possible follow-up. DDA
agreed that it had not been notified.
Recommendation 2
We recommend that DDA
a. establish a process to ensure that all CCS agencies’ quarterly monitoring
forms are completed as required for each consumer;
b. ensure that the CCS agencies’ comprehensive quarterly monitoring forms
contain detailed comments regarding the consumer’s progress on
achieving personal outcomes and goals; and
c. revise its quarterly monitoring review process to include a confirmation
that the information recorded on the CCS agencies’ comprehensive
quarterly monitoring forms is accurate and include an indication that
records from service providers were reviewed, including assurances that
consumers received the required services as identified in their IPs.
22

--- Page 25 ---
Exhibit 1
Definitions of Developmentally Disabled Services
Service Type Definition
Residential Community residential habilitative services help consumers learn the skills necessary to be as independent as
possible. Services are provided in either group homes or alternative living units (ALU). ALUs are licensed
residential services providing 10 or more hours of supervision per week for up to three people. Examples
include: training in self-help, daily living, self-advocacy, and survival skills; mobility training to maximize use of
public transportation; learning correct social behaviors and how to handle money; and transportation to and
from medical appointments.
Day Teaches skills for employment and/or community living. The service is designed for each individual's goals for
Habilitative employment. Consumers take part in activities in places other than your home for the majority of the day. Day
habilitative includes a yearly assessment of employment goals and what barriers a consumer might face to
employment and community integration. Examples include: 1) Physical therapy, 2) Occupational therapy, 3)
Nursing Services, 4) Speech pathology, 5) Social services, 6) Special diets, exercise, and preventive activities,
7) Transportation.
Personal Hands-on assistance to perform a task or reminding a consumer to perform a task. These supports are
Supports provided in the consumer's home, family home, in the community, and/or at a work site. Examples of Personal
Support Services include the following: 1) Bathing, 2) Toileting, 3) Mobility - including transferring from a bed,
chair, or other place and moving about indoors and outdoors, 4) Moving, turning, and positioning the body
while in bed or in a wheelchair, 5) Eating and preparing meals, 6) Dressing and changing clothes, 7) Light
housework including laundry, 8) Care of adaptive devices, 9) Support, supervision, and training may be
provided in such activities as Housekeeping, Menu planning, food shopping, meal preparation, eating,
personal care and assistance with hygiene and grooming
Supported Employment in a work place in the community where the majority of individuals do not have disabilities. The
Employment services are designed to assist the consumer with accessing and maintaining paid employment in the
community. Examples include the following: 1) Job coaching and counseling, 2) Worksite visits, 3) Ongoing
evaluation, 4) Monitoring your performance, 5) Training in acclimating to or acceptance in the workplace.
Self-Directed This is a service delivery method that allows consumers that wish to exercise more choice, control, and
Financial authority over their supports. A support broker and a fiscal management service are provided in addition to the
CCS agency. Self-direction gives consumers and families greater control over the services they receive, how
Management
they receive them, and who provides them. Consumers must be willing to take on the responsibility of
managing their services and have responsibility for the following: 1) Control of budget for the purchase of
services and support, 2) Select and arrange for the services and supports, 3) Responsibility as the employer
for the service providers the consumer hires, trains, and supervises.
Individual Assistance provided to enable a consumer's participation in the community. These services use available
Support resources in the community while, at the same time, building on existing network support. Examples include
the following: 1) Assistance locating and accessing education, recreational and social activities, and
Services
roommates of the individual's choosing 2) Providing training related to finances, including money
management, banking, and tax preparation 3) Training, facilitating opportunities and accompanying the
consumer to require self-advocacy and independent living skills.
Community Community learning services are activities, special assistance, support, and education to help individuals
Learning whose age, disability, or circumstances currently limits their ability to be employed and/or participate in
activities in their communities. They assist the consumer in developing the skills and social supports
Services
necessary to gain, retain, or advance in employment. Examples include the following: 1) Self-determination or
Self-advocacy training, 2) Workshops and classes, 3) Peer Mentoring, 4) Volunteer Activities, 5) Activities that
promote health and socialization.
Other Includes Individual Family Care Services, Family Supports Services, Innovative Service Program, and
Employment Discovery/Customization.
23

--- Page 27 ---
Maryland Department of Health
Developmental Disabilities Administration
December 2018
Agency Response Form
Background Information
Agency Response
Analysis Factually Accurate
Please explain any No concerns with factual accuracy.
concerns with factual
accuracy.
Finding 1
DDA’s guidance to and training of CCS agencies on consumer monitoring responsibilities did
not contain clear instruction about the level of detail required to complete the monitoring
forms and did not address specific documentation the CCS agencies should obtain when
conducting the reviews.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that DDA develop clear and specific guidance for CCS agencies on the
monitoring of consumer services and the completion of the related quarterly monitoring
forms. For example, this guidance should identify specific documentation to be obtained
during the reviews, the detail required to be included on the monitoring forms, and when to
refer issues of concern to DDA.
Agency Response
Analysis Factually Accurate
Please explain any No concerns with factual accuracy.
concerns with factual
accuracy.
Recommendation 1 Agree Estimated Completion Date: 02/28/2019
Please provide details of DDA concurs with the finding. The DDA currently has specific
corrective action or guidelines for the monitoring and follow-up of Person-Centered Plans
explain disagreement. (previously called the Individual Plan or IP) which detail how
monitoring of the plans should be documented, and how to document
needed revisions to the plan when progress has not occurred. This
guideline was issued in February of 2014.
On August 1, 2018, Release 1 of DDA functionality in the Maryland
Long Term Services and Support (MDLTSS) system became
operational. Release 1 includes intake and eligibility, Person Centered
Page 1 of 3

--- Page 28 ---
Maryland Department of Health
Developmental Disabilities Administration
December 2018
Agency Response Form
Plan development and monitoring, and CCS agency billing. The
Monitoring and Follow Up forms are auto-generated by MDLTSS on a
quarterly basis. The form includes sections related to demographic
information, contacts, date of visit, any changes in status, service
provision, individual satisfaction, progress of outcomes, and health and
safety. Based on data entry to these sections, follow up action may be
required and will be noted in the Recommended Action section which
can include items specific to service provision.
Recorded webinar training on how to complete the Person-Centered Plan
document and monitor plan progress are being created in a module
format to be completed by February 2019, and all CCS’s must
demonstrate successful completion of the training module as evidenced
by achieving a passing score. The CCS will be required to seek support
from the DDA for any documented instance where they identified goals
that were not implemented by the service provider. On a weekly basis,
the DDA Regional CCS staff will conduct a follow-up review of
recommended actions. Required follow-up may include that the service
provider submit a plan of correction to address failure to implement the
PCP goals.
Agree
Finding 2
DDA did not adequately monitor CCS agencies’ efforts to determine whether they were
ensuring that consumers received the required services from providers
Recommendation 2
We recommend that DDA
a. establish a process to ensure that all CCS agencies’ quarterly monitoring forms are
completed as required for each consumer;
b. ensure that the CCS agencies’ comprehensive quarterly monitoring forms contain
detailed comments regarding the consumer’s progress on achieving personal outcomes
and goals; and
c. revise its quarterly monitoring review process to include a confirmation that the
information recorded on the CCS agencies’ comprehensive quarterly monitoring forms is
accurate and include an indication that records from service providers were reviewed,
including assurances that consumers received the required services as identified in their
IPs.
Page 2 of 3

--- Page 29 ---
Maryland Department of Health
Developmental Disabilities Administration
December 2018
Agency Response Form
Agency Response
Analysis Factually Accurate
Please explain any No concerns with factual accuracy.
concerns with factual
accuracy.
Recommendation a Agree Estimated Completion Date: 12/31/2018
Please provide details of The LTSS system auto-generates the quarterly Monitoring and Follow-
corrective action or Up form for each person in service. The Monitoring Form Report
explain disagreement. specifically allows both the DDA and CCS agencies to review the
completion status of the Quarterly Monitoring and Follow-up forms for
each person served. This functionality enables DDA to improve its
oversight and review of CCS activities. On a weekly basis, the DDA
staff will review the report to ensure that the Monitoring and Follow-Up
forms are completed for the people served by CCS agencies within the
specified region.
Recommendation b Agree Estimated Completion Date: 12/31/2018
Please provide details of The LTSS auto-generated Monitoring and Follow Up forms include a
corrective action or section on the progress of outcomes. All sections of the forms must be
explain disagreement. completed by the CCS, to include detailed comments regarding
outcomes/goal progress for the document to be successfully submitted.
The CCS will upload evidence of service goal implementation with the
form.
Recommendation c Agree Estimated Completion Date: 12/31/2018
Please provide details of A sample of the quarterly monitoring forms will be reviewed by the
corrective action or Regional DDA staff on a weekly basis, and a reliability check completed
explain disagreement. during a provider visit to ensure that the documentation accurately
reflects plan implementation. The CCS will upload evidence of service
goal implementation and review whether progress has been made. They
will also upload documentation to verify the provision of services as
authorized. If there is insufficient progress, the CCS will meet with the
service provider to determine why progress is not being made. In every
incident where there is no evidence of plan implementation, the CCS is
required to notify DDA’s Regional Office, who will be responsible for
reviewing and requesting a plan of action from the identified provider.
On a monthly basis or sooner as outlined in the plan, the Regional DDA
staff will monitor outstanding plans of action with the CCS and provider
to facilitate compliance.
Page 3 of 3

--- Page 30 ---
A T
UDIT EAM
Matthew L. Streett, CPA, CFE
Audit Manager
Edward A. Rubenstein, CPA
Senior Auditor
Amanda M. Jones
James J. Podhorniak, CPA, CFE
Staff Auditors