Title: Maryland Department of Transportation - Maryland Transit Administration - Allegations Related to Possible Violations of State Laws, Regulations, and Policies Involving an MTA Management Employee
Date: 01/07/2019
Type: Fraud, Waste, and Abuse
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5c36304aa1ce5806d0b81c72
Extracted: 2025-06-18T22:21:57.306715
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Special Review
Maryland Department of Transportation
Maryland Transit Administration
Allegations Related to Possible Violations of State Laws, Regulations, and
Policies Involving an MTA Management Employee
January 2019
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
For further information concerning this report contact:
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
301 West Preston Street, Room 1202
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Phone: 410-946-5900 ꞏ 301-970-5900
Toll Free in Maryland: 1-877-486-9964
Maryland Relay: 711
TTY: 410-946-5401 ꞏ 301-970-5401
E-mail: OLAWebmaster@ola.state.md.us
Website: www.ola.state.md.us
The Office of Legislative Audits operates a Fraud Hotline to report fraud, waste, or abuse
involving State of Maryland government resources. Reports of fraud, waste, or abuse
may be communicated anonymously by a toll-free call to 1-877-FRAUD-11, by mail to the
Fraud Hotline, c/o Office of Legislative Audits, or through the Office’s website.
The Department of Legislative Services does not discriminate on the basis of age, ancestry, color,
creed, marital status, national origin, race, religion, gender, gender identity, sexual orientation,
or disability in the admission or access to its programs, services, or activities. The Department’s
Information Officer has been designated to coordinate compliance with the nondiscrimination
requirements contained in Section 35.107 of the Department of Justice Regulations. Requests for
assistance should be directed to the Information Officer at 410-946-5400 or 410-970-5400.

--- Page 5 ---
Table of Contents
Scope, Objectives, and Methodology 4
Background Information 5
Agency Responsibilities 5
Overview 5
Findings and Recommendations 9
Ancillary Service Contracts
Finding 1 – MTA included language in certain contracts that allowed its 9
employees to circumvent State procurement regulations by directing
the contractors to use specific vendors as subcontractors. An MTA
management employee used this capability in two ancillary service
contracts to direct work to a vendor with whom the employee had
less than an arm’s-length relationship.
Finding 2 – The structure and basis of award of the light rail ancillary 13
service contracts may have limited competition and did not ensure
the State received the most advantageous prices. In addition, the
security and wireless ancillary service contract was awarded to
contractors that did not appear to meet the contract’s technical
qualifications.
Finding 3 – MTA improperly issued task orders for larger projects that 15
should have been separately procured in accordance with MTA
policy, did not retain copies of the task orders and critical bid
documents, and did not obtain required approvals for the task orders.
In addition, MTA did not properly monitor the amounts paid under
the task orders and obtain support for the related invoices.
Snow and Ice Removal Contracts
Finding 4 – The MTA management employee directed and monitored 18
four snow and ice removal contracts totaling $6.2 million involving
the vendor with whom the employee had a relationship.
Agency Response Appendix
3

--- Page 6 ---
Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We conducted a review of allegations received through our fraud, waste, and
abuse hotline regarding the Maryland Department of Transportation (MDOT) –
Maryland Transit Administration (MTA). The allegations related to possible
violations of State laws, regulations, and policies involving an MTA management
employee directing a prime contractor to pay another vendor for work unrelated to
the contract, as well as a possible relationship between this employee and a light
rail maintenance vendor (hereinafter referred to as the “related vendor”). The
purpose of our review was to determine whether the allegations we received were
valid and the extent to which the related activities violated State laws, regulations,
and policies. This review was performed in accordance with State Government
Article, Section 2-1220 of the Annotated Code of Maryland.
The scope of our review included three contracts awarded to the prime contractor
identified in the allegations, including two contracts in which work was
subcontracted to the related vendor. We also identified and reviewed four light
rail snow and ice removal contracts involving the related vendor as either a
subcontractor or the prime contractor. These seven contracts covered the period
from October 2012 through September 2022 and were collectively valued at $42.2
million (Table 1 on page 7). The MTA management employee referenced in the
allegations was the project manager for six of the seven contracts involving
MTA’s light rail operations, collectively valued at $24.2 million.
Our review consisted of tests, analyses, observations, and discussions with MTA
personnel and others, as we deemed necessary, to achieve our objectives. The
results of our review, which substantiated the allegations, are described in detail
in Findings 1 and 4. Our review also identified issues with the procurement of the
contracts and task orders and monitoring of the related payments, which are
identified in Findings 2 and 3, certain of which involved the MTA management
employee. Additional contract procurement and monitoring deficiencies
identified as a result of other referrals to our fraud, waste, and abuse hotline were
included in our fiscal compliance audit report of MTA dated November 20, 2018.
Our review did not constitute an audit conducted in accordance with generally
accepted government auditing standards. Our review was conducted during the
period from March through September 2018.
The response from MDOT, on behalf of MTA, to our findings and
recommendations is included as an appendix to this report. As prescribed in State
Government Article, Section 2-1224 of the Annotated Code of Maryland, we will
advise MDOT regarding the results of our review of its response.
4

--- Page 7 ---
Background Information
Agency Responsibilities
The Maryland Transit Administration (MTA), a transportation business unit of the
Maryland Department of Transportation, is responsible for the construction,
operation, and maintenance of the Baltimore metropolitan area transit system and
commuter services in suburban areas of the State. Transit modes include the
Metro subway, bus, light rail, and the Maryland Rail Commuter (MARC) service.
MTA is headquartered in Baltimore City and maintains a workforce of
approximately 3,400 employees. According to State records, during fiscal year
2017, MTA’s operating and capital expenditures totaled approximately $1.42
billion.
Overview
The hotline allegations we received related to possible violations of State laws,
regulations, and policies involving an MTA management employee directing a
prime contractor to pay another vendor for work unrelated to the contract, as well
as a possible relationship between this employee and a light rail maintenance
vendor (hereinafter referred to as the “related vendor”). We reviewed three
contracts for ancillary services that were awarded to this contractor1 (as well as to
two other prime contractors) with a combined value of $36 million, including two
contracts that used the related vendor as a subcontractor. We also identified and
reviewed four snow and ice removal contracts, collectively valued at $6.2 million,
that involved the related vendor as either the prime contractor or a subcontractor.
All of the contracts reviewed were competitively procured by MTA’s
Procurement Department based on the specifications and deliverables established
by the respective departments. Once awarded, the respective departments were
delegated responsibility for administering the contracts, assigning and monitoring
the work, and approving the related invoices. The conditions noted during our
review primarily related to the activities that were delegated to the respective
departments, including the Light Rail Operations department in which the MTA
management employee worked.
1 The contractor had additional contracts with MTA that were not included in this review.
5

--- Page 8 ---
Ancillary Service Contracts
MTA uses ancillary service contracts to obtain the services of prequalified prime
contractors (generally at least three) to perform necessary support of
transportation operations using a task order system for projects undertaken within
the scope of each contract. According to MTA policy, the task orders on these
contracts are to be used for smaller projects valued at $500,000 or less. Any
project valued at more than $500,000 is to be competitively procured as a separate
contract. After the initial award of the contract, the respective departments are to
solicit bids from the prequalified prime contractors based on written task orders
that define the scope of work to be performed. The prime contractor that
responds with the lowest bid is awarded the task order for that project.
As noted above, the three ancillary service contracts we reviewed were
competitively procured by the MTA Procurement Department, each of which was
awarded to three prime contractors. One of the prime contractors2 for each of the
three contracts was the contractor identified in the allegations. One of the
ancillary service contracts was for agency-wide repairs and maintenance on
MTA’s security and wireless systems. The other two contracts were for
maintenance and repairs on the light rail tracks and light rail facilities (such as
HVAC, electrical, and minor construction).
Snow and Ice Removal Contracts
MTA’s Light Rail Operations Unit uses vendors to perform snow and ice removal
at its light rail stations and facilities. MTA competitively procured and awarded
contracts for snow and ice removal on light rail station platforms and sidewalks
within each of its three regions (Northern, Central, and Southern). A separate
contract is used for snow and ice removal services in light rail parking lots.
The four snow and ice removal contracts we reviewed were for light rail station
platforms and sidewalks in the Northern and Central regions which involved the
related vendor. Two contracts for the period from October 2012 through
September 2017 were awarded to one vendor that subcontracted work to the
related vendor. Two other contracts for the period from September 2017 through
September 2022 were awarded directly to the related vendor (Table 1 on page 7).
2 This contractor operates as two separate business entities with the same directors, officers,
and business address. For the purposes of our review, we treated these entities as one
contractor.
6

--- Page 9 ---
Table 1
Contracts Selected for Review
Value (original Payments as Payments to
Role of Related
Contract Scope Contract Term value plus of August Related
Vendor
modifications) 2018 Vendor
Ancillary repair and
maintenance of January 2015 to
None $18,000,000 $15,565,940 $0
security and wireless January 2020
systems
Ancillary light rail
June 2014 to
facility and track Subcontractor 9,000,000 8,999,013 1,881,723
June 2019
maintenance*
Ancillary light rail
October 2016 to
facility and track Subcontractor 9,000,000 5,004,987 1,119,195
October 2021
maintenance*
Snow and ice
removal at light rail October 2012 to
Subcontractor 1,874,950 1,522,539 781,005
platforms and September 2017
sidewalks*
Snow and ice
removal at light rail October 2012 to
Subcontractor 1,872,150 1,526,012 87,320
platforms and September 2017
sidewalks*
Snow and ice
removal at light rail Prime September 2017 to
1,240,400 322,960 322,960
platforms and Contractor September 2022
sidewalks*
Snow and ice
removal at light rail Prime September 2017 to
1,240,400 272,100 272,100
platforms and Contractor September 2022
sidewalks*
Totals $42,227,900 $33,213,551 $4,464,303
Source: MTA and Contractor Records
*The MTA management employee referenced in the allegations was the project manager for these contracts.
According to MTA and contractor records, as of August 2018, contractor
payments under these seven contracts totaled $33.2 million, including $4.5
million paid to the related vendor. The MTA management employee referenced
in the allegations was the project manager for the six light rail contracts selected
for review. As project manager, the MTA management employee, or the
employee’s subordinates, were responsible for establishing task orders under
these contracts, awarding and monitoring the work, and approving related
invoices.
7

--- Page 10 ---
Based on our review, we identified certain questionable matters as described in
the findings which follow. Consequently, based on the nature and entirety of
these matters, we referred them to the Office of the Attorney General – Criminal
Division. We also identified possible violations of State ethics law that may
require referral to the State Ethics Commission. Finally, we noted violations of
State procurement regulations and MTA policy, as well as poor contract
administration procedures and controls that require corrective action by MTA.
MTA should consult with the Office of the Attorney General – Criminal Division
before taking any actions related to the findings contained in this report. A
referral to the Criminal Division does not mean that a criminal act has actually
occurred or that criminal charges will be filed.
8

--- Page 11 ---
Findings and Recommendations
Ancillary Service Contracts
Finding 1
MTA included language in certain contracts that allowed its employees to
circumvent State procurement regulations by directing the contractors to use
specific vendors as subcontractors. An MTA management employee used
this capability in two ancillary service contracts to direct work to a vendor
with whom the employee had less than an arm’s-length relationship.
Analysis
MTA included language in certain contracts that allowed its employees to
circumvent State procurement regulations by directing the prime contractors to
use specific vendors as subcontractors. An MTA management employee used this
capability to direct work to a vendor with whom the employee had less than an
arm’s-length relationship. We also noted certain questionable payments to the
related vendor for certain contracts managed by the MTA employee.
Table 2
We reviewed three five-year
Contracts with Improper Contract
ancillary service contracts
collectively valued at $36 million
Language Selected for Review
Scope Term Value
(see table) that were each awarded
Repairs and January
to the prime contractor identified in
maintenance of 2015 to
the allegations and two other prime $18 million
security and January
contractors. The vendors used as
wireless systems 2020
subcontractors on these contracts
Light rail facility
June 2014 to
were not specified in the initial and track 9 million
June 2019
contract awards; rather, they were maintenance
selected during the task order Light rail facility
Oct. 2016 to
and track 9 million
solicitation process and/or Oct. 2021
maintenance
subsequent to the award of the task
Total $36 million
orders.
Source: MTA Records
Contract Language Allowed MTA to Circumvent Procurement Regulations
MTA included language in these three contracts that allowed its employees to
direct the prime contractors to use certain vendors as subcontractors,
circumventing State procurement regulations. Specifically, the ability to choose
subcontractors to perform work under the prime contractor through a non-
competitive arrangement compromises the integrity of the original competitively
awarded contract.
9

--- Page 12 ---
In addition, MTA allowed the prime contractors to charge higher overhead rates
for using these vendors. Specifically, the contract terms allowed the prime
contractor to charge an overhead rate of up to 5 percent when work was
performed by a subcontractor selected by the contractor, and up to 10 percent
when work was performed by a subcontractor selected by MTA. MTA
subsequently used each of these three contracts to direct work to certain vendors
as subcontractors. The vendors on the task orders we reviewed reported directly
to MTA with no apparent added value from the prime contractors, whose role was
limited to billing MTA for the services.
The use of these contracts to direct work to specific vendors enabled MTA to
circumvent State procurement regulations and resulted in increased cost for the
services because of the aforementioned overhead fees. For example, our review
of two task orders for the security and wireless systems maintenance contract
totaling approximately $3,219,000 and $255,000 respectively, disclosed that
MTA used the task orders to obtain information technology services from two
incumbent vendors whose contracts had expired. MTA directed the prime
contractors to use these vendors as subcontractors and specified the related rates
(based on MTA’s prior contracts with these vendors).
These services should have been procured as separate contracts, and MTA should
have obtained Board of Public Works (BPW) approval and published the awards
on eMaryland Marketplace, as required by State procurement regulations. We
confirmed with BPW staff that, under these circumstances, including language in
the contracts allowing MTA to direct work to specific vendors was improper and
violated State procurement regulations.
This practice also resulted in MTA paying overhead rates which would not have
been paid had the contracts been procured directly with the vendors. Specifically,
although the contract provided for a 10 percent overhead rate when using the
MTA selected vendors, MTA requested the prime contractors to bid on the
overhead rates they would charge to use the MTA selected vendors. The MTA
chosen prime contractor ultimately was paid $144,000 in overhead fees for the
two aforementioned task orders.
We could not readily determine the total number of contracts procured by MTA
that included the aforementioned language permitting the circumvention of State
procurement regulations. However, we reviewed 10 other contracts listed on
eMaryland Marketplace, collectively valued at $101.9 million, which were
awarded by MTA during the period from June 2016 through July 2018. Four of
these contracts totaling $72.5 million, all of which were ancillary service
10

--- Page 13 ---
contracts, included the language authorizing MTA to select the subcontractors and
provided for the increased overhead rates.
MTA Management Employee Relationship with a Vendor
An MTA management employee directed prime contractors on the two $9 million
light rail contracts to subcontract work to a vendor with whom the employee had
less than arm’s-length relationship. Specifically, we were advised by two prime
contractors that, when procuring the task orders, the MTA management employee
would notify the contractors that they were required to use this related vendor or
would direct them to use the related vendor after the task order was awarded. Our
review disclosed the following relationships between the management employee
and the vendor:
 Two employees of the vendor are close relatives of the MTA management
employee.
 Two other employees of the vendor resided at properties owned by the MTA
management employee.
 The vendor’s Chief Financial Officer operated a business out of a property
owned by the MTA management employee.
Our review of MTA records disclosed further indicators of a possible relationship
between the management employee and the related vendor. Specifically, we
found personnel and payroll information for the related vendor’s employees in the
offices of the MTA management employee or the employee’s subordinates, as
well as correspondence from the MTA management employee’s subordinates
directing the related vendor to hire certain employees.
A prime contractor advised us that the related vendor’s employees reported to
MTA’s light rail headquarters every day to receive their daily work orders from
MTA staff and then submitted their weekly timesheets to the MTA management
employee or one of the employee’s subordinates for approval. The related vendor
then submitted its invoices to the prime contractors, which paid the invoices
without any review or direct knowledge of the work performed. The prime
contractors incorporated the related vendor’s charges into the invoices they
submitted to MTA for payment, along with the previously mentioned overhead
fees, which were approved for payment by the MTA management employee or
the subordinates.
11

--- Page 14 ---
Questionable Payments Were Made to a Related Vendor
According to MTA and contractor records as of August 2018, $3 million of the
then $14 million in payments on these contracts were directed to the related
vendor selected by the MTA management employee, certain of which we found to
be questionable. Specifically, at the direction of the management employee, the
related vendor was paid $192,000 to perform snow removal and train cleaning
services that should have been provided under separate existing contracts
specifically designed for these services.
The rates paid to the related vendor to perform these services also exceeded the
rates on the other existing contracts. For example, our review of three invoices
totaling $66,400 for snow removal and train cleaning services disclosed that MTA
paid $20,000 more than if the services had been obtained under the other contracts
intended for these services. In addition, certain tasks performed by the related
vendor were not maintenance-related services and, therefore, did not appear to be
appropriate under the contracts. For example, one $15,420 invoice for multiple
services included charges for delivering bottled water to a light rail office and
driving a light rail operations employee to a hardware store to purchase cleaning
supplies.
These questionable payments, coupled with the relationships we described above,
raise questions about a possible conflict of interest between the MTA
management employee and the related vendor. Legal counsel for the State Ethics
Commission advised us that the MTA management employee’s participation in
matters involving this vendor (such as directing the contractor to use the vendor’s
services and monitoring of the contracts) could potentially violate several conflict
of interest provisions of State ethics law. Any final decision related to violations
of State ethics law would ultimately be determined by the State Ethics
Commission.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that MTA
a. remove the aforementioned language, which permitted the circumvention
of State procurement regulations, from future contracts, and discontinue
the practice of directing contractors to use specific vendors as
subcontractors on existing contracts;
b. take appropriate action regarding the MTA management employee’s
continued involvement with these contracts;
c. refer the matter to the State Ethics Commission after consulting with the
Office of the Attorney General – Criminal Division; and
12

--- Page 15 ---
d. after consulting with the Office of the Attorney General – Criminal
Division, review the aforementioned questionable payments and recover
any amounts determined to be improperly paid to the related vendor.
Finding 2
The structure and basis of award of the light rail ancillary service contracts
may have limited competition and did not ensure the State received the most
advantageous prices. In addition, the security and wireless ancillary service
contract was awarded to contractors that did not appear to meet the
contract’s technical qualifications.
Analysis
The structure and basis of award of the light rail ancillary service contracts may
have limited competition and did not ensure the State received the most
advantageous prices. In addition, the ancillary contract for repairs and
maintenance of security and wireless systems was awarded to contractors that did
not appear to meet the contract’s technical qualifications.
 MTA may have limited competition in the procurement of the most recently
awarded light rail facility and track maintenance contract by changing the
experience requirements. In addition, we question the appropriateness of
combining, in a single procurement, specialized maintenance and repair of
light rail tracks with general maintenance and repairs at MTA facilities (such
as painting, electrical, plumbing, and HVAC).
For the June 2014 contract, the Invitation for Bids (IFB) required prospective
contractors or their subcontractors to have the qualifications to perform both
track maintenance and facility maintenance. The IFB for the more recent
October 2016 contract added a further requirement that prospective
contractors have 10 years of experience in completing track maintenance and
repairs, and provide references for three major track-related projects
completed within the last five years. These increased requirements may have
limited competition on the recent contract because MTA only received 4 bids
on the IFB for that contract compared to 11 bids on the earlier contract’s IFB.
In our opinion, the combination of track maintenance with general facility
maintenance work did not seem appropriate for either IFB. Based on our
review of the task orders awarded as of May 2018 under these two contracts,
the majority of work performed for both related to facility maintenance. For
example, $6.1 million of the $9 million paid on one of the contracts (68
percent) related to painting, electrical, HVAC, and building maintenance
13

--- Page 16 ---
projects, which did not require any light rail track maintenance and repair
experience or skills.
The method used to award the two light rail contracts provided no assurance
that the State received the most advantageous pricing. Each contract was
awarded based on bids for a single anticipated project that we did not judge to
be representative of the comprehensive services to be provided under the
scope of the contracts. Specifically, the June 2014 contract was awarded
based on bids to install trackside fencing, and the October 2016 contract was
awarded based on bids to supply and install a new generator and fuel tank at a
light rail facility. In addition, the bids did not include fixed hourly rates for
personnel categories (such as supervisor, laborer) to be used on all task orders
awarded during the term of the contracts.
As a result, the pricing of the services obtained under both contracts was
established during the solicitation and award of the task orders over which the
MTA management employee had control. This may have enabled the MTA
management employee to direct work to the related vendor through the prime
contractors.
 Two of the three prime contractors that were awarded the contract valued at
$18 million for repairs and maintenance of MTA security and wireless
systems did not demonstrate that they met the contract’s technical experience
and qualification requirements. As noted in Finding 1, MTA subsequently
used this contract to subcontract most of the work to two incumbent vendors
whose contracts had expired. The lack of qualifications of the awarded
contractors was raised as a concern by the one losing bidder prior to the
award.
To “cure” the situation, MTA allowed these two contractors to submit
additional documentation of their qualifications, such as employee resumes.
However, one of the contractors submitted documentation that, in our opinion,
was vague and did not appear to support the contractor’s qualifications. MTA
could not provide us with any additional documentation from the other
contractor. The failure to meet contract qualifications should have resulted in
disqualifying these bidders. MTA advised us that it chose not to disqualify
these two bidders because of its desire to award the contract to three prime
contractors.
14

--- Page 17 ---
Recommendation 2
We recommend that MTA
a. maximize competition on future ancillary contracts by establishing
appropriate qualifications and separating contracts for disparate
services,
b. require bidders on future contracts to provide specific labor rates to be
used in the contract to ensure the State receives the most advantageous
pricing,
c. retain all critical procurement documents,
d. ensure contracts are only awarded to vendors who meet the qualifications
established in the solicitation, and
e. terminate the aforementioned contracts if MTA subsequently determines
the vendors do not meet the required qualifications.
Finding 3
MTA improperly issued task orders for larger projects that should have been
separately procured in accordance with MTA policy, did not retain copies of
the task orders and critical bid documents, and did not obtain required
approvals for the task orders. In addition, MTA did not properly monitor
the amounts paid under the task orders and obtain support for the related
invoices.
Analysis
MTA improperly issued task orders for larger projects that should have been
separately procured in accordance with MTA policy, did not retain copies of the
task orders and critical bid documents, and did not obtain required approvals for
the task orders. In addition, MTA did not properly monitor the amounts paid
under the task orders and obtain support for the related invoices. We tested 12 of
the 74 task orders that were issued under the three ancillary contracts discussed in
Findings 1 and 2. These 12 task orders had expenditures totaling $9.9 million.
 MTA used the contracts for the completion of large maintenance projects that
should have been separately procured in accordance with MTA policy. The
aforementioned contracts were all “ancillary service” contracts which,
according to MTA policy, are to be used for smaller projects. The policy
requires any project valued at more than $500,000 to be competitively
procured as a separate contract. Our review disclosed that, as of June 21,
2018, 4 of the 12 task orders tested had payments to the prime contractors
totaling $3.2 million, $2.4 million, $1.9 million, and $762,000 – each of
which, according to MTA policy, should have been competitively procured as
a separate contract. The MTA management employee had control over three
15

--- Page 18 ---
of these task orders totaling $5.8 million, including two task orders (payments
totaling $5.1 million) that included charges for work performed by the related
vendor as a subcontractor.
 The files of the MTA management employee did not have documentation of
the task orders or the related winning bids for three of these task orders for
which payments to the prime contractors totaled $3.5 million, and did not
have documentation of the losing bids for seven task orders for which
payments totaled $4.3 million. Two of the task orders with payments totaling
$3.3 million, for which there was no documentation of any bids, included
payments to the related vendor for work it performed as a subcontractor.
Because of the lack of documentation, we could not determine whether
services were provided in accordance with the task orders, whether the task
orders were awarded to the lowest bidders, and whether the rates paid were
proper.
 MTA’s Task Order Review Committee (TORC) did not review and approve 8
of the 12 task orders tested (including 6 under the control of the MTA
management employee) with payments to the prime contractors totaling $8.5
million. Of the 6 task orders under the control of the management employee
that were not approved, 3 task orders totaling $5.2 million included charges
for work performed by the related vendor as a subcontractor. MTA’s
Procurement Policies and Procedures Manual requires task orders be
reviewed and approved by the TORC prior to execution to ensure there are no
ethics issues, that rates are reasonable, and to verify the availability of
funding.
 The MTA management employee did not maintain a record of costs nor
monitor the amounts paid on each task order, which resulted in payments
exceeding the amounts authorized on two task orders. Specifically, MTA
processed payments totaling $1.9 million on one task order valued at
$721,900. This task order included payments to the related vendor and was
not approved by the TORC. Furthermore, as noted above, the initial value of
the task order required that the services be competitively procured as a
separate contract. For the other $200,000 task order, MTA processed
payments totaling approximately $762,400.
 Amounts invoiced on the task orders were not always supported to allow
MTA to substantiate the propriety of the amounts billed, and certain charges
appeared excessive. Our test of 27 invoices totaling $1.9 million (including
23 invoices paid on the two ancillary light rail contracts) disclosed that the
MTA management employee did not ensure documentation was provided by
16

--- Page 19 ---
the prime contractors to support subcontractor billings and labor charges on
14 invoices totaling $826,000. For example, 11 invoices totaling $779,000
included no subcontractor invoices to support the amounts billed by the prime
contractors, including 6 invoices totaling $109,400 for work performed by the
related vendor. In addition, 2 of the 11 invoices totaling $392,900 included
$84,100 in charges that appeared excessive. For example, the invoices
included charges totaling $36,000 for the contractor’s use of equipment that
was not approved in the task order. Finally, our comparison of current market
pricing, based on an Internet search, to the equipment rates paid by MTA
disclosed that payments were higher than the average market rates by more
than $10,000.
Recommendation 3
We recommend that MTA
a. competitively procure tasks expected to exceed $500,000 and only use the
ancillary contracts in accordance with MTA policy;
b. attempt to obtain the aforementioned missing task orders and bid
documentation, ensure the tasks were properly awarded, and retain
critical documents for future task orders;
c. submit the task orders to the TORC for review and approval, including a
retroactive submission of those noted in the finding;
d. maintain a record of specific costs on each task order and ensure costs do
not exceed the value of the related task orders;
e. obtain and review support for amounts invoiced, including those noted
above; and
f. ensure amounts invoiced are consistent with the task orders and take
appropriate action for any amounts billed that appear excessive.
17

--- Page 20 ---
Snow and Ice Removal Contracts
Finding 4
The MTA management employee directed and monitored four snow and ice
removal contracts totaling $6.2 million involving the vendor with whom the
employee had a relationship.
Analysis
The MTA management employee directed and monitored four competitively
procured light rail platform and sidewalk snow and ice removal contracts,
collectively valued at $6.2 million (see table), that involved the related vendor
(identified in Finding 1) with which the employee had less than an arm’s-length
relationship. As noted in the table to the right, these four contracts consisted of
two consecutive five-year contracts for
the Central (Baltimore City) and Table 3
Northern (Baltimore County) Light Rail Snow and
Regions. We also noted a Ice Removal Contracts
questionable bidding practice, as Scope Term Value
14 Light Rail
the related vendor was either the
Platforms and October 2012 to
prime contractor or a subcontractor $1,874,950
Sidewalks in the September 2017
for a second vendor that also bid on Central Region
all four contracts. Specifically, 9 Light Rail Platforms
October 2012 to
and Sidewalks in the 1,872,150
both the related vendor and the September 2017
Northern Region
second vendor bid on each contract
14 Light Rail
and listed each other as Platforms and September 2017 to
1,240,400
subcontractors in their respective Sidewalks in the September 2022
Central Region
bid submissions. As of August
9 Light Rail Platforms
2018, MTA had made payments September 2017 to
and Sidewalks in the 1,240,400
September 2022
totaling $3.6 million under the four Northern Region
contracts, of which $1.5 million Total $6,227,900
Source: MTA Records
was paid to the related vendor, as
either the prime contractor or
subcontractor.
The relationship between the MTA management employee and the related vendor
(which, based on our review of State expenditure data, did not receive payments
from any other State agencies during this period) and the questionable bidding
practice brings into question the integrity of the award of these contracts.
Specifically, although MTA competitively procured and awarded these contracts
based on the lowest hourly rate for an estimated 1,400 regular and 700 overtime
hours per year, the MTA management employee was responsible for authorizing
the number of hours the vendor could work (including overtime). Consequently,
18

--- Page 21 ---
the vendors could have potentially submitted low hourly rates to win the contract
awards, with knowledge that the amount ultimately paid to the vendors was
dictated by the number of hours the MTA employee later authorized for the work.
In this regard, MTA subsequently increased the contract value for the two
contracts for the earlier five-year period (October 2012 to September 2017) by a
total of $694,000 for additional services to be provided during critical snow
events in calendar year 2016, because the amounts of the original contracts had
been expended.
We observed that the MTA management employee or the employee’s subordinate
approved invoice payments related to these contracts. We could not determine
the propriety of the hours billed or the aforementioned $694,000 increase in
contract value (a portion of which was not spent). Although our test of invoices
disclosed that the dates the services provided related to days of documented
inclement weather, we could not determine if the hours billed were reasonable.
Recommendation 4
We recommend that MTA
a. review the procurement of the four snow and ice removal contracts to
reassess the integrity of the award process;
b. review each invoice submitted under these contracts to determine
whether the hours invoiced were justified and proper, and take
appropriate corrective action for any questionable billings; and
c. to the extent any award is deemed to have been compromised, consider
terminating the active contract with the aforementioned vendor that had
a relationship with the MTA management employee.
19

--- Page 23 ---
Maryland Department of Transportation
Maryland Transit Administration
Special Review Audit Responses
Ancillary Service Contracts
Finding 1
MTA included language in certain contracts that allowed its employees to circumvent State
procurement regulations by directing the contractors to use specific vendors as
subcontractors. An MTA management employee used this capability in three ancillary
service contracts to direct work to a vendor with whom the employee had less than an
arm’s-length relationship.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that MTA
a. remove the aforementioned language, which permitted the circumvention of State
procurement regulations, from future contracts, and discontinue the practice of
directing contractors to use specific vendors as subcontractors on existing contracts;
b. take appropriate action regarding the MTA management employee’s continued
involvement with these contracts;
c. refer the matter to the State Ethics Commission after consulting with the Office of the
Attorney General – Criminal Division; and
d. after consulting with the Office of the Attorney General – Criminal Division, review the
aforementioned questionable payments and recover any amounts determined to be
improperly paid to the related vendor.
Responses:
a. The MDOT MTA concurs with the recommendation. Beginning in 2012, the language in
question was included on a limited number of contracts that were approved through the
normal procurement process. In 2017, the Secretary of Transportation consolidated all
MDOT MTA procurement activities under the MDOT Secretary’s Office (MDOT TSO) to
address several procurement concerns. The current administration agrees that language
directing contractors which subcontractors to use and allowing contractors to charge higher
overhead rates in certain circumstances is inappropriate and will not be included in future
contracts.
The MDOT MTA is creating a new process whereby all task and work orders against Master
Contracts will be reviewed and approved by the Office of Procurement. The process will
include a review of the task/work order to validate that it is within the scope of the contract
and, when appropriate, ensure a change order is issued to add additional subcontractors. In
the interim, all task orders will continue to be submitted to the Task Order Review
Committee (TORC) for approval. Since June 2018, a representative from the Office of
Procurement is an active member of the TORC to ensure that the proposed task orders are
within the scope of the contract and that a task order, rather than a new procurement, is
warranted. The process has also been changed so that the Office of Procurement must now
approve all task orders. Management will also establish a process that will verify that all task

--- Page 24 ---
orders are submitted until the new process is implemented. Standard operating procedures
will be updated in early 2019.
b. The MDOT MTA concurs with the recommendation. The management employee was
removed as the project manager on the noted contracts. The employee’s actions are under
review by the Office of the Attorney General (OAG) – Criminal Division. Referral to the
State Ethics Commission is contingent on the outcome of the OAG – Criminal Division
review and the return of records from the OAG.
c. The MDOT MTA concurs with the recommendation. On November 2, 2018 the MDOT
MTA Administrator informed Chief Legal Counsel at the Office of the Governor of the
matter and the matter will be referred to the State Ethics Commission.
d. The MDOT MTA concurs with the recommendation. All invoices and supporting
documentation have been provided to the OAG – Criminal Division. The Operations Project
Manager and Audit Compliance Manager will facilitate a review of the noted questionable
payments to determine if any amounts were improperly processed and can be recovered once
the records are returned. The MDOT MTA will work with the OAG to ensure the
appropriate steps are taken to recover the funds.
Finding 2
The structure and basis of award of the light rail ancillary service contracts may have
limited competition and did not ensure the State received the most advantageous prices. In
addition, the security and wireless ancillary service contract was awarded to contractors
that did not appear to meet the contract’s technical qualifications.
Recommendation 2
We recommend that MTA
a. maximize competition on future ancillary contracts by establishing appropriate
qualifications and separating contracts for disparate services,
b. require bidders on future contracts to provide specific labor rates to be used in the
contract to ensure the State receives the most advantageous pricing,
c. retain all critical procurement documents,
d. ensure contracts are only awarded to vendors who meet the qualifications established in
the solicitation, and
e. terminate the aforementioned contracts if MTA subsequently determines the vendors
do not meet the required qualifications.
Response:
a. The MDOT MTA concurs with the recommendation but not with the finding. The Office of
Procurement does not agree that the cited contract unnecessarily limits competition. Due to
the nature of the work being performed under the cited ancillary contract, as well as the
location of the work, the qualifications asked of proposed bidders were necessary. Working
in a transportation-related environment often requires a vendor to have very specific skill sets
and very diverse capabilities.
The Office of Procurement routinely analyzes prospective scopes of work to ensure that
disparate scopes are not bundled into a single solicitation unless there is a reasonable
justification. Additionally, the Office of Procurement will ensure ancillary invitation for bids
include appropriate language that will not limit competition and that the most advantageous
prices will be received. Procurement Officers will ensure contracts are awarded to

--- Page 25 ---
contractors that meet the contract technical qualifications according to the evaluation criteria
that is included in the MDOT MTA procurement manual.
b. The MDOT MTA concurs with the recommendation. The MDOT MTA maintains that
neither State statute nor regulation precludes the award of an ancillary contract based upon
the evaluation of a relevant sample task. However, while this practice is commonplace, the
Office of Procurement has been working with MDOT MTA business units regarding the
criteria for evaluating and awarding future contracts.
c. The MDOT MTA concurs with the recommendation. Procurement Officer training has
emphasized ensuring all critical contract documentation is maintained on file. The contract
or project manager for task orders is responsible for obtaining and maintaining critical
documentation at the task order level. The Office of Procurement, in conjunction with
Operations Management, awarded a contract to develop and instruct a Contract Management
curriculum that will include task order management, including requirements for obtaining
and maintaining critical documentation. Training is expected to begin in early 2019 and
curriculum materials will be maintained to conduct future Contract Management training.
MDOT – The Secretary’s Office (MDOT TSO) is also developing Contract Management
training that will be offered department wide in 2019. Additionally, a Quality
Assurance/Quality Control Manager position was created within the MDOT MTA Office of
Procurement and the position is tasked with completing a random sample of contracts to test
compliance, which would include ensuring all critical procurement documentation is on file.
Based on upcoming regulatory changes related to task order approvals by the BPW, the
Office of Procurement has been in conversation with MDOT MTA management regarding
possible changes to the task/work order control process. Once the new regulations are
promulgated, the MDOT MTA will decide if any additional changes are necessary.
d. The MDOT MTA concurs with the recommendation. The MDOT MTA agrees that awards
should only be granted to vendors who meet the qualifications stated in the solicitation. The
MDOT MTA procurement process includes evaluation criteria in a request for proposals
(RFP) that an evaluation committee utilizes to ensure vendors meet the qualifications
established in the solicitation.
e. The MDOT MTA concurs with the recommendation. All procurement files and records
related to the contract have been provided to the OAG – Criminal Division. Once the records
are returned, the Operations Project Manager and Audit Compliance Manager, in conjunction
with the Office of Procurement, will complete a review of the procurements of the light rail
ancillary service contracts. If it is determined that the vendors did not meet the qualifications
established in the solicitation, the MDOT MTA will pursue new contracts as soon as when
appropriate, while taking into consideration any effects to operations. In the interim,
management of the noted contracts will be removed from Light Rail Operations and managed
by Transit Operations Management to provide a higher level of oversight and monitoring of
these contracts.

--- Page 26 ---
Finding 3
MTA improperly issued task orders for larger projects that should have been separately
procured in accordance with MTA policy and did not retain copies of the task orders and
critical bid documents nor obtain required approvals for the task orders. In addition,
MTA did not properly monitor the task orders and obtain support for the related invoices.
Recommendation 3
We recommend that MTA
a. competitively procure tasks expected to exceed $500,000 and only use the ancillary
contracts in accordance with MTA policy;
b. attempt to obtain the aforementioned missing task orders and bid documentation,
ensure the tasks were properly awarded, and retain critical documents on future task
orders;
c. submit the task orders to the TORC for review and approval, including a retroactive
submission of those noted in the finding;
d. maintain a record of specific costs on each task order and ensure costs do not exceed the
value of the related task orders;
e. obtain and review support for amounts invoiced, including those noted above; and
f. ensure amounts invoiced are consistent with the task orders and take appropriate
action for any amounts billed that appear excessive.
Response:
a. The MDOT MTA concurs with the recommendation. The MDOT MTA is creating a new
process whereby all task and work orders against Master Contracts will be reviewed and
approved by the Office of Procurement. The process will include a review of the task/work
order to validate that it is within the scope of the contract and, when appropriate, ensure a
change order is issued to add additional subcontractors. In the interim, all task orders over
$500,000 will continue to be submitted to the TORC for approval according to MDOT MTA
policy. Any task orders submitted for review to the TORC will not be approved if it is
determined that a new procurement is warranted. Since June 2018, a representative from the
Office of Procurement is an active member of the TORC to ensure that the proposed task
orders are within the scope of the contract and a task order, rather than a new procurement, is
warranted. The process has also been changed so that the Office of Procurement must now
approve all task orders. Management will also establish a process that will verify that all task
orders are submitted until the new process is implemented. Standard operating procedures
will be updated in early 2019.
b. The MDOT MTA concurs with the recommendation. All procurement files and records
related to the contract have been provided to the OAG – Criminal Division. Once the records
are returned, management will review procurement files of the Operations area to determine
if the task orders and bid documentation noted as missing can be located. If the
documentation is located, the Office of Procurement will review to determine if the tasks
were properly awarded.

--- Page 27 ---
The contract or project manager for task orders is responsible for obtaining and maintaining
critical documentation at the task order level. The Office of Procurement, in conjunction
with Operations Management, awarded a contract to develop and instruct a Contract
Management curriculum which will include task order management that will incorporate
requirements for obtaining and maintaining critical documentation. Training is expected to
begin in early 2019 and curriculum materials will be maintained to conduct future Contract
Management training. MDOT TSO is also developing Contract Management training that
will be offered departmentwide in 2019. Additionally, a Quality Assurance/Quality Control
Manager position was created within the MDOT MTA Office of Procurement and is tasked
with completing a random sample of contracts to ensure compliance.
c. The MDOT MTA concurs with the recommendation. Operations senior management began
a review of the noted contracts to determine which task orders need to be reviewed and
approved by the TORC. However, contract records and supporting documentation were
turned over to the OAG – Criminal Division. Once the records are returned, the review will
be completed, and task orders will be retroactively submitted for review and approval to
TORC, if appropriate.
d. The MDOT MTA concurs with the recommendation. Records of specific costs on each task
order are to be maintained by the contract or project manager which are to be used to ensure
costs do not exceed the value of related task orders. MDOT MTA will ensure that contract
and project managers maintain records of specific costs and utilize those cost to ensure task
orders are not exceeded. Additionally, as mentioned previously, Contract Management
training will be provided to contract and project managers in 2019 and a newly created
Quality Assurance/Quality Control Manager position will audit compliance with these
requirements.
e. The MDOT MTA concurs with the recommendation. All invoices and supporting
documentation have been provided to the OAG – Criminal Division. The Operations Project
Manager and Audit Compliance Manager will facilitate a review of all the invoices to ensure
amounts are adequately supported and consistent with the corresponding task orders once the
records are returned. Upon completion of the review, the results will be communicated to
executive management who will work with the Office of Legal Counsel as well as consult
with the State Ethics Commission to ensure the appropriate steps are taken to recover the
funds that are excessive, if appropriate.
f. Same response as recommendation 3e above.
Snow and Ice Removal Contracts
Finding 4
The MTA management employee directed and monitored four snow and ice removal
contracts totaling $6.2 million involving the related vendor with whom the employee had a
relationship.
Recommendation 4
We recommend that MTA
a. review the procurement of the four snow and ice removal contracts to reassess the
integrity of the award process;

--- Page 28 ---
b. review each invoice submitted under these contracts to determine whether the hours
invoiced were justified and proper, and take appropriate corrective action for any
questionable billings; and
c. to the extent any award is deemed to have been compromised, consider terminating the
active contract with the aforementioned vendor that had a relationship with the MTA
management employee.
Response:
a. The MDOT MTA concurs with the recommendation. All procurement files and records
related to the contract have been provided to the OAG – Criminal Division. Once the records
are returned, the Operations Project Manager and Audit Compliance Manager, in conjunction
with the Office of Procurement, will complete a review the procurements of the noted snow
and ice removal contracts. If it is determined that the integrity of the award process has been
compromised, MDOT MTA will pursue new contracts as soon as when appropriate, while
taking into consideration any effects to operations. Additionally, if it is found that the vendor
acted improperly, or in collusion with the management employee, all legal actions will be
considered. In the interim, management of the noted contracts will be removed from Light
Rail Operations and managed by Transit Operations Management to provide a higher level of
oversight and monitoring of these contracts.
b. The MDOT MTA concurs with the recommendation. All invoices and supporting
documentation have been provided to the OAG – Criminal Division. The Operations Project
Manager and Audit Compliance Manager will facilitate a review of all the invoices to
determine whether hours invoiced were consistent with other regions once the records are
returned. MDOT MTA will subsequently work with the OAG to ensure the appropriate steps
are taken to recover the funds for questionable billings, if applicable.
c. Same response as recommendation 4a above.