Title: Department of Human Services - Social Services Administration - Follow-up Review
Date: 01/09/2019
Type: Special Reports and Letters
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5c377f06a1ce5807ac455d95
Extracted: 2025-06-18T22:22:08.391126
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Special Review
Department of Human Services
Social Services Administration
Follow-up Review
July 2022
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Senator Clarence K. Lam, M.D. (Senate Chair) Delegate Carol L. Krimm (House Chair)
Senator Malcolm L. Augustine Delegate Steven J. Arentz
Senator Adelaide C. Eckardt Delegate Mark S. Chang
Senator George C. Edwards Delegate Nicholas P. Charles II
Senator Katie Fry Hester Delegate Andrea Fletcher Harrison
Senator Cheryl C. Kagan Delegate Trent M. Kittleman
Senator Benjamin F. Kramer Delegate David Moon
Senator Cory V. McCray Delegate Julie Palakovich Carr
Senator Justin D. Ready Delegate Elizabeth G. Proctor
Senator Craig J. Zucker Delegate Geraldine Valentino-Smith
To Obtain Further Information
Office of Legislative Audits
The Warehouse at Camden Yards
351 West Camden Street, Suite 400
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Phone: 410-946-5900 ꞏ
Maryland Relay: 711
TTY: 410-946-5401 ꞏ 301-970-5401
E-mail: OLAWebmaster@ola.state.md.us
Website: www.ola.state.md.us
To Report Fraud
The Office of Legislative Audits operates a Fraud Hotline to report fraud, waste, or abuse involving State
of Maryland government resources. Reports of fraud, waste, or abuse may be communicated anonymously
by a toll-free call to 1-877-FRAUD-11, by mail to the Fraud Hotline, c/o Office of Legislative Audits, or
through the Office’s website.
Nondiscrimination Statement
The Department of Legislative Services does not discriminate on the basis of age, ancestry, color, creed,
marital status, national origin, race, religion, gender, gender identity, sexual orientation, or disability in the
admission or access to its programs, services, or activities. The Department’s Information Officer has been
designated to coordinate compliance with the nondiscrimination requirements contained in Section 35.107
of the United States Department of Justice Regulations. Requests for assistance should be directed to the
Information Officer at 410-946-5400 or 410-970-5400.

--- Page 3 ---
July 6, 2022
Senator Clarence K. Lam, M.D., Senate Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Delegate Carol L. Krimm, House Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Members of Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Annapolis, Maryland
Ladies and Gentlemen:
We have conducted a follow-up review of actions taken by the Department of
Human Services (DHS) – Social Services Administration (SSA) to address the
findings in our June 3, 2021 audit report. In that report, we concluded that SSA’s
accountability and compliance rating was unsatisfactory.
DHS, on behalf of SSA, provided a status report, as of November 30, 2021,
indicating the implementation status of each finding as well as its corrective
action plan, including timelines and processes to monitor the implementation of
the plan. In summary, SSA’s status report indicated that additional corrective
actions were required to fully implement the recommendations for all eight
findings in our report.
Based on our assessment of the relative significance of the eight findings, we
performed certain procedures to evaluate the appropriateness of actions taken by
SSA for six findings. Our review, which was performed during the period from
December 2021 to March 2022, disclosed that SSA had corrected three of the six
findings and had made progress, but had not resolved the three other findings.
For the three that had been corrected, this outcome was due to SSA either meeting
its established deadline for implementation of its corrective action or
implementing actions more timely than planned.
Exhibit 1 identifies SSA’s assessed implementation status for all eight findings,
according to the status report, as well as the results of our review for the six
findings. Exhibit 2 describes, in detail, the results of our review of the status of

--- Page 4 ---
SSA’s efforts to implement the recommendations for the three findings that we
determined SSA had not resolved (fully corrected). To obtain a thorough
understanding of the audit findings, recommendations, and the follow-up status
described in Exhibit 2, the original June 3, 2021 audit report should be consulted
due to the technical nature of some of these findings.
DHS’ status report and its response to this report, provided on behalf of SSA, are
included as Appendix A and Appendix B, respectively. DHS’ response, as
presented in Appendix B, only addresses the recommendations that we
determined to be in progress. We have reviewed DHS’ response to our
assessment of the status of those recommendations and determined that DHS
generally agreed with our assessment.
To improve its accountability and compliance rating, SSA should continue to
implement its corrective action plan for all findings and related recommendations,
and ensure that other areas do not deteriorate. The status of all of the audit
findings will be subject to review during our next audit of SSA. Furthermore,
DHS, on behalf of SSA, will be required to submit quarterly status reports to this
Office for all eight findings as required by State Government Article, Section 2-
1224 of the Annotated Code of Maryland. We wish to acknowledge the
cooperation extended to us during the review by SSA. We also wish to
acknowledge DHS’ and SSA’s willingness to address the audit issues and
implement appropriate corrective actions.
Respectfully submitted,
Gregory A. Hook, CPA
Legislative Auditor
2

--- Page 5 ---
Exhibit 1
Implementation Status of Findings in the June 2021
SSA Audit Report
Status as
Determined by Status Based on
Prior Finding
SSA as of Auditor’s Review
November 20211
Quality Assurance Program
1. Although the Social Services Administration (SSA)
had implemented certain processes to monitor the
In Progress
administration of child welfare program services by In Progress
(See Exhibit 2)
the State’s local departments of social services
(LDSSs), we found they were not necessarily
comprehensive or effective.
Monitoring Compliance with Foster Care Requirements
2. SSA had not established effective monitoring of the
LDSSs to ensure that foster children were placed in In Progress
In Progress
the least restrictive environment and received
(See Exhibit 2)
required services.
Child Protective Services
3. SSA’s monitoring process was not effective for
both ensuring the timeliness of child abuse and
In Progress
neglect investigations and for the required In Progress
(See Exhibit 2)
assessments of substance-exposed newborns
conducted by the LDSSs.
4. SSA lacked adequate controls to ensure the LDSSs
were immediately notified of children born to
In Progress Corrected
individuals who previously had their parental rights
terminated for abuse or neglect.
Page 1 of 2
1 SSA’s detailed implementation status for each finding is based upon DHS’ status report, as of
November 30, 2021. The status based on the auditor’s review presented by finding in Exhibit 1
was discussed with, and agreed to by, SSA management personnel.
3

--- Page 6 ---
Exhibit 1
Implementation Status of Findings in the June 2021
SSA Audit Report
Status as
Determined by Status Based on
Prior Finding
SSA as of Auditor’s Review
November 20212
Federal Funds
5. SSA did not have an effective process for ensuring
the propriety and timeliness of Title IV-E eligibility
determinations and redeterminations, and had not
conducted quality assurance reviews; both of which In Progress N/A
resulted in a potential loss of federal funds.
Foster Care, Adoption, and Guardianship Payments
6. SSA did not pursue the collection of approximately
$4.8 million in provider overpayments. In Progress Corrected
7. SSA had not established procedures to ensure that
adoption assistance payments funded entirely by the
State were suspended when an adopted child was
In Progress Corrected
removed from the adoptive home.
Interagency Agreements
8. SSA did not ensure that certain payments made to a
State university for three interagency agreements
were adequately supported, were reasonable in
relation to the tasks performed, and were made in In Progress N/A
accordance with the terms of the agreements.
Page 2 of 2
N/A – Not applicable since we did not review the implementation status of this finding.
2 SSA’s detailed implementation status for each finding is based upon DHS’ status report, as of
November 30, 2021. The status based on the auditor’s review presented by finding in Exhibit 1
was discussed with, and agreed to by, SSA management personnel.
4

--- Page 7 ---
Exhibit 2
Detailed Comments on the June 2021 Audit Report Findings for
Which the Office of Legislative Audits Deemed the
Implementation Status to be “In Progress”
Quality Assurance Program
Prior Finding 1
Although the Social Services Administration (SSA) had implemented certain
processes to monitor the administration of child welfare program services by
the State’s local departments of social services (LDSSs), we found they were
not necessarily comprehensive or effective.
Prior Report Recommendation 1
We recommended that SSA establish comprehensive quality assurance processes
to ensure its child welfare programs are effectively and properly administered by
the LDSSs. Specifically, we recommended that SSA modify its existing
processes to ensure that they provide
a. comprehensive written procedures for monitoring program services and
functions to ensure compliance with applicable laws, regulations, and policies;
appropriate and timely recordkeeping; and the maintenance of supporting
documentation relating to services and functions performed (repeat); and
b. a quality assurance case review process at each LDSS that addresses all
critical services and functions performed by the LDSSs (repeat).
Status as Determined by SSA – In Progress
Office of Legislative Audits (OLA) Assessment of Status – In Progress
SSA had not fully implemented the recommendations. To address the
recommendations, SSA developed certain procedures to monitor child welfare
program services and functions, and established a quality assurance case review
process at each LDSS in December 2021. However, SSA’s written procedures
did not address the quality assurance case review process performed by the
LDSSs and, as of March 2022, the first quality assurance case review was still in
progress. Comprehensive written procedures should specify, for example, the
services and functions to be included in these reviews, how cases were to be
selected for review, the nature of supporting documentation required to
demonstrate compliance with program requirements, and a formal process to
analyze the results and correct identified deficiencies.
5

--- Page 8 ---
Monitoring Compliance with Foster Care Requirements
Prior Finding 2
SSA had not established effective monitoring of the LDSSs to ensure that
foster children were placed in the least restrictive environment and received
required services.
Prior Report Recommendation 2
We recommended that SSA monitor the LDSSs to ensure compliance with foster
care requirements. Specifically, we recommended that SSA ensure
a. the applicable legal documentation is included in each foster child’s case
record in the statewide case management system (repeat);
b. the LDSSs place children in the least restrictive environment and document
attempts to place the child with a relative (repeat); and
c. compliance with medical, dental, and education requirements by reviewing
applicable documentation (repeat).
Status as Determined by SSA – In Progress
OLA Assessment of Status – In Progress
SSA had not fully implemented the recommendations. In regard to
recommendations a and b, we were advised that SSA was relying on the quality
assurance case review process established in response to Prior Finding 1 to ensure
that foster children’s case records in the statewide case management system
included applicable legal documentation and evidence of the LDSSs’ efforts to
place children in the least restrictive environment. As we noted in our assessment
of Prior Finding 1, SSA had not completed the first quality assurance case review
as of March 2022.
Although SSA implemented certain procedures to address recommendation c,
these procedures were not sufficient. SSA routinely generated Child, Juvenile,
and Adult Management System (CJAMS)3 reports which identified cases that
were not in compliance with medical, dental, and educational requirements
established in State regulations. However, SSA did not review applicable
documentation within CJAMS or follow-up with the LDSSs to ensure instances of
non-compliance were resolved, even though the CJAMS reports indicated that
such requirements were not met for numerous children. For example, according
to CJAMS reports, as of March 14, 2022, 254 of the 787 children (32 percent) in
regular foster care were overdue for their annual medical exam, including 30
children who had not received a medical exam since calendar year 2019.
3 CJAMS is a statewide child welfare, foster care, and adoption case management tool.
6

--- Page 9 ---
Child Protective Services
Prior Finding 3
SSA’s monitoring process was not effective for both ensuring the timeliness
of child abuse and neglect investigations and for the required assessments of
substance-exposed newborns conducted by the LDSSs.
Prior Report Recommendation 3
We recommended that SSA
a. establish effective procedures to ensure that the LDSSs conduct and complete
investigations of allegations of child abuse and neglect and safety and risk
assessments of controlled substance-exposed newborns in a timely manner, as
required by State law and regulations (repeat); and
b. enhance the accuracy and completeness of system reports to ensure they can
be reliably used to monitor compliance with these requirements (repeat).
Status as Determined by SSA – In Progress
OLA Assessment of Status – In Progress
SSA did not fully implement the recommendations. In response to
recommendation a, SSA established procedures to monitor child abuse4 and
neglect investigations conducted by the LDSSs, however these procedures were
not fully implemented at the time of our review. Specifically, SSA planned on
using a CJAMS report of all allegations received and taking corrective action
when the LDSSs did not initiate and complete investigations within the
timeframes prescribed by State law5. However, this CJAMS report was not
functioning correctly as of March 2022, and SSA was in the process of
implementing the necessary modifications. In addition, SSA had not established
procedures to ensure that safety and risk assessments of substance-exposed
newborns were conducted timely. SSA advised that it had not yet developed a
CJAMS report for use in monitoring these assessments and could not estimate
when such a report would be available.
4 Chapter 200, Laws of Maryland 2022, effective October 1, 2022, requires DHS to implement
additional policies to address delays in conducting and completing child abuse and neglect
investigations. For example, DHS will be required to issue quarterly reports of untimely
investigations along with explanations for each delay, and to submit annual reports to the General
Assembly on the progress made by the LDSSs in complying with the time frames for these
investigations. Our review did not include an assessment of DHS or SSA compliance with this
law since the law was enacted after the period that we reviewed.
5 State law requires investigations to be initiated within 24 hours after receiving an allegation of
abuse and 5 days after receiving an allegation of neglect, and completed no later than 60 days
after the allegation is received. SSA considered LDSSs to be non-compliant if they initiated less
than 95 percent of investigations timely or completed less than 90 percent of investigations
timely.
7

--- Page 10 ---
In regard to recommendation b, since SSA was still in the process of developing
or enhancing the aforementioned CJAMS reports at the time of our review, this
recommendation was not fully addressed.
8

--- Page 11 ---
Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We conducted a follow-up review of the actions taken by the Department of
Human Services (DHS) – Social Services Administration (SSA) to address the
findings in our June 3, 2021 audit report. In that report, we concluded that SSA’s
fiscal accountability and compliance rating was unsatisfactory.
The purpose of our review was to determine the status of SSA’s corrective actions
to address certain of our audit findings and recommendations. As customary, our
review did not include all prior report findings and recommendations, but a
number judgmentally selected based on our assessment of significance. This
review was conducted under the authority of Section 2-1220(a)(4) of the State
Government Article of the Annotated Code of Maryland and was based on our
long-standing practice of performing a follow-up review whenever an agency
receives an unsatisfactory rating in its fiscal compliance audit report. The rating
system was established, in accordance with State Government Article, Section 2-
1221, of the Annotated Code of Maryland, for the purpose of determining an
overall evaluation of an agency’s fiscal accountability and compliance with State
laws and regulations.
Our review consisted of obtaining a status report from DHS, on behalf of SSA, as
of November 30, 2021, which described the level of implementation of each prior
audit report finding, as well as obtaining additional clarifications from SSA of the
actions taken to resolve the selected findings. Our review also consisted of
performing tests and analyses of certain information and holding discussions with
SSA personnel, as we deemed necessary, to determine the status of SSA’s
corrective actions to address the selected findings, including the related
recommendations, from our June 3, 2021 audit report.
This review did not constitute an audit conducted in accordance with generally
accepted government auditing standards. Had we conducted an audit in
accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards, other matters
may have come to our attention that would have been reported.
Our review was conducted primarily during the period from December 2021 to
March 2022, and our assessment of the status of SSA’s corrective actions was
performed at the time of our review.
DHS’ response, on behalf of SSA, to our follow-up review is included as an
appendix to this report. As prescribed in the State Government Article, Section 2-
1224 of the Annotated Code of Maryland, we will advise SSA regarding the
results of our review of its response.
9

--- Page 12 ---
APPENDIX A
Quality Assurance Program
Finding 1 – Although the Social Services Administration (SSA) had implemented certain processes to monitor the administration of
child welfare program services by the State’s local departments of social services (LDSSs), we found they were not necessarily
comprehensive or effective.
OLA DHS SSA Response to Audit Contact Status of Corrective Actions (Actions Projected
Recommendation Person1 Taken) and Next Steps Completion
Date &
Intermediate
Milestones
We recommend that SSA establish comprehensive quality assurance processes to ensure its child welfare programs are effectively and
properly administered by the LDSSs. Specifically, we recommend that SSA modify its existing processes to ensure that they provide:
a. comprehensive Agreed. Actions Taken: December
written 2021
SSA will continue to take the appropriate ● Updated the SOPs that align with
procedures for
actions to ensure specific program services Child Welfare programs that included
monitoring
activities for each program (i.e. CPS
program and functions dictated by State law and
and family preservation, Foster Care,
services and regulations, with policy direction from SSA,
and resource homes) in preparation for
functions to are performed effectively by LDSS.
utilization by SSA staff to conduct QA
ensure
Specifically, SSA continues to modify draft reviews of sample cases representing
compliance
Standard Operating Procedures (SOPs) that all local departments. (Complete)
with
applicable outline SSA’s monitoring activities. Each ● Developed Standard Operating
laws, SOP outlines a comprehensive quality Procedures for Monitoring of the
regulations, assurance process designed to ensure that all LDSSs which will be implemented by
and policies; required program services and functions are December 2021. (Complete)
appropriate being effectively and properly carried out by ● Completed CJAMS Documentation
and timely the LDSS. The most recently edited versions Guide for child welfare to ensure
recordkeeping; accurate documentation of services for
and the ongoing monitoring. (Complete)
1 Auditor’s Comment – names in this column have been removed.
311 W. Saratoga Street, Baltimore, MD 21201-3500 | Tel: 1-800-332-6347 | TTY: 1-800-735-2258 | www.dhs.maryland.gov

--- Page 13 ---
maintenance of the SOPs are expected to be implemented
of supporting by June 2021.
documentation
In addition, SSA has developed a
relating to
services and standardized local QA (Quality Assurance)
functions review process to be implemented within
performed each LDSS by December 2021.
(repeat); and
b. a quality Agreed. Actions Taken: December
assurance case 1. Developed standardized local QA review 2021
SSA will continue to take the appropriate
review process
process by completing the following:
actions to ensure that a standardized quality
at each LDSS
● Completed local QA Pilot of three
that addresses assurance review process exists at each
jurisdictions. (Complete)
all critical jurisdiction that addresses all critical services
● Completed SSA QA case review of
services and and functions performed by the LDSS.
local Departments. (Complete)
functions
● Launched ACQI monitoring tools for
Specifically, SSA has designed a
performed by
compliance with macro level data
standardized (QA) review process that the LDSSs
derived from milestone reports.
(repeat). includes the development of a standardized
(Complete)
web-based tool and companion desk guide,
Next Steps:
random sampling methodology, a schedule
for when each program area (i.e. Child ● Monitoring responses from LDSSs for
Protective Services {CPS}, Family initial findings from SSA QA tool to
Preservation, Resource Home, and Foster ensure compliance. (In Progress)
Care, etc.) is to be reviewed, and a recorded ● Statewide launch of Local QA Tool by
December 2021. (In Progress)
training to orient staff on the use of the tool.
● Develop schedule for ACQI/LDSS
In addition, between October and November routine audit compliance and
2020, the process was shared with local monitoring meetings by December
departments and other stakeholders. LDSS 2021. (Complete)
are identifying jurisdictions to pilot the
standardized process.
311 W. Saratoga Street, Baltimore, MD 21201-3500 | Tel: 1-800-332-6347 | TTY: 1-800-735-2258 | www.dhs.maryland.gov
Page
2

--- Page 14 ---
Implementation of a 2-3-month pilot was
launched in April 2021 with a statewide
launch planned for December 2021.
To support the piloting of the standardized
QA process, SSA staff will utilize the
standardized web-based tool to conduct
interim reviews as outlined in the SOPs that
support SSA’s monitoring activities.
311 W. Saratoga Street, Baltimore, MD 21201-3500 | Tel: 1-800-332-6347 | TTY: 1-800-735-2258 | www.dhs.maryland.gov
Page
3

--- Page 15 ---
Finding 2 – SSA had not established effective monitoring of the LDSSs to ensure that foster children were placed in the least
restrictive environment and received required services.
OLA DHS SSA Response to Audit Contact Status of Corrective Actions (Actions Projected
Recommendation Person Taken) and Next Steps Completion
Date &
Intermediate
Milestones
We recommend that SSA monitor the LDSSs to ensure compliance with foster care requirements. Specifically, we recommend that
SSA ensure:
a. the applicable Agreed. Actions Taken: June 2022
legal
SSA will continue to take action to ensure that ● Began Title IV-E Eligibility review of In Progress
documentation
the applicable legal documentation is included in 100% of all active foster care,
is included in
adoption, and guardianship cases in
each foster each foster child’s case record.
CJAMS to ensure that all required
child’s case
Specifically, in April 2018, SSA completed and legal documents are uploaded into
record in the
recorded a series of webinars for local department CJAMS. (Action #3) (In Progress)
statewide case
staff on effective documentation of legal ● Updated the SOPs that align with
management
documentation and drafted SOPs to outline a Child Welfare programs that included
system
(repeat); comprehensive quality assurance process activities for each program (i.e. CPS
and family preservation, Foster Care,
designed to ensure that all required program
and resource homes) in preparation for
services and functions are being effectively and
utilization by SSA staff to conduct
properly carried out by the LDSS.
QA reviews of sample cases
In December 2020, the SSA Title IV-E Eligibility representing all local departments.
Unit began a 100% review of all active cases in (Action #1) (Complete)
CJAMS to ensure that all required legal ● Developed Standard Operating
Procedures for monitoring of the
documents are uploaded into CJAMS.
LDSSs which will be implemented by
Supervisors must approve all of the updated IV-E
December 2021. (Action #3)
determinations in CJAMS and maintain a QA log
(Complete)
of all case reviews. To support this process, the
● Reviewed existing webinars to align
IV-E Eligibility Management Team meets weekly
with CJAMS and replaced them with
to review and discuss the progress of the reviews
and any challenges the staff are facing. These
311 W. Saratoga Street, Baltimore, MD 21201-3500 | Tel: 1-800-332-6347 | TTY: 1-800-735-2258 | www.dhs.maryland.gov
Page
4

--- Page 16 ---
reviews are anticipated to be completed by June e-learning videos. (Action #1)
2022. (Complete)
● Implemented standardized local QA
In addition, SSA will implement the following
review process by completing the
actions:
following: (In Progress)
Action #1: By June 2021, update and revise audit ○ Completed SSA QA case
response webinars and existing monitoring SOPs review of local Departments.
(In Progress)
to align with CJAMS and offer technical
○ Launched ACQI monitoring
assistance to local departments related to the
tools for compliance with
uploading of legal documents.
macro level data derived from
Action #2: Between June - December 2021, milestone reports. (Action #2)
review a randomly stratified sample of cases per (Complete)
month, allowing for cases to be pulled from Next Steps:
various counties, to ensure legal documentation is ● Continue with 100% review of all
uploaded into CJAMS. SSA staff plans to utilize active foster care, adoption and
the standardized web-based tool to conduct these guardianship cases by Title IV-E
reviews. Eligibility Unit. Make any necessary
corrections, as required. (In Progress)
Action #3: Beginning December 2021, utilize the
● Implement Local QA Tool December
standardized quality assurance (QA) case review
2021 (Action #3) (In Progress)
process implemented at each LDSS to monitor
compliance with uploading all legal documents in
each foster child’s record and provide technical
assistance accordingly
311 W. Saratoga Street, Baltimore, MD 21201-3500 | Tel: 1-800-332-6347 | TTY: 1-800-735-2258 | www.dhs.maryland.gov
Page
5

--- Page 17 ---
b. the LDSSs Agreed. Actions Taken: December
place children SSA will continue to take action to ensure that ● Created SOPs that align with Child 2021
in the least
the State places children in the least restrictive Welfare programs that included
restrictive
environment and documents attempts to place required activities for each program
environment
children with relatives. Specifically, in April (i.e. CPS and Family Preservation,
and document
Foster Care, and Resource Homes).
2018, SSA completed and recorded a series of
attempts to
(Action #1) (Complete)
place the child webinars for local department staff on effective
● Developed Standard Operating
with a relative documentation of placement in the least
Procedures for monitoring of the
(repeat); restrictive environment and placement with
LDSSs which will be implemented by
families. SSA also drafted SOPs to outline a
December 2021. (Action #3)
comprehensive quality assurance process
(Complete)
designed to ensure that all required program
● Reviewed existing webinars to align
services and functions are being effectively and
with CJAMS and replaced them with
properly carried out by the LDSS. e-learning videos. (Action #1)
(Complete)
In addition, SSA will implement the following
● Implemented standardized local QA
actions:
review process by completing the
Action #1: By June 2021, update and revise audit following: (In Progress)
response webinars and existing monitoring SOPs ○ Completed SSA QA case
to align with CJAMS and offer technical review of local Departments.
(In Progress)
assistance to local departments related to the
○ Launched ACQI monitoring
documentation of placement in the least
tools for compliance with
restrictive environment and placement with
macro level data derived from
families.
milestone reports. (Action #2)
(Complete)
Action #2: Between June - December 2021,
review a randomly stratified sample of cases per
month, allowing for cases to be pulled from
various counties, to ensure placement in the least
restrictive environment and placement with
families is documented in CJAMS. SSA staff
plan to utilize the standardized web-based tool to
conduct these reviews.
311 W. Saratoga Street, Baltimore, MD 21201-3500 | Tel: 1-800-332-6347 | TTY: 1-800-735-2258 | www.dhs.maryland.gov
Page
6

--- Page 18 ---
Action #3: Beginning December 2021, utilize the
standardized quality assurance (QA) case review
process implemented at each LDSS to monitor
compliance with uploading all legal documents in
each foster child’s record and provide technical
assistance accordingly.
c. compliance Agreed. Actions Taken: December
with medical, 2021
SSA is continuing to conduct activities to ensure ● Updated the SOPs that align with
dental, and
specific program services, which are dictated by Child Welfare programs that In Progress
education
included activities for each program
requirements State laws and regulations, with policy direction
(i.e. CPS and family preservation,
by reviewing from SSA, are performed effectively by LDSS.
Foster Care, and resource homes) in
applicable
Specifically, in April 2018, SSA completed and preparation for utilization by SSA
documentation
recorded a series of webinars for local department staff to conduct QA reviews of
(repeat).
staff on effective documentation of medical, sample cases representing all local
departments. (Action #1) (Complete)
dental, and education requirements and drafted
● Developed Standard Operating
education and health monitoring standard
Procedures for monitoring of the
operating procedures (SOPs).
LDSSs which will be implemented
In addition, SSA plans to implement the by December 2021. (Action #3)
following actions: (Complete)
● Draft of updated health policy
Action #1: By June 2021 update SOPs to align
complete. (Action #2) (In Progress)
with CJAMS reporting. Once the SOPs and
● Completed SSA/LDSS one-on-one
reporting tools are refined and updated, quarterly
audit compliance and monitoring
oversight and monitoring of medical, dental and meetings in September 2021. (Action
education documentation will resume via #3) (Complete)
implementation of the updated SOP utilizing the Next Steps:
standardized web-based tool.
● Initiate the vetting and approval
Action #2: By December 2021 update COMAR process for the updated Health
Policy. (Action #2) (In Progress)
related to health. Based on the resulting
● Upon the onboarding of the new
provisions, SSA will be conducting a review
Medical Director, update COMAR
process of related medical and dental policies to
related to health. (Action #2) (In
ensure alignment with practice, CJAMS, and
Progress)
311 W. Saratoga Street, Baltimore, MD 21201-3500 | Tel: 1-800-332-6347 | TTY: 1-800-735-2258 | www.dhs.maryland.gov
Page
7

--- Page 19 ---
requirements for compliance; current education
policies will also be included in this review.
Action #3: Beginning December 2021, utilize the
standardized quality assurance (QA) case review
process implemented at each LDSS to monitor
compliance with uploading all legal documents in
each foster child’s record and provide technical
assistance accordingly.
311 W. Saratoga Street, Baltimore, MD 21201-3500 | Tel: 1-800-332-6347 | TTY: 1-800-735-2258 | www.dhs.maryland.gov
Page
8

--- Page 20 ---
Child Protective Services
Finding 3 – SSA’s monitoring process was not effective for both ensuring the timeliness of child abuse and neglect investigations
and for the required assessments of substance-exposed newborns conducted by the LDSSs.
OLA DHS SSA Response to Audit Contact Status of Corrective Actions (Actions Projected
Recommendation Person Taken) and Next Steps Completion
Date &
Intermediate
Milestones
We recommend that SSA
a. establish Agreed. Actions Taken to address timeliness of CPS February
effective investigations: 2022
Conduct and complete investigations of
procedures to
1. Communication provided to all CPS
allegations of child abuse and neglect:
ensure that the and Family Preservation staff by
LDSSs conduct
DHS is committed to ensuring the safety and completing the following:
and complete
wellbeing of children in our state through ● Reissued the required protocol on
investigations
thorough timely and appropriate responses to CPS timeframes for timely
of allegations of
reports of child abuse and neglect. SSA will initiation and closure of CPS
child abuse and
continue to take appropriate actions to monitor responses and offered TA to local
neglect and
departments to reinforce
safety and risk the timeliness of CPS Responses. In April 2018,
compliance. (Completed)
assessments of SSA conducted and recorded a webinar to guide
● Distributed a Tip Sheet to LDSS
controlled the LDSS on timeliness of CPS cases and
for improving CPS timeliness
substance- ensure appropriate documentation in MD
broken down by each finding and
exposed CHESSIE.
the CPS Timeframe Requirements
newborns in a
document detailing when the
timely manner, Following the webinars, in May 2018, SSA
"clock" starts ticking for each
as required by began monitoring compliance of timeliness of
requirement. (Completed)
State law and CPS cases utilizing the In-Home Milestone
regulations Report.
(repeat); and 2. Began interim monitoring of CPS
In January 2019, SSA reassigned one staff
response data by completing the
person to serve as Acting Program Manager for
following:
Baltimore City CPS staff with direct
311 W. Saratoga Street, Baltimore, MD 21201-3500 | Tel: 1-800-332-6347 | TTY: 1-800-735-2258 | www.dhs.maryland.gov
Page
9

--- Page 21 ---
supervision from SSA’s Director of CPS/Family ● Distributed CPS Timeliness data
Preservation Services. In addition, SSA engaged for timely case closure and face-
a team to provide targeted support to Baltimore to-face response to LDSS.
(Completed)
City CPS staff to include training on CPS
● Reviewed over 200 cases from a
statute, regulations, policy and best practice,
large and medium LDSS for the 3
implementation of a targeted case supervision
CPS timeliness findings
approach, and monthly meetings among
(Screening timeliness, face-to-face
Supervisors and Unit Managers to identify and
contact, and timely closure).
address any systemic issues in providing CPS Feedback and technical assistance
responses. were provided to each LDSS
reviewed to support the local in
In February 2020, SSA hired a staff person
meeting CPS investigation
whose main responsibility is to provide
timelines. (In Progress)
monitoring, oversight, and technical assistance
● Completed an update and
for CPS activities including timeliness of
reissuance of the policy regarding
investigations. This staff person is leading an
accessing children/families.
interim process to monitor the timeliness of
(Completed)
initiating and completing investigations within
● Completed SSA/LDSS one-on-
targeted jurisdictions which began in October
one audit compliance and
2020. This process allows for a random
monitoring meetings in October
selection of cases out of CJAMS to review. If 2021. (Completed)
concerns are noted, SSA contacts the local ● Developed and distributed weekly
department to discuss the findings and provide reports by ACQI for closure
technical assistance. timeliness. (Completed)
Next Steps:
In April 2020, SSA began working with
CJAMS developers to refine the CPS milestone ● Enhancements to CJAMS milestone
report, to include the ability to monitor timely reports (In Progress)
initiation of responses and case closures. In
March 2021, an accurate CPS milestone report
was implemented to capture the timely
completion of CPS investigations that is
available daily to SSA and Local staff. SSA has
continued to direct LDSS leadership to utilize
the existing CPS Milestone Reports during
311 W. Saratoga Street, Baltimore, MD 21201-3500 | Tel: 1-800-332-6347 | TTY: 1-800-735-2258 | www.dhs.maryland.gov
Page
10

--- Page 22 ---
supervision so CPS supervisors can monitor
case activities while a CPS case is active.
In addition, SSA plans to implement the
following actions:
Action #1: Effective immediately, send out
communication to all CPS and Family
Preservation staff to provide guidance related to
timeliness on investigations to include steps to
take to access children, what to do if staff are
unable to see a child timely, and effective
documentation of reasonable efforts. To support
the guidance provided, the current policy
regarding access to children will also be
updated.
Action #2: Reviewed CPS response data with
LDSS Directors and Assistant Directors at the
March SSA/LDSS weekly call to identify
barriers and identify technical assistance
needed. SSA will continue to provide regular
data to Local Directors and Assistant Directors
related to CPS responses.
Action: #3: In March 2021, initiated steps to
begin an interim monitoring process to using the
information from the CFSR (Child and Family
Services Review) along with random case
sampling by requesting a data report of
additional cases beyond what is currently
provided as part of the CFSR review (14 cases
for a large jurisdiction, 10 or a medium
jurisdiction and 6 for a small jurisdiction). The
random case samples will be from the same
period under review as the CFSR.
311 W. Saratoga Street, Baltimore, MD 21201-3500 | Tel: 1-800-332-6347 | TTY: 1-800-735-2258 | www.dhs.maryland.gov
Page
11

--- Page 23 ---
The initial random sample was provided in May
2021.
The review of the additional cases will provide
opportunities to offer technical assistance to
LDSS to reinforce their efforts to initiate and
complete CPS responses timely and allow for
information learned from the additional case
reviews to be included in their final CFSR
report.
Action #4: By December 2021, utilize the
standardized quality assurance case review
process implemented at each LDSS to monitor
timeliness of initiating and closing
investigations and provide technical assistance
accordingly.
Safety and risk assessments of controlled Actions Taken to ensure completion of
substance-exposed newborns in a timely timely SEN assessments:
manner:
● Drafted a monitoring tool that was
SSA has taken action to efficiently monitor and shared with program staff for input and
feedback. (In Progress)
provide oversight of Substance Exposed
● Initiated the development of the
Newborn (SEN) assessments. The current In-
monitoring tool in collaboration with
Home Milestone report captures active SEN
University of Maryland. (In Progress)
Risk of Harm cases and the date of the last/most
● Updated the SOPs that align with Child
current safety and risk assessment completed for
Welfare programs that included
the case; however, this data report is
activities for each program (i.e. CPS
incomplete.
and family preservation, Foster Care,
Due to the report inaccuracies, an informal data and resource homes) in preparation for
utilization by SSA staff to conduct QA
validation process has been utilized. After
reviews of sample cases representing all
identifying the SEN cases for the jurisdictions
local departments. (Completed)
using the In-Home Milestone report, MD
311 W. Saratoga Street, Baltimore, MD 21201-3500 | Tel: 1-800-332-6347 | TTY: 1-800-735-2258 | www.dhs.maryland.gov
Page
12

--- Page 24 ---
CHESSIE has been used to cross check the data ● Develop Standard Operating
(safety and risk assessment dates). Procedures for monitoring of the
LDSSs which will be implemented by
Additionally, SSA conducted a SEN policy
December 2021. (Completed)
training in February 2021.
● Completed one-on-one technical
The training included a review of the safety and assistance meetings with local
risk assessments and timelines for completion. departments regarding updated SEN
Substance Exposed Newborn #21-05 policy was policy. (In Progress)
issued to clarify, provide details, and offer ● Completed SSA/LDSS one-on-one
additional guidance to professionals serving audit compliance in monitoring
SEN and their families. The revised SEN meetings in October 2021. (Completed)
policy, due to take effect in March 2021, was Next Steps:
updated to clarify roles and responsibility as it
● Generate finalized SEN report. (In
relates to the coordination of, care of and
Progress)
response to SEN. Along with the policy, several
new and revised SEN forms are being
introduced to support and improve practice;
those tools were also demonstrated during the
training.
In addition, SSA plans to implement the
following actions:
Action #1: Beginning March 2021, utilized a
pilot data report for SEN as a short-term plan to
provide improved data to support the
monitoring of the completion of required safety
and risk assessment within required timeframes.
Action #2: By May 2021, in order to improve
oversight, refine the existing Monitoring SOPs
to include alignment with CJAMS (Child,
Juvenile and Adult Management System), the
enhancement of the oversight process, and the
revision of the established monitoring
timeframes.
311 W. Saratoga Street, Baltimore, MD 21201-3500 | Tel: 1-800-332-6347 | TTY: 1-800-735-2258 | www.dhs.maryland.gov
Page
13

--- Page 25 ---
Action #3: By December 2021, utilize the
standardized quality assurance case review
process implemented at each LDSS to monitor
compliance with medical, dental, and education
requirements and provide technical assistance
accordingly.
b. enhance the Agreed. Actions Taken: March 2022
accuracy and
● Issued a daily CPS Milestone Report
SSA continues to implement appropriate actions
completeness of
in March 2021 to assess the timely
to enhance the accuracy and completeness of
system reports
completion and initiation of CPS cases
to ensure they reports to reliably monitor timely completion of
and the report is currently available in
can be reliably CPS investigations and the timeliness of
Qlik. This tool also will assist with
used to monitor required assessments of substance-exposed
assessing SEN assessment. (In
compliance newborns completed by the LDSS.
Progress)
with these
Next Steps:
Specifically, SSA is planning the following
requirements
(repeat). short- and long-term activities to ensure data is ● Enhance CJAMS milestone reporting.
reliable and can be used to monitor compliance: (In Progress)
● Finalize SEN report and share final
Action #1: In March 2021, implemented an draft with SSA Executive Team. (In
accurate CPS milestone report to capture the Progress)
timely completion of CPS investigations that is ● SSA Research and Evaluation Unit to
available daily to SSA and Local staff. In provide program staff with access to
addition, in partnership with the University of reports/monitoring tools. (In Progress)
Maryland School of Social Work, a draft
template of a reporting tool that can be used for
monitoring timeliness of SEN assessments was
created and provided to program staff for input.
Reporting templates outlined response timing
for the jurisdictions and state overall; the
reporting templates are in the process of being
enhanced to better monitor the accurate
timeliness of safety and risk assessments for a
sample size of SEN. Once a final version of the
SEN report is decided upon, it will be created in
311 W. Saratoga Street, Baltimore, MD 21201-3500 | Tel: 1-800-332-6347 | TTY: 1-800-735-2258 | www.dhs.maryland.gov
Page
14

--- Page 26 ---
the system where it will be available on a daily
basis.
Action #2: In April 2021, completed a review
of CJAMS Child Welfare fields to ensure that
data elements for timely completion of CPS
investigations and SEN reporting is a part of the
application side of the system. This review
showed that the two reports either developed
(CPS Milestone) or SEN, in process of being
finalized, will provide the necessary information
for monitoring timeliness either of CPS cases or
SEN assessments as the necessary data elements
are in CJAMS.
Action #3: By September 2021, complete an
assessment and update the past reporting for
timely completion of CPS investigations and
SEN to create improved electronic reporting
capability.
Action #4: By December 2021, complete
data/report validation of the newly revised
report(s) in the new system to confirm accuracy.
311 W. Saratoga Street, Baltimore, MD 21201-3500 | Tel: 1-800-332-6347 | TTY: 1-800-735-2258 | www.dhs.maryland.gov
Page
15

--- Page 27 ---
Child Protective Services (continued)
Finding 4 – SSA lacked adequate controls to ensure the LDSSs were immediately notified of children born to individuals who
previously had their parental rights terminated for abuse or neglect.
OLA DHS SSA Response to Audit Contact Status of Corrective Actions (Actions Projected
Recommendation Person Taken) and Next Steps Completion
Date &
Intermediate
Milestones
We recommend Agreed. Actions Taken: December
that SSA establish SSA has taken appropriate action to ensure LDSS 1. Strengthened the Birth Match Review 2021
adequate controls, receive timely notifications of children born to Process by completing the following:
such as initiating a individuals who previously had their parental ● Established a multi-step review
supervisory review rights terminated for abuse or neglect. process that includes weekly review
over the process, to Responsibility for who receives the information of data to identify any matches, 2-
ensure that LDSSs from Vital Statistics has been adjusted and as of day notification of local departments
are promptly August 2020 all outstanding birth matches were of any matches, bi-weekly review by
notified of children caught up. With all jurisdictions now using Program Director and the
maintenance of a master list to
born to individuals CJAMS, a standard report has also been created.
monitor completion of assessments
who previously had
Several months ago, the CPS/Family Preservation following the notification of a match.
their parental
office established a multi-step plan to review (Completed)
rights terminated
matches weekly after a match has been received, 2. Initiated follow up activities to the audit
by a court (repeat).
and ensure notifications are sent within 2 to ensure that required assessments were
completed on cases tested by completing
business days of the match. In addition, the
the following:
CPS/Family Preservation Director reviews birth
● Reviewed the 144 cases tested during
match notifications on a bi-weekly basis to ensure
the audit to ensure that the required
the LDSS are notified of all matches by SSA. The
assessments were completed once a
CPS/Family Preservation Office maintains a
local was notified of a birth match.
master list to track birth matches and notifications This review indicated that about half
to the LDSSs. The Office also tracks whether the of the children reviewed during the
LDSS has initiated a timely assessment of the audit did not have an assessment
documented.
311 W. Saratoga Street, Baltimore, MD 21201-3500 | Tel: 1-800-332-6347 | TTY: 1-800-735-2258 | www.dhs.maryland.gov
Page
16

--- Page 28 ---
family where a match has been made and ● Notifications were sent to LDSS with
documents the information. identified outstanding birth match
assessments directing assessments to
be completed.
● Responses were received by SSA
birth match monitoring staff
confirming completion of
assessment. (Completed)
Next Steps:
● ACQI testing of enhancements to
ensure compliance. (In Progress)
311 W. Saratoga Street, Baltimore, MD 21201-3500 | Tel: 1-800-332-6347 | TTY: 1-800-735-2258 | www.dhs.maryland.gov
Page
17

--- Page 29 ---
Federal Funds
Finding 5 – SSA did not have an effective process for ensuring the propriety and timeliness of Title IV-E eligibility determinations
and redeterminations and had not conducted quality assurance reviews; both of which resulted in a potential loss of federal funds.
OLA DHS SSA Response to Audit Contact Status of Corrective Actions Projected
Recommendation Person (Actions Taken) and Next Steps Completion
Date &
Intermediate
Milestones
We recommend that SSA ensure federal reimbursement is obtained for all children eligible for Title IV-E funding. Specifically, we
recommend that SSA
a. ensure that Title Agreed. Actions Taken: June 2022
IV-E eligibility is
SSA has taken appropriate action to ensure the 1. Began 100% review of all active cases
properly
timely determination of children’s eligibility for in CJAMS to ensure the accuracy of
determined for
Title IV-E. Specifically, the SSA Title IV-E the Title IV-E eligibility determination:
all children
● Review process includes
Eligibility Unit began completing a 100% review
(repeat);
automated supervisory approval
of all active cases in CJAMS in December 2020.
within CJAMS and weekly IV-E
This review is being conducted to ensure that all Eligibility Management Team
eligibility determinations were properly meetings to discuss the progress of
determined and to obtain reimbursement of any the review and address any
challenges. (In Progress)
federal funds potentially lost as a result of an
incorrect decision. Next Steps:
● Title IV-E will continue the 100%
The IV-E Eligibility Management Team meets
(60% completed) review of all IV-
weekly to review and discuss the progress of the
E cases including any cases
review and any challenges the staff are facing.
determined to be ineligible. (In
The IV-E Eligibility Supervisors must approve all Progress)
of the updated IV-E determinations in CJAMS and
a QA log is being updated as case review updates
are provided.
311 W. Saratoga Street, Baltimore, MD 21201-3500 | Tel: 1-800-332-6347 | TTY: 1-800-735-2258 | www.dhs.maryland.gov
Page
18

--- Page 30 ---
b. conduct reviews Agreed. Actions Taken: June 2022
to ensure that
SSA has taken appropriate action to ensure the 1. Implemented Title IV-E eligibility
Title IV-E
timely determination of children’s eligibility for process within CJAMS by completing
eligibility
Title IV-E. Specifically, the SSA Title IV-E the following:
determinations
● Created a rules engine within
Eligibility Unit began completing a 100% review
and
CJAMS to ensure that all Title IV-
of all active cases in CJAMS in December 2020.
redeterminations
E determinations are in
are proper and
This review is being conducted to ensure that all compliance with the federal and
timely, as
eligibility determinations were properly state requirements. (Completed)
required by SSA
determined and to obtain reimbursement of any o Completion of mandatory
policy; and
supervisory approval
federal funds potentially lost as a result of an
within CJAMS to ensure
incorrect decision.
accuracy of Title IV-E
The IV-E Eligibility Management Team meets determination.
weekly to review and discuss the progress of the ● In June 2020, all Title IV-E staff
review and any challenges the staff are facing. were provided with necessary
training on utilizing CJAMS to
The IV-E Eligibility Supervisors must approve all complete Title IV-E eligibility
of the updated IV-E determinations in CJAMS and determinations. (Completed)
a QA log is being updated as case review updates
Next Steps:
are provided.
● Title IV-E will continue the 100%
(60% completed) review of all IV-
E cases including any cases
determined to be ineligible. (In
progress)
c. review all Agreed. Actions Taken: June 2022
children who are
1. Began 100% review of all active cases
SSA has taken appropriate action to ensure the
currently
in CJAMS to ensure the accuracy of
timely determination of children’s eligibility for
determined to be
the Title IV-E eligibility
ineligible due to Title IV-E. Specifically, the SSA Title IV-E
determination:
a missing court Eligibility Unit began completing a 100% review
● Review process includes
order or who of all active cases in CJAMS in December 2020.
automated supervisory approval
entered care This review includes any remaining active
within CJAMS and weekly IV-E
prior to July ineligible cases that received services within the Eligibility Management Team
2016 (and
last two years. These cases are being prioritized meetings to discuss the progress of
311 W. Saratoga Street, Baltimore, MD 21201-3500 | Tel: 1-800-332-6347 | TTY: 1-800-735-2258 | www.dhs.maryland.gov
Page
19

--- Page 31 ---
received services and if any determinations are found to be incorrect, the review and address any
within the last the determination will be amended accordingly and challenges. (Completed)
two years), all necessary steps to obtain federal reimbursement ● Made corrections and necessary
including the adjustments on any cases
will be taken where applicable.
aforementioned identified as incorrectly
cases, and obtain determined. (In Progress)
Title IV-E funds
Next Steps:
when possible
● Title IV-E will continue the 100%
(repeat).
(60% completed) review of all IV-
E cases including any cases
determined to be ineligible any
adjustment required will be
completed. (In Progress)
311 W. Saratoga Street, Baltimore, MD 21201-3500 | Tel: 1-800-332-6347 | TTY: 1-800-735-2258 | www.dhs.maryland.gov
Page
20

--- Page 32 ---
Foster Care, Adoption, and Guardianship Payments
Finding 6 – SSA did not pursue the collection of approximately $4.8 million in provider overpayments.
OLA DHS SSA Response to Audit Contact Status of Corrective Actions (Actions Projected
Recommendation Person Taken) and Next Steps Completion
Date &
Intermediate
Milestones
We recommend that Agreed. Actions Taken: June 2022
SSA pursue for 1. Completed Standard Operating Procedure to
SSA continues to take appropriate action to
collection provider address how provider overpayments will be
pursue the collection of provider
overpayments perused timely:
overpayments calculated by the Office of
calculated by the ● Staff identified to review information
Inspector General.
OIG, including those and provide updates. (Complete)
noted above. In 2018, SSA, OIG and Budget and Finance ● Collection letters sent to providers for
agreed upon procedures to address how each FY 17’ and 18’. (In Progress)
● Tracking sheets were created and
department would address calculated provider
monitored for FY17’ and 18’ overpayments. However, due to staff turnover,
collection letters. (In Progress)
the procedures were not fully carried out.
Next Steps:
In 2020, a written standard operating
● Collection letters to be distributed for
procedure has been put in place that
FY 19’ and 20’. (In Progress)
adequately addresses how each department
● Tracking sheets created and monitored
will continue to work together to ensure that for FY 19’ and 20’ collection letters.
provider overpayments are pursued timely. (In Progress)
SSA has identified staff that will specifically ● Individual meetings with providers
address these functions. In addition, monthly scheduled as needed. (In Progress)
updates are scheduled to be provided to OIG
and Budget and Finance beginning in May
2021 to indicate the status of those providers
with overpayments.
311 W. Saratoga Street, Baltimore, MD 21201-3500 | Tel: 1-800-332-6347 | TTY: 1-800-735-2258 | www.dhs.maryland.gov
Page
21

--- Page 33 ---
Foster Care, Adoption, and Guardianship Payments (continued)
Finding 7 – SSA had not established procedures to ensure that adoption assistance payments funded entirely by the State were
suspended when an adopted child was removed from the adoptive home.
OLA DHS SSA Response to Audit Contact Status of Corrective Actions (Actions Projected
Recommendation Person Taken) and Next Steps Completion
Date &
Intermediate
Milestones
We recommend that SSA
a. establish Agreed. Actions Taken: January
procedures to SSA continues to take appropriate action to 1. Began to review and update Policy 2022
ensure
ensure that adoption assistance payments SSW/CW #13-01 by completing the
compliance
funded entirely by the State are suspended following:
with State ● Initiated conversations with Office of
when an adopted child is removed from the
regulations
the Attorney General and Permanency
adoptive home. SSA is taking the following
regarding
Workgroup to review SSA/CW#13-01
adoption actions:
to ensure compliance with State
assistance
Action #1: Review and update as needed Policy COMAR regulations. (Completed)
payments being
SSA/CW#13-01 to ensure compliance with ● Developed an automatic flag in
made for a
State COMAR regulations regarding the CJAMS to stop payments for state
child who has
suspension of adoption assistance payments subsidized adoptions ending in out-of-
been moved
from the when required. home placement immediately at the
onset of the change in the placement
adoptive home
Action #2: Create an automatic flag in CJAMS status: (Completed)
to an out-of-
to stop payments for state subsidized adoptions
home ● Reviewed recommendations from AG
placement ending in out-of-home placement immediately and workgroup and made revisions to
(repeat); and at the onset of the change in the placement policy SSA/CW#13-01. (Completed)
status. Once completed, generate monthly
● Revised policy has been distributed to
reports to allow for the monitoring of the the local departments for comment. (In
suspension of adoption subsidy for any youth Progress)
who have moved from an adoptive home to an
out-of-home placement.
311 W. Saratoga Street, Baltimore, MD 21201-3500 | Tel: 1-800-332-6347 | TTY: 1-800-735-2258 | www.dhs.maryland.gov
Page
22

--- Page 34 ---
Action #3: Update and revise audit response Next Steps
webinars as a means of providing ongoing ● Distribute revised policy SSA CW#13-
technical assistance to LDSS to ensure that 01. (In Progress)
State adoption subsidies are terminated when a ● Update existing webinars to align with
youth is placed in out-of-home care. CJAMS and replace them with e-
learning videos. (Completed)
● ACQI to test cases of children who
reentered care since implementation of
“Flag” to ensure that letters are
generated and payments are stopped
within required timeframes.
(Completed)
b. review Agreed. Actions Taken: April 2022
adoption
SSA is taking appropriate action to review ● Completed the review of all children
assistance
adoption assistance payments made on behalf of that re-entered foster care from an
payments made
children in out-of-home placement, including adoptive home and continue to be in
on behalf of
receipt of an adoption subsidy to
for the aforementioned children, to determine
children in out-
determine if the child continues to the ability to recover any amounts that were
of-home
meet the requirements to continue to
placement, inappropriately paid.
receive the subsidy. If they no longer
including the
Specifically, SSA is reviewing the list of met the requirements, the LDSS was
aforementioned
children currently in foster care who entered notified within two weeks of the
28 children,
completion of the review to take the
after an adoption to confirm that adoption
and recover
necessary action to terminate the
subsidy payments were suspended when
any amounts
subsidy payment. (Completed)
that were appropriate and suspend those that no longer
Next Steps:
inappropriately meet the eligibility criteria for an adoption
● SSA will attempt to recoup any funds
paid (repeat). subsidy. SSA will complete the review by June
as deemed appropriate by April 2022.
30, 2021. For any payments not suspended,
(In Progress)
SSA will make attempts to recoup any funds, as
appropriate, by April 2022.
311 W. Saratoga Street, Baltimore, MD 21201-3500 | Tel: 1-800-332-6347 | TTY: 1-800-735-2258 | www.dhs.maryland.gov
Page
23

--- Page 35 ---
Interagency Agreements
Finding 8 – SSA did not ensure that certain payments made to a State university for three interagency agreements were adequately
supported, were reasonable in relation to the tasks performed, and were made in accordance with the terms of the agreements.
OLA DHS SSA Response to Audit Contact Status of Corrective Actions (Actions Projected
Recommendation Person Taken) and Next Steps Completion
Date &
Intermediate
Milestones
We recommend Agreed. Actions Taken: June 2022
that SSA SSA currently receives timesheets and the DHS ● Developed Standard Operating
implement a Monthly Detail Form for all Interagency Procedures to provide guidance on
process to ensure Agreements (IAA) with the University of contract monitoring requirements
the propriety of Maryland. (Actions #1 & 2). (Complete)
State university ● Updated current Interagency
Both documents provide a detailed summary of Agreement template (Action #3).
invoices. For
charges for all staff funded by the agreement and (Complete)
example, obtain
the specific tasks that each employee worked on ● Notified University Partners in
and review payroll
during the invoice period. SSA is taking the writing regarding the requirement
records or
for informing and obtaining
following actions to implement a process to
restructure the
approval from SSA before changes
ensure the propriety of State university invoices:
agreements to base to key personnel are made.
payment on specific Action 1: By June 2021, develop a SOP and (Action #3) (Complete)
deliverables to be training to ensure that all project officers have Next Steps:
monitored by SSA, clear guidance on contract monitoring
● Monitoring and control tracking tool
or a combination requirements related to reviewing timesheets,
to be developed. (In Progress)
thereof (repeat). tasks completed during the invoice period,
monthly charges for accuracy, and documentation
provided to support charges.
Action 2: By December 2021, review the current
contracting mechanism with the DHS
procurement office and Office of Attorney
311 W. Saratoga Street, Baltimore, MD 21201-3500 | Tel: 1-800-332-6347 | TTY: 1-800-735-2258 | www.dhs.maryland.gov
Page
24

--- Page 36 ---
General to determine any necessary changes to the
contracting process.
Action 3: By June 2022, partner with the Office
of the Attorney General and the Procurement
Office to draft language to be included in the
current IAA agreements requiring SSA approval
of critical changes in personnel. While the IAA
language is being drafted and finalized, SSA is
notifying University contacts in writing that key
personnel changes (i.e. Principal Investigators,
Program Managers/Directors, Research Analysts)
must be approved by SSA prior to changes being
made. These notifications will be distributed in
May 2021.
311 W. Saratoga Street, Baltimore, MD 21201-3500 | Tel: 1-800-332-6347 | TTY: 1-800-735-2258 | www.dhs.maryland.gov
Page
25

--- Page 37 ---
APPENDIX B
June 30, 2022
Mr. Gregory A. Hook
Legislative Auditor
Office of Legislative Audits
The Warehouse at Camden Yards,
351 West Camden Street, Suite 400
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Dear Mr. Hook:
Enclosed is the Maryland Department of Human Services’ (DHS) response to the Office of
Legislative Audits’ (OLA) Follow-up Review of the Department of Human Services
–Social Services Administration related to the June 3, 2021 legislative audit report.
If there are any questions, please contact Inspector General Marva Sutherland at (443) 378-4060 or by
email at marva.sutherland@maryland.gov.
Sincerely,
Lourdes R. Padilla
Secretary
Enclosures:
cc:
Gregory James, Deputy Secretary, Operations
Netsanet Kibret, Deputy Secretary, Programs
Daniel Wait, Acting Deputy Secretary for Administration
Denise Conway, Executive Director, SSA
Stafford Chipungu, Chief Financial Officer
Marva M. Sutherland, Inspector General
Shelly-Ann Dyer, Acting Assistant Inspector General – Audits
Constantine “Coke” Hagepanos, Director, Audit Compliance & Quality Improvement, SSA
311 W. Saratoga Street, Baltimore, MD 21201-3500 | Tel: 1-800-332-6347 | TTY: 1-800-735-2258 |www.dhs.maryland.gov

--- Page 38 ---
Department of Human Services (DHS)
Social Services Administration (SSA)
Special Review Follow-Up Response
Quality Assurance Program
Prior Finding 1
Although the Social Services Administration (SSA) had implemented certain processes to
monitor the administration of child welfare program services by the State’s local
departments of social services (LDSSs), we found they were not necessarily comprehensive
or effective.
Prior Report Recommendation 1
We recommended that SSA establish comprehensive quality assurance processes to ensure its
child welfare programs are effectively and properly administered by the LDSSs. Specifically,
we recommended that SSA modify its existing processes to ensure that they provide
a. comprehensive written procedures for monitoring program services and functions to ensure
compliance with applicable laws, regulations, and policies; appropriate and timely
recordkeeping; and the maintenance of supporting documentation relating to services and
functions performed (repeat); and
b. a quality assurance case review process at each LDSS that addresses all critical services and
functions performed by the LDSSs (repeat).
Status – In Progress
DHS Response: The Department concurs with OLA’s assessment of the status of prior finding.
a) SSA initially developed a QA Desk Guide that provided written procedures for
completing the Local QA process. Subsequently, SSA has implemented Standard
Operating Procedures related to overall monitoring and is developing a more
comprehensive set of written procedures related to implementing the SOP. We
acknowledge this is an ongoing process and therefore, additional steps must be taken to
improve compliance, efficiency, and effectiveness to fully address OLA’s
recommendations. Consistent with our planned efforts, SSA’s more comprehensive
written procedures will provide a specific linkage between the SOP and the Local QA
process, consistent with the examples cited in the OLA assessment.
b) In December 2021, SSA implemented the initial Local Quality Assurance (QA) process.
The initial results were collected in February 2022. The results were accumulated and
distributed to the LDSS for corrective actions. This included follow-up efforts with the
LDSS to address missing supporting documentation in April 2022.
1

--- Page 39 ---
The second round of the Local QA process was implemented in March 2022, and this
round of reviews was completed on May 25, 2022. SSA expects to receive the results of
the reviews from the University of Maryland School of Social Work in June 2022.
SSA continues to enhance the Local QA process based on local feedback, policy updates,
and CJAMS enhancements.
Monitoring Compliance with Foster Care Requirements
Prior Finding 2
SSA had not established effective monitoring of the LDSSs to ensure that foster children
were placed in the least restrictive environment and received required services.
Prior Report Recommendation 2
We recommended that SSA monitor the LDSSs to ensure compliance with foster care
requirements. Specifically, we recommended that SSA ensure
a. the applicable legal documentation is included in each foster child’s case record in the
statewide case management system (repeat);
b. the LDSSs place children in the least restrictive environment and document attempts to place
the child with a relative (repeat); and
c. compliance with medical, dental, and education requirements by reviewing applicable
documentation (repeat).
Status – In Progress
DHS Response: The Department concurs with OLA’s assessment of the status of prior finding.
a) The Local QA process established in response to Finding 1 is designed to help ensure that
foster children’s case records in CJAMS include applicable legal documentation.
Additionally, SSA’s Title IV-E Eligibility Unit continues to complete a 100% review of
all foster care cases to confirm that supporting legal documentation is contained in
CJAMS (which is also among the corrective actions being taken related to Finding 5).
This review is expected to be completed by the end of June 2022, as previously
scheduled. SSA’s Title IV-E Unit is concurrently monitoring Title IV-E eligibility
determinations and redeterminations on an ongoing basis, which includes a review to
ensure applicable legal documents are properly included in foster children’s case records.
Issues and discrepancies noted in each of these reviews are being followed up with the
appropriate LDSS to ensure corrective actions are taken. Actions are also being taken for
2

--- Page 40 ---
any areas noted where enhancements to the processes can be made for efficiencies or to
provide better monitoring and oversight.
b) The Local QA process established in response to Finding 1 is designed to help ensure that
foster children’s case records in CJAMS include applicable evidence of the LDSSs’
efforts to place children in the least restrictive environment.
In accordance with the Child Welfare Documentation Guide, caseworkers have been
instructed to document that each child in foster care is placed in the least restrictive
environment as part of their routine assessments.
SSA is currently working with MD THINK to create a monitoring report of least
restrictive placements in the CJAMS system. SSA and MD THINK are working to make
the least restrictive environment fields mandatory. Until the enhancements are made to
CJAMS, SSA continues to use the Local QA process to monitor compliance.
Issues and discrepancies noted in each of these reviews are being followed up with the
appropriate LDSS to ensure corrective actions are taken. Actions are also being taken for
any areas noted where enhancements to the processes can be made for efficiencies or to
provide better monitoring and oversight.
c) Since October 2021, SSA has been monitoring compliance with education requirements
on a weekly basis, with successful results. The State achieved compliance in December
2021 and is currently exceeding compliance standards for education requirements. This
monitoring effort includes follow-up with the LDSS to ensure instances of non-
compliance are resolved.
Regarding medical requirements, as of May 2022, of the 254 cases cited by OLA for
outdated annual health records, updates in CJAMS showed that annual health exams have
been completed for 159 of these youth. SSA is currently working with the LDSS to
address the remaining 95 outstanding cases in accordance with the Local Operations and
Support SOP process.
For the 30 youth identified as having no documented annual health exam since 2019,
SSA and the LDSS reviewed these cases, and noted that all 30 youth have received an
annual medical exam. SSA is continuing to monitor compliance for medical
requirements, and these efforts are resulting in increased documentation.
This noted improvement is due to several factors. First, SSA was aware of needed
enhancements in CJAMS and the data reporting application (QLIK) for medical and
dental appointments for foster youth. In response to these needed actions, SSA partnered
with MD THINK to implement enhancements in March 2022 that led to the development
of a more accurate Foster Care Milestone report. Following these enhancements, the
3

--- Page 41 ---
LDSS were provided one month to correct the data before being issued a notification of
non-compliance in accordance with the Local Operations Support and Assistance to the
LDSS SOP. The established monitoring process includes follow-up with the LDSS to
ensure instances of non-compliance are resolved. In May 2022, the first non-compliance
notifications were issued to ensure corrective actions are taken to update these records or
have the children seen by health service providers. LDSS are provided one month after
initial notification to comply before additional escalation.
Additionally, SSA was informed by the LDSS of insurance payment barriers related to
having children seen within mandated timeframes. For instance, insurance companies
were often refusing to reimburse medical providers if 365 days had not elapsed since the
previous routine medical exam. Since being made aware of this barrier, information has
been provided to the LDSS regarding insurance codes to help ensure children are seen
within the mandated timeframes. In collaboration with the DHS Child Welfare Medical
Director, SSA is working to align practice, policy, and regulation with standard medical
and insurance practices.
Finally, additional technical assistance (“TA”) has been provided to the LDSS by SSA’s
ACQI and Office of Programs and Operations, regarding proper documentation of all
medical appointments. These TA sessions are especially important where application
enhancements are introduced and/or inconsistent results are noted between LDSS.
Through these TA sessions, SSA has learned that local child welfare staff are ensuring
that youth receive timely medical services. For older youth who refuse medical services,
staff are documenting this refusal and educating the youth about the importance of
managing their own health care.
Documentation of dental services in CJAMS as reported through the QLIK application is
currently being enhanced. These enhancements will improve SSA’s ability to collect
data and create reports for better monitoring.
Child Protective Services
Prior Finding 3
SSA’s monitoring process was not effective for both ensuring the timeliness of child abuse
and neglect investigations and for the required assessments of substance-exposed newborns
conducted by the LDSSs.
Prior Report Recommendation 3
We recommended that SSA
4

--- Page 42 ---
a. establish effective procedures to ensure that the LDSSs conduct and complete investigations
of allegations of child abuse and neglect and safety and risk assessments of controlled
substance-exposed newborns in a timely manner, as required by State law and regulations
(repeat); and
b. enhance the accuracy and completeness of system reports to ensure they can be reliably used
to monitor compliance with these requirements (repeat).
Status – In Progress
DHS Response: The Department concurs with OLA’s assessment of the status of prior finding.
a) SSA is continuing its work with MD THINK to address ongoing system enhancements in
both the CJAMS application and the related QLIK application to monitor timely CPS
investigation and assessment of substance-exposed newborns. CPS initial face to face
contacts and SEN case reports are currently being tested for validity. Upon completion
of the CPS Milestone enhancements, the initial face to face contact will be included in the
regular SOP notification process. CJAMS and QLIK reports related to timely closure of
investigations in child abuse and neglect cases are functioning and is currently being used
by SSA to monitor compliance.
SSA reviews LDSS internal SEN tracking methods and utilizes these to complete
ongoing monitoring as an interim method pending QLIK report finalization.
In addition to the monitoring reports being worked on, other efforts to monitor the LDSS
efforts in these critical areas have been put in place. Technical Assistance (“TA”)
sessions are regularly provided by ACQI and Office of Program staff to monitor
consistent and timely delivery of required services. These TA sessions are especially
important where application enhancements are introduced and/or inconsistent results are
noted between LDSS. Statewide TA sessions began May 2022 and are provided, at
minimum, on a weekly basis. Going forward, LDSS may request individual sessions with
ACQI and Office of Program staff.
Prior to the implementation of the TA group sessions, ACQI completed 4 rounds of
“One-on-One” meetings with all 24 LDSS in September, October and December of 2021
and in February 2022. During these meetings, the LDSS were asked to present ACQI
and SSA Leadership with their current monitoring procedures for ensuring the timely
assessment and completion of substance exposed newborn cases. During these meetings,
the LDSS were able to describe differing but robust monitoring practices that meet their
responsibilities to assess these children in a timely manner. Often, the quality and
timeliness of the initial contact efforts by LDSS staff is based on close relationships with
the hospitals and other related healthcare providers which are actively nurtured by the
LDSS staff.
5

--- Page 43 ---
b) SSA continues to work with MD THINK to develop new functionality and enhance the
current features of CJAMS and related QLIK applications to deliver accurate and reliable
data for monitoring of LDSS compliance. This is an ongoing effort as policy and practice
changes are implemented throughout the State.
6

--- Page 44 ---
A T
UDIT EAM
Edward A. Rubenstein, CPA
Audit Manager
Edward J. Welsh, CFE
Menachem Katz, CPA
Senior Auditors