Title: Morgan State University
Date: 01/11/2019
Type: Fiscal Compliance
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5c3ce6eaa1ce580d90cf64a6
Extracted: 2025-06-18T22:22:17.868216
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Audit Report
Morgan State University
September 2022
Public Notice
In compliance with the requirements of the State Government Article Section
2-1224(i), of the Annotated Code of Maryland, the Office of Legislative
Audits has redacted cybersecurity findings and related auditee responses
from this public report.
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Senator Clarence K. Lam, M.D. (Senate Chair) Delegate Mark S. Chang (House Chair)
Senator Malcolm L. Augustine Delegate Steven J. Arentz
Senator Adelaide C. Eckardt Delegate Nicholas P. Charles II
Senator George C. Edwards Delegate Andrea Fletcher Harrison
Senator Katie Fry Hester Delegate Trent M. Kittleman
Senator Cheryl C. Kagan Delegate Carol L. Krimm
Senator Benjamin F. Kramer Delegate David Moon
Senator Cory V. McCray Delegate Julie Palakovich Carr
Senator Justin D. Ready Delegate Elizabeth G. Proctor
Senator Craig J. Zucker Delegate Geraldine Valentino-Smith
To Obtain Further Information
Office of Legislative Audits
The Warehouse at Camden Yards
351 West Camden Street, Suite 400
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Phone: 410-946-5900
Maryland Relay: 711
TTY: 410-946-5401 ꞏ 301-970-5401
E-mail: OLAWebmaster@ola.state.md.us
Website: www.ola.state.md.us
To Report Fraud
The Office of Legislative Audits operates a Fraud Hotline to report fraud, waste, or abuse involving State
of Maryland government resources. Reports of fraud, waste, or abuse may be communicated anonymously
by a toll-free call to 1-877-FRAUD-11, by mail to the Fraud Hotline, c/o Office of Legislative Audits, or
through the Office’s website.
Nondiscrimination Statement
The Department of Legislative Services does not discriminate on the basis of age, ancestry, color, creed,
marital status, national origin, race, religion, gender, gender identity, sexual orientation, or disability in the
admission or access to its programs, services, or activities. The Department’s Information Officer has been
designated to coordinate compliance with the nondiscrimination requirements contained in Section 35.107
of the United States Department of Justice Regulations. Requests for assistance should be directed to the
Information Officer at 410-946-5400 or 410-970-5400.

--- Page 3 ---
September 22, 2022
Senator Clarence K. Lam, M.D., Senate Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Delegate Mark S. Chang, House Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Members of Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Annapolis, Maryland
Ladies and Gentlemen:
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of Morgan State University (MSU)
for the period beginning January 4, 2017 and ending April 30, 2021. MSU
operates under a Board of Regents and offers baccalaureate, masters, and doctoral
degree programs. MSU has been officially designated by State law as Maryland’s
preeminent public urban research university.
Our audit disclosed that MSU did not adequately monitor the vendor it used for
processing student refunds, including verification that refunds were properly
disbursed and undeliverable refunds were returned to MSU. Student refunds
totaled $60.5 million during calendar years 2019 and 2020. We also noted that
adjustments made to room and board charges on student accounts were not
independently verified for propriety. Furthermore, supervisory reviews of
changes to initial student residency determinations were not documented, not all
changes to residency status were subject to review, and changes reviewed were
not documented or independent. Verifying proper residency status is critical to
ensuring that students are charged the correct tuition amount.
Our audit also disclosed that MSU did not independently review deferred
payment plans. Between February 7, 2017 and July 1, 2021, $39.6 million was
deferred by students through payment plans. Also, MSU did not periodically
ensure that delinquent student accounts were referred to the State’s Central
Collection Unit within the required time period.
We also found that MSU did not comprehensively review honors scholarship

--- Page 4 ---
awards for propriety, and did not take required action, such as discontinuing the
scholarship, when students failed to earn or maintain the required grade point
average for scholarship eligibility.
Furthermore, MSU did not procure certain goods and services in accordance with
its policies and procedures, and did not ensure related goods and services were
received and amounts invoiced were proper. For example, required Board of
Public Works approval was not obtained for certain services received from one
vendor with payments totaling $7.8 million through April 2021.
Our audit also disclosed certain risks in MSU’s information systems. However in
accordance with the State Government Article, Section 2-1224(i) of the
Annotated Code of Maryland, we have redacted these findings from this audit
report. Specifically, State law requires the Office of Legislative Audits to redact
cybersecurity findings in a manner consistent with auditing best practices before
the report is made available to the public. The term “cybersecurity” is defined in
the State Finance and Procurement Article, Section 3A-301(b), and using our
professional judgment we have determined that the redacted findings falls under
the referenced definition. The specifics of the cybersecurity findings were
previously communicated to MSU as well as those parties responsible for acting
on our recommendations.
Based on our current audit assessment of significance and risk to our audit
objectives, our audit included a review to determine the status of 15 of the 17
findings contained in our preceding audit report. For the non-cybersecurity-
related findings we determined that MSU satisfactorily addressed 8 of those 12
findings. The remaining 4 findings are repeated in the report.
MSU’s response to this audit is included as an appendix to this report. In
accordance with State law, we have reviewed the response and, while MSU
generally agrees with the recommendations in this report, we identified certain
instances in which statements in the response conflict with or disagree with the
report findings. In each instance, we reviewed and reassessed our audit
documentation, and reaffirmed the validity of our finding. In accordance with
generally accepted government auditing standards, we have included “auditor’s
comments” within MSU’s response to explain our position. Finally, although we
concluded that MSU generally agreed with our recommendations, there are other
aspects of MSU’s response which will require further clarification, but we do not
anticipate that these will require the Committee’s attention to resolve. Consistent
with the requirements of State law, we have redacted the elements of MSU’s
response related to cybersecurity audit findings.
2

--- Page 5 ---
We wish to acknowledge the cooperation extended to us during the audit by
MSU. We also wish to acknowledge MSU’s willingness to address the audit
issues and implement appropriate corrective actions.
Respectfully submitted,
Gregory A. Hook, CPA
Legislative Auditor
3

--- Page 6 ---
4

--- Page 7 ---
Table of Contents
Background Information 7
Agency Responsibilities 7
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report 7
Findings and Recommendations 10
Student Accounts Receivable
* Finding 1 – Morgan State University (MSU) did not adequately monitor 10
the vendor responsible for disbursing student refunds to ensure the
refunds were properly issued and unissued refunds were returned.
* Finding 2 – MSU did not independently verify the propriety of adjustments 11
to student room and board charges, certain of which were not
processed in accordance with MSU policy.
* Finding 3 – Reviews of changes to student residency status were either not 12
documented or not independent; and certain changes were not subject
to review because system output reports used for this purpose were
incomplete.
Finding 4 – MSU did not adequately review deferred payment plan 13
agreements to ensure they were proper.
Finding 5 – MSU did not periodically ensure that all eligible delinquent 14
accounts were referred to the State’s Central Collection Unit
within the required time period.
Financial Aid and Scholarships
Finding 6 – MSU did not conduct comprehensive reviews of honors 15
scholarship awards to ensure the awards were proper, and did not take
required action when students did not maintain their eligibility. As a
result, certain awards were overstated or issued to ineligible students.
* Denotes item repeated in full or part from preceding audit report
5

--- Page 8 ---
Contracts and Disbursements
 Finding 7 – MSU did not procure certain goods and services in accordance 18
with its policies and procedures, and did not ensure related goods and
services were received and amounts invoiced were proper.
Information Systems Security and Control
Finding 8 – Redacted cybersecurity-related finding 21
Finding 9 – Redacted cybersecurity-related finding 21
Finding 10 – Redacted cybersecurity-related finding 21
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology 22
Agency Response Appendix
* Denotes item repeated in full or part from preceding audit report
6

--- Page 9 ---
Background Information
Agency Responsibilities
Morgan State University (MSU), which is the State’s public urban research
university, offers baccalaureate, masters, and doctoral programs. MSU is
governed by a Board of Regents appointed by the Governor with the advice and
consent of the Maryland Senate. Based on MSU’s records, its student population
for the Fall 2021 semester totaled 8,469, including 7,034 undergraduate students
and 1,435 graduate students. MSU’s budget is funded by unrestricted revenues,
such as tuition and fees, a State general fund appropriation, and restricted
revenues, such as federal grants and contracts. According to the State’s records,
MSU revenues for fiscal year 2021 totaled approximately $274.7 million,
including a State general fund appropriation of approximately $107.1 million.
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Reports
Based on our current assessment of significance and risk relative to our audit
objectives, our audit included a review to determine the status of 15 of the 17
findings contained in our preceding audit report dated January 11, 2019. As
disclosed in Figure 1, for the non-cybersecurity-related findings, we determined
that MSU satisfactorily addressed 8 of those 12 findings. The remaining 4
findings are repeated in this report.
7

--- Page 10 ---
Figure 1
Status of Preceding Findings
Preceding Implementation
Finding Description
Finding Status
Reviews of financial aid awards and scholarships were
Finding 1 not adequately performed to ensure their propriety and Not repeated
were not sufficiently documented.
MSU did not always perform monthly reconciliation of
federally funded financial aid records and, consequently,
Finding 2 Not repeated
had not recovered $1.6 million in eligible aid awards
from the United States Department of Education.
Eligibility requirements for three honors scholarships
Finding 3 Not repeated
were not consistent with MSU Board of Regents policy.
MSU had not established a maximum amount,
consistent with State law, of unpaid student charges that
can be carried forward from one semester to the next,
Finding 4 did not comply with established policies regarding Not repeated
student deferred payment plans, and permitted students
with delinquent balances to register for classes or
receive transcripts and diplomas.
Adjustments to student room and board charges were
not subject to an independent review and approval Repeated
Finding 5
process to ensure accuracy and proper posting to student (Current Finding 2)
records.
MSU did not adequately monitor the vendor that was
responsible for disbursing student refunds to ensure that Repeated
Finding 6 the vendor properly issued all refunds and that sensitive (Current Finding
student information retained by the vendor was properly 1)1
safeguarded.
Documented supervisory reviews of student residency
Repeated
Finding 7 determinations were not performed or not adequately
(Current Finding 3)
performed in certain instances.
MSU did not maintain current, complete, and accurate
Not repeated
grant records, and did not pursue collection of
Finding 8 (Not followed up
outstanding grant receivables as required.
on)
MSU did not properly procure and monitor a five-year
$35.1 million food services contract. Based on the
Finding 9 Not repeated
deficiencies we noted, MSU should recover vendor
payments totaling $2.2 million.
1 Specific information on the current status of the cybersecurity-related portion of this finding,
related to safeguarding sensitive student information, has been redacted from this publicly
available audit report in accordance with State Government Article, Section 2-1224(i) of the
Annotated Code of Maryland.
8

--- Page 11 ---
Figure 1
Status of Preceding Findings
Preceding Implementation
Finding Description
Finding Status
MSU procured two contracts totaling approximately
$600,000 to renovate a food service area without
Repeated (Current
Finding 10 competitive procurements, and did not adequately
Finding 7)
monitor two housekeeping contracts with one vendor
totaling $1.3 million.
MSU could not document that it received and reviewed
critical documentation to help monitor capital
Finding 11 Not repeated
construction projects, and did not adjust contractor
performance bonds when contract values increased.
MSU did not adequately control receipts at four
Finding 12 locations which processed cash and check collections Not repeated
totaling $24.4 million in fiscal year 2016.
MSU did not adequately monitor corporate purchasing
card purchases and did not comply with the
Finding 13 requirements of the Comptroller of Maryland’s Not repeated
Corporate Purchasing Card Policy and Procedures
Manual.
MSU did not adequately account for and control its Not repeated (Not
Finding 14
equipment inventory. followed up on)
Sensitive personally identifiable information
Finding 15 maintained by MSU was stored without adequate Status Redacted2
safeguards.
MSU did not adequately monitor user access to certain
automated systems. As a result, critical functions were
Finding 16 assigned to employees who did not need the access for Status Redacted2
their job duties and access was not terminated timely
when employees left State service.
MSU lacked intrusion detection prevention system
Finding 17 coverage for encrypted traffic entering the MSU Status Redacted2
network.
2 Specific information on the current status of cybersecurity-related findings 15 through 17
included in the preceding audit report has been redacted from this publicly available audit report
in accordance with State Government Article, Section 2-1224(i) of the Annotated Code of
Maryland.
9

--- Page 12 ---
Findings and Recommendations
Student Accounts Receivable
Confidentiality Notice – Elements of Finding 1 have been deemed to be
cybersecurity-related and have been redacted in this publicly available report.
Finding 1
MSU did not adequately monitor the vendor responsible for disbursing
student refunds to ensure the refunds were properly issued and unissued
refunds were returned.
Analysis
MSU did not adequately monitor the vendor responsible for disbursing student
refunds to ensure the refunds were properly issued and unissued refunds were
returned. Students are eligible for a refund when account credits (such as
payments and financial aid awards) exceed charges (such as tuition, fees, and
housing). MSU calculates the amount to be refunded and transfers funds weekly
to a vendor to issue the refunds to the students. Any refunds that the vendor is
unable to distribute (for example, if the student moved and could not be located or
refund checks were not deposited) must be returned to MSU. According to MSU
records, student refunds totaled approximately $60.5 million during calendar
years 2019 and 2020. According to the vendor’s records, between January 1,
2019 and August 30, 2021, approximately $4.1 million in refunds were returned
to MSU as undeliverable.
 Although the vendor periodically provided MSU with an online report of
refunds issued to students, MSU did not have a process to independently
verify that the refunds were properly disbursed. MSU also did not have an
adequate process to ensure that undelivered or uncashed refunds were returned
to MSU and properly credited to student accounts. Specifically, there was no
review to ensure the vendor returned the appropriate funds, and the review to
ensure the undeposited refunds were properly credited to the student account
was not independent as it was performed by the same employee who initially
recorded the credits. In this regard, our limited testing of credits found
undetected incorrect postings, which MSU advised us were due to clerical
errors. Specifically, our test of ten refunds totaling approximately $41,800
processed during calendar years 2019 and 2020, including six that were
ultimately returned to MSU, disclosed that three returned refunds totaling
$6,800 were posted to the wrong student accounts.3
3 Our selection was based on significant refunds and refund returns that appeared to have been
credited to an incorrect account (for example, the account was never designated as due the
refund).
10

--- Page 13 ---
 Redacted cybersecurity-related finding.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that MSU
a. perform independent reviews to ensure the vendor properly issued
refunds to students and returned any amounts not disbursed (repeat);
b. establish an independent review process to ensure that returned refunds
are properly credited to student accounts, and correct the recording
discrepancies noted in this finding; and
c. redacted cybersecurity-related recommendation.
Finding 2
MSU did not independently verify the propriety of adjustments to student
room and board charges, certain of which were not processed in accordance
with MSU policy.
Analysis
MSU did not independently verify the propriety of adjustments to student room
and board charges, certain of which were not processed in accordance with MSU
policy. According to its records, between January 2019 and April 2021, MSU
processed adjustments reducing room and board charges by approximately $16.9
million.
 Although MSU advised us that an employee verified that all adjustments
recorded in student accounts had been reviewed and approved by management
personnel prior to recording, this employee could also process adjustments,
and therefore was not independent. As a result, there was a lack of assurance
that adjustments processed were accurate and valid, and complied with MSU
policy.
 Certain adjustments were not processed in accordance with MSU policy.
Specifically, our test of 10 significant account adjustments that collectively
reduced room and board charges by $46,470, and which MSU advised had
been subject to the aforementioned supervisory review, disclosed that three
adjustments totaling $13,150 were not processed in accordance with MSU
policy. Specifically, based on the timing of the adjustment and MSU’s policy
for when an adjustment must be requested by a student, the applicable three
students were not eligible for a reduction in their respective account balance.
For example, an adjustment to one student’s account of approximately $4,900
relating to the Spring 2020 semester was processed in February 2021. MSU’s
policy indicates that a student who submits a cancellation request after the
11

--- Page 14 ---
midterms of the semester to which the cancellation applies will not receive a
refund. For 2 of the 3 adjustments, the required room and board cancellation
form was not on file to support the adjustment. MSU advised there were
extenuating circumstances that prompted the need to process these
adjustments after the time period allowed. However, MSU did not have
written justification and supervisory approval for doing so.
Similar conditions regarding the lack of independent verification of adjustments
were commented upon in our preceding audit report.
Recommendation 2
We recommend that MSU
a. ensure that adjustments to student room and board charges are properly
supported and subject to an effective independent supervisory review for
propriety after being recorded in MSU’s automated records (repeat),
b. ensure that justification for any deviation from its policy is documented
and approved by supervisory personnel, and
c. review the aforementioned adjustments and take appropriate action as
necessary.
Finding 3
Reviews of changes to student residency status were either not documented
or not independent; and certain changes were not subject to review because
system output reports used for this purpose were incomplete.
Analysis
Supervisory reviews of changes to initial student residency status determinations
were not documented or were not independent; and not all residency changes
were subject to review because system output reports used for this purpose were
incomplete. Students are classified as in-state or out-of-state based on an
evaluation of documentation to support their address at the time of enrollment.
The student must request a change of residency and submit supporting
documentation for any changes to the initial residency status. We were advised
by MSU management that on a monthly basis these changes are reviewed for
propriety on a test basis; however, we determined that the reviews were not
documented or were not independent.
Furthermore, we noted that output reports that MSU advised were used to verify
residency changes to in-State status did not include all changes made. According
to output reports provided by MSU for the period January 2019 to April 2021,
there were 1,105 changes made by its Admissions Office and 52 made by the
12

--- Page 15 ---
Registrar’s Office. However, these reports did not include certain types of change
transactions, such as those classified as first time changes. Although we noted
that these changes were included on other reports of all changes made to student
accounts, they were not subject to the aforementioned review, and because they
were commingled with all changes, we could not readily determine how many
such changes had been made. Our testing did not disclose any improper residency
status changes.
MSU’s Board of Regents Policy on Student Residency Classification for
Admission and Tuition Purposes states that a student requesting initial in-state
residency status must provide evidence of residency in the State for at least the
last twelve consecutive months and, for a change in residency status, must submit
an MSU Petition for Change in Classification for Tuition Purposes along with
supporting evidence that provides clear and convincing evidence of his or her
residency status, such as a valid Maryland driver’s license.
We believe that an accurate student residency status determination is critical
because of the significant differences between resident and nonresident tuition
rates. For example, MSU’s full-time undergraduate tuition and fee charges for the
Spring 2021 semester totaled $3,814 for Maryland residents and $9,050 for non-
Maryland residents. Similar conditions regarding inadequate controls over
changes to student residency status were commented upon in our three preceding
audit reports. In response to the prior audit report finding, MSU implemented the
aforementioned monthly change review process; however, as noted above, the
process was not sufficiently comprehensive to provide the recommended and
necessary corrective action.
Recommendation 3
We recommend that MSU ensure that independent documented supervisory
reviews of student residency changes are performed using output reports
that include all changes made (repeat).
Finding 4
MSU did not adequately review deferred payment plan agreements to ensure
they were proper.
Analysis
MSU did not adequately review deferred payment plan agreements to ensure they
were proper. We tested 12 large agreements totaling approximately $53,900
processed between fiscal years 2019 and 2021. Our test disclosed that 11
agreements totaling $38,700 were reviewed by an employee who had the ability
13

--- Page 16 ---
to record deferred payment plans in MSU’s automated records and therefore was
not independent. In addition, MSU did not use available system output reports of
recorded agreements to ensure all agreements were subject to a review and had
not established a maximum amount that would be allowed to be rolled into a
subsequent semester without a deferred payment plan.
According to MSU records, $39.6 million was deferred by students through
payment plans between February 7, 2017 and July 1, 2021. The State’s Central
Collection Unit (CCU) has authorized MSU to award deferred payment
agreements and to roll over “reasonable” charges4 from semester to semester as
long as the student is attending and passing classes. State law, which applies to
all public institutions of higher learning, only allows balances of $250 or less to
be carried forward to the next semester without a payment plan. MSU advised us
that it deems the $250 threshold to be unreasonably low and might seek
clarification of its authority (for example, future legislation) to carry over larger
dollar amounts.
Recommendation 4
We recommend MSU
a. perform documented independent supervisory reviews of all deferred
payment plan agreements using output reports of recorded plans, and
b. establish the maximum amount of a student’s account balance that is
allowed to be rolled into a subsequent semester without a deferred
payment plan consistent with State law.
Finding 5
MSU did not periodically ensure that all eligible delinquent accounts were
referred to CCU within the required time period.
Analysis
MSU did not periodically review student accounts to ensure that all eligible
delinquent accounts were referred to the CCU within the required time period,
and our testing disclosed numerous accounts for which referral was made as much
as 10 months late and then only after our inquiry. As of April 2021, there were
974 student accounts with unpaid balances totaling approximately $2 million from
the Summer 2020 semester and earlier, including approximately $774,000 and
$476,000 from the Fall 2019 and Spring 2019 semesters, respectively.
4 CCU’s authorization to MSU does not define “reasonable” charges.
14

--- Page 17 ---
Our test of 11 of the 974 accounts5 totaling $129,700, disclosed that each of the
11 had not been referred to CCU within the period established by CCU
regulations, as modified for MSU. After our inquiries, MSU referred to CCU 9 of
the accounts with balances totaling $101,000 for which 2 to 10 months had
elapsed since the date the accounts were eligible for transfer.6 The remaining 2
accounts with balances totaling $28,600 had not been referred as of October 18,
2021, which was 8 and 12 months after the date the respective account could have
been transferred.
CCU regulations, as amended for MSU, generally require delinquent accounts for
non-enrolled students be sent to CCU two semesters after the charges were
incurred. For example, Spring 2019 charges should be referred to CCU after the
Spring 2020 semester.
Recommendation 5
We recommend that MSU establish procedures to periodically review
student accounts to ensure that all eligible delinquent accounts are referred
to CCU in accordance with CCU regulations as amended for MSU, including
the two delinquent accounts noted above.
Financial Aid and Scholarships
Finding 6
MSU did not conduct comprehensive reviews of honors scholarship awards
to ensure the awards were proper, and did not take required action when
students did not maintain their eligibility. As a result, certain awards were
overstated or issued to ineligible students.
Analysis
MSU did not conduct comprehensive reviews of honors scholarship awards to
ensure the awards were proper, and did not take required action when students did
not maintain eligibility for these scholarships. As a result, we found that certain
awards were overstated or issued to ineligible students. According to MSU
records, honors scholarships awarded to students during the Fall and Spring
semesters from 2017 through 2021 totaled approximately $21.3 million.
5 We selected accounts of students not currently enrolled, but with significant account balances
that had been outstanding for an extended period of time.
6 Under normal conditions, certain test items would have been eligible for submission to CCU in
June 2020. In calculating the delay, we used October 2020 because CCU was not actively
collecting debt between April and October 2020 due to the COVID-19 pandemic.
15

--- Page 18 ---
 MSU’s review process of scholarship awards did not include a verification to
supporting documentation such as student transcripts and test scores. In
addition, MSU’s review did not identify certain improper awards, such as
scholarship amounts that were overstated or awards to ineligible students. For
example, our test of six honors scholarships7 totaling approximately $81,800
awarded during fiscal years 2019 or 2021 disclosed that one award totaling
$27,900 exceeded the $10,000 maximum annual award limit by $17,900. In
addition, two awards totaling $55,400, including the aforementioned award of
$27,900, were made to students who were not eligible; for example, based on
their grade point average. As of the time of our review in June 2021, these
two students had received honors scholarships totaling $106,800 while
attending MSU.
 MSU did not always cancel a student’s award, as required by its policy, when
the student did not earn or maintain the grade point average required for
continued eligibility. Our test of the aforementioned six awards disclosed that
the remaining four students who were initially deemed eligible by MSU
subsequently became ineligible based on their grade point averages.
However, MSU did not discontinue these scholarships, and these students
received $51,800 after failing to earn or maintain the grade point average
required for eligibility. For example, one student became ineligible in the Fall
2018 semester and continued to receive scholarships for five additional
semesters while ineligible.
Recommendation 6
We recommend that MSU
a. conduct comprehensive reviews to supporting documentation of initial
honors scholarship awards to ensure their propriety,
b. take the action required by its policy when a student is no longer eligible
for an honors scholarship, and
c. review the scholarships noted in our finding and take any appropriate
action warranted.
Contracts and Disbursements
Background
MSU established procurement policies and procedures that have been approved
by its Board of Regents and by the Board of Public Works (BPW). According to
7 Our selection was made from students who received awards and appeared to have high school or
MSU GPAs, or standardized test scores lower than those of most other students in MSU’s
records.
16

--- Page 19 ---
State and MSU records, during our audit period, 6,215 purchase orders totaling
$217.5 million were issued (excluding capital construction). We judgmentally
selected and reviewed the procurements of seven contracts collectively valued at
$99.7 million, and security guard services with payments totaling approximately
$7.8 million as of April 2021 that we found MSU obtained from an eighth vendor
using multiple purchase orders and change orders over the course of five years
rather than one multi-year contract (see figure 2). We also reviewed MSU’s
contract monitoring and disbursements processes for seven of these contracts that
had expenditures totaling $10.1 million as of April 2021.
Figure 2
Summary of Procurements Reviewed
Description Total Total Payments as
Type of
Item of Goods or Contract of April 2021
Procurement
Services Value
Dining Competitive Sealed
1 $97,397,000 $332,382
Services Proposal
Interpretation Competitive Sealed
2 288,000 582,253
Services Bid
Intergovernmental
Computer Cooperative
3 205,869 205,869
Software Purchasing
Agreement (ICPA)
Research
4 Sole Source 162,756 162,756
Equipment
Computer
State-wide Master
5 Hardware and 601,000 250,000
Contract
Installation
Student
6 Emergency 890,000 890,000
Housing
Computer
7 ICPA 194,258 194,258
Software
Security No Competitive No Multiyear
8 7,847,348
Guards Procurement Contract
Total $99,738,883 $10,464,866
Source: MSU Procurement Records
17

--- Page 20 ---
Finding 7
MSU did not procure certain goods and services in accordance with its
policies and procedures, and did not ensure related goods and services were
received and amounts invoiced were proper.
Analysis
MSU did not procure goods and services for five of the eight procurements tested
in accordance with its policies and procedures, and did not always ensure related
goods and services were received and amounts invoiced were proper.
Security Guard Services
MSU did not competitively procure or obtain Board of Public Works (BPW)
approval for security guard services obtained from one vendor during the period
from November 2016 through June 2021. Specifically, instead of issuing a
competitively procured single multi-year contract for these services, MSU
issued six individual purchase orders totaling $6.5 million, five of which
exceeded the $1 million threshold requiring BPW approval (after six change
orders totaling $2.2 million).
According to MSU’s records, these services were originally obtained through an
emergency procurement, and then under an Intergovernmental Cooperative
Purchasing Agreement (ICPA). However, MSU could not document that it
procured the services under the ICPA and documentation prepared by the ICPA
agency indicated MSU was not eligible to participate in that ICPA. We also
noted that MSU did not obtain documentation, such as daily logs of hours and
locations worked, to support vendor billings. We believe that given the
historically high cost of the annual services, a competitive procurement should
be have been conducted, a formal comprehensive contract executed, and BPW
approval obtained, as appropriate. Our position was confirmed by BPW’s
procurement officer.
Computer Hardware and Installation
MSU procured computer hardware and installation services under a Department
of Information Technology (DoIT) master contract without soliciting more than
one of the available pre-qualified vendors as required, and without establishing
a separate detailed written contract. MSU management advised us that the
vendor selected had been used on other MSU projects, and they believed it was
the best qualified vendor. We also noted that the resultant sales quote and
purchase order did not provide sufficient detail to enable MSU to adequately
monitor the products and services received (such as, a breakdown of the costs of
each product and service to be provided, when payments were to be made, or
18

--- Page 21 ---
project milestones). MSU also could not document the delivery of certain billed
equipment totaling $250,000.
Intergovernmental Cooperative Purchasing Agreements
MSU did not document that its use of an ICPA for two procurements totaling
approximately $400,100 was in the best interest of MSU, and that the ICPA
contract originally had been awarded using a proper procurement process, such
a negotiated procurement, as required by MSU’s procurement policies and
procedures for ICPAs. In addition, MSU did not ensure its contract terms, such
as prices and amounts, were consistent with the ICPA, and for one contract did
not solicit quotes from all vendors available through the ICPA.
Sign Language Interpretation Services
MSU did not verify that interpreters provided the services invoiced, and instead
assumed the service was provided unless a student reported otherwise. In
addition, MSU paid for services beyond those stipulated in the contract. For
example, the contract called for a total of 690 hours of interpretive services for
three students during the Fall and Spring semesters over the three-year life of
the contract. However, in November 2019 MSU paid $58,300 for 834 hours of
service provided to four students for just one month. As of April 2021 (28
months into the contract period), MSU payments to the vendor exceeded the
contract by $294,300.
Emergency Procurement of Student Housing
MSU did not maintain required documentation for an emergency procurement
of 100 hotel rooms to be used for student housing. MSU advised us that that
due to the COVID-19 pandemic, it needed as many hotel rooms as possible to
accommodate students and that it had contacted other hotels, but no other space
was available. MSU could not provide us with required documentation
including a description of the efforts made to ensure that the University received
reasonable value, and a listing of the hotels solicited. Although we
acknowledge the uncertainty during the COVID-19 pandemic that resulted in
actions MSU deemed necessary to best serve its student body, the circumstances
did not alleviate the need to adequately document all actions taken to safeguard
the University’s financial resources. MSU ultimately did not use the rooms
because classes were held virtually for the Fall 2020 semester but still had to
pay liquidated damages equal to 100 percent of the contract value ($890,000) as
stipulated in the contract.
MSU’s procurement policies and procedures generally require competitive
procurements, as well as executed contracts with certain specific terms and
conditions for purchases over $100,000, including the scope of the contract,
19

--- Page 22 ---
compensation, and method of payment. In addition, service contracts valued over
$1 million require Board of Public Works approval. Similar conditions regarding
a lack of competitive procurements and insufficient verification of vendor billings
were included in our preceding audit report.
Recommendation 7
We recommend that MSU
a. competitively procure and execute contracts in accordance with its
policies and procedures (repeat);
b. obtain BPW approval as required, including retroactive approval for the
security guard services noted above;
c. comply with DoIT master contracts and MSU ICPA requirements;
d. verify that all goods and services have been received (repeat);
e. obtain adequate support and ensure amounts invoiced and paid are
proper and consistent with the related contract;
f. fully document, in accordance with its procurement policies and
procedures, its use of all emergency procurements; and
g. determine if any amounts were improperly paid and recover any such
amounts.
Information Systems Security and Control
Background
MSU’s Division of Information Technology maintains campus-wide
administrative applications, including the student administration, human
resources, and financial system. The Division also maintains a website that
functions as an entry point to many of MSU’s information technology services.
Furthermore, the Division also operates an integrated administrative and academic
computer network, which provides connectivity to the internet, protective firewall
appliances, and multiple servers used for administrative and academic
applications and related databases.
20

--- Page 23 ---
We determined that Findings 8 through 10 related to “cybersecurity”, as defined
by the State Finance and Procurement Article, Section 3A-301(b) of the
Annotated Code of Maryland, and therefore are subject to redaction from the
publicly available report in accordance with the State Government Article,
Section 2-1224(i). Consequently, the specifics of the following findings,
including the analysis, related recommendations, along with MSU’s responses,
have been redacted from this report copy.
Finding 8
Redacted cybersecurity-related finding.
Finding 9
Redacted cybersecurity-related finding.
Finding 10
Redacted cybersecurity-related finding.
21

--- Page 24 ---
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of Morgan State University (MSU)
for the period beginning January 4, 2017 and ending April 30, 2021. The audit
was conducted in accordance with generally accepted government auditing
standards. Those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain
sufficient, appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and
conclusions based on our audit objectives. We believe that the evidence obtained
provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit
objectives.
As prescribed by the State Government Article, Section 2-1221 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, the objectives of this audit were to examine MSU’s financial
transactions, records, and internal control, and to evaluate its compliance with
applicable State laws, rules, and regulations.
In planning and conducting our audit, we focused on the major financial-related
areas of operations based on assessments of significance and risk. The areas
addressed by the audit included purchases and disbursements, student accounts
receivable, financial aid, cash receipts, payroll, construction, and information
technology systems. We also determined the status of 15 of the 17 findings in our
preceding audit report.
Our audit did not include an evaluation of internal controls over compliance with
federal laws and regulations for federal financial assistance programs and an
assessment of MSU’s compliance with those laws and regulations because the
State of Maryland engages an independent accounting firm to annually audit such
programs administered by State agencies, including MSU.
Our assessment of internal controls was based on agency procedures and controls
in place at the time of our fieldwork. Our tests of transactions and other auditing
procedures were generally focused on the transactions occurring during our audit
period of January 4, 2017 to April 30, 2021, but may include transactions before
or after this period as we considered necessary to achieve our audit objectives.
To accomplish our audit objectives, our audit procedures included inquiries of
appropriate personnel, inspections of documents and records, tests of transactions,
and to the extent practicable, observations of MSU operations. Generally,
transactions were selected for testing based on auditor judgment, which primarily
considers risk, the timing or dollar amount of the transaction, or the significance
of the transaction to the area of operation reviewed. As a matter of course, we do
not normally use sampling in our tests, so unless otherwise specifically indicated,
22

--- Page 25 ---
neither statistical nor non-statistical audit sampling was used to select the
transactions tested. Therefore, unless sampling is specifically indicated in a
finding, the results from any tests conducted or disclosed by us cannot be used to
project those results to the entire population from which the test items were
selected.
We also performed various data extracts of pertinent information from the State’s
Financial Management Information System (such as revenue and expenditure
data) and the State’s Central Payroll Bureau (payroll data), as well as from the
contractor administering the State’s Corporate Purchasing Card Program (credit
card activity). The extracts are performed as part of ongoing internal processes
established by the Office of Legislative Audits and were subject to various tests to
determine data reliability. We determined that the data extracted from these
sources were sufficiently reliable for the purposes the data were used during this
audit. We also extracted data from MSU’s financial system for the purpose of
testing certain areas, such as payroll, purchases, disbursements, financial aid, and
student accounts receivable. We performed various tests of the relevant data and
determined that the data were sufficiently reliable for the purposes the data were
used during the audit. Finally, we performed other auditing procedures that we
considered necessary to achieve our audit objectives. The reliability of data used
in this report for background or informational purposes was not assessed.
MSU’s management is responsible for establishing and maintaining effective
internal control. Internal control is a process designed to provide reasonable
assurance that objectives pertaining to the reliability of financial records;
effectiveness and efficiency of operations, including safeguarding of assets; and
compliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations are achieved. As
provided in Government Auditing Standards, there are five components of
internal control: control environment, risk assessment, control activities,
information and communication, and monitoring. Each of the five components,
when significant to the audit objectives, and as applicable to MSU, were
considered by us during the course of this audit.
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate.
Our reports are designed to assist the Maryland General Assembly in exercising
its legislative oversight function and to provide constructive recommendations for
improving State operations. As a result, our reports generally do not address
activities we reviewed that are functioning properly.
23

--- Page 26 ---
This report includes findings relating to conditions that we consider to be
significant deficiencies in the design or operation of internal control that could
adversely affect MSU’s ability to maintain reliable financial records, operate
effectively and efficiently, and/or comply with applicable laws, rules, and
regulations. Our report also includes findings regarding significant instances of
noncompliance with applicable laws, rules, or regulations. Other less significant
findings were communicated to MSU that did not warrant inclusion in this report.
State Government Article Section 2-1224(i) requires that we redact in a manner
consistent with auditing best practices any cybersecurity findings before a report
is made available to the public. This results in the issuance of two different
versions of an audit report that contains cybersecurity findings – a redacted
version for the public and an unredacted version for government officials
responsible for acting on our audit recommendations.
The State Finance and Procurement Article, Section 3A-301(b), states that
cybersecurity is defined as “processes or capabilities wherein systems,
communications, and information are protected and defended against damage,
unauthorized use or modification, and exploitation”. Based on that definition, and
in our professional judgment, we concluded that certain findings in this report fall
under that definition. Consequently, for the publicly available audit report all
specifics as to the nature of cybersecurity findings and required corrective actions
have been redacted. We have determined that such aforementioned practices, and
government auditing standards, support the redaction of this information from the
public audit report. The specifics of these cybersecurity findings have been
communicated to MSU and those parties responsible for acting on our
recommendations in an unredacted audit report.
MSU’s response to our findings and recommendations is included as an appendix
to this report. Depending on the version of the audit report, responses to any
cybersecurity findings may be redacted in accordance with State law. As
prescribed in the State Government Article, Section 2-1224 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, we will advise MSU regarding the results of our review of its
response.
24

--- Page 27 ---
APPENDIX

--- Page 28 ---
Morgan State University
Agency Response Form
Student Accounts Receivable
The Office of Legislative Audits (OLA) has determined that elements of Findings 1 related to
“cybersecurity”, as defined by the State Finance and Procurement Article, Section 3A-301(b) of
the Annotated Code of Maryland, and therefore are subject to redaction from the publicly
available audit report in accordance with State Government article 2-1224(i). The specifics of
the finding, including the analysis, related recommendation (1c), along with MSU’s response,
have been redacted from this report copy. Furthermore, although MSU’s response indicated
“disagreement” with the cybersecurity recommendation, our analysis of MSU’s response
concluded it included elements or corrective actions that would be consistent with our
recommendation.
Finding 1
MSU did not adequately monitor the vendor responsible for disbursing student refunds to
ensure the refunds were properly issued, unissued refunds were returned, and sensitive
student information was safeguarded.
We recommend that MSU
a. perform independent reviews to ensure the vendor properly issued refunds to students
and returned any amounts not disbursed (repeat);
b. establish an independent review process to ensure that returned refunds are properly
credited to student accounts, and correct the recording discrepancies noted in this
finding; and
c. redacted cyber-security recommendation.
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide Note, the $4.1M stated in the introductory paragraph includes refunds
additional comments as issued to students during the pandemic related to housing and room and
deemed necessary. board charges for the closure of the campus during the pandemic.
Recommendation 1a Agree Estimated Completion Date: December, 2022
Please provide details of MSU notes the current process of issuing refunds has not resulted in any
corrective action or
material financial errors or unresolved student matters. Due to the pandemic
explain disagreement.
staffing shortages, MSU is currently undertaking a restructuring of the
Bursar Office to ensure sufficient staffing to allow for independent reviews
and better adherence to procedures and internal controls. Based on our
discussion, MSU does not believe this is a repeat finding as there is a process
Page 1 of 13

--- Page 29 ---
Morgan State University
Agency Response Form
for undeliverable refunds and amounts are returned to MSU. MSU agrees
with independent review recommendation.
Recommendation 1b Agree Estimated Completion Date: December, 2022
Please provide details of MSU notes the current process of issuing refunds has not resulted in any
corrective action or material financial errors or unresolved student matters. Corrections
explain disagreement. identified in this report have already been completed. Due to the pandemic
staffing shortages, MSU is currently undertaking a restructuring of the
Bursar Office to ensure sufficient staffing to allow for independent reviews
and better adherence to procedures and internal controls. MSU notes that
item a. and b. are very similar (are the same process just different steps), an
independent review would cover both steps and should be combined and
reworded based upon our discussion.
Recommendation 1c Disagree Estimated Completion Date:
Please provide details of Agency Response has been redacted by OLA.
corrective action or
explain disagreement.
Page 2 of 13

--- Page 30 ---
Morgan State University
Agency Response Form
Finding 2
MSU did not independently verify the propriety of adjustments to student room and board
charges, certain of which were not processed in accordance with MSU policy.
We recommend that MSU
a. ensure that adjustments to student room and board charges are properly supported
and subject to an effective independent supervisory review for propriety after being
recorded in MSU’s automated records (repeat),
b. ensure that justification for any deviation from its policy is documented and approved
by supervisory personnel, and
c. review the aforementioned adjustments and take appropriate action as necessary.
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide To provide additional details, procedurally, each room and board adjustment
additional comments as is independently reviewed for appropriateness by the Director of the Office of
deemed necessary. Residence Life and Housing (ORL&H) and approved by the Vice President
(VP) of the Division of Student Affairs (SA) before it is entered to the
information system. To help ensure that no transaction is executed in the
system without the proper approval, at the end of each semester, the Fiscal
Manager traces each adjustment on the output report to the approval form
signed by the VP of SA to ensure propriety. However, as the auditors pointed
out correctly, the Fiscal Manager had access in the information system to
execute adjustments, albeit this individual did not do so and was unaware of
this capability, thereby rendering this person’s review not independent.
Recommendation 2a Agree Estimated Completion Date: August, 2022
Please provide details of The Fiscal Manager can no longer apply room or board adjustments in the
corrective action or system, as we revoked this access during the audit. The effectiveness of this
explain disagreement. individual’s review has been restored and is now independent. The cited
adjustments that were processed beyond the allowed timeline and without
sufficient documentation are primarily extenuating circumstances that were
beyond the control of the student and at times were initiated by the University
(e.g. policy change to move upper classmen off campus in middle of a
semester and to charge them at the reduced on-campus rate). We will revise
the policy to address these exceptions and to require documentation that is
acceptable to the auditors. More specifically, we will add language to the
student Hall Agreement outlining specific and applicable guidelines regarding
“extenuating circumstances,” and implement a form to document and support
this accordingly. This language will be added to support a more congruent
demonstration of compliance.
Recommendation 2b Agree Estimated Completion Date: August, 2022
Page 3 of 13

--- Page 31 ---
Morgan State University
Agency Response Form
Please provide details of The process for documenting the independent supervisory approval of a
corrective action or departure from the policy has since been enhanced to meet the requirements
explain disagreement. of the audit.
Recommendation 2c Agree Estimated Completion Date: September, 2022
Please provide details of We will review the aforementioned adjustments and take the appropriate
corrective action or action, as recommended by the auditors.
explain disagreement.
Page 4 of 13

--- Page 32 ---
Morgan State University
Agency Response Form
Finding 3
Reviews of changes to student residency status were either not documented or not
independent; and certain changes were not subject to review because system output reports
used for this purpose were incomplete.
We recommend that MSU ensure that independent documented supervisory reviews of
student residency changes are performed using output reports that include all changes
made (repeat).
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide  The system output report cited by the auditors’ recommendation includes
additional comments as all changes made to a student record, not just residency updates, but any
deemed necessary.
insertion of a general student record on the applicable screen in the
automated information system, including when a change in major,
readmission, or when an archive record has to be rebuilt and others.
 Supervisory reviews were performed and documented.
Recommendation 3 Disagree Estimated Completion Date: December, 2022
Please provide details of  There is an extensive tracking process in place for monitoring any updates
corrective action or made to residency. As OLA noted, their testing did not disclose any
explain disagreement.
improper residency changes, and we remain confident that the internal
controls are effective. MSU will, however, work to determine the
feasibility of a more refined system output report that can identify
residency updates while excluding the thousands of other updates to the
student record currently displayed in the report.
 Concerted good faith effort was made after the previous audit to ensure
that supervisory reviews were both performed and sufficiently
documented. There are either paper or electronic trails to support the
reviews. In one instance, though the supervisory reviews were done and
were provided upon request, the process for documenting the independent
review did not meet the auditors’ expectation. We will work to further
enhance the process for documenting that the supervisory review was
completed, but we disagree that this should be a repeat finding.
Auditor’s Comment: MSU’s response indicated disagreement with the
recommendation. However, the response stated that MSU would work to enhance the
process for documenting that supervisory reviews were completed, and would work to
determine the feasibility of refining system output reports that can identify residency
updates. These steps, including assurance that the reviews are performed by independent
personnel would be consistent with our recommendation.
Page 5 of 13

--- Page 33 ---
Morgan State University
Agency Response Form
Finding 4
MSU did not adequately review deferred payment plan agreements to ensure they were
proper.
We recommend MSU
a. perform documented independent supervisory reviews of all deferred payment plan
agreements using output reports of recorded plans, and
b. establish the maximum amount of a student’s account balance that is allowed to be
rolled into a subsequent semester without a deferred payment plan consistent with State
law.
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 4a Agree Estimated Completion Date: December, 2022
Please provide details of Due to the pandemic staffing shortages, MSU is currently undertaking a
corrective action or restructuring of the Bursar Office to ensure sufficient staffing to allow for
explain disagreement. independent reviews and better adherence to procedures and internal
controls.
Recommendation 4b Agree Estimated Completion Date: December, 2022
Please provide details of MSU will undertake an analysis to assess a “reasonable” maximum amount
corrective action or of a student’s account balance that is allowed to be rolled into a subsequent
explain disagreement. semester without a deferred payment plan.
Page 6 of 13

--- Page 34 ---
Morgan State University
Agency Response Form
Finding 5
MSU did not periodically ensure that all eligible delinquent accounts were referred to CCU
within the required time period.
We recommend that MSU establish procedures to periodically review student accounts to
ensure that all eligible delinquent accounts are referred to CCU in accordance with CCU
regulations as amended for MSU, including the two delinquent accounts noted above.
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 5 Agree Estimated Completion Date: December, 2022
Please provide details of Due to the pandemic staffing shortages, MSU is currently undertaking a
corrective action or
restructuring of the Bursar Office to ensure sufficient staffing to allow for
explain disagreement.
periodic review of student accounts to ensure that all eligible delinquent
accounts are referred to CCU in accordance with MSU practice and
procedure.
Page 7 of 13

--- Page 35 ---
Morgan State University
Agency Response Form
Financial Aid and Scholarships
Finding 6
MSU did not conduct comprehensive reviews of honors scholarship awards to ensure the
awards were proper, and did not take required action when students did not maintain their
eligibility. As a result, certain awards were overstated or issued to ineligible students.
We recommend that MSU
a. conduct comprehensive reviews to supporting documentation of initial honors
scholarship awards to ensure their propriety,
b. take the action required by its policy when a student is no longer eligible for an honors
scholarship, and
c. review the scholarships noted in our finding and take any appropriate action
warranted.
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 6a Agree Estimated Completion Date: August, 2022
Please provide details of In January 2022, a new executive director for the Honors College was
corrective action or installed. Subsequently, the admission and scholarship award processes
explain disagreement. were revisited and are in the process of being updated to address the audit
recommendations. We will improve the level of documentation and
increase the rigor of our review going forward.
Recommendation 6b Agree Estimated Completion Date: August, 2023
Please provide details of Due to inopportune disruptions of COVID-19 and especially mid-year
corrective action or leadership changes, recovery period of one additional semester has been
explain disagreement. extended to students noted in above. Students will now have till Spring
2023 to meet the GPA threshold or their Scholarship and Honors College
membership will be deactivated. As of the Spring 2022 semester, a
comprehensive review of all current Honors College scholarships is
conducted and documented. As per the handbook, warning letters were
sent to all those not meeting the academic GPA threshold.
Recommendation 6c Agree Estimated Completion Date: August, 2022
Page 8 of 13

--- Page 36 ---
Morgan State University
Agency Response Form
Please provide details of We will review the exceptions noted and take the appropriate course of
corrective action or action.
explain disagreement.
Page 9 of 13

--- Page 37 ---
Morgan State University
Agency Response Form
Contracts and Disbursements
Finding 7
MSU did not procure certain goods and services in accordance with its policies and
procedures, and did not ensure related goods and services were received and amounts
invoiced were proper.
We recommend that MSU
a. competitively procure and execute contracts in accordance with its policies and
procedures (repeat);
b. obtain BPW approval as required, including retroactive approval for the security guard
services noted above;
c. comply with DoIT master contracts and MSU ICPA requirements;
d. verify that all goods and services have been received (repeat);
e. obtain adequate support and ensure amounts invoiced and paid are proper and
consistent with the related contract;
f. fully document, in accordance with its procurement policies and procedures, its use of
all emergency procurements; and
g. determine if any amounts were improperly paid and recover any such amounts.
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 7a Agree Estimated Completion Date: December, 2022
Please provide details of MSU notes that additional documentation could have been enhanced for
corrective action or purchases during the pandemic. The University has hired a new director of
explain disagreement. Procurement. The Procurement department is undertaking a review of the
procurement process for all new contracts and expiring contracts to ensure
compliance with the MSU Procurement Policies and Procedures. New
procurement policies and procedures will be presented to the Morgan Board
of Regents and the Board of Public Works.
Recommendation 7b Agree Estimated Completion Date: December, 2022
Please provide details of MSU has issued a competitive IFB in accordance with MSU Procurement
corrective action or Policies & Procedures. Appropriate approvals, including Board of Regents
explain disagreement. and Board of Public Works will be sought as appropriate and in accordance
with MSU Procurement Policies & Procedures.
Recommendation 7c Agree Estimated Completion Date: December, 2022
Page 10 of 13

--- Page 38 ---
Morgan State University
Agency Response Form
Please provide details of MSU notes that additional documentation could have been enhanced for
corrective action or purchases during the pandemic. The University has hired a new director of
explain disagreement. Procurement. The Procurement department is undertaking a review of the
procurement process for all new contracts and expiring contracts to ensure
compliance with the MSU Procurement Policies and Procedures. New
procurement policies and procedures will be presented to the Morgan Board
of Regents and the Board of Public Works. MSU is in the process of reviewing
and updating its current Procurement Policies & Procedures to include the
development of policy interpretations to provide clarity and consistency in
documenting procurements though consortiums, cooperatives, or other
procurement vehicles.
Recommendation 7d Agree Estimated Completion Date: December, 2022
Please provide details of MSU notes that additional documentation could have been enhanced for
corrective action or purchases during the pandemic. MSU is in the process of reviewing and
explain disagreement. possibly updating its current Procurement Policies & Procedures to include
the development of policy interpretations to provide clarity and consistency
in monitoring and documenting contract compliance. MSU will be reviewing
the post procurement phase of contract implementation and developing a
process, to include the department responsible for managing the contracted
service, to confirm and document proper receipt and acceptance of related
goods and services as part of the contract compensation and payment process.
Recommendation 7e Agree Estimated Completion Date: December, 2022
Please provide details of MSU notes that additional documentation could have been enhanced for
corrective action or purchases during the pandemic. MSU is in the process of reviewing and
explain disagreement. possibly updating its current Procurement Policies & Procedures to include
the development of policy interpretations to provide clarity and consistency
in monitoring and documenting contract compliance. MSU will be reviewing
the post procurement phase of contract implementation and developing a
process, to include the department responsible for managing the contracted
service, to confirm and document proper receipt and acceptance of related
goods and services as part of the contract compensation and payment process.
Recommendation 7f Agree Estimated Completion Date: December, 2022
Please provide details of MSU notes that additional documentation could have been enhanced for
corrective action or purchases during the pandemic. MSU is in the process of reviewing and
explain disagreement. possibly updating its current Procurement Policies & Procedures to include
the development of policy interpretations to provide clarity and consistency
in approving emergency purchases.
Note the emergency procurement cited in this finding went through legal and
BoR / BPW approval as required. Clarity on what additional documentation
is needed would be helpful.
Recommendation 7g Disagree Estimated Completion Date:
Page 11 of 13

--- Page 39 ---
Morgan State University
Agency Response Form
Please provide details of MSU asserts no amounts for services have been improperly paid. While
corrective action or payments may have exceeded amounts contained in a particular contract noted
explain disagreement. in the analysis, MSU asserts that the payments made were for services duly
rendered and within the scope of the agreement and are therefore proper.
Auditor’s Comment: In its response, MSU indicated disagreement with the
recommendation to determine if any amounts were improperly paid and recover such
amounts. MSU specifically asserts in the response that no amounts were improperly
paid. However, since the response includes no specific reference to any subsequent
actions MSU took to ensure that no amounts related to the matters identified in Finding 7
were improperly paid, we are compelled to conclude that MSU’s assertion is
unsubstantiated.
Page 12 of 13

--- Page 40 ---
Morgan State University
Agency Response Form
Information Systems Security and Control
OLA has determined that Findings 8 through10 related to “cybersecurity”, as defined by the
State Finance and Procurement Article, Section 3A-301(b) of the Annotated Code of Maryland,
and therefore are subject to redaction from the publicly available audit report in accordance with
State Government article 2-1224(i). Although the specifics of the findings, including the
analysis, related recommendations, along with MSU’s responses, have been redacted from this
report copy, MSU’s responses indicated agreement with the findings and recommendations.
Finding 8
Redacted cybersecurity-related finding.
Agency Response has been redacted by OLA.
Finding 9
Redacted cybersecurity-related finding.
Agency Response has been redacted by OLA.
Finding 10
Redacted cybersecurity-related finding.
Agency response has been redacted by OLA.
Page 13 of 13

--- Page 41 ---
A T
UDIT EAM
Adam J. Westover, CPA
Audit Manager
R.Brendan Coffey, CPA, CISA
Edwin L. Paul, CPA, CISA
Information Systems Audit Managers
Nicholas J. Caronna, CPA
Amanda M. Jones
Senior Auditors
Eric Alexander, CPA, CISA
Edward O. Kendall, CISA
Information Systems Senior Auditors
Matusala Y. Abishe
Daniel G. Johnson
Jacob M. Kasten
Oluwafemi E. Ogundolie
Gary B. Staples, CPA
Staff Auditors
Dominick R. Abril
Charles O. Price
Malcolm J. Woodard
Information Systems Staff Auditors