Title: Presentation to the Joint Audit Committee - Department of Human Services - Baltimore City Department of Social Services - Allegation Related to Possible Violations of State Procurement Regulations and Certain Payments Made to a Nonprofit Organization


Related Report Dated (7/11/2018)
Date: 01/22/2019
Type: Presentations to the Legislature
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5c48aebba1ce580ea86b9872
Extracted: 2025-06-18T22:23:30.616850
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Department of Human Services
Baltimore City Department of Social Services
Allegation Related to Possible Violations of State
Procurement Regulations and Certain Payments
Made to a Nonprofit Organization
Special Review
Report dated July 11, 2018
Presentation to the Joint Audit Committee
Gregory A. Hook, CPA
Joshua S. Adler, CPA, CFE
Joseph E. McWilliams, CFE
January 22, 2019

--- Page 2 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Background
 The Department of Human Services (DHS) –
Baltimore City Department of Social Services
(BCDSS) is one of the State’s 24 local departments
of social services. BCDSS administers activities,
such as the Supplemental Nutrition Assistance
Program (formerly the food stamp program) and
Temporary Cash Assistance, as well as services for
adoption, foster care, and child protection.
 According to the State’s records, BCDSS operating
expenses totaled $175.4 million for fiscal year
2017, of which $134.2 million was for employee
salaries and benefits and $41.2 million was for its
remaining operating expenditures. These
expenditures exclude funds disbursed to BCDSS
clients under public assistance programs.
Baltimore City Dept. of Social Services – Page 2
Special Review

--- Page 3 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Overview
We conducted a review of an allegation received
through our fraud, waste, and abuse hotline regarding
possible violations of State laws, regulations, and
policies by a former BCDSS management employee
and a nonprofit organization.
BCDSS has had a longstanding relationship with the
nonprofit organization, and had 5 active agreements
with the organization during the period July 2014 –
June 2019 with a combined value of $12.6 million.
Baltimore City Dept. of Social Services – Page 3
Special Review

--- Page 4 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Overview (continued)
 The scope of our review included the 3 agreements
with the nonprofit organization for which payments
totaling approximately $7 million had been made as
of December 2017. We also looked at certain
payments made by the nonprofit organization to an
out-of-state vendor under one of these agreements
(and one earlier agreement) which totaled $1.3
million.
 We identified certain questionable matters,
violations of State procurement regulations, and a
lack of sufficient procedures and accountability over
the execution, use, and monitoring of the
agreements as detailed in the following slides.
 Certain of these matters were referred to the Office
of the Attorney General – Criminal Division, which
subsequently referred the matter to the Office of the
State Prosecutor. We also identified possible
violations of State ethics law that may require
referral to the State Ethics Commission.
Baltimore City Dept. of Social Services – Page 4
Special Review

--- Page 5 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Key Issues
 A former BCDSS management employee directed
a nonprofit organization to invoice BCDSS
$500,000 for a cancelled project on which no
work had been performed, and authorized the
related payment which was retained by the
nonprofit until we notified DHS of the issue.
 The former BCDSS management employee also
circumvented State regulations by directing a
nonprofit organization to contract with and pay an
out-of-state vendor for work unrelated to its
agreements with the nonprofit organization.
Some of the related payments appeared
questionable.
 BCDSS lacked sufficient procedures over the
execution, use, and monitoring of two agreements
with the nonprofit organization that we reviewed.
Baltimore City Dept. of Social Services – Page 5
Special Review

--- Page 6 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Questionable Disbursement (Finding 1)
Questionable Payment to Nonprofit
A former BCDSS management employee directed a
nonprofit organization to invoice BCDSS for
$500,000 for a cancelled project on which no work
had been performed. The management employee
subsequently authorized BCDSS to pay the invoice in
September 2016.
The nonprofit organization still had possession of the
funds when we began our review. After discussing
the matter with DHS management, the funds were
recovered in December 2017.
Baltimore City Dept. of Social Services – Page 6
Special Review

--- Page 7 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Questionable Use of Agreements (Finding 2)
Circumvention of State Procurement
 The former BCDSS management employee
directed the nonprofit organization to contract
with and pay an out-of-state vendor under two
agreements. The out-of-state vendor (an
individual) had a previous relationship with the
BCDSS employee.
 The out-of-state vendor worked directly for the
former management employee and the majority of
work performed related to generating reports and
providing technical support directly to BCDSS. This
work was unrelated to the purpose of the BCDSS
agreements with the nonprofit which was to
provide services to parents to help reduce the
time that children were in foster care.
 The nonprofit organization included charges
related to the out-of-state vendor on its invoices to
BCDSS without any knowledge or oversight of the
work done.
Baltimore City Dept. of Social Services – Page 7
Special Review

--- Page 8 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Questionable Use of Agreements (Finding 2)
Unsupported Contract Rates and Terms, and Lack of
Deliverables
 There was no support for the contract amounts
paid to the out-of-state vendor and for the
contract increase that occurred at the direction of
the former BCDSS management employee. The
annual contract amounts were $125,000 for
fiscal years 2010 to 2013 and $175,000 for
fiscal years 2014 through 2017.
 The contacts lacked any specific tasks or
anticipated level of effort.
 BCDSS management could not confirm or
document the specific services or work products
that were provided by the out-of-state vendor to
support the charges. While we located certain
reports which indicated that some work was
performed, BCDSS had no assurance that the
amounts paid were commensurate with the
services performed.
Baltimore City Dept. of Social Services – Page 8
Special Review

--- Page 9 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Questionable Use of Agreements (Finding 2)
Questionable Purchases
 The out-of-state vendor submitted six invoices to
the nonprofit organization (ultimately paid by
BCDSS) that included questionable purchases of
electronic equipment, such as computer tablets,
totaling approximately $22,100.
 The purchases of 14 computer tablets appeared
to have been for the personal use of the former
BCDSS management employee or were given by
this employee to others as gifts. All purchases
were shipped to or picked up by the former BCDSS
management employee. Three tablets were
engraved with the former management
employee’s name, one was engraved with the
initials of the former management employee’s
close relative, and ten were engraved with the
names of other BCDSS employees.
 None of these purchases were recorded on
BCDSS equipment records.
Baltimore City Dept. of Social Services – Page 9
Special Review

--- Page 10 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Questionable Use of Agreements (Finding 2)
Possible Ethics Violation
Legal counsel to the State Ethics Commission
advised us that the former BCDSS management
employee’s influence over the nonprofit organization
to contract with and pay the out-of-state vendor, as
well as the subsequent receipt of the aforementioned
equipment, could potentially violate several conflict of
interest provisions of State law.
Termination of Contract
The extent to which current BCDSS management was
aware of the aforementioned conditions was unclear.
Nevertheless, on October 25, 2017, BCDSS
management directed the nonprofit organization to
terminate its contract with the out-of-state vendor
because the services could be obtained using
existing BCDSSS personnel.
Baltimore City Dept. of Social Services – Page 10
Special Review

--- Page 11 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Agreement Oversight (Finding 3)
Lack of Agreements Oversight
BCDSS lacked sufficient procedures and
accountability over two agreements with the non-
profit organization valued at $9.6 million. For
example:
 BCDSS did not independently verify that funds
paid under these agreements were consistent with
the approved budgets. Our test of 22
disbursements totaling $5.5 million disclosed that
BCDSS did not obtain sufficient documentation for
any of the payments, including subcontractor
billings, support of labor charges, and receipts for
supply purchases.
 BCDSS did not ensure that the nonprofit provided
the agreed-upon services. For example, under one
agreement, the nonprofit was to provide
emergency support services to 75 families whose
children were at risk for entering foster care.
BCDSS did not obtain any of the required activity
reports to substantiate the services provided.
Baltimore City Dept. of Social Services – Page 11
Special Review

--- Page 12 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Conclusion
BCDSS should
• discontinue using existing agreements to procure
unrelated services;
• ensure goods and services are procured in
accordance with State regulations;
• document the specific tasks assigned under the
contract and only pay invoices after agreed-upon
services were received;
• after consultation with the Office of the State
Prosecutor, refer this matter to the State Ethics
Commission;
• locate the electronic equipment and review all
payments to the out-of-state vendor for propriety,
after consulting with the aforementioned
authorities;
• obtain documentation to verify past and future
payments to the nonprofit; and
• ensure contractual services are provided.
Baltimore City Dept. of Social Services – Page 12
Special Review