Title: Presentation to the Joint Audit Committee - Results of OLA Follow-up Reviews of Unsatisfactory Fiscal Compliance Audit Reports


The reports referenced in this presentation are listed below.

Department of Human Services - Social Services Administration - Follow-up Review (1/9/2019)

Maryland Department of Health - Medical Care Programs Administration - Follow-up Review (11/8/2018)

Uninsured Employers' Fund - Follow-up Review (11/2/2018)

Maryland Department of Health - Office of the Secretary and Other Units - Follow-up Review (10/16/2018)
Date: 01/22/2019
Type: Presentations to the Legislature
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5c48aebaa1ce580ea86b986f
Extracted: 2025-06-18T22:23:01.526032
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Results of OLA Follow-up Reviews of
Unsatisfactory Fiscal Compliance
Audit Reports
Presentation to the Joint Audit Committee
Gregory A. Hook, CPA
Paul R. Denz, CPA
January 22, 2019

--- Page 2 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Audit Report Rating System – State Law
 State Government Article, § 2-1221
(e) Evaluation of financial transactions, records
and compliance. --
(1) Upon approval of the Joint Audit
Committee, the Office of Legislative Audits
shall develop and use a rating system that is
based on the results of a fiscal/compliance
audit to determine an overall evaluation of a
unit’s financial transactions, records, and
internal controls and compliance with
applicable laws and regulations as a means of
comparing the various units of State
government.
(2) When an evaluation is issued, it shall be
provided to the unit and shall be available to
the Joint Audit Committee and the Budget
Committees of the Maryland General
Assembly.
Follow-up Reviews of Unsatisfactory Audit Reports
Page 2

--- Page 3 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Audit Report Rating System – Guidelines
 OLA established a rating system that is based on
the results of our fiscal/compliance audit process
and is uniformly applied to all such audits.
 The system was approved by the Joint Audit
Committee (JAC), and is used to advise the
General Assembly of those agencies for which OLA
has concluded that an increased level of oversight
is warranted.
 Since the General Assembly is interested in
identifying those agencies that warrant additional
attention, only unsatisfactory ratings are
published in audit reports.
 Each agency receiving an unsatisfactory rating is
advised of the methodology used in determining
its accountability level and provided a copy of the
guidelines.
 When a subsequent audit discloses that an
agency’s rating has improved from the
unsatisfactory rating, the improvement is
acknowledged in the subsequent audit report.
Follow-up Reviews of Unsatisfactory Audit Reports
Page 3

--- Page 4 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Four Unsatisfactory Agencies
 During calendar year 2018, OLA conducted
reviews to determine the corrective actions taken
by four agencies, which had received
unsatisfactory ratings, to address certain of the
audit findings in our reports on those agencies.
 The table below indicates those four agencies and
the number of findings in their audit reports.
 Repeat audit findings impact the rating.
Original Number of Number of
Agency Report Report Repeat Report
Date Findings Findings
Maryland Department of Health
(MDH) –Medical Care Programs August 18, 15 6*
Administration 2017
Maryland Department of Health August 30, 17 6
(MDH) –Office of the Secretary 2017
and Other Units
Department of Human Services November 20, 14 2
(DHS) -Social Services 2017
Administration
Uninsured Employers’ Fund January 3, 8 7
(UEF) 2018
* There were actually seven repeated findings, but two appeared as one finding in the current report.
Follow-up Reviews of Unsatisfactory Audit Reports
Page 4

--- Page 5 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Medical Care Programs Administration (MCPA)
 MDH provided a status report, as of February 28,
2018, on behalf of MCPA indicating the
implementation status of each finding (corrected
or in progress) as well as its corrective action
plan, including timelines and processes to
monitor the implementation of the plan.
 In summary, MCPA's status report indicated that
10 findings had been corrected, and additional
actions were still required to address the 5
remaining findings.
 We performed certain procedures to evaluate
the actions taken by MCPA for 8 of the 15
findings. Specifically, we reviewed 5 of the 10
findings which MDH's status report indicated
were corrected and 3 of the 5 findings for which
MDH's status report indicated that additional
actions were required.
Follow-up Reviews of Unsatisfactory Audit Reports
Page 5

--- Page 6 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
MCPA – Follow-up: Summary Results
 Our review disclosed that MDH had corrected 3 of
the findings we reviewed, and had made progress,
but had not resolved the 5 other findings
(including 3 that MDH reported as corrected). In
several cases, although MCPA had established
appropriate procedures to address the
recommendations, the recommendations had not
been fully implemented.
Finding Topic MDH Status OLA Status
1 Recipient Enrollment Corrected Corrected
3 Recipient Enrollment Corrected In Progress
4 Recipient Enrollment Corrected In Progress
5 Recipient Enrollment In Progress Corrected
8 Program Oversight – Corrected In Progress
Hospitals and Long-Term
Care Providers
10 Program Oversight – Corrected Corrected
Behavioral Health
11 Program Oversight – In Progress In Progress
Behavioral Health
13 IS Security and Control In Progress In Progress
Follow-up Reviews of Unsatisfactory Audit Reports
Page 6

--- Page 7 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
MCPA – Select Findings from Follow-up
 Finding 1 was deemed to be Corrected.
MCPA had taken sufficient action to implement
recommendations related to the finding, which
noted that MCPA did not assign a temporary
enrollment status to 11,153 new enrollees,
resulting in delays (allegedly caused by a computer
compatibility issue) in placing them in Managed
Care Organizations (MCOs). Such delays resulted in
certain associated claims being paid on a fee-for-
service basis that would have been paid by MCOs.
 Finding 4 was deemed to be In Progress.
MCPA established procedures as recommended,
but had not fully implemented them. MCPA
identified and forwarded monthly reports of active
recipients age 65 and older who were not enrolled
in Medicare to the Department of Human Services
(DHS) for follow-up and correction. Our test found
DHS was not always taking timely corrective action
and MCPA was not prompt in its follow-up.
Follow-up Reviews of Unsatisfactory Audit Reports
Page 7

--- Page 8 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Maryland Department of Health - Office of the Secretary and
Other Units (MDH)
 MDH provided a status report, as of February 28,
2018, indicating the implementation status of
each finding (corrected or in progress) as well as
its corrective action plan, including timelines and
processes to monitor the implementation of the
plan.
 In summary, MDH’s status report indicated that
11 findings had been corrected, and additional
actions were still required to address the 6
remaining findings.
 We performed certain procedures to evaluate
the actions taken by MDH for 9 of the 17
findings. Specifically, we reviewed 6 of the 11
findings which MDH's status report indicated
were corrected and 3 of the 6 findings for which
MDH's status report indicated that additional
actions were required.
Follow-up Reviews of Unsatisfactory Audit Reports
Page 8

--- Page 9 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
MDH – Follow-up: Summary Results
 Our review disclosed that MDH had corrected 4 of
the findings we reviewed, and had made progress,
but had not resolved the 5 other findings
(including 3 that MDH reported as corrected).
Regarding the 5, in most cases MDH satisfactorily
completed some of the recommendations in the
finding, but had not fully addressed others.
Finding Topic MDH Status OLA Status
1 Interagency Agreements Corrected In Progress
2 Interagency Agreements Corrected In Progress
3 Procurements Corrected In Progress
5 Procurements In Progress Corrected
6 Federal Funds Corrected Corrected
7 Office of the Inspector Corrected Corrected
General
9 IS Security and Control Corrected Corrected
10 IS Security and Control In Progress In Progress
11 IS Security and Control In Progress In Progress
Follow-up Reviews of Unsatisfactory Audit Reports
Page 9

--- Page 10 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
MDH – Select Findings from Follow-up
 Finding 1 was deemed to be In Progress.
MDH established procedures for determining the
most cost beneficial option for obtaining services
before entering into an interagency agreement,
and for ensuring the reasonableness of the related
administrative fees. However, MDH did not fully
address recommendations relating to providing
oversight of and guidance to its administrations
regarding the use of these agreements, evaluating
existing agreements, and refraining from using
such agreements to augment its staff.
 Finding 5 was deemed to be Corrected.
MDH had taken sufficient action to implement
recommendations related to the finding, which
noted that MDH did not always comply with State
procurement regulations with respect to bidding
requirements and retention of critical procurement
documents.
Follow-up Reviews of Unsatisfactory Audit Reports
Page 10

--- Page 11 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Social Services Administration (SSA)
 SSA provided a status report, as of June 13,
2018, indicating the implementation status of
each finding (corrected or in progress) as well as
its corrective action plan, including timelines and
processes to monitor the implementation of the
plan.
 In summary, SSA's status report indicated that 2
findings had been corrected, and additional
actions were still required to address the 12
remaining findings.
 We performed certain procedures to evaluate
the actions taken by SSA for 6 of the 14 findings.
Specifically, we reviewed 6 of the 12 findings for
which SSA's status report indicated that
additional actions were required.
Follow-up Reviews of Unsatisfactory Audit Reports
Page 11

--- Page 12 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
SSA – Follow-up: Summary Results
 Our review confirmed that SSA had made some
progress, but had not resolved the 6 findings we
reviewed. In most cases, although SSA had
established certain procedures to address the
recommendations, the procedures were not
sufficient to fully address the recommendations or
had not been fully implemented.
Finding Topic SSA Status OLA Status
1 Quality Assurance Program In Progress In Progress
2 Monitoring Compliance In Progress In Progress
with Foster Care
Requirements
3 Monitoring of Foster Care, In Progress In Progress
Adoption, and
Guardianship Assistance
5 Federal Funds In Progress In Progress
7 Child Protective Services In Progress In Progress
11 Foster Care, Adoption, and In Progress In Progress
Guardianship Payments
Follow-up Reviews of Unsatisfactory Audit Reports
Page 12

--- Page 13 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
SSA – Select Findings from Follow-up
 Finding 1 was deemed to be In Progress.
SSA established certain procedures for monitoring
program services and functions. However, the
procedures were not always complete or sufficient
to address compliance with applicable laws,
regulations, and policies; appropriate and timely
record keeping; and the maintenance of
supporting documentation. SSA had also not
developed a quality assurance case review process
at each local department of social services (LDSS).
 Finding 7 was deemed to be In Progress.
SSA established written procedures requiring
LDSSs to provide written justification for child
abuse or neglect allegations and any related
investigations not reviewed and completed within
the timeframes required by law. However, the
procedures did not address LDSS and SSA
responsibility for ensuring that investigations were
actually initiated timely.
Follow-up Reviews of Unsatisfactory Audit Reports
Page 13

--- Page 14 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Uninsured Employers’ Fund (UEF)
 UEF provided a status report, as of June 29,
2018, indicating the implementation status of
each finding (corrected or in progress) as well as
its corrective action plan, including timelines and
processes to monitor the implementation of the
plan.
 In summary, UEF's status report indicated that 4
findings had been corrected, and additional
actions were still required to address the 4
remaining findings.
 We performed certain procedures to evaluate
the actions taken by UEF for 5 of the 8 findings.
Specifically, we reviewed the 4 findings which
UEF's status report indicated were corrected and
1 of the 4 findings for which UEF's status report
indicated that additional actions were required.
Follow-up Reviews of Unsatisfactory Audit Reports
Page 14

--- Page 15 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
UEF – Follow-up: Summary Results
 Our review disclosed that UEF had corrected 1 of
the findings we reviewed. The remaining 4 had
not been resolved (including 3 that UEF reported
as corrected). Although varying degrees of
progress had been made by UEF, the actions
taken were often incomplete or inadequate to fully
resolve the findings.
Finding Topic UEF Status OLA Status
3 Claims Processing Corrected In Progress
4 Claims Processing Corrected No Progress
5 Cash Receipts Corrected In Progress
6 IS Security and Control Corrected Corrected
8 IS Security and Control In Progress In Progress
Follow-up Reviews of Unsatisfactory Audit Reports
Page 15

--- Page 16 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
UEF – Select Findings from Follow-up
 Finding 3 was deemed to be In Progress.
UEF established procedures to conduct
independent supervisory reviews of indemnity
payments to ensure their validity and accuracy, but
had not established a documented procedure to
verify that medical claim payments were proper
based on supporting documentation.
 Finding 4 was deemed to be No Progress.
UEF had not adequately addressed any of the
audit recommendations, which included, for
example, complying with procurement and
contract provisions of the State procurement
regulations, and ensuring that invoiced amounts
are supported and agree to contract-approved
rates and level of services prior to payment.
 Finding 6 was deemed to be Corrected.
UEF had taken sufficient action to properly protect
sensitive personally identifiable information (PII).
Follow-up Reviews of Unsatisfactory Audit Reports
Page 16