Title: Presentation to the Joint Audit Committee - Fraud Hotline Activity - OLA Results from Pursuing Allegations


The reports referenced in this presentation are listed below.

Maryland Department of Transportation - Maryland Transit Administration - Allegations Related to Possible Violations of State Laws, Regulations, and Policies Involving an MTA Management Employee (1/7/2019)

Department of Human Services - Baltimore City Department of Social Services - Allegation Related to Possible Violations of State Procurement Regulations and Certain Payments Made to a Nonprofit Organization (7/11/2018)
Date: 01/22/2019
Type: Presentations to the Legislature
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5c48aebaa1ce580ea86b986d
Extracted: 2025-06-18T22:23:11.069673
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Fraud Hotline Activity
OLA Results from Pursuing
Allegations
Presentation to
Maryland General Assembly
Joint Audit Committee
Gregory A. Hook, CPA
Brian S. Tanen, CPA, CFE
Joseph E. McWilliams, CFE
January 22, 2019

--- Page 2 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Hotline History
 August 2002 – JAC instructed OLA to implement
a hotline and web referral process for the
reporting of allegations of fraud, waste, and
abuse in State government operations.
 February 2003 – OLA’s hotline and web referral
process were launched with an expected call
volume of 200 calls per year.
 Actual annual call volume has consistently
exceeded expectations.
Fraud Hotline Activity
Page 2

--- Page 3 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Hotline Activity
Call Volume
(Calendar Year Basis)
The spike in CY 2015 related to increase in public assistance
benefit fraud allegations, which are usually referred to the
administering agencies.
Fraud Hotline Activity
Page 3

--- Page 4 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Hotline Marketing
OLA’s hotline and web
referral process are
marketed through a
variety of methods:
• Fraud Posters in
State Offices
• Biennial message
on State employee
payroll notices
• Annual email
reminder to State
employees
Fraud Hotline Activity
Page 4

--- Page 5 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Hotline Operations
 Allegations are received by phone, web referral,
mail, and from OLA auditors in the field.
 Callers are informed that the information
provided is considered confidential, and are
provided with information about the State’s
“whistleblower” laws if reassurance is needed.
 Audit professionals (certified fraud examiners)
handle calls during business hours in
accordance with established procedures.
 All allegations are assessed for credibility, and
due diligence is performed before field
investigations are initiated.
 Allegations are investigated by OLA, referred to
applicable State agencies, or not pursued.
Fraud Hotline Activity
Page 5

--- Page 6 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Hotline Allegation Disposition
Hotline Allegation Disposition
(February 2003 through December 2018)
Investigations Completed by OLA or in
17%
Process
Referred to State Agencies* 61%
Not Pursued 22%
* Approximately 43% of allegations we referred to State
agencies were related to Department of Human
Services benefits.
Fraud Hotline Activity
Page 6

--- Page 7 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Investigations Completed by OLA
OLA will highlight findings from two recent special
reviews of hotline allegations (please refer to
related handouts):
 Department of Human Services – Baltimore City
Department of Social Services - Allegation
Related to Possible Violations of State
Procurement Regulations and Certain Payments
Made to a Nonprofit Organization (Report Dated
July 11, 2018)
 Maryland Department of Transportation –
Maryland Transit Administration - Allegations
Related to Possible Violations of State Laws,
Regulations, and Policies Involving an MTA
Management Employee (Report Dated January
7, 2019)
Fraud Hotline Activity
Page 7

--- Page 8 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Investigations Completed by OLA
In addition to conducting special reviews, OLA
investigates some hotline allegations in
conjunction with its fiscal compliance audits.
During calendar year 2018, these efforts resulted
in the identification of significant violations of State
laws, regulations, and policies.
• Contracts were used to obtain services outside
their scope, lacked detailed deliverables, and
contained excessive rate increases.
• Interagency agreements were improperly used
to augment staffing levels and avoid
competitive procurement processes.
• Corporate purchasing cards were not used in
accordance with State regulations.
• Potential violations of State ethics laws were
identified for possible referral to the State
Ethics Commission.
Fraud Hotline Activity
Page 8

--- Page 9 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Referrals to State Agencies
Callers who report allegations that would be more
appropriately handled by other agencies are
referred to the applicable agencies for assistance.
Examples of these referrals include:
• Welfare Benefits – Department of Human
Services, Office of the Inspector General
• Medicaid Benefits – Maryland Department of
Health, Office of the Inspector General
• Identity Theft – Office of the Attorney General,
Identity Theft Unit
• Unemployment Insurance – Department of
Labor, Licensing and Regulation
Fraud Hotline Activity
Page 9

--- Page 10 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Conclusion
Efforts Devoted to OLA’s Hotline Have Been
Worthwhile
 Significant efforts continue to be made to build
awareness of the hotline.
 Hotline activity has continued to exceed initial
expectations.
 OLA continues to identify and report on
significant findings, in both fiscal compliance
audit reports and reports of special reviews,
based on hotline allegations.
Fraud Hotline Activity
Page 10