Title: Presentation to the Joint Audit Committee - Maryland Department of Transportation - Maryland Transit Administration - Allegations Related to Possible Violations of State Laws, Regulations, and Policies Involving an MTA Management Employee


Related Report Dated (1/7/2019)
Date: 01/22/2019
Type: Presentations to the Legislature
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5c48aebba1ce580ea86b9871
Extracted: 2025-06-18T22:23:20.575161
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Maryland Department of Transportation
Maryland Transit Administration
Allegations Related to Possible Violations of
State Laws, Regulations, and Policies
Involving an MTA Management Employee
Special Review
Report dated January 7, 2019
Presentation to the Joint Audit Committee
Gregory A. Hook, CPA
Brian S. Tanen, CPA, CFE
Matthew L. Streett, CPA, CFE
Joseph E. McWilliams, CFE
January 22, 2019

--- Page 2 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Overview
 We conducted a review of allegations received
through our fraud, waste, and abuse hotline
regarding possible violations of State laws,
regulations, and policies by an MTA Light Rail
Operations management employee.
 The management employee directed a prime
contractor to use specific vendors as
subcontractors, including one vendor with which
the management employee had less than an
arm’s-length relationship (hereinafter referred to
as the “related vendor”).
 All of the contracts were competitively procured by
MTA’s Procurement Department based on the
specifications and deliverables established by the
respective departments. The respective
departments were delegated responsibility for
administering the contracts, assigning and
monitoring the work, and approving the related
invoices.
Maryland Transit Administration Special Review Page 2

--- Page 3 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Overview
 The scope of our review included 3 five-year
ancillary service contracts collectively valued at
$36 million that were each awarded to the prime
contractor identified in our allegation, including
two contracts in which work totaling $3 million
was subcontracted to the related vendor. We also
identified and reviewed 4 snow and ice removal
contracts, collectively valued at $6.2 million, that
involved the related vendor as either the prime
contractor or a subcontractor.
 We identified certain questionable matters as
described in the findings which we referred to the
Office of the Attorney General – Criminal Division.
We also identified possible violations of State
ethics law that may require referral to the State
Ethics Commission. Finally, we noted violations of
State procurement regulations and MTA policy, as
well as poor contract administration procedures
and controls.
Maryland Transit Administration Special Review Page 3

--- Page 4 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Key Issues
 Language in certain contracts allowed employees
to circumvent State procurement regulations. The
management employee used this capability to
direct work to the related vendor.
 Competition may have been limited on two
contracts, and another contract was awarded to
contractors that did not appear to meet the
technical qualifications.
 Task orders were improperly issued for projects
that should have been procured separately;
critical task order and bid documents were not
retained; required approvals were not obtained,
and task order payments were not monitored.
 The management employee directed and
monitored 4 snow and ice removal contracts
involving the related vendor, raising questions
about the integrity of the award and related
payments.
Maryland Transit Administration Special Review Page 4

--- Page 5 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Ancillary Service Contracts (Finding 1)
Contract Language Allowed MTA to Circumvent State
Procurement Regulations
 Contract language allowed MTA employees to
direct prime contractors to use certain vendors as
subcontractors, circumventing State procurement
regulations. Prime contractors could charge higher
overhead rates for using the vendors selected by
MTA employees.
MTA Management Employee Had a Relationship with
a Vendor
 The management employee directed prime
contractors on two $9 million contracts to
subcontract work to a vendor. Two employees of
the vendor were close relatives of the
management employee. Two other employees of
the vendor resided at properties owned by the
management employee. The vendor’s Chief
Financial Officer operated a business out of a
property owned by the management employee.
Maryland Transit Administration Special Review Page 5

--- Page 6 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Ancillary Service Contracts (Finding 1 cont.)
Questionable Payments
 The related vendor was paid $192,000 to perform
snow removal and train cleaning services that
should have been provided under other existing
contracts. The rates paid to perform these
services exceeded the rates on the existing
contracts.
 Certain tasks performed by the related vendor did
not appear to be appropriate under the contracts.
For example, one $15,420 invoice for multiple
services included charges for driving a light rail
operations employee to a hardware store to
purchase cleaning supplies.
These questionable payments, coupled with the
relationships we described previously, raise
questions about a possible conflict of interest
between the management employee and the related
vendor.
Maryland Transit Administration Special Review Page 6

--- Page 7 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Ancillary Service Contracts (Finding 2)
 MTA may have limited competition on the light rail
ancillary service contracts by combining
specialized maintenance and repair of light rail
tracks with maintenance and repairs at MTA
facilities. Our review disclosed that the majority of
work performed under the contract was related to
maintenance of MTA facilities (such as painting,
electrical, plumbing, and HVAC).
 The method used to award the two light rail
contracts provided no assurance that the State
received the most advantageous pricing and may
have enabled the management employee to direct
work to the related vendor.
 Two of the three prime contractors awarded a
security and wireless ancillary contract did not
demonstrate that they met the contract’s
technical experience and qualification
requirements. MTA used this contract to
subcontract work to two incumbent vendors
whose contracts had expired.
Maryland Transit Administration Special Review Page 7

--- Page 8 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Ancillary Service Contracts (Finding 3)
MTA did not properly administer task orders issued
under the three ancillary contracts and did not
monitor the related payments.
 MTA improperly issued task orders for projects
that exceeded $500,000 which, according to MTA
policy, should have been competitively procured
as separate contracts. The management
employee controlled three such task orders
totaling $5.8 million.
 MTA did not retain copies of task orders and
critical bid documents, and did not obtain required
approvals. For example, 8 task orders totaling
$8.5 million (of 12 tested) were not approved by
MTA's Task Order Review Committee.
 MTA did not properly monitor the amounts paid
under the task orders and obtain support for the
related invoices. For example, MTA did not ensure
documentation was provided by the contractors to
support subcontractor charges.
Maryland Transit Administration Special Review Page 8

--- Page 9 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Snow and Ice Removal Contracts (Finding 4)
The management employee directed and monitored
four light rail snow and ice removal contracts that
involved the related vendor.
 The related vendor and a second vendor bid on
each contract and listed each other as
subcontractors in their respective bid
submissions. Of the $3.6 million paid under these
contracts, $1.5 million was paid to the related
vendor as a prime contractor or a subcontractor.
 The management employee was responsible for
authorizing the number of hours the vendor could
work (including overtime). Therefore, the vendors
could have potentially submitted low hourly rates
to win the contract awards, with the knowledge
that the amount ultimately paid would be dictated
by the hours the management employee later
authorized.
Maryland Transit Administration Special Review Page 9

--- Page 10 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Conclusion
MTA should
• discontinue using contract language that permits
circumvention of State procurement regulations
and directing contractors to use specific vendors;
• take appropriate action regarding the MTA
employee’s involvement with the contracts;
• after consultation with the Office of the Attorney
General – Criminal Division, refer this matter to
the State Ethics Commission;
• ensure future contracts maximize competition,
provide the State with the most advantageous
pricing, and are only awarded to vendors who
meet the qualifications;
• administer task orders in accordance with MTA
policies and retain critical documents;
• obtain and review support for invoice charges; and
• verify the propriety of the procurement of and
invoices submitted under the four snow and ice
removal contracts.
Maryland Transit Administration Special Review Page 10