Title: Presentation to the House Appropriations Subcommittee - Maryland Health Benefit Exchange


Related Report Dated (10/30/2018)
Date: 01/31/2019
Type: Presentations to the Legislature
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5c5468e7a1ce5810380c8de2
Extracted: 2025-06-18T22:23:51.504223
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Maryland Health Benefit Exchange
(MHBE)
Report Dated October 30, 2018

--- Page 2 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Report Overview
The report contained 8 findings, including 3 repeat
findings from the prior report. (MHBE satisfactorily
addressed 7 of the 10 findings from the prior audit
report dated October 2, 2015.)
Audit Scope Limitation
As detailed on pages 6 and 7 of the audit report,
our audit scope was limited with respect to
MHBE’s Medicaid eligibility determination and
redetermination processes due to restrictions
imposed by the federal Internal Revenue Code on
access to federal tax information (FTI).
As a result, we could not review a key portion of
the MHBE eligibility determination and
redetermination processes or the related FTI to
assess whether proper Medicaid determinations
were being made.
Maryland Health Benefit Exchange (MHBE)
Page 2

--- Page 3 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Key Findings
For certain applicants, MHBE did not verify
income against available federal tax information.
MHBE granted 119 individuals access to perform
critical functions within the Maryland Health
Connection, such as changing eligibility
determinations, and did not monitor the related
activity for propriety.
MHBE did not obtain approval of its Board of
Trustees for awards made under its multi-year
Information Systems Master Contact, and certain
procurement policies were not comprehensive.
MHBE did not sufficiently verify billings, such as
from its customer support vendor.
Security and control deficiencies existed over
MHBE’s information systems.
Maryland Health Benefit Exchange (MHBE)
Page 3

--- Page 4 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Medicaid Eligibility (Finding 1)
For certain applicants, MHBE did not verify applicant
income against available federal tax information (FTI).
MHBE relied solely on the Maryland Automated
Benefits System (MABS) maintained by the
Department of Labor, Licensing and Regulation to
verify the income of certain applicants, even though
MABS excluded many types of income. MABS
contains employer reported wages for most
Maryland workers, but does not include other
sources of income such as self employment, rental,
and investment income, and excludes wages from
non-reporting employers such as federal agencies.
MHBE had access to FTI data but only conducted
income verifications using FTI if no MABS record
was located for the applicant, resulting in a lack of
assurance that all applicant income was identified.
MHBE’s verification of applicant data to MABS
excluded unemployment compensation which was
available within MABS.
Maryland Health Benefit Exchange (MHBE)
Page 4

--- Page 5 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Medicaid Eligibility (Finding 2)
MHBE did not properly restrict and document its review
of user access to the Maryland Health Connection
(MHC) and did not monitor critical changes to applicant
eligibility information. As of March 2018, there were
1,221 active MHC users, including employees of other
State agencies and contractors.
MHBE granted 119 individuals the SuperUser role
which, among other critical functions, could override
enrollees’ eligibility status. During fiscal year 2017,
there were 5,885 overrides processed affecting
14,294 enrollees.
MHBE’s annual review of critical MHC user access
capabilities was not adequately documented to
include who performed the review and the date it
was conducted.
MHBE did not review changes to the eligibility status
of manually verified applicants and did not use
available MHC capabilities to identify these changes.
Maryland Health Benefit Exchange (MHBE)
Page 5

--- Page 6 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Purchases and Disbursements (Finding 3)
 MHBE did not obtain MHBE Board approval for its
multi-year Information Systems Master Contract
and any of the subsequent task orders we tested.
MHBE awarded 21 task orders from the Master
Contract in fiscal year 2017 totaling $6.4 million
that were each valued at $200,000 or more.
 MHBE did not always document vendor technical
evaluations and rankings.
 MHBE did not adequately verify vendor technical
qualifications and the qualifications of vendor
employees and substitute employees.
 MHBE awarded a $206,560 contract to a
vendor that was not approved for work in the
functional area awarded.
 We identified certain substitute employees who
did not meet the minimum qualifications in the
related task orders.
Maryland Health Benefit Exchange (MHBE)
Page 6

--- Page 7 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Purchases and Disbursements (Findings 4 & 5)
MHBE’s procurement policies and procedures were
not comprehensive (Finding 4). These policies and
procedures did not establish a minimum period for
submission of solicitations, and did not provide for
adequate control over the bid submission and bid
opening processes. We noted that bid solicitation
periods were not consistent and, in one instance, the
short period may have limited competition. Electronic
bid documents were not adequately secured by
passwords, and bid openings were not documented.
MHBE did not sufficiently verify the billings received
from its customer support vendor (which was
responsible for assisting applicants) and did not
ensure the vendor met certain contract performance
measures (Finding 5). For example, MHBE did not
verify the propriety of $4.9 million of $5.1 million in
charges for two months during fiscal year 2017. A
similar condition was noted in our preceding audit
report.
Maryland Health Benefit Exchange (MHBE)
Page 7

--- Page 8 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Other Fiscal Compliance Findings
Connector Program Grants
MHBE did not verify the propriety of payroll
expenditures reported by one of its seven grantees
(Finding 6).
Information Systems Security and Control
MHBE did not establish adequate application
maintenance controls, and lacked intrusion
detection prevention system coverage for encrypted
traffic entering the hosted Exchange System
network (Finding 7).
MHBE lacked security assurances over critical data
on servers hosted by contractors for both the
original and replacement Exchange Systems
(Finding 8).
Maryland Health Benefit Exchange (MHBE)
Page 8

--- Page 9 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Conclusions
MHBE should
 verify all applicant income information using
both MABS and FTI data;
 limit access to the SuperUser role, conduct and
document annual security reviews, and review
changes to manual verification eligibility status;
 obtain Board approval for the Information
Systems Master Contract and task orders over
$200,000;
 document vendor technical evaluations,
rankings, and qualifications;
 amend procurement policies to encourage broad
competition and control bid documents;
 perform documented reviews of supporting
documentation from its customer support vendor
to support charges billed and performance
measures; and
 improve controls over Connector Program Grants
and its information system.
Maryland Health Benefit Exchange (MHBE)
Page 9