Title: Maryland Department of Transportation - State Highway Administration
Date: 01/30/2019
Type: Fiscal Compliance
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5c598807a1ce580a5083cb96
Extracted: 2025-06-18T22:24:02.176820
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Audit Report
Maryland Department of Transportation
State Highway Administration
March 2022
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Senator Clarence K. Lam, M.D. (Senate Chair) Delegate Carol L. Krimm (House Chair)
Senator Malcolm L. Augustine Delegate Steven J. Arentz
Senator Adelaide C. Eckardt Delegate Mark S. Chang
Senator George C. Edwards Delegate Nicholas P. Charles II
Senator Katie Fry Hester Delegate Andrea Fletcher Harrison
Senator Cheryl C. Kagan Delegate Trent M. Kittleman
Senator Benjamin F. Kramer Delegate David Moon
Senator Cory V. McCray Delegate Julie Palakovich Carr
Senator Justin D. Ready Delegate Elizabeth G. Proctor
Senator Craig J. Zucker Delegate Geraldine Valentino-Smith
To Obtain Further Information
Office of Legislative Audits
The Warehouse at Camden Yards
351 West Camden Street, Suite 400
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Phone: 410-946-5900
Maryland Relay: 711
TTY: 410-946-5401 ꞏ 301-970-5401
E-mail: OLAWebmaster@ola.state.md.us
Website: www.ola.state.md.us
To Report Fraud
The Office of Legislative Audits operates a Fraud Hotline to report fraud, waste, or abuse involving State
of Maryland government resources. Reports of fraud, waste, or abuse may be communicated anonymously
by a toll-free call to 1-877-FRAUD-11, by mail to the Fraud Hotline, c/o Office of Legislative Audits, or
through the Office’s website.
Nondiscrimination Statement
The Department of Legislative Services does not discriminate on the basis of age, ancestry, color, creed,
marital status, national origin, race, religion, gender, gender identity, sexual orientation, or disability in the
admission or access to its programs, services, or activities. The Department’s Information Officer has been
designated to coordinate compliance with the nondiscrimination requirements contained in Section 35.107
of the United States Department of Justice Regulations. Requests for assistance should be directed to the
Information Officer at 410-946-5400 or 410-970-5400.

--- Page 3 ---
March 29, 2022
Senator Clarence K. Lam, M.D., Senate Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Delegate Carol L. Krimm, House Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Members of Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Annapolis, Maryland
Ladies and Gentlemen:
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the Maryland Department of
Transportation (MDOT) – State Highway Administration (SHA) for the period
beginning July 1, 2017 and ending October 31, 2020. SHA is responsible for the
planning, construction, improvement, maintenance, and operations of the State
highway system.
Our audit disclosed certain procurement related issues and insufficiency in
information system security settings. Specifically, SHA did not publish certain
contract awards on eMaryland Marketplace Advantage (eMMA) as required,
including 3,114 snow removal contracts totaling $316.4 million. Furthermore,
SHA did not adequately safeguard vendor proposals submitted electronically for
certain ongoing procurements expected to result in awards for an estimated 66
contracts for architectural and engineering services totaling $411.8 million. In
addition, certain SHA employees may have potentially violated State ethics laws
by having relationships with certain contractors and SHA did not take permissible
disciplinary actions against certain of these related contractors when their
performance was determined to be unsatisfactory. Finally, certain outdated
software and security-related settings on SHA computers were not sufficient to
provide SHA with adequate assurance that its computers were properly protected.
Our audit also included a review to determine the status of the eight findings
contained in our preceding SHA audit report. We determined that SHA
satisfactorily addressed six of these findings. The remaining two findings are
repeated in this report.

--- Page 4 ---
MDOT’s response to this audit, on behalf of SHA, is included as an appendix to
this report. We reviewed the response to our findings and related
recommendations, and have concluded that the corrective actions identified are
sufficient to address all audit issues. Additionally, as allowed by our policy, we
have edited MDOT’s response to remove certain language unrelated to the finding
and overly detailed information regarding information systems security.
We wish to acknowledge the cooperation extended to us during the audit by SHA.
We also wish to acknowledge MDOT’s and SHA’s willingness to address the
audit issues and implement appropriate corrective actions.
Respectfully submitted,
Gregory A. Hook, CPA
Legislative Auditor
2

--- Page 5 ---
Table of Contents
Background Information 4
Agency Responsibilities 4
Resource Sharing Agreements 4
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report 5
Findings and Recommendations 7
Procurements
* Finding 1 – The State Highway Administration (SHA) did not comply 7
with publication requirements for certain contract awards totaling
$333.4 million.
Finding 2 – SHA did not have adequate safeguards in place to secure 8
vendor proposals for architectural and engineering services submitted
and stored electronically.
Possible Ethics Violations
Finding 3 – Certain SHA employees potentially violated State ethics 9
laws and permissible disciplinary action was not taken when certain
contractors performed unsatisfactorily.
Information Systems Security and Control
* Finding 4 – Two malware protection controls were not sufficient to 11
provide adequate assurance that SHA computers were properly
protected from security risks.
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology 13
Agency Response Appendix
 Denotes item repeated in full or part from preceding audit report
3

--- Page 6 ---
Background Information
Agency Responsibilities
The State Highway Administration (SHA) is responsible for the planning,
construction, improvement, maintenance, and operations of the State highway
system. SHA operates numerous facilities throughout the State, including a
headquarters in Baltimore City, seven district offices, and the Statewide
Operations Center (including the Coordinated Highways Action Response Team -
CHART).
According to the State’s accounting records, SHA’s expenditures totaled
approximately $1.6 billion (special funds of $852 million and federal funds of
$725 million) during
fiscal year 2021.
The majority of
SHA’s expenditures
related to capital
projects for the
construction and
system preservation
of State highways,
roads, and bridges,
related maintenance,
and State and federal
aid to local
jurisdictions for the
construction and
maintenance of local
roads (see Figure 1).
Resource Sharing Agreements (RSAs)
On August 3, 2018, we issued a performance report on Telecommunication
Resource Sharing Agreements which contained several findings related to SHA.
This audit report included a number of findings related to selected agencies, but
emphasized the need for the Department of Information Technology to exercise
greater oversight of the RSAs entered into by State agencies in general. The
performance audit included the following select findings related to SHA.
4

--- Page 7 ---
 SHA did not maintain comprehensive records of RSAs, inventories of State-
owned telecommunication towers and fiber optic cables for potential resource
sharing, and inventories of private company equipment installed on towers;
 SHA did not treat certain agreements as resource sharing resulting in lost
opportunities to maximize compensation;
 SHA did not verify all monetary compensation was received;
 SHA did not always include adequate provisions to protect State interests, and
 SHA executed and renewed resource sharing agreements without proper
approvals.
The Maryland Department of Transportation, on behalf of SHA, agreed to the
findings and recommendations in the August 2018 report.
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report
Our audit included a review to determine the status of the eight findings contained
in our preceding audit report dated January 30, 2019. As disclosed in Figure 2
below, we determined that SHA satisfactorily addressed six of these findings.
The remaining two findings are repeated in this report.
5

--- Page 8 ---
Figure 2
Status of Preceding Findings
Preceding Implementation
Finding Description
Finding Status
State Highway Administration (SHA) procedures to identify State
property damaged by traffic accidents using Maryland Department
of State Police (MSP) records and to invoice for these damages were
Finding 1 Not repeated
not comprehensive. We identified more than 8,700 accidents during
our audit period from MSP records that may have caused damage to
State property and could be subject to recovery by the State.
SHA did not have adequate procedures in place to ensure the
Finding 2 Not repeated
SafeZones program vendor complied with all contract requirements.
SHA did not always follow established procedures at the one SHA
Finding 3 district office that we examined to ensure the propriety of payments Not repeated
to vendors for snow and ice removal contracts.
SHA did not comply with certain State procurement-related
Repeated
Finding 4 reporting and publication requirements for contract awards totaling
(Current Finding 1)
$77.1 million.
SHA did not have comprehensive written procedures to resolve, in a
timely manner, certain highway construction-related expenditures
Finding 5 Not repeated
that had been suspended from the federal reimbursement process,
and related follow-up efforts were not always documented.
(Policy Issue) SHA had not completed a comprehensive review of
physical security practices in place at its district offices to ensure
Finding 6 Not repeated
that equipment and supplies were adequately protected from loss or
misappropriation.
SHA lacked proper internal controls over corporate purchasing
Finding 7 Not repeated
cards to prevent or detect unauthorized purchases.
Certain outdated software and security-related settings on SHA
Repeated
Finding 8 computers were not sufficient to provide SHA with adequate
(Current Finding 4)
assurance that its computers were properly protected.
6

--- Page 9 ---
Findings and Recommendations
Procurements
Finding 1
The State Highway Administration (SHA) did not comply with publication
requirements for certain contract awards totaling $333.4 million.
Analysis
SHA did not comply with publication requirements on eMaryland Marketplace
Advantage (eMMA)1 for certain contract awards totaling $333.4 million.
Publishing awards on eMMA provides transparency to the general public over
State procurements including information about each winning bidder and the
amount of the related award.
 SHA did not publish 3,114 contract awards for emergency snow and ice
removal2 totaling $316.4 million for fiscal years 2018 to 2021. State law
requires SHA to publish contracts procured as emergency procurements,
which includes snow and ice removal contracts, on eMMA within 30 days of
contract award. SHA management advised us that it believed its annual
reporting of snow and ice removal contracts as emergency procurements to
the Board of Public Works (BPW) satisfied all publication requirements under
State law. However, SHA legal counsel confirmed that the snow and ice
removal contract awards should be posted to eMMA within 30 days of contract
approval and execution since they are considered emergency procurements.
 Our test of five architectural and engineering service contract awards during
the period from June 2019 through June 2020, totaling $35.5 million,
disclosed that three contracts were not published on eMMA within 30 days of
execution as required by State law. Specifically, one contract awarded on
June 18, 2020 totaling $3.0 million was not published on eMMA as of June 15,
2021 and two contracts totaling $14.0 million were published 46 and 103 days
after execution. State law requires architectural and engineering service
contracts be posted to eMMA 30 days after contract execution.
1 eMaryland Marketplace (eMM) is an internet-based, interactive procurement system managed by
the Department of General Services (DGS). Effective July 2019, DGS replaced eMM with
eMaryland Marketplace Advantage (eMMA).
2 State law allows SHA to procure contracts for the pretreatment and removal of snow and ice
from Maryland bridges and roadways as emergency procurements in order to avoid or mitigate
serious damage to public health, safety, or welfare. These are annual contracts procured prior to
the start of each winter season. SHA’s utilization of the contract is contingent on the level of
winter events during each season and unexpended balances do not carry over from season to
season.
7

--- Page 10 ---
A similar condition related to different contract types was commented upon in our
two preceding audit reports.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that SHA comply with State procurement laws by publishing
contract awards on eMMA within 30 days of contract award, as required
(repeat).
Finding 2
SHA did not have adequate safeguards in place to secure vendor proposals
for architectural and engineering services submitted and stored
electronically.
Analysis
SHA did not have adequate safeguards in place to secure vendor proposals
(expressions of interest and technical proposals) for architectural and engineering
services submitted and stored electronically. Beginning in April 2020, SHA
instructed vendors to submit their proposal documents for architectural and
engineering contract solicitations directly to a Procurement Office shared email
account. The proposal documents in the shared email account, which were not
encrypted or password-protected, were then transferred to a shared file folder on
SHA’s network. Thirty-two employees had access to either the shared email
account or to the shared file folder prior to the bid submission deadlines for the
solicitations. Consequently, confidential competitive information could be
accessed and disclosed to other prospective candidates without detection.
During the period from April 2020 through April 2021, SHA solicited 15
architectural and engineering procurements that required emailed submissions.
SHA estimated that 66 contracts totaling $411.8 million could ultimately be
awarded through the 15 solicitations.
Upon bringing this issue to SHA’s attention, it attempted to implement corrective
action by requiring vendors to submit proposals on eMMA, which has security
configurations for secure storage and transmission of electronically submitted
bids and proposals. However, DGS subsequently advised SHA that eMMA would
not have the functionality to handle electronically submitted bids and proposals
for qualifications-based-selection (QBS) procurements (such as for architectural
and engineering services). When using QBS, potential vendors submit an
expression of interest, then a technical proposal for evaluation, and the award is
made without consideration of price, which is negotiated later after the award.
According to DGS, its Office of State Procurement plans to provide written
8

--- Page 11 ---
guidance to State agencies in the future on how to handle bids and proposals for
QBS procurements.
Recommendation 2
We recommend that SHA establish adequate safeguards to secure vendor
proposals submitted and stored electronically against improper access. In
addition, since eMMA presently does not have the functionality for
qualifications-based selection procurements (such as for architectural and
engineering services), SHA should consult with DGS to ensure that it
implements the best corrective action for securing related vendor proposals.
Possible Ethics Violations
Finding 3
Certain SHA employees potentially violated State ethics laws by overseeing
contracts in which a qualifying relative had a financial interest and certain of
these employees did not properly disclose that financial interest as required.
In addition, permissible disciplinary action was not taken when certain of
these related contractors performed unsatisfactorily.
Analysis
Certain SHA employees potentially violated State ethics laws by overseeing
contracts in which a qualifying relative3 had a financial interest (owned or was an
employee) in the contractor and certain of these employees did not properly
disclose that financial interest as required. In addition, SHA did not document its
rationale for not taking permissible disciplinary action when certain of these
related contractors performed unsatisfactorily.
We performed an analysis to identify potential conflicts of interest between SHA
employees and contractors doing business with SHA and identified one employee
who had a qualifying relative with a financial interest in a SHA contractor. Our
review of contract documentation related to this employee disclosed that while
this employee did not participate in work related to this contractor, the employee
did not disclose the relationship to SHA or the State Ethics Commission
(Commission) as required by SHA’s policy. In addition, in the course of our
review, we identified two other employees that participated in contracts with two
contractors in which their qualifying relatives had a financial interest.
Specifically, we noted the following conditions.
3 A qualifying relative is defined in Maryland Public Ethics Law Section 5-501 as a “spouse,
parent, child, brother, or sister.”
9

--- Page 12 ---
 One SHA employee directed and monitored a contractor that employed the
employee’s qualifying relative. We noted at least 12 documented instances
where the employee participated in matters involving this contractor,
including representing SHA in discussions, directing operations when this
contractor was performing work, and checking the contractor’s personnel in
and out of their shift. The employee did not disclose the relationship to SHA
or the Commission, as required. During our audit period, this contractor was
issued three contracts totaling $886,300, and received payments totaling
$385,146.
 A second SHA employee participated in the oversight of a contractor where a
qualifying relative worked. This employee had previously disclosed the
relationship to SHA, and based on the advice of the Commission, SHA
established a non-participation agreement that the employee signed, which
prohibited the employee from participating in matters involving the
contractor. However, we noted at least 26 documented instances where the
employee participated in matters involving this contractor, including receiving
contractor invoices and checking the contractor’s personnel in and out of their
shift. During our audit period, this contractor was issued three contracts
totaling $640,700 with payments totaling $427,813.
 A third SHA employee (who was identified in our initial analysis) had a
qualifying relative who owned a company doing business with SHA and
another qualifying relative who performed services for the same company.
The employee did not disclose these relationships to SHA or the Commission,
as required by SHA policy. We did not identify instances in which the
employee participated in matters involving this contractor. During our audit
period, this contractor was issued two contracts totaling $120,100, with
payments totaling $84,248.
Our review also disclosed that SHA did not assess monetary penalties or
terminate the contracts with the contractors noted above in the first and third
bullet, who did not comply with the contract terms. For example, the contractor
in the first bullet, was paid $385,146 and its contract stated that it may be
terminated if the contractor did not report two or more occurrences of equipment
failures to SHA. The contractor repeatedly failed to report equipment failures and
SHA did not terminate the contract or document its justification for not taking
corrective action. SHA did not have documentation evidencing which employees
were involved in the decision to not take corrective action and therefore, we could
not determine if the SHA employee with the qualifying relative was involved in
these decisions. We were advised by district management personnel overseeing
10

--- Page 13 ---
these contracts that contract terminations were subject to professional judgement
on the part of SHA employees and were rarely taken for any contractor.
We consulted senior management personnel at the Commission who advised that
the aforementioned relationships with the first two employees above could
potentially be a violation of State ethics law. Referral of a matter to the
Commission by a State agency does not mean that a violation took place. Any
final decision as to whether violations of State ethics laws did or did not occur
would ultimately be made by the Commission.
Recommendation 3
We recommend that SHA
a. refer the matters discussed above to the Commission and take action to
comply with any decisions that the Commission provides on these
matters, and
b. take available corrective action when contractors do not comply with the
terms of the contract or document the justification for waiving available
disciplinary actions when performance was unsatisfactory.
Information Systems Security and Control
Background
The SHA Office of Information Technology supports employee use of numerous
information technology applications which operate on the Maryland Department
of Transportation data center mainframe and various server platforms. Certain of
SHA’s systems are either web-based or cloud-hosted applications which
employees can access from remote locations. As of September 2020, SHA had
over 3,900 computers in operation.
Finding 4
Two malware protection controls were not sufficient to provide adequate
assurance that SHA computers were properly protected from security risks.
Analysis
Two malware protection controls were not sufficient to provide adequate
assurance that SHA computers were properly protected from security risks. Our
September and October 2020 testing disclosed the following conditions.
 Certain SHA computers had not been updated with the latest releases for a
certain software product known to have significant security-related
vulnerabilities. Although the vendor for this software product frequently
11

--- Page 14 ---
provides software patches to address these vulnerabilities, these computers
had not been updated for these patches. Specifically, 9 of 14 computers tested
which had the software product installed were running an outdated installed
software version, having a software release date of January 2019.
 Host-based firewalls were not enabled on the 3 of the 10 laptop computers
tested. If these laptops were used outside of the SHA network, they would be
susceptible to attack from untrusted traffic.
The State of Maryland Information Technology Security Manual states that
agencies, at a minimum, must protect against malicious code (viruses, worms,
Trojan horses) by implementing protections (anti-virus, anti-malware) that, to the
extent possible, include a capability for automatic updates. Similar conditions
were commented upon in our preceding audit report.
Recommendation 4
We recommend that SHA
a. promptly install all critical security-related software updates for
commonly vulnerable applications on all computers (repeat), and
b. ensure that all laptop computers are protected by an enabled and
properly configured host-based firewall (repeat).
12

--- Page 15 ---
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the Maryland Department of
Transportation (MDOT) – State Highway Administration (SHA) for the period
beginning July 1, 2017 and ending October 31, 2020. The audit was conducted in
accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards. Those
standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient,
appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and
conclusions based on our audit objectives. We believe that the evidence obtained
provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit
objectives.
As prescribed by the State Government Article, Section 2-1221 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, the objectives of this audit were to examine SHA’s financial
transactions, records, and internal control, and to evaluate its compliance with
applicable State laws, rules, and regulations.
In planning and conducting our audit, we focused on the major financial-related
areas of operations based on assessments of significance and risk. The areas
addressed by the audit included procurements and disbursements for highway
design, construction, and maintenance, as well as SHA’s operating expenditures,
federal funds, equipment, and information systems. We also determined the
status of the findings contained in our preceding audit report.
Our audit did not include certain payroll support services (such as processing of
personnel transactions and maintenance of employee leave records) provided by
MDOT – Secretary’s Office to SHA. In addition, our audit did not include an
evaluation of internal controls over compliance with federal laws and regulations
for federal assistance programs and an assessment of SHA’s compliance with
those laws and regulations because the State of Maryland engages an independent
accounting firm to annually audit such programs administered by State agencies,
including SHA.
Our assessment of internal controls was based on agency procedures and controls
in place at the time of our fieldwork. Our tests of transactions and other auditing
procedures were generally focused on the transactions occurring during our audit
period of July 1, 2017 to October 31, 2020, but may include transactions before or
after this period as we considered necessary to achieve our audit objectives.
To accomplish our audit objectives, our audit procedures included inquiries of
appropriate personnel, inspections of documents and records, tests of transactions,
and to the extent practicable, observations of SHA’s operations. Generally,
13

--- Page 16 ---
transactions were selected for testing based on auditor judgment, which primarily
considers risk, the timing or dollar amount of the transaction, or the significance
of the transaction to the area of operation reviewed. As a matter of course, we do
not normally use sampling in our tests, so unless otherwise specifically indicated,
neither statistical nor non-statistical audit sampling was used to select the
transactions tested. Therefore, unless sampling is specifically indicated in the
finding, the results of any tests conducted or disclosed by us cannot be used to
project those results to the entire population from which the test items were
selected.
We also performed various data extracts of pertinent information from the State’s
and MDOT’s Financial Management Information Systems (such as revenue and
expenditure data), the State’s Central Payroll Bureau (payroll data), as well as
from the contractor administering the State’s Corporate Purchasing Card Program
(credit card activity). The extracts are performed as part of ongoing internal
processes established by the Office of Legislative Audits and were subject to
various tests to determine data reliability. We determined that the data extracted
from these sources were sufficiently reliable for the purposes the data were used
during this audit. Finally, we performed other auditing procedures that we
considered necessary to achieve our audit objectives. The reliability of data used
in this report for background or informational purposes was not assessed.
SHA’s management is responsible for establishing and maintaining effective
internal control. Internal control is a process designed to provide reasonable
assurance that objectives pertaining to the reliability of financial records;
effectiveness and efficiency of operations, including safeguarding of assets; and
compliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations are achieved. As
provided in Government Auditing Standards, there are five components of
internal control: control environment, risk assessment, control activities,
information and communication, and monitoring. Each of the five components,
when significant to the audit objectives, and as applicable to SHA, were
considered by us during the course of this audit.
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate.
Our reports are designed to assist the Maryland General Assembly in exercising
its legislative oversight function and to provide constructive recommendations for
improving State operations. As a result, our reports generally do not address
activities we reviewed that are functioning properly.
14

--- Page 17 ---
This report includes findings relating to conditions that we consider to be
significant deficiencies in the design or operation of internal control that could
adversely affect SHA’s ability to maintain reliable financial records, operate
effectively and efficiently, and/or comply with applicable laws, rules, and
regulations. Our report also includes findings regarding significant instances of
noncompliance with applicable laws, rules, or regulations. Other less significant
findings were communicated to SHA that did not warrant inclusion in this report.
The response from MDOT, on behalf of SHA, to our findings and
recommendations is included as an appendix to this report. As prescribed in the
State Government Article, Section 2-1224 of the Annotated Code of Maryland,
we will advise MDOT regarding the results of our review of its response.
15

--- Page 18 ---
APPENDIX

--- Page 19 ---
Maryland Department of Transportation
State Highway Administration
Agency Response Form
Procurements
Finding 1
The State Highway Administration (SHA) did not comply with publication requirements
for certain contract awards totaling $333.4 million.
We recommend that SHA comply with State procurement laws by publishing contract
awards on eMMA within 30 days of contract award, as required (repeat).
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide None.
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 1 Agree Estimated Completion Date: 8/31/2022
Please provide details of MDOT SHA will take the following corrective actions to address the
corrective action or issues noted:
explain disagreement.
 For the 2021-2022 snow season, the Statewide Financial Manager
will post a public notice with a memorandum that includes the
blanket purchase order, vendor name, contract award, and the
original award amount. This action will be completed by April 1,
2022.
 Beginning in the 2022-2023 snow season, we will require that each
District and office post the contract award in eMMA before the
Office of Finance activates the blanket purchase order. This will be
an additional step in the existing approval process and quality
assurance/quality control (QA/QC) checklist. Contract processes
and templates are finalized and distributed by August 31st before
each snow season.
 For architectural/engineering (A/E) contracts, we will add eMMA
posting confirmation to the QA/QC checklist for blanket purchase
orders over $50,000 and require proof of posting to be attached. The
eMMA Contract ID number must be posted for blanket purchase
order activation. This action will be completed immediately.
Page 1 of 7

--- Page 20 ---
Maryland Department of Transportation
State Highway Administration
Agency Response Form
Finding 2
SHA did not have adequate safeguards in place to secure vendor proposals for
architectural and engineering services submitted and stored electronically.
We recommend that SHA establish adequate safeguards to secure vendor proposals
submitted and stored electronically against improper access. In addition, since eMMA
presently does not have the functionality for qualifications-based selection procurements
(such as for architectural and engineering services), SHA should consult with DGS to
ensure that it implements the best corrective action for securing related vendor proposals.
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide None.
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 2 Agree Estimated Completion Date: 7/15/2021
Please provide details of MDOT SHA has reverted to sealed envelope submission of technical
corrective action or proposals, as explained below.
explain disagreement.
 In May 2021, MDOT SHA directed all A/E procurement officers to
receive Technical Proposals through eMMA for newly advertised
contract series. For contract series already advertised, each
procurement officer was directed to issue an amendment to the
solicitation requiring each offeror to submit their Technical Proposal
on a USB drive in a sealed envelope. (eMMA does not allow
changes to the solicitation type after advertisement.) Technical
proposals were then secured in a locked file room until the due date
and time, when the envelope was to be opened in the presence of two
State employees.
 On December 21, 2021, the eMMA Help Desk informed MDOT
SHA that the Triple Envelope process was not designed for
Qualifications Based Selection, stating, “eMMA really only
recognizes one 'phase' of proposal submission. So when a solicitation
is Open (out on the street), vendors have to submit all parts of their
proposal, both general, technical, and financial.” MDOT SHA has
received all Technical Proposals as required in COMAR
21.05.03.02G, Receipt of Proposals, since July 15, 2021.
Page 2 of 7

--- Page 21 ---
Maryland Department of Transportation
State Highway Administration
Agency Response Form
 On March 11, 2021, SHA’s Office of Procurement and Contract
Management (OPCM) revised the template document for a request
for technical proposals (RFTP). New language in the template states
the following:
The Technical Proposals in response to this RFTP are due no later
than 12:00pm EST. on [Due Date] via USB and delivered to OPCM,
707 North Calvert Street, C-405, Baltimore, Maryland 21202.
Technical Proposals received after the deadline time will not be
accepted, no matter how transmitted, and will be returned unopened
to the Consultant.
MDOT SHA will continue to consult with the Department of General
Services to ensure that it implements the best corrective action for
securing related vendor proposals since eMMA does not provide this
functionality.
Page 3 of 7

--- Page 22 ---
Maryland Department of Transportation
State Highway Administration
Agency Response Form
Possible Ethics Violations
Finding 3
Certain SHA employees potentially violated State ethics laws by overseeing contracts in
which a qualifying relative had a financial interest and certain of these employees did not
properly disclose that financial interest as required. In addition, permissible disciplinary
action was not taken when certain of these related contractors performed unsatisfactorily.
We recommend that SHA
a. refer the matters discussed above to the Commission and take action to comply with
any decisions that the Commission provides on these matters, and
b. take available corrective action when contractors do not comply with the terms of the
contract or document the justification for waiving available disciplinary actions when
performance was unsatisfactory.
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide None.
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 3a Agree Estimated Completion Date: 4/29/22
Please provide details of The MDOT SHA Ethics Coordinator has an internal process that is
corrective action or followed when made aware of possible conflicts of interest between an
explain disagreement. employee and a qualifying relative who is employed by a firm that does
business with MDOT SHA. This includes contacting the employee’s
senior manager to obtain information about the qualifying relationship
and how the District/Office plans to avoid any interaction between the
MDOT SHA employee and the qualifying relative and/or the qualifying
relative’s employer. Once the requested information is received, a Non-
Participation Plan is developed and implemented through the employee’s
Senior Manager and signed by the employee. The executed Non-
Participation Plan is sent to the State Ethics Commission for review and
approval.
This same process is employed if the matter deals with an employee who
is deemed to have a non-qualifying relative under the State Ethics Laws.
In these cases, a Mitigation Agreement is developed and implemented
Page 4 of 7

--- Page 23 ---
Maryland Department of Transportation
State Highway Administration
Agency Response Form
through the employee’s Senior Manager, signed by the employee, and
sent to the State Ethics Commission for review and approval.
The MDOT SHA Ethics Coordinator immediately began the process of
developing a Non-Participation Plan for the employee identified by the
Auditors. We learned that the employee’s son no longer works for the
specific contractor referred to in the audit. However, we were made
aware that another son of the same employee is working for a different
snow vendor contractor. The Commission approved a Non-Participation
Plan on February 14, 2022, which is now in place.
MDOT SHA made the State Ethics Commission aware of this violation
as mentioned in the Audit regarding non-compliance of the Non-
Participation Plan that was in place. The appropriate disciplinary action
was given to the employee who did not comply with the Non-
Participation Plan. MDOT SHA updated the Non-Participation plan
which was approved by the State Ethics Commission on February 14,
2022. Additionally, we put a Mitigation Agreement in place, which was
approved by the State Ethics Commission on February 14, 2022, to
address the relationship between the MDOT SHA employee and his
nephew, who is the owner of the company that does business with
MDOT SHA.
During the Audit, we were made aware of the relationship between the
MDOT SHA employee and their qualifying relatives, who owns and is
employed by a firm that does business with MDOT SHA. MDOT SHA
acted and followed our internal process to develop and implement a
Non-Participation Plan. MDOT SHA was made aware on August 19,
2021, that the company no longer does business with MDOT SHA.
MDOT SHA’s Office of Procurement and Contract Management
confirmed on August 23, 2021, the company had no active
procurements. MDOT SHA did not proceed with the Non-Participation
Plan that was being developed given there were no active procurements
and/or business relationship with the relative’s company.
The MDOT SHA Ethics Coordinator and the MDOT SHA
Organizational Development Division worked with the State Ethics
Commission to establish training for MDOT SHA which will begin in
April 2022. This will cover all aspects of the Maryland Public Ethics
Law including employees who have relationships with vendors or
vendor employees who are not qualifying relatives to capture these
Page 5 of 7

--- Page 24 ---
Maryland Department of Transportation
State Highway Administration
Agency Response Form
relationships under a Mitigation Agreement for State Ethics Commission
approval.
Recommendation 3b Agree Estimated Completion Date: 2/15/2022
Please provide details of MDOT SHA will take corrective action when contractors do not comply
corrective action or with contract terms through the use of the “Notice of Unsatisfactory
explain disagreement. Performance Form” and any justifications for waivers of disciplinary
actions will be documented.
Page 6 of 7

--- Page 25 ---
Maryland Department of Transportation
State Highway Administration
Agency Response Form
Information Systems Security and Control
Finding 4
Two malware protection controls were not sufficient to provide adequate assurance that
SHA computers were properly protected from security risks.
We recommend that SHA
a. promptly install all critical security-related software updates for commonly vulnerable
applications on all computers (repeat), and
b. ensure that all laptop computers are protected by an enabled and properly configured
host-based firewall (repeat).
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide None.
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 4a Agree Estimated Completion Date: 9/30/2022
Please provide details of MDOT SHA will patch all computers to the latest operating system and
corrective action or to the latest version of our software products. MDOT SHA will ensure
explain disagreement. compliance and remediate out of date computers and software by
reviewing vulnerability scans near real time, reviewing monthly
vulnerability scans, and capturing activities in the reporting system. We
will apply critical updates on all computers and identify computers that
failed to get patches.
Recommendation 4b Agree Estimated Completion Date: 5/1/2022
Please provide details of MDOT SHA will turn on the configuration to activate “host-based” on
corrective action or all devices and turn on the privilege level security. This prevents
explain disagreement. malware from damaging a PC and helps organizations deploy a better-
managed desktop.
Page 7 of 7

--- Page 26 ---
A T
UDIT EAM
Raymond G. Burton Jr., CPA, CFE
Audit Manager
Edwin L. Paul, CPA, CISA
Information Systems Audit Manager
Edward J. Welsh, CFE
Amanda M. Jones
Senior Auditors
Eric Alexander, CPA, CISA
Information Systems Senior Auditor
Kareem R. Jackson
Paul A. McGrew
Staff Auditors
Vickey K. Micah
Information Systems Staff Auditor