Title: Maryland Technology Development Corporation


Supplement to TEDCO's Response
Date: 02/05/2019
Type: Fiscal Compliance
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5c5b09d7a1ce58124c5815a3
Extracted: 2025-06-18T22:24:11.832126
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Audit Report
Maryland Technology Development Corporation
February 2019
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
For further information concerning this report contact:
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
301 West Preston Street, Room 1202
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Phone: 410-946-5900 ꞏ 301-970-5900
Toll Free in Maryland: 1-877-486-9964
Maryland Relay: 711
TTY: 410-946-5401 ꞏ 301-970-5401
E-mail: OLAWebmaster@ola.state.md.us
Website: www.ola.state.md.us
The Office of Legislative Audits operates a Fraud Hotline to report fraud, waste, or abuse
involving State of Maryland government resources. Reports of fraud, waste, or abuse
may be communicated anonymously by a toll-free call to 1-877-FRAUD-11, by mail to the
Fraud Hotline, c/o Office of Legislative Audits, or through the Office’s website.
The Department of Legislative Services does not discriminate on the basis of age, ancestry, color,
creed, marital status, national origin, race, religion, gender, gender identity, sexual orientation,
or disability in the admission or access to its programs, services, or activities. The Department’s
Information Officer has been designated to coordinate compliance with the nondiscrimination
requirements contained in Section 35.107 of the Department of Justice Regulations. Requests for
assistance should be directed to the Information Officer at 410-946-5400 or 410-970-5400.

--- Page 5 ---
Table of Contents
Background Information 4
Agency Responsibilities 4
Organizational Change 4
Status of Maryland Venture Fund Authority 5
Financial Statement Audits and Financial Activity 5
Findings and Recommendations 7
Maryland Venture Fund
Finding 1 – The Maryland Technology Development Corporation 8
(TEDCO) had not adopted regulations for direct equity investments
through the Maryland Venture Fund (MVF), as required by State law,
and documentation was lacking to support how certain investments
promoted economic development in the State.
Finding 2 – TEDCO created a three member advisory committee related 9
to the MVF to provide investment advice without establishing adequate
policies and procedures regarding the committee’s membership to
prevent potential conflicts of interest. We found that the committee
included members associated with certain venture firms that received
funding from the MVF.
Finding 3 – TEDCO’s monitoring of third-party venture firms receiving 10
funding through the MVF’s Invest Maryland Program was not
sufficient.
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology 13
Agency Response Appendix
3

--- Page 6 ---
Background Information
Agency Responsibilities
The Maryland Technology Development Corporation (TEDCO) was created by
the Maryland General Assembly in 1998 as a public instrumentality of the State to
help businesses get started and grow through commercialization of technology
developed in Maryland by university researchers, the private sector, and federal
laboratories. TEDCO seeks to create and sustain businesses, and create jobs in
technology-related industry throughout all regions of the State. TEDCO is
governed by a 15-member Board of Directors, which includes the Secretary of the
Department of Commerce, formerly the Department of Business and Economic
Development. The remaining 14 members are appointed to the Board by the
Governor with the advice and consent of the Maryland Senate.
To achieve its goals, TEDCO uses several available financing initiatives and
programs, which, according to its fiscal year 2018 Annual Report, were broadly
categorized as Technology Transfer and Commercialization, Technology
Incubator Program, Gateway Services, Federal Laboratory Technology Initiatives,
Maryland Stem Cell Research Fund, and Maryland Venture Fund. Each of these
functional categories includes various purpose specific initiatives and programs,
which provide, for example, financial assistance to early-stage technology
businesses, funding to promote the development and patenting of new
technologies at research universities, and funding to private and public entities in
the State to promote State-funded stem cell research and cures.
Organizational Change
Effective October 1, 2015, Chapter 141, Laws of Maryland 2015, restructured the
principal economic development entities in the State. The law renamed the
Department of Business and Economic Development (DBED) as the Department
of Economic Competitiveness and Commerce (DECC) and created a Secretary of
Commerce within the Governor’s Office to be the head of economic development
policy and implementation efforts in the State, and to be responsible for the
operations of DECC. A Governor’s Executive Order, effective October 1, 2015,
provided that DECC be known as the Department of Commerce and the Secretary
of Commerce be responsible for monitoring the operations of TEDCO and serve
on its board of directors. The law also moved the BioMaryland Center, the
Maryland Venture Fund (MVF), and the Maryland Venture Fund Authority from
DBED, now the Department of Commerce, to TEDCO.
4

--- Page 7 ---
Status of Maryland Venture Fund Authority
The MVF is primarily a State-supported fund that invests in qualified Maryland
companies either directly or indirectly through venture firms. The Authority is a
nine-member body appointed by the Governor, President of the Senate, and
Speaker of the House with members serving four-year staggered terms. No
member of the Authority may have a financial interest in a purchaser, qualified
business, or venture firm. The Authority has several statutory responsibilities. Its
initial responsibility, which has been completed, was to select venture firms to
receive allocations of designated capital from the Invest Maryland Program within
the MVF. A second responsibility is to ensure that those firms selected make
investments in the State that equal or exceed the amount of designated capital
received under the applicable law, and a third is to provide advice to and consult
with TEDCO in connection with the administration of the Invest Maryland
Program.
We were advised by the Governor’s Appointments Office that the Authority is
inactive and its members’ appointments have all expired. According to TEDCO,
the Authority has not met since it was transferred to TEDCO on October 1, 2015.
TEDCO further advised that the Authority’s responsibility for ensuring that
venture firm investments meet prescribed amounts has been assumed by TEDCO.
Consequently, legislative action may be appropriate to clarify or modify the
Authority’s role in the Invest Maryland Program.
Financial Statement Audits and Financial Activity
In accordance with the Economic Development Article, Section 10-414 of the
Annotated Code of Maryland, TEDCO engaged an independent certified public
accounting firm to perform audits of its financial statements for the fiscal years
ended June 30, 2015, 2016, 2017, and 2018. In the related audit reports, the firm
stated that TEDCO’s financial statements presented fairly, in all material respects,
the financial position of TEDCO, its changes in financial position, and its cash
flows for the years then ended in accordance with accounting principles generally
accepted in the United States of America.
According to its audited financial statements, TEDCO’s fiscal year 2018
expenses, primarily funded with State general funds, were approximately $23.8
million, including $8.2 million in administrative expenses. TEDCO’s fiscal year
2018 net operating income totaled $4.2 million and, as of June 30, 2018, its net
position was $114.7 million.
5

--- Page 8 ---
Since fiscal year 2014, TEDCO’s net position has increased by $107.2 million, of
which $94.1 million was attributable to the transfer of the MVF to TEDCO, as
discussed elsewhere in this report. The remainder of the increase related to
funding for new program initiatives and accumulated earnings, including earnings
from non-State sources (such as federal grants and investment earnings).
As of June 30, 2018, $102 million of TEDCO’s $114.7 million net position
related to the MVF and included MVF investments totaling $69.9 million.
6

--- Page 9 ---
Findings and Recommendations
Maryland Venture Fund
Background
Effective October 1, 2015, State law transferred the Maryland Venture Fund
(MVF) and the Maryland Venture Fund Authority from the Department of
Business and Economic Development, now the Department of Commerce, to the
Maryland Technology Development Corporation (TEDCO). The MVF is
primarily a State-supported fund that invests in qualified Maryland companies
either directly or indirectly through venture firms. The MVF invests in innovative
technology companies across a full range of industry sectors including software,
communications, cyber security, and life sciences.
The Invest Maryland Program, which is part of the MVF and provides funding to
spur growth and innovation through venture capital investment, was funded
primarily through a premium tax credit auction in 2012 that generated $84
million. Of this amount, approximately $56.31 million was designated by law (67
percent) to be distributed to selected third-party venture firms for making
investments in qualified Maryland companies on the State’s behalf (MVF’s
indirect investments). The remainder of the $84 million was, as directed by the
law, to be distributed and used for certain other initiatives, including direct
investments to be made in qualified Maryland companies.
The MVF also includes funding from the Legacy/Enterprise program, essentially
a self-funding program with proceeds from investments retained within the
program for reinvestment, federal funding for the State Small Business Credit
Initiative designed to use a state’s economic development programs to increase
capital available to small businesses, and the Maryland Innovation Opportunity
Fund (MIOF) program. Under the MIOF program, the Maryland State
Retirement and Pension System (MSRPS) entered into an agreement with
TEDCO to make and manage private equity and venture capital investments on its
behalf. MSRPS has committed $25 million to this program.
According to TEDCO’s records, at the end of fiscal year 2018, investments held by
TEDCO through the MVF totaled approximately $69.9 million, an increase of $8.8
million since the end of fiscal year 2017. As of June 30, 2018, $40.1 million of the
$54.31 million in funds designated for indirect investments (i.e., “committed”)
1 The difference of $2 million is considered unallocated and designated for the administration of
the Program.
7

--- Page 10 ---
through the MVF’s Invest Maryland Program had been distributed to venture
capital firms.
Finding 1
TEDCO had not adopted regulations for direct equity investments through
the MVF, as required by State law, and documentation was lacking to
support how certain investments promoted economic development in the
State.
Analysis
TEDCO had not adopted regulations, as required by State law, for the provision
of direct equity investments (investments made by TEDCO rather than by the
aforementioned venture firms) through the MVF. In addition, documentation was
lacking to support how certain investments promoted economic development in
the State. State law requires TEDCO to adopt regulations governing the provision
of direct equity investments made through the MVF that specify, for example, the
types of business enterprises in which investments may be made, the basic
standards an enterprise is required to meet to qualify for investment, and the
criteria that TEDCO uses to make investment decisions. Furthermore, the law
requires TEDCO to make these investments in qualified businesses which have
their principal business operations located in the State and intend to maintain their
principal business operations in the State after receiving an investment.
Our test of 10 direct investments (related to 7 companies), totaling approximately
$8.5 million, made between May 2016 to January 2018 through the MVF,
disclosed that for 6 of these investments (related to 4 of the 7 companies), totaling
$4.7 million, each company’s principal place of business was not in Maryland at
the time of the investment or did not remain in Maryland after the investment, as
required. For example, TEDCO made 2 investments of $1.5 million each in a
company that had disclosed its intention, prior to the finalization of the first
TEDCO investment, to move its principal place of business outside of Maryland
within four months following the first investment. The second investment was
made less than a month following the company’s relocation outside of Maryland
and the closing of its Maryland facility. Furthermore, TEDCO invested $1
million in another company based in a state adjacent to Maryland, and there was
no evidence from the investment documentation that the company intended to
relocate its company’s principal place of business to Maryland (nor did the
company subsequently relocate to Maryland). For each of the 6 investments,
TEDCO did not adequately document why these companies were still considered
qualified for investments or what potential economic impact to the State of
Maryland would result from these investments.
8

--- Page 11 ---
TEDCO advised us that its investment team performs due diligence in order to
assess the merits of potential investments being considered. However, this
information was not always consistently documented, and documentation that did
exist did not include critical information, such as how companies met eligibility
requirements, the potential economic impact to the State of Maryland, and the
number of jobs that would be created or retained in Maryland.
Prior to the transfer of the MVF to TEDCO, the Department of Commerce had
established certain regulations that governed related equity investments, including
a formal application process that required companies to provide information
regarding the company’s management, its products and services, its market, its
business plan, the projected use of the requested funding, and the potential
economic impact on Maryland. Those regulations also required that an applicant
for investment must be maintaining or will maintain its principal place of business
in Maryland. However, TEDCO did not adopt these regulations, nor had it
established a formal application process.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that TEDCO
a. adopt regulations, as required, for the provision of direct equity
investments through the MVF, which include the types of business
enterprises in which investments may be made, the basic standards an
enterprise is required to meet to qualify for investment, and the criteria
used to make investment decisions;
b. comply with the law regarding requirements to invest in companies
located in Maryland; and
c. establish a mechanism to evaluate and document each investment’s
potential economic impact on Maryland.
Finding 2
TEDCO created a three member advisory committee related to the MVF to
provide investment advice without establishing adequate policies and
procedures regarding the committee’s membership to prevent potential
conflicts of interest. We found that the committee included members
associated with certain venture firms that received funding from the MVF.
Analysis
TEDCO created a separate advisory committee to work with TEDCO’s MVF
investment team, but had not instituted adequate policies and procedures,
including a formal conflict of interest policy, governing this committee or its
formal relationship to TEDCO and MVF investment decisions. According to
9

--- Page 12 ---
TEDCO, the advisory committee met with TEDCO’s MVF investment team on a
quarterly basis to discuss investments currently held and their valuations, as well
as companies in the “pipeline” being considered for investment. Committee
members were selected by TEDCO’s Chief Investment Officer, served on a
voluntary basis, and were considered industry experts. Our review disclosed that
two of the three committee members were associated with venture firms that had
received approximately $21.3 million in funding through the MVF, according to
TEDCO’s records.
However, TEDCO had not established any policies or procedures governing this
committee. Specifically, committee members were not required to be
independent, or file financial disclosure statements with the State Ethics
Commission, as is required of TEDCO investment employees. Furthermore,
TEDCO had not established a formal conflict of interest policy for the majority of
the MVF’s investment initiatives and programs, and had no procedure to review
Financial Disclosure Statements that were filed by its investment employees.
Recommendation 2
We recommend that TEDCO establish adequate policies and procedures to
ensure the independence of MVF investment decisions. Specifically, we
recommend that TEDCO
a. develop a formal conflict of interest policy for all MVF programs;
b. require individuals involved with MVF investments, including those who
provide advisory and consultation services, to file Financial Disclosure
Statements with the State Ethics Commission; and
c. review the Financial Disclosure Statements of all individuals involved
with MVF programs to ensure no conflicts of interest exist.
Finding 3
TEDCO’s monitoring of third-party venture firms receiving funding through
the MVF’s Invest Maryland Program was not sufficient.
Analysis
TEDCO’s monitoring of the third-party venture firms receiving funding through
the MVF’s Invest Maryland Program was not sufficient. Specifically, TEDCO
did not have procedures to monitor the accuracy and propriety of management
fees charged by venture firms or the completeness of investor reports related to
specific information required by TEDCO’s agreements with the firms. Further,
TEDCO had not established a formal process to resolve investment shortfalls on a
timely basis.
10

--- Page 13 ---
 TEDCO did not have a procedure to monitor management fees charged by the
venture firms to ensure their accuracy and compliance with TEDCO’s
agreements with those firms and with State law. Specifically, TEDCO did not
verify that fees charged, which totaled approximately $1.1 million during
fiscal year 2017 according to TEDCO’s records, were proper. State law caps
annual management fees paid to a firm at 2.5 percent of TEDCO’s total
designated capital committed to the firm, although the exact fees for each firm
were established by TEDCO’s agreement with that firm up to the 2.5 percent
maximum. As permitted, venture firms take their management fees
throughout the year from capital calls for funds committed to them, and
formally report those fees to TEDCO, along with certain other information
related to the firm’s investments. Our limited testing of management fees did
not disclose any firm receiving more than the 2.5 percent threshold.
 Six of the eight venture firms did not report certain investment specific
information required under their agreements with TEDCO, and TEDCO did
not follow up to obtain the information. These six firms had commitments
totaling approximately $36.7 million with capital calls from those
commitments totaling $26.5 million as of June 2018. Although TEDCO did
obtain investor reports on a regular basis, these reports were targeted to all of
the partners with investments in the same venture fund, and did not include
the additional information related to Program investments required under the
agreements. For example, TEDCO’s agreements with each of the eight
venture firms included provisions that required the firms to report on a
quarterly basis, certain information specific to the Maryland businesses in
which qualified investments were made, such as the number of jobs
established and average employee compensation. This information is meant
to help TEDCO monitor the investment activity of the venture funds, and is
important in assessing the impact of investments made on the economy of the
State.
 TEDCO had not established a formal process to address investment shortfalls
(failure of a firm to invest committed funds as required), including whether
the “clawback” provision included in its agreements with the venture firms
should be exercised. This provision is standard language in each Program
agreement, and provides the means by which TEDCO may divest its interest
in the venture fund and terminate any future capital obligations if the venture
firms do not meet their contractual obligations to invest the designated capital
received into qualified Maryland companies. Under this provision, TEDCO is
to make an assessment of any potential shortfalls in qualified investments and
determine whether the clawback provision should be exercised.
11

--- Page 14 ---
Although TEDCO advised us that its investment team closely monitors the
venture firms, and is aware of potential investment shortfalls, we noted a long-
outstanding significant shortfall and lack of Maryland investments relating to
one firm. That firm received a commitment of $10 million from the Invest
Maryland Program in 2013, but had not, as of June 2018, made any
investments in Maryland companies. Specifically, of the $10 million
committed, only $5.9 million in capital calls had been distributed from the
Program through the period of December 2013 to June 2018 and, according to
capital calls and investor reports from the venture firm, these funds were used
for investments outside of Maryland as well as for management fees and other
fund expenses.
According to TEDCO’s management, it is fully aware of the lack of Maryland
investments in relation to this fund, as well as the investment activity of the
other venture firms through frequent contact with them. However, in this
case, after almost five years without any Maryland-related investment, there
had been no formal consideration of action to be taken in response to the
aforementioned shortfall. In our opinion, a formal process should be
established, including consultation with TEDCO’s legal counsel, to govern the
exercising of clawback provisions for cases of potentially significant non-
compliance with Program agreements by venture firms.
Recommendation 3
We recommend that TEDCO
a. monitor management fees charged to ensure that they are accurate and in
compliance with TEDCO’s agreements with the firms and the law;
b. ensure that the venture firms report all investment specific information
required under their related agreements;
c. resolve potential shortfalls on a timely basis, and, in particular, evaluate
whether use of the clawback provision is warranted, including for the
shortfall noted in our finding; and
d. document these monitoring and evaluation efforts.
12

--- Page 15 ---
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the Maryland Technology
Development Corporation (TEDCO) for the period beginning January 7, 2015 and
ending April 10, 2018. The audit was conducted in accordance with generally
accepted government auditing standards. Those standards require that we plan
and perform the audit to obtain sufficient, appropriate evidence to provide a
reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives.
We believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings
and conclusions based on our audit objectives.
As prescribed by the State Government Article, Section 2-1221 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, the objectives of this audit were to examine TEDCO’s
financial transactions, records, and internal control, and to evaluate its compliance
with applicable State laws, rules, and regulations.
In planning and conducting our audit, we focused on the major financial-related
areas of operations based on assessments of significance and risk. The areas
addressed by the audit included administration of certain grants and investments
(primarily related to the Maryland Venture Fund), disbursements, and payroll.
We also reviewed the transfer of the Maryland Venture Fund from the
Department of Commerce to TEDCO.
TEDCO engaged an independent certified public accounting firm to perform
audits of its financial statements for the fiscal years ended June 30, 2015, 2016,
2017, and 2018. In the related audit reports, the firm stated that TEDCO’s
financial statements presented fairly, in all material respects, the financial position
of TEDCO, its changes in financial position, and its cash flows for the years then
ended in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United
States of America.
Our audit did not include an evaluation of internal controls over compliance with
federal laws and regulations for federal financial assistance programs and an
assessment of TEDCO’s compliance with those laws and regulations because
TEDCO engages an independent certified public accounting firm to audit such
programs as appropriate.
To accomplish our audit objectives, our audit procedures included inquiries of
appropriate personnel, inspections of documents and records, observations of
TEDCO’s operations, and tests of transactions. Generally, transactions were
selected for testing based on auditor judgment, which primarily considers risk.
Unless otherwise specifically indicated, neither statistical nor non-statistical audit
13

--- Page 16 ---
sampling was used to select the transactions tested. Therefore, the results of the
tests cannot be used to project those results to the entire population from which
the test items were selected.
We performed various data extracts of pertinent information from the State’s
Financial Management Information System (such as revenue and expenditure
data). These extracts are performed as part of ongoing internal processes
established by the Office of Legislative Audits and were subject to various tests to
determine data reliability. We determined that the data extracted from this source
were sufficiently reliable for the purposes the data were used during this audit.
We also extracted data from TEDCO’s automated financial accounting system for
the purpose of testing related accounting transactions. We performed various
tests of the relevant data and determined that the data were sufficiently reliable for
the purposes the data were used during this audit. Finally, we performed other
auditing procedures that we considered necessary to achieve our audit objectives.
The reliability of data used in this report for background or informational
purposes was not assessed.
TEDCO’s management is responsible for establishing and maintaining effective
internal control. Internal control is a process designed to provide reasonable
assurance that objectives pertaining to the reliability of financial records;
effectiveness and efficiency of operations including safeguarding of assets; and
compliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations are achieved.
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate.
Our reports are designed to assist the Maryland General Assembly in exercising
its legislative oversight function and to provide constructive recommendations for
improving State operations. As a result, our reports generally do not address
activities we reviewed that are functioning properly.
This report includes findings relating to conditions that we consider to be
significant deficiencies in the design or operation of internal controls that could
adversely affect TEDCO’s ability to maintain reliable financial records, operate
effectively and efficiently, and/or comply with applicable laws, rules, and
regulations. Our report also includes findings regarding significant instances of
noncompliance with applicable laws, rules, or regulations. A less significant
14

--- Page 17 ---
finding was communicated to TEDCO that did not warrant inclusion in this
report.
TEDCO’s response to our audit findings and recommendations is included as an
appendix to the report. As prescribed in the State Government Article, Section 2-
1224 of the Annotated Code of Maryland, we will advise TEDCO regarding the
results of our review of its response.
15

--- Page 21 ---
A T
UDIT EAM
Bekana Edossa, CPA, CFE
Audit Manager
Edward J. Welsh, CFE
Senior Auditor
Dianne P. Ramirez
Staff Auditor