Title: Department of Labor, Licensing and Regulation - Division of Unemployment Insurance
Date: 02/05/2019
Type: Fiscal Compliance
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5c5b0938a1ce58124c580454
Extracted: 2025-06-18T22:24:21.906359
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Audit Report
Department of Labor, Licensing and Regulation
Division of Unemployment Insurance
February 2019
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
For further information concerning this report contact:
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
301 West Preston Street, Room 1202
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Phone: 410-946-5900 · 301-970-5900
Toll Free in Maryland: 1-877-486-9964
Maryland Relay: 711
TTY: 410-946-5401 · 301-970-5401
E-mail: OLAWebmaster@ola.state.md.us
Website: www.ola.state.md.us
The Office of Legislative Audits operates a Fraud Hotline to report fraud, waste, or abuse
involving State of Maryland government resources. Reports of fraud, waste, or abuse
may be communicated anonymously by a toll-free call to 1-877-FRAUD-11, by mail to the
Fraud Hotline, c/o Office of Legislative Audits, or through the Office’s website.
The Department of Legislative Services does not discriminate on the basis of age, ancestry, color,
creed, marital status, national origin, race, religion, gender, gender identity, sexual orientation,
or disability in the admission or access to its programs, services, or activities. The Department’s
Information Officer has been designated to coordinate compliance with the nondiscrimination
requirements contained in Section 35.107 of the Department of Justice Regulations. Requests for
assistance should be directed to the Information Officer at 410-946-5400 or 410-970-5400.

--- Page 5 ---
Table of Contents
Background Information 5
Agency Responsibilities 5
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report 5
Findings and Recommendations 6
Benefit Payments
Finding 1 – The Division of Unemployment Insurance (DUI) did not 7
always use available data to identify claimants who may not be
eligible for benefits, and did not always conduct timely investigations
into the results of certain data matches.
Finding 2 – Supervisory reviews of claims and adjustments to claimant 10
wages on the Maryland Automated Benefits System (MABS) were
not always conducted or documented.
* Finding 3 – DUI lacked a formal comprehensive policy for timely 12
collection of delinquent accounts resulting from benefit
overpayments and referrals to the State’s Central Collection Unit.
Finding 4 – DUI did not establish sufficient controls over reissued debit 13
cards nor ensure the proper disposition of funds remaining on expired
cards.
Employer Contributions
Finding 5 – DUI did not adequately follow up or track the results of 15
computer matches it performed to identify employers that had not
registered with DUI and may not be remitting required
unemployment insurance taxes.
System Access
Finding 6 – DUI did not have a comprehensive or effective procedure to 16
periodically review user access to the Maryland Unemployment
Insurance Tax System and MABS, which resulted in unnecessary or
incompatible access being granted to certain individuals.
* Denotes item repeated in full or part from preceding audit report
3

--- Page 6 ---
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology 18
Agency Response Appendix
4

--- Page 7 ---
Background Information
Agency Responsibilities
The Division of Unemployment Insurance (DUI) is a separate budgetary unit
within the Department of Labor, Licensing and Regulation that administers the
State’s Unemployment Insurance Program. DUI’s primary responsibilities
include collecting unemployment insurance tax contributions from employers,
processing applications for unemployment benefits, and disbursing the related
unemployment benefits. DUI also maintains the Maryland Unemployment
Insurance Trust Fund (UITF), which is used to account for the aforementioned
collections and disbursements. According to the State’s records, DUI’s fiscal
year 2017 operating expenditures (excluding unemployment benefit
disbursements) totaled approximately $71.4 million.
Maryland employers are required to remit Maryland unemployment insurance
taxes based on a percentage of wages paid to their employees which, during
calendar year 2017, ranged from 0.3 percent to 7.5 percent of the first $8,500 of
employee wages. Certain entities, such as nonprofit organizations and
governmental entities, are exempt from these taxes and, instead, reimburse the
State for any unemployment benefits paid on their behalf. As of November 2017,
an unemployed individual could receive a maximum of $430 per week for 26
weeks in one benefit year.
According to DUI records, during fiscal year 2017, DUI collected approximately
$608 million from employers ($540 million in unemployment insurance taxes and
$68 million in reimbursements). During this period, DUI paid approximately
$550 million in unemployment insurance benefits to more than 120,000
claimants. As of June 30, 2017, the UITF had a balance of approximately $1.3
billion.
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report
Our audit included a review to determine the status of the five findings contained
in our preceding audit report dated February 27, 2015. We determined that DUI
satisfactorily addressed four of these findings. The remaining finding is repeated
in this report.
5

--- Page 8 ---
Findings and Recommendations
Benefit Payments
Background
Individuals may file for unemployment insurance benefits online or over the
phone with any of the four Division of Unemployment Insurance (DUI) claims
centers located throughout the State. Individuals may not apply for benefits in
person. Each individual completes an application, which includes his or her
previous employer, wages earned, and the reason for the individual’s current
unemployment. After verifying that the application information is complete and
the applicant is eligible for benefits, DUI sets up an account for each approved
claimant into which weekly benefits are transferred. DUI also issues each
approved claimant a Maryland Unemployment Insurance (UI) Benefits Debit
Card, which is used by the claimant to access benefits.
Benefit amounts are based on the individual applicant’s earnings and other factors
(such as, the number of dependents). State law requires applicants to be able,
available, and actively looking for work in order to be eligible for unemployment
benefits. During our review, as a further condition of eligibility, DUI required
applicants to register in the Maryland Workforce Exchange system within 10 days
of filing a claim. The Maryland Workforce Exchange system provides services to
help individuals gain employment. In addition, claimants are required to certify
each week that they are able, available, and actively looking for work and disclose
any information that could affect their eligibility (such as, attending school). Any
claimant who obtains work must notify DUI of the number of days worked and
the related compensation.
DUI’s business information systems include the Maryland Unemployment
Insurance Tax System (UITAX), which is used to process employers’
unemployment insurance taxes owed and paid, and the Maryland Automated
Benefits System (MABS), which tracks payments to and amounts due from
unemployment insurance claimants. MABS also tracks wage information
reported by Maryland employers.
6

--- Page 9 ---
Finding 1
DUI did not always use available data to identify claimants who may not be
eligible for benefits, and did not always conduct timely investigations into the
results of certain data matches.
Analysis
DUI did not always use available data to identify claimants who may not be
eligible for benefits. DUI performs various procedures both prior to and after the
claims approval process as a means to ensure that only eligible applicants are
approved and that the benefit amounts are proper. Any overpayments identified
are required to be repaid to DUI, and any incidents of suspected fraud are
investigated.
Claimants Filing from Foreign Internet Protocol (IP) Addresses
DUI did not sufficiently use available IP address data to identify claimants filing
an initial claim or weekly certification from foreign IP addresses1 and flag them
for follow-up, nor did DUI have a proactive process to prevent these potentially
improper claims from being approved. DUI collects data on the IP addresses
from which claims and weekly certifications are filed but primarily only used
these data to augment existing investigations of possibly ineligible claimants who
had been identified through other means. Individuals who file from a foreign IP
address may be residing outside of the country and may be unavailable for work,
which could affect their eligibility for benefits. Based on DUI records for the
period from June 2015 through June 2017, there were 503 claimants who filed
five or more consecutive weekly certifications from a foreign IP address.
We tested 20 of these claimants who filed between 24 and 52 weekly
certifications. Our test found 19 who received approximately $182,000 in
benefits for whom we identified additional information that led us to conclude
that these claimants may have been ineligible for benefits.
For example, on the initial claim, one individual reported termination from
employment as a result of working outside of the country and being unable to
return to the United States as requested by the employer. This initial claim and
subsequent weekly certifications originated from an IP address in India, but the
claims were never flagged for follow-up. In addition, in this instance, the
claimant should not have been approved for benefits based on the aforementioned
situation noted on the initial claim. Another claimant tested was not flagged for
filing from a foreign IP address but was subsequently investigated by DUI after
submitting another claim in a subsequent year from a foreign phone number.
1 For the purposes of our audit, a foreign IP address is defined as one originating from other than
the 50 states, the District of Columbia, Puerto Rico, the Virgin Islands, Guam, and Canada.
7

--- Page 10 ---
While DUI investigated and took action to assess an overpayment regarding the
individual phone claim, it did not review the prior claims submitted by this
claimant via a foreign IP address.
DUI’s policies and procedures stipulate that DUI should cease providing benefits
to claimants discovered to have an out-of-country status and that these claimants
should be flagged for review and potential recovery. In addition, a 2015 report
published by the United States Department of Labor – Office of the Inspector
General (OIG) on combatting fraud in the Unemployment Insurance Program,
recommended that state workforce agencies (such as DUI) develop a plan to
identify and consider blocking claims that originate from outside the country, as a
means to minimize fraud. Since claimants must be able and available to work to
be eligible for benefits, we believe DUI should develop a plan to identify and
review claimants filing from foreign IP addresses as recommended by the federal
OIG to help prevent improper claims.
Claimants Attending School Full-Time
DUI did not obtain data to identify claimants who may not be eligible for benefits
because they were full-time students and were not available for work. During the
initial application process, applicants were asked if they were attending school
(defined by State law as an institution of higher education). For applicants who
were attending school full-time but who also stated they were available for work,
DUI would inquire about the applicants’ course schedules and clarify the
requirement to be able and available for work. However, DUI did not verify the
information provided by these applicants nor flag them for follow-up in
subsequent semesters. DUI also did not have any procedure to identify claimants
who failed to disclose their school enrollment on their applications or who may
have enrolled in school after submitting their applications. For example, DUI did
not obtain enrollment data from State universities to match against claimant data.
We matched DUI claim payment records for the period from August 2015
through May 2017 with student enrollment records obtained from three State
universities for the corresponding academic semesters (Fall 2015, Spring 2016,
Fall 2016, and Spring 2017). This match identified 179 claimants who were
enrolled as full-time students, all of whom stated they were able and available to
work, and who received unemployment benefits totaling approximately $506,000.
Of the 179 claimants, 87 claimants reported to DUI that they were attending
school. Our test of 20 of these 87 claimants, who received approximately
$109,000 in benefits, confirmed that none were flagged by DUI for periodic
follow-up to determine if their status as a full-time student affected their ability
and availability for full-time work. The remaining 92 claimants identified in our
match responded on one or more weekly DUI certifications that they were not
8

--- Page 11 ---
attending school and, under current DUI procedures, would also not have been
identified for follow-up.
Since the DUI certifications require the claimants to attest to their education and
employment situations under penalty of perjury (with false statements potentially
resulting in a loss of benefits) and each claimant’s availability to work could
change, we believe that DUI should routinely verify eligibility to work at least
once a semester and should have a procedure to identify claimants who failed to
disclose their school enrollment or who may have enrolled after submitting their
applications.
Claimants not Enrolled in the Maryland Workforce Exchange System
DUI did not use available data to ensure that claimants had enrolled in the
Maryland Workforce Exchange System. State law requires claimants to enroll in
the system unless they are receiving benefits to supplement a temporary lay-off or
a decreased work schedule. We compared unemployment claims records for
benefits paid for non-exempt claimants between July 1, 2014 and March 31, 2017
with records of individuals enrolled in the Workforce Exchange system. We
identified 7,724 claimants who had not enrolled in the Workforce Exchange
system and had received benefit payments totaling $44.5 million.
Although the Secretary has the authority to formally waive this requirement on a
case-by-case basis, DUI could not always provide documentation of the waivers.
Using statistical sampling, we selected and reviewed 52 of the 8,122 claims paid
for the aforementioned claimants. Our test disclosed that there was no
documentation of formal waivers for 43 of the 52 claims tested to justify why the
claimants had not enrolled. Based on our statistical sampling, we are 95 percent
confident that at least 74.09 percent of the total population of 8,122 claims (6,017)
did not have documentation to support a waiver and, therefore, were not in
compliance with State law, which could result in the delay or denial of UI
benefits.
Claimants With Reported Wages
DUI did not timely investigate the results of quarterly data matches it performed
of individuals receiving unemployment benefits, as reflected in MABS, with
individuals with reported wage income. We tested 20 individuals who were
identified from the matches performed for four quarters in calendar year 2015 as
receiving unemployment benefits as well as wage income. Our test disclosed that,
as of August 2017, DUI did not complete its review of the match results for these
20 individuals for periods ranging from 112 to 358 days after the end of the
quarter. The failure to conduct timely reviews is significant because claimants
continue to receive benefits until the match result investigations are completed.
9

--- Page 12 ---
For example, these 20 individuals received approximately $144,000 in improper
unemployment benefits, of which approximately $19,000 could have been
avoided or reduced if the quarterly match results were investigated within 60 days
following the end of the quarter.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that DUI maximize the use of available data to identify
ineligible claimants and conduct timely investigations of the results of data
matches. Specifically, we recommend that DUI
a. implement a proactive process, such as flagging foreign IP addresses for
immediate investigation, to minimize the risk of improper benefits being
paid to claimants who may be unavailable to work;
b. follow up on all applicants who state they are attending school to
determine whether it impacts eligibility for unemployment benefits;
c. establish procedures, such as periodic matches to State higher education
institution enrollment records, to identify and follow up on claimants who
are attending school full-time but fail to disclose it;
d. verify that all claimants comply with applicable enrollment requirements,
including the Maryland Workforce Exchange system;
e. conduct timely investigations of the results of quarterly wage matches;
and
f. take timely and appropriate corrective action for any ineligible claimants
or benefits identified, including those noted in this finding.
Finding 2
Supervisory reviews of claims and adjustments to claimant wages on MABS
were not always conducted or documented.
Analysis
Supervisory reviews of claims and adjustments to claimant earned wages were not
always conducted or documented.
 Required supervisory reviews of claims processed at the two claims centers
we reviewed were not always performed. These two claims centers processed
claims totaling $63.7 million and $126.4 million during fiscal year 2017. Our
test of 10 weeks of claims activity processed at each of the centers during the
period between August 2014 and April 2017 disclosed that one center did not
complete 840 of the required 1,540 claims reviews and the other center did not
complete 658 of the required 770 claims reviews. According to DUI policy,
supervisors at the claims centers are required to review seven claims
processed by each claims taker on a weekly basis. These reviews are intended
10

--- Page 13 ---
to verify that critical information is complete and properly recorded. DUI did
not monitor the claims centers to ensure the reviews were performed.
 Claimant wages manually recorded in MABS by DUI employees were not
subject to independent supervisory review. According to DUI records,
approximately 4,000 wage entries were manually recorded during the audit
period by DUI employees who were also responsible for initiating claim
payments as part of their job duties. DUI did not generate output reports or
perform supervisory reviews of the manually entered wages. MABS uses
employee wages to calculate the benefits paid to claimants. Consequently,
improper or erroneous claimant wage data could result in improper claim
payments.
For most Maryland employers, wages are automatically recorded in MABS
when reported on a quarterly basis. For employers who are not required to
report wage information (such as out-of-State employers and the federal
government), DUI employees are responsible for manually entering wage data
for relevant claimants.
Our test of manually recorded wage entries made between May 2015 and
September 2016 for 10 claimants who received $57,487 in benefits disclosed
that DUI could not locate documentation, such as a claimant’s employer’s
wage report, to support the propriety of 5 entries. All 10 entries were
processed by employees who could also process claims, including 4 that were
made by the same employee who initiated a claim for the same claimant. We
did sight documentation to support the propriety of these 4 claims.
Recommendation 2
We recommend that DUI
a. establish a formal monitoring process to ensure supervisors at the local
claims centers perform the required claims reviews;
b. generate output reports of manual wage entries and ensure these entries
are independently reviewed and approved, at least on a test basis;
c. retain appropriate documentation of manual wage entries; and
d. ensure all supervisory reviews are documented and retained for future
reference.
11

--- Page 14 ---
Finding 3
DUI lacked a formal comprehensive policy for timely collection of delinquent
accounts resulting from benefit overpayments and referrals to the State’s
Central Collection Unit (CCU).
Analysis
DUI lacked a formal comprehensive policy for timely collection of delinquent
accounts related to benefit overpayments and referrals to CCU. State law allows
DUI to recover benefits paid to claimants who are subsequently found to be
ineligible, and to assess penalties and interest on overpayments made to claimants
who either made a false statement or failed to disclose a material fact in order to
obtain the benefits. According to DUI records as of June 30, 2017, the benefit
overpayment account balance totaled approximately $156.6 million, including
$139.7 million that was more than one year old. During calendar year 2017, DUI
referred approximately 25,000 accounts totaling $43.7 million to CCU.
DUI is exempt from standard State collection regulations and, consequently,
established its own collection policy. The policy was revised several times
throughout the audit period to reflect different criteria for accounts referred to
CCU and for accounts transferred to DUI’s litigation unit. However, updates to
the policy were not consolidated into the policy document; rather, changes to
provisions within the policy were denoted in various informal emails that
included handwritten modifications. As a result, policy provisions were not
clearly established and communicated for enforcement. Additionally, certain
modifications lacked clarity in setting forth which accounts should be referred to
CCU and did not clearly provide specific timelines for the collection process or
for referrals to CCU.
We tested 15 delinquent benefit overpayment accounts totaling approximately
$182,000 dating back to 2010. Our test disclosed that 5 accounts were
appropriately retained for DUI collection efforts. With respect to the remaining
accounts, 4 accounts had been referred to CCU for periods ranging from three to
five years after the accounts had qualified to be referred, and the remaining 6
accounts, dating back to 2010, should have been but had not been referred to
CCU. While DUI’s collection policy changed multiple times during the audit
period, these 6 accounts qualified to be referred to CCU under the most
conservative of these policies, which was one year after the date of overpayment
for accounts with no relevant activity, such as pending legal issues.
In our preceding audit report, we commented that DUI did not always refer
certain delinquent overpayment accounts to CCU. We also disclosed that $118.6
million of the $170.3 million December 31, 2013 benefit overpayment accounts
12

--- Page 15 ---
receivable balance was more than a year old. Finally, we cited the referral of
approximately 3,600 accounts totaling $8.8 million to CCU during calendar year
2013. As previously mentioned, during calendar year 2017, DUI referred to CCU
approximately 25,000 accounts totaling $43.7 million. Accordingly, while
significant progress has been noted in CCU referral activity, continued
improvement is warranted.
Recommendation 3
We recommend that DUI
a. update and formalize internal collection policies to reflect current best
practices, including the expected timeframes for various collection
methods; and
b. refer applicable delinquent benefit overpayment accounts to CCU in
accordance with its updated policy (repeat).
Finding 4
DUI did not establish sufficient controls over reissued debit cards nor ensure
the proper disposition of funds remaining on expired cards.
Analysis
DUI did not establish sufficient controls over reissued UI Benefits Debit Cards
and did not ensure the proper disposition of funds remaining on expired debit
cards. DUI issues a UI Benefits Debit Card for each approved claimant as a
means to access the claimant’s unemployment insurance benefits. A new debit
card can be issued if the original card is lost or damaged.
 There was no independent review of reissued debit cards to ensure they were
proper. This is significant because the employee responsible for reissuing lost
or damaged debit cards had other incompatible duties that allowed the
employee to reissue debit cards on inactive accounts and potentially
misappropriate funds. Specifically, in addition to reissuing debit cards, this
employee’s duties included the responsibility for updating claimant mailing
addresses in the card sponsoring bank’s records. This employee was also
responsible for identifying debit cards that had not been activated within six
months of issuance and for following up with these claimants. As a result, the
employee was in a position to identify an inactive card, reissue a new card to a
different address (such as a PO box), and misappropriate the funds.
According to records we obtained from the sponsoring bank, approximately
90,000 debit cards were reissued during the period between April 2014 and
June 2017, of which 349 were reissued to an address not included in DUI’s
benefit system.
13

--- Page 16 ---
We asked DUI management for documentation to support 15 of the debit
cards that were mailed to addresses that appeared questionable (such as a PO
box or multiple cards to the same address). DUI could not provide us with
documentation or adequate explanations for these card issuances, including 10
debit cards that were issued to an address that had never been listed in DUI’s
automated system for the claimant. Benefits paid to these 15 claimants totaled
approximately $95,300 during the period from February 2014 through June
2017.
 DUI did not have procedures to ensure the proper disposition of funds
remaining on expired debit cards. According to an October 2017 report
obtained by DUI from the sponsoring bank, there were approximately 18,000
activated and not-activated cards that had expired with approximately
$450,000 remaining in the related accounts at the sponsoring bank. The most
recent transactions on the activated accounts occurred during the period from
November 2013 through June 2014. Since debit cards expire three years after
they are issued, these funds should have been either returned to DUI or
reported to the State Comptroller as unclaimed property during the period
between November 2016 and June 2017.
We were advised that DUI did not transfer these unclaimed funds in
accordance with the Maryland Unemployment Benefits Debit Card Deposit
Agreement because claimants sometimes safeguard funds on the inactivated
debit cards for emergency situations. However, according to the Agreement
between DUI and the sponsoring bank, if a debit card is not activated within
one year of issuance, the account is to be closed and the funds returned to
DUI. If the debit card is activated, any remaining unclaimed funds should be
reported and remitted as unclaimed property to Maryland after a period of
three years in accordance with State laws for unclaimed property.
Recommendation 4
We recommend that DUI establish procedures to ensure
a. all reissued debit cards are subject to independent review and approval,
including the 349 cards noted above; and
b. unspent funds remaining on debit cards are returned to DUI or reported
to the State Comptroller as unclaimed property in accordance with the
Agreement.
14

--- Page 17 ---
Employer Contributions
Finding 5
DUI did not adequately follow up or track the results of computer matches it
performed to identify employers that had not registered with DUI and may
not be remitting required unemployment insurance taxes.
Analysis
DUI did not adequately follow up or maintain records of the results of computer
matches it used to identify employers that did not register with DUI and may not
be remitting unemployment insurance tax payments. On a weekly basis, DUI
matched information about newly hired employees with employers’
unemployment insurance tax information in its UITAX system to identify entities
with employees that have not filed as employers with DUI. The Maryland
Department of Human Services maintains a new hire registry based on
information reported by employers, which was used for this match.
We reviewed DUI’s follow-up of the approximately 1,200 match results that were
identified in 10 weeks during fiscal years 2016 and 2017. Our review disclosed
that DUI’s records indicate that only one letter was sent to each entity requesting
an explanation for the failure to register as a Maryland employer. DUI did not
maintain copies of the letters that were issued, any responses received, and actions
taken, and did not follow up with entities that did not reply to the letters.
Consequently, DUI had no record of the overall effectiveness or results of its
follow-up efforts.
DUI management advised us that following up on these matches is an inefficient
process because the matches sometimes include entities that are exempt from
unemployment taxes and new entities for which information had not yet been
entered into its UITAX system. Nevertheless, DUI maintains additional data that
it could use to help focus its follow-up efforts. DUI could exclude the exempt
employers from the matches performed and could use data elements in the match
results to further focus formal follow-up on employers with higher risk of
significant unpaid taxes (such as employers with a large number of new hires).
Recommendation 5
We recommend that DUI improve the effectiveness of its match procedures
used to identify employers who failed to register and remit unemployment
taxes. Specifically, we recommend that DUI
a. reevaluate its match criteria,
b. maintain copies of letters sent to entities identified in these computer
matches and the related entity responses, and
15

--- Page 18 ---
c. perform documented follow-up of entities which fail to respond to the
letters.
System Access
Finding 6
DUI did not have a comprehensive or effective procedure to periodically
review user access to UITAX and MABS which resulted in unnecessary or
incompatible access being granted to certain individuals.
Analysis
DUI’s procedure to periodically review user access capabilities on UITAX and
MABS was not comprehensive or effective. Specifically, while supervisors were
contacted annually to determine if any changes were needed to the access of
employees under their supervision, those supervisors were not required to
positively confirm that individual employee access was appropriate. In addition,
no analysis was performed to ensure that employees had not been granted access
capabilities that were incompatible with their assigned job duties. We identified
certain individuals who were granted unnecessary update access or could perform
incompatible functions.
UITAX is used to process and track employer unemployment insurance taxes
owed and paid, and MABS is used to track employee wages reported by
employers and unemployment insurance benefit payments. As of August 2017,
there were 79 user accounts with update access to the UITAX system and 303
user accounts with update access to the MABS system.
 Our review of the 79 UITAX user accounts disclosed that 9 accounts had
unnecessary access. For example, 2 accounts were assigned to employees
who no longer worked at DUI. Three other user accounts, which provided
capabilities to record and modify accounts receivable records, were assigned
to one employee who did not have any job duties related to accounts
receivable.
 Our test of 30 MABS user accounts disclosed that all 30 accounts had
unnecessary or incompatible access. For example, 12 claims center
adjudicators who required access to clear discrepancies with an initial claim,
also had the capability within the system to initiate the claim. Since claims
initiated are only subject to review on a test basis, these employees could
initiate fraudulent claims without detection.
16

--- Page 19 ---
DUI advised us that certain employees are provided access to multiple
incompatible functions so they can serve in a backup capacity when work volume
is high. However, given the number of user accounts in existence, we do not
believe this to be sufficient justification to allow these employees to have access
to incompatible duties on a routine basis.
According to the State of Maryland Information Security Policy, agencies shall
continuously (at least annually) monitor the security controls within their
information systems to ensure that the controls are operating as intended. The
Policy further provides that agencies must support the “least possible privilege”
security strategy in which users are only granted the access needed to perform
assigned tasks.
Recommendation 6
We recommend that DUI
a. establish an effective procedure to perform periodic reviews of UITAX
and MABS user access capabilities; and
b. discontinue providing routine incompatible or unnecessary user access
capabilities, and remove the incompatible or unnecessary access noted
above.
17

--- Page 20 ---
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the Department of Labor,
Licensing and Regulation (DLLR) – Division of Unemployment Insurance (DUI)
for the period beginning February 24, 2014 and ending April 16, 2017. The audit
was conducted in accordance with generally accepted government auditing
standards. Those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain
sufficient, appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and
conclusions based on our audit objectives. We believe that the evidence obtained
provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit
objectives.
As prescribed by the State Government Article, Section 2-1221 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, the objectives of this audit were to examine DUI’s financial
transactions, records, and internal control, and to evaluate its compliance with
applicable State laws, rules, and regulations.
In planning and conducting our audit, we focused on the major financial-related
areas of operations based on assessments of significance and risk. The areas
addressed by the audit included employer unemployment contributions,
reimbursements from government agencies and certain non-profit organizations,
benefit claims and payments, and recovery of benefit overpayments. We also
determined the status of the findings contained in our preceding audit report.
Our audit did not include certain support services provided to DUI by the DLLR –
Office of the Secretary. These support services (such as payroll, purchasing,
maintenance of accounting records, and related fiscal functions) are included
within the scope of our audits of the Office of the Secretary. In addition, our audit
did not include an evaluation of internal controls over compliance with federal
laws and regulations for federal financial assistance programs and an assessment
of DUI’s compliance with those laws and regulations because the State of
Maryland engages an independent accounting firm to annually audit such
programs administered by State agencies, including DUI.
To accomplish our audit objectives, our audit procedures included inquiries of
appropriate personnel, inspections of documents and records, observations of
DUI’s operations, and tests of transactions. Generally, transactions were selected
for testing based on auditor judgment, which primarily considers risk. Unless
otherwise specifically indicated, neither statistical nor non-statistical audit
sampling was used to select the transactions tested. Therefore, the results of the
tests cannot be used to project those results to the entire population from which
the test items were selected.
18

--- Page 21 ---
We also performed various data extracts of pertinent information from the State’s
Financial Management Information System (such as revenue and expenditure
data). The extracts are performed as part of ongoing internal processes
established by the Office of Legislative Audits and were subject to various tests to
determine data reliability. We determined that the data extracted from this source
were sufficiently reliable for the purposes the data were used during this audit.
We also extracted data from the Maryland Automated Benefits System and the
Maryland Unemployment Insurance Tax System for the purpose of testing benefit
claims and payments. We performed various tests of the relevant data and
determined that the data were sufficiently reliable for the purposes the data were
used during the audit. Finally, we performed other auditing procedures that we
considered necessary to achieve our audit objectives. The reliability of data used
in this report for background or informational purposes was not assessed.
DUI’s management is responsible for establishing and maintaining effective
internal control. Internal control is a process designed to provide reasonable
assurance that objectives pertaining to the reliability of financial records;
effectiveness and efficiency of operations, including safeguarding of assets; and
compliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations are achieved.
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate.
Our reports are designed to assist the Maryland General Assembly in exercising
its legislative oversight function and to provide constructive recommendations for
improving State operations. As a result, our reports generally do not address
activities we reviewed that are functioning properly.
This report includes findings relating to conditions that we consider to be
significant deficiencies in the design or operation of internal control that could
adversely affect DUI’s ability to maintain reliable financial records, operate
effectively and efficiently, and/or comply with applicable laws, rules, and
regulations. Our report also includes findings regarding significant instances of
noncompliance with applicable laws, rules, or regulations. Other less significant
findings were communicated to DUI that did not warrant inclusion in this report.
The response from DLLR, on behalf of DUI, to our findings and recommendations
is included as an appendix to this report. As prescribed in the State Government
Article, Section 2-1224 of the Annotated Code of Maryland, we will advise the
Office of the Secretary regarding the results of our review of its response.
19

--- Page 23 ---
Benefit Payments
Finding 1
DUI did not always use available data to identify claimants who may not
be eligible for benefits, and did not always conduct timely investigations
into the results of certain data matches.
Response – DUI agrees with the findings:
a. DLLR accepts this recommendation. DUI will implement a
proactive process and will block all foreign IP addresses from the
website. These claimants will still be provided due process and
will be able to file for benefits via the telephone. DLLR will
implement this change by July 2019.
b. DLLR accepts this recommendation. DUI will institute a system
whereby a DUI staffer follows up with the claimant to investigate
and verify that the claimant is attending school to determine
whether it impacts the claimant’s eligibility for unemployment
benefits. DLLR will implement this verification system by July
2019.
c. DLLR accepts this recommendation. DUI will develop MOUs in
conjunction with higher education institutions throughout the
state to perform cross-matches and verify that claimants are
truthfully providing complete information regarding their status
as students. This will also help in analyzing a claimant’s eligibility
for unemployment benefits by ascertaining the number of credit
hours the claimant is enrolled in for that semester. DLLR will
begin developing the required MOUs with the universities by
March 2019.
d. DLLR accepts this recommendation. DUI currently registers
claimants with the Maryland Workforce Exchange (“MWE”)
system via a data transfer of essential demographic information at
the time the claimant files their initial claim. DUI will set up a
periodic review of this data transfer to ensure the transfer is
capturing all DUI claimants that register for the MWE.
Additionally, DUI will institute a quarterly cross-match with the

--- Page 24 ---
Division of Workforce Development and Adult Learning, the
Division within DLLR that oversees the MWE, to ensure that all
claimants are meeting enrollment requirements. If a claimant is
not registered, the claimant will be disqualified from receiving
benefits. DLLR will implement this change by March 2019.
e. DLLR accepts this recommendation. DUI has recently moved the
cross-match report closer to the preceding quarter ending in an
effort to minimize the potential for additional overpayments. DUI
is currently making determinations on average within 40 days
after a cross-match report hit is received following the close of the
filing period for the respective quarter’s wages.
f. DLLR accepts this recommendation and will take appropriate
corrective action for any ineligible claimants or benefits identified.
DUI will begin taking action to recover any overpayments by
March 2019.

--- Page 25 ---
Benefit Payments
Finding 2
Supervisory reviews of claims and adjustments to claimant wages on
MABS were not always conducted or documented.
Response – DUI agrees with the findings:
a. DLLR accepts this recommendation. DUI has implemented a
statewide review process by using a uniform claims review
checklist. All claims center supervisors are instructed to perform
supervisory reviews, at least on a test basis, and to document the
reviews. Documentation is to be maintained for at least six months
to allow a sample of the reviews to be further reviewed by a claims
administrator.
b. DLLR accepts this recommendation. DUI will implement a system
whereby supervisors independently review all manually entered
wage data to confirm the validity of the entries. This system will
be implemented immediately.
c. DLLR accepts this recommendation. DUI will retain appropriate
documentation of manual wage entries for at least three years.
DUI will also explore the possibility of maintaining these reports
electronically.
d. DLLR accepts this recommendation and will retain all supervisory
reviews for at least six months to allow for further review by
management. DUI will also explore the possibility of maintaining
these reports electronically.

--- Page 26 ---
Benefit Payments
Finding 3
DUI lacked a formal comprehensive policy for timely collection of
delinquent accounts resulting from benefit overpayments and referrals
to the State’s Central Collection Unit (CCU).
Response – DUI agrees with the findings:
a. DLLR accepts this recommendation. DUI will memorialize its
internal collection policies in a written policy. DUI will review the
written policy periodically and update the policy as appropriate.
DUI will take action by March 2019.
b. DLLR accepts this recommendation. DUI will work with CCU
and develop appropriate referral criteria based on collection
actions available under Maryland law and CCU’s capacity to
effectively take additional referrals at this time. DUI will also
update its MOU with CCU to reflect the new referral criteria.
DUI will take action and begin developing a new MOU
immediately.

--- Page 27 ---
Benefit Payments
Finding 4
DUI did not establish sufficient controls over reissued debit cards nor
ensure the proper disposition of funds remaining on expired cards.
Response – DUI agrees with the findings:
a. DLLR accepts this recommendation. DUI has implemented the
appropriate segregation of duties to perform and review this
function. When DUI determines that a claimant has not received
their debit card due to an incorrect address, a request is now made
to the claim center to update Maryland’s Automated Benefit
System (MABS) with the correct address. Once this is completed,
an employee who has access to the debit card system has the card
reissued. All address changes to debit cards are recorded within
MABS. The debit card banking institution is to refer any card
holders with address changes to DUI for updating. DUI will also
review the accounts of the 349 debit cards that were reissued to
identify additional policies it may institute to avoid any further
complications.
b. DLLR accepts this recommendation. In regards to the inactivated
debit cards, DUI will ask the bank to provide the list of debit cards
that have not been activated within one year of issuance, monthly.
DUI will follow-up with the sponsoring bank if it does not receive
this list within a timely fashion. DUI will be able to use this list to
cancel the inactivated debit cards. The remaining balance will be
escheated to the agency. DUI will implement this recommendation
immediately.
In regards to unspent funds on activated debit cards, DUI will
work with the sponsoring bank to ensure that the card closes once
the card expires. Once the activated card closes, the funds will
revert back to the State Comptroller. DUI will implement this
recommendation immediately.

--- Page 28 ---
Employer Contributions
Finding 5
DUI did not adequately follow up or track the results of computer
matches it performed to identify employers that had not registered with
DUI and may not be remitting required unemployment insurance taxes.
Response – DUI agrees with the findings:
a. DLLR accepts this recommendation. DUI will reevaluate its
match criteria and explore pursuing an enhanced cross-match on
identified high risk employers in our modernized system. Efforts
to enhance the cross-match will require the use of IT resources
that are currently focused on the modernization project. The
enhanced cross-match will be implemented once the
modernization project is completed. In the meantime, DUI will
continue to perform a system automated cross-match between
employers and the State New Hire registry.
b. DLLR accepts this recommendation. DUI’s modernized system
will be able to maintain copies of letters sent to entities identified
in the enhanced cross-match. The modernized system will also be
able to maintain copies of any related entity responses sent to DUI.
This will be instituted once DUI’s modernized system is fully
implemented later this year.
c. DLLR accepts this recommendation. DUI’s modernized system
will be able to automatically send out follow-up notices to entities
which fail to respond to the initial letters. This system will be
implemented once DUI’s modernization system is fully
implemented later this year.

--- Page 29 ---
System Access
Finding 6
DUI did not have a comprehensive or effective procedure to periodically
review user access to UITAX and MABS which resulted in unnecessary
or incompatible access being granted to certain individuals.
Response – DUI agrees with these findings:
a. DLLR accepts this recommendation. DUI will begin reviewing
UITAX and MABS user access capabilities every six months to
determine if user access to confidential UI information needs to be
restricted. DUI will update its account access policies to reflect
this new biannual review. DUI will implement the new biannual
review immediately.
b. DLLR accepts this recommendation. DUI will review the
individual’s position description needs, discuss access needs with
the individual’s supervisor or supervisors, and take into
consideration requirements and flexibility to ensure unnecessary
users to do not have access to the UITAX or MABS systems.
DLLR will implement this review immediately.

--- Page 30 ---
A T
UDIT EAM
Heather A. Warriner, CPA
Audit Manager
Richard L. Carter, CISA
Information Systems Audit Manager
David R. Fahnestock, CPA
Senior Auditor
Matthew D. Walbert, CISA
Information Systems Senior Auditor
Samuel Hur, CPA
Larry M. Richardson
Winnie J. Tenekam
Richard Tran
Staff Auditors
Joseph R. Clayton
Information Systems Staff Auditor
Yanchao Ma
Staff Auditor Intern