Title: Presentation to the House Appropriations Subcommittee - Maryland Department of Health - Prevention and Health Promotion Administration - Office of Population Health Improvement - Office of Preparedness and Response


Related Report Dated (4/4/2018)
Date: 02/14/2019
Type: Presentations to the Legislature
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5c66d7b9a1ce580df46777fc
Extracted: 2025-06-18T22:24:42.257907
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Maryland Department of Health (MDH)
Prevention and Health Promotion Administration (PHPA)
Office of Population Health Improvement (OPHI)
Office of Preparedness and Response (OPR)
Report dated April 4, 2018

--- Page 2 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Report Overview
The report contained 7 findings related to PHPA,
including 2 repeat findings from the prior PHPA report
(current Findings 2 and 3).
Key Findings:
 PHPA did not ensure that all rebates from drug
manufacturers were received and were accurate.
OLA identified certain rebates not received.
 PHPA did not use available resources to help verify
applicant income and to identify other insurance.
 PHPA did not adequately restrict user access to its
AIDS drug assistance applicant eligibility system
and did not review overrides of rejected claims, and
certain premium payments.
 PHPA did not recover pharmacy claim
overpayments totaling $425,000 identified during
pharmacy audits.
 Cash receipts were not sufficiently controlled,
employees had unnecessary access to confidential
patient health information, and food-processing
facilities were not always inspected timely.
Maryland Department of Health – PHPA, et al. Page 2

--- Page 3 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Drug Rebates (Finding 1)
PHPA receives rebates from drug manufacturers for
covered outpatient drugs dispensed to its approved
clients under the Maryland AIDS Drug Assistance
Program (MADAP). According to PHPA records, drug
rebates received during fiscal year 2016 totaled
$52.4 million. Our audit disclosed PHPA did not
ensure that all drug rebates were received and were
accurate.
 PHPA did not compare the quarterly rebates
received from drug manufacturers with a listing of
manufacturers that were required to pay rebates.
PHPA was not aware that 1 of 10 drug
manufacturers tested had not submitted rebates
for 6 months. Subsequently, PHPA received a
$49,300 rebate from this manufacturer for the
period noted.
 PHPA did not independently calculate the quarterly
rebates due from each manufacturer. Our test of
20 rebates from 8 manufacturers disclosed all
appeared to be underpaid by up to $2 million,
collectively.
Maryland Department of Health – PHPA, et al. Page 3

--- Page 4 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Client Eligibility (Finding 2)
PHPA did not use available independent resources to
help verify applicant income for certain programs and
to identify possible third-party insurance coverage
(Repeat Finding).
 For the majority of our audit period, PHPA did not
use the Maryland Automated Benefits System
(MABS) to verify that new and renewal applicants
submitted complete and accurate income
information. Also, our test of 10 applications
processed and approved after MABS use started,
found 5 lacked evidence of its use by PHPA.
MABS is a database of employee wage data
maintained by the Department of Labor, Licensing
and Regulation.
 PHPA had no procedure to identify the existence
of third-party insurance for its clients. PHPA was
included in an MDH contract to search for
possible third-party insurance, but as of February
2017, had not used the services of the contracted
vendor because of technical issues.
Maryland Department of Health – PHPA, et al. Page 4

--- Page 5 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
MADAP Client Services (Findings 3 & 4)
 PHPA did not adequately restrict user access to
the MADAP system and did not review certain
rejected claims and manually processed
payments (Finding 3).
 As of December 2016, 23 of the 31 MADAP
users could enter applications and record
individuals as eligible for MADAP and MADAP-
Plus without any independent approval
(Repeat Finding).
 PHPA did not independently review 4,626
overrides of rejected claims totaling $4.8
million in FY 2016, and an employee approved
insurance premium payments of $9.3 million
in FY 2016 without verifying the accuracy and
propriety of the amounts paid.
 PHPA did not recover pharmacy claim
overpayments totaling $425,000 identified during
two recent pharmacy claim audits (Finding 4).
PHPA management advised that it lacked
resources to follow up on the audit results.
Maryland Department of Health – PHPA, et al. Page 5

--- Page 6 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Other Findings
Finding 5 - Cash Receipts
PHPA lacked adequate procedures and controls over
MADAP collections which, according to its records,
totaled approximately $52.7 million during FY 2016.
Finding 6 - Confidential Information
Numerous PHPA employees had unnecessary access
to the confidential personally identifiable information
(PII) and protected health information (PHI) of all
patients maintained in PHPA’s Sexually Transmitted
Disease (STD) Patient Reporting Investigation and
Surveillance Manager (PRISM) system. As of
December 14, 2016, PRISM had 486,676 unique
patient records with PII and PHI.
Finding 7 - Food Protection
PHPA did not conduct timely inspections of food-
processing facilities, to ensure the facilities were
complying with applicable food safety laws and
regulations. In this regard, PHPA inspection records
were not always accurate, precluding effective
monitoring of the inspections.
Maryland Department of Health – PHPA, et al. Page 6

--- Page 7 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Conclusion
MDH should
• establish procedures to ensure all required drug
rebates are received and are accurate, recalculate
prior rebates received, and pursue any
underpayments;
• use MABS to verify income and identify individuals
who have third-party insurance coverage;
• eliminate improper employee MADAP capabilities;
• independently review and approve system
overrides of rejected claims and insurance
premium payments;
• take timely action to recover claim overpayments;
• establish adequate controls over collections;
• restrict employee access to confidential
information (PII and PHI) of STD patients; and
• ensure that food-processing inspections are
conducted timely and inspection data are
accurate.
Maryland Department of Health – PHPA, et al. Page 7