Title: Presentation to the House Appropriations Subcommittee - Maryland Technology Development Corporation


Related Report Dated (2/5/2019)
Date: 02/20/2019
Type: Presentations to the Legislature
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5c6eb573a1ce5812701cbe4a
Extracted: 2025-06-18T22:25:21.656301
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Maryland Technology
Development Corporation
(TEDCO)
Report Dated February 5, 2019

--- Page 2 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Background
 Fiscal compliance audit period was from January 7,
2015 to April 10, 2018.
 TEDCO is a public instrumentality of the State that
seeks to create and sustain businesses in
Maryland, and create jobs in technology-related
industries throughout all regions of the State.
 In 2015, State law restructured the principal
economic development entities in the State. This
restructuring included the October 1, 2015 transfer
of the Maryland Venture Fund (MVF) and the
Maryland Venture Fund Authority (MVFA) from the
Department of Commerce (DOC) to TEDCO. Our
audit included a review of this transfer and
TEDCO’s investment practices since then.
 The MVF (which is also known as the Enterprise
Fund) is primarily a State-supported fund that
invests in qualified Maryland companies either
directly or indirectly through venture firms.
 In 2011, State law established the Invest Maryland
Program and the MVFA under the MVF.
TEDCO Page 2

--- Page 3 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Overview of Findings
 The MVF represents TEDCO’s most significant
program. As of 6/30/18, $102 million of TEDCO’s
$114.7 million net position related to the MVF.
 The audit report consisted of 3 findings and 10
specific recommendations related to the MVF;
along with one informational comment on the
MVFA’s status.
 The MVFA is a 9 member body established under
State law. The MVFA was created to select the
venture firms that would receive commitments
under the Invest Maryland Program and ensure
that those firms made equal investments in
Maryland businesses. In addition, the MVFA is to
provide advice and consultation to TEDCO.
According to the Governor’s Appointments Office,
the MVFA has been inactive and all of its
members’ appointments have expired. According
to TEDCO, the MVFA has not met since the MVF’s
transfer from DOC to TEDCO in October 2015, and
its responsibilities have been assumed by TEDCO.
TEDCO Page 3

--- Page 4 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Key Findings
 TEDCO had not adopted regulations for direct
equity investments made through the MVF, as
required by State law, and did not adequately
document its investment decisions or rationale as
to how certain investments promoted economic
development in the State of Maryland.
 TEDCO created an advisory committee for the MVF
to provide investment advice, without establishing
adequate policies or procedures. For example,
committee members were not required to file
financial disclosure statements and TEDCO had
not created a conflict of interest policy. We noted
that 2 of the 3 committee members were
associated with venture firms that had previously
received $21 million in commitments under the
Invest Maryland Program (prior to their
appointment).
 TEDCO had not established adequate procedures
over the monitoring of third-party venture firms that
had received funding commitments through the
Invest Maryland Program.
TEDCO Page 4

--- Page 5 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Direct Equity Regulations (Finding 1)
TEDCO had not adopted regulations for direct equity
investments made through the MVF, as required by
State law. Further, the documentation prepared by
TEDCO to support its investment decisions was not
adequate to indicate how certain investments
promoted economic development in Maryland.
State law requires TEDCO to adopt regulations to
include certain key elements, such as the types of
business enterprises in which an investment may be
made and the criteria it uses to make investment
decisions. The law also requires TEDCO to make
such investments in qualified businesses that have
their principal business operations located in
Maryland and intend to maintain that operation in
Maryland after receiving an investment.
TEDCO Page 5

--- Page 6 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Direct Equity Regulation (Finding 1 )
cont.
 Our review of 10 investments from May 2016 to
January 2018 identified 6 investments related to 4
companies, totaling $4.7 million, where each
company’s principal place of business was not
located in Maryland at the time of investment or
following the investment.
 For example, TEDCO made 2 investments of $1.5
million each in a company between May 2016 and
January 2018. These investments were made
despite the company’s disclosure of its intention to
move its principal business operations outside of
Maryland within four months of the first investment.
The second investment was made less than a month
after the company’s relocation outside of Maryland
and the closing of its Maryland facility.
 For each of the 6 investments, TEDCO did not
document the reason(s) why these companies were
considered qualified for investments or what
potential economic impact to the State of Maryland
would result from these investments.
TEDCO Page 6

--- Page 7 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Conflict of Interest Policy (Finding 2)
TEDCO had not established adequate policies
governing its 3 member MVF investment advisory
committee or its formal relationship to TEDCO. In
addition, TEDCO had not established a formal conflict
of interest policy for the majority of MVF’s investment
initiatives and programs and had no procedure to
review financial disclosure statements that were filed
by its own investment employees.
TEDCO established a 3 member advisory committee
for the MVF comprised of industry experts selected by
TEDCO’s Chief Investment Officer to provide advice
on investments currently held in TEDCO’s portfolio
and on companies considered for future investments.
Our review found that 2 of the 3 committee members
were associated with two of the venture firms that
had previously received commitments, totaling $21
million, through the Invest Maryland Program (prior to
the transfer of the MVF to TEDCO).
TEDCO Page 7

--- Page 8 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Venture Firm Monitoring (Finding 3)
 TEDCO did not monitor management fees charged
by the venture firms that received funding through
the Invest Maryland Program (IMP) to ensure that
fees were charged in accordance with State law
and its agreements with the firms.
 TEDCO did not ensure that 6 of the 8 firms, that
had received funding under the IMP, reported
required investment specific information on a
quarterly basis. This information should be used to
monitor qualified Maryland investments made by
the venture firms and assess the impact of those
investments on the Maryland economy.
 TEDCO had not established a process to address
potential investment shortfalls and the exercising of
a “clawback” provision when firms receiving
commitments under the IMP did not make required
investments in qualified Maryland businesses. We
noted one of the 8 firms had received $6 million of
a $10 million commitment during 12/2013 to
6/2018, but had not made any investments in
Maryland companies as of 6/2018.
TEDCO Page 8

--- Page 9 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Conclusions
TEDCO should
• adopt regulations, as required, for the MVF
governing the provision of direct equity
investments;
• comply with State law in regards to making
investments in companies whose principal
business operations are in Maryland;
• establish a mechanism to evaluate and document
each investment’s potential economic impact on
Maryland;
• develop a formal conflict of interest policy over all
MVF programs, require all investment advisors and
decision makers to file financial disclosure
statements, and monitor those statements for
potential conflicts; and
• monitor the appropriateness of management fees,
ensure the required program information is
reported and used to assess program performance,
and monitor and resolve any potential investment
shortfalls, documenting such efforts.
TEDCO Page 9