Title: Presentation to the House Appropriations Subcommittee - State Department of Assessments and Taxation


Related Report Dated (2/22/2018)
Date: 02/20/2019
Type: Presentations to the Legislature
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5c6eb573a1ce5812701cbe49
Extracted: 2025-06-18T22:25:10.709237
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
State Department
of Assessments and Taxation
(DAT)
Report Dated February 22, 2018

--- Page 2 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Report Overview
The report contained 10 findings, including 5 repeat
findings from the preceding fiscal compliance report
and 1 repeat finding from our performance report on
the Homestead Property Tax Credits program, dated
February 28, 2013.
Key Findings:
 Real Property Assessments - DAT did not ensure
required supervisory reviews of real property
assessments were performed and did not ensure
data recorded in its automated real property system
were complete and accurate.
 Personal Property Assessments - DAT did not use
available data to ensure all businesses registered
with the State, did not review personal property
assessment exemptions and penalty waivers, and
did not pursue timely collection of filing penalties.
 Homestead Property and Homeowners’ Tax Credits -
DAT did not have adequate procedures to timely
verify the propriety of tax credits, including those it
had identified as questionable.
State Department of Assessments and Taxation
Page 2

--- Page 3 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Real Property Assessments (Findings 2 & 3)
Finding 2
 Supervisory reviews of real property reassessments
by office supervisors were not always performed and
documented, as required, at two local offices we
reviewed. For one local office, none of the required
reviews of residential and commercial
reassessments were performed in the calendar year
we selected for review. For the other office, the
required number of reviews were not performed or
documented.
Finding 3
 DAT did not ensure real property data recorded in its
automated system were complete and accurate. For
example, 2 of the 10 building permits tested at one
local office were not accurately recorded in the
system, and certain permit processing errors at the
other office were not resolved timely. DAT also did
not document supervisory reviews of assessment
appeals decisions recorded at both offices, and real
property exemptions recorded at one office (Repeat).
State Department of Assessments and Taxation
Page 3

--- Page 4 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Personal Property Assessments (Finding 4)
 DAT did not use available data from the Comptroller
of Maryland (such as records of entities receiving
State payments and/or entities with active sales tax
accounts) to identify unregistered businesses
conducting business in the State and failing to file a
personal property return.
 DAT did not independently review and approve
exemptions from personal property assessments
that were granted by numerous DAT employees. At
the time of our audit, approximately 54,800 entities
were exempt.
 DAT did not timely pursue the collection of personal
property late filing penalties and did not refer
unpaid penalties to the State’s Central Collection
Unit timely.
 DAT employees reduced or waived penalties without
any independent supervisory review and approval.
DAT could not provide justifications for reducing /
waiving 8 of 10 penalties tested totaling $7,196.
State Department of Assessments and Taxation
Page 4

--- Page 5 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Homestead Property Tax Credits (Finding 5)
DAT did not effectively use automated reports to help
identify improper Homestead Property Tax Credits
(HPTC) for review and follow-up (Repeat). State law
limits the increase in county and State taxable
assessments on owner-occupied properties to a fixed
percentage of the preceding year’s assessment.
Approximately 392,100 properties received HPTCs for
the year beginning July 1, 2016.
 DAT did not ensure local offices reviewed and
resolved items on weekly reports that identified
differences between the Homestead Credit
Application System and DAT’s assessment system.
 DAT did not review a pending report that identified
accounts with HPTCs that were placed in a pending
status and that may no longer be eligible.
 DAT did not follow-up on results of certain income
tax record matches that identified significant
discrepancies potentially impacting HPTCs claimed.
A January 2016 match identified 156,040 address
discrepancies that DAT had not reviewed.
State Department of Assessments and Taxation
Page 5

--- Page 6 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Homeowners’ Tax Credits (Finding 6)
DAT did not perform timely and comprehensive
verification procedures to help ensure the accuracy
of Homeowners’ Tax Credits (HTC) awarded
(Repeat). HTCs are awarded to homeowners with a
household income up to $60,000. During fiscal
year 2016, 46,751 HTCs were awarded totaling
$58.4 million.
 DAT had not audited any HTC applications,
including those it had identified as questionable,
for calendar years 2012 through 2015.
 DAT did not require manually processed HTCs to
be independently reviewed to ensure that only
authorized HTCs were processed for payment.
 DAT did not ensure all jurisdictions submitted
monthly electronic files of HTCs redeemed by
homeowners, and did not use the files that were
submitted to verify the propriety of the
jurisdictions’ related reimbursement requests.
State Department of Assessments and Taxation
Page 6

--- Page 7 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Other Findings
Real Property Assessments – Finding 1
Physical exterior inspections were not performed for all
properties as required by State Law. This finding was
subsequently resolved by Senate Bill 10 during the
2018 legislative session, which changed the frequency
and manner of such inspections.
Information Systems Security and Control - Findings 7-9
 DAT did not adequately log or monitor critical
database and mainframe security events (Repeat).
 DAT did not have intrusion detection prevention
systems enabled for the DAT network (Repeat) and
numerous workstations were running an outdated
and unsupported operating system.
 DAT did not ensure services provided by the
Department of Information Technology were
sufficient to secure the DAT network.
Cash Receipts – Finding 10
DAT did not have adequate controls over personal
property filing fee collections (Repeat).
State Department of Assessments and Taxation
Page 7

--- Page 8 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Conclusion
DAT should
 ensure local supervisors conduct and document
required reviews of real property assessments;
 establish appropriate procedures at local offices to
ensure building permit data, assessment appeals
decisions, and real property exemptions are
properly recorded;
 use available Comptroller records to identify
businesses not registered to file a personal
property return, perform supervisory reviews of
exemptions, pursue collection of unpaid penalties,
and review reduced or waived penalties;
 review reports of potentially ineligible HTC
accounts, and take appropriate corrective action;
 perform timely audits of HTC applications, perform
reviews of manually processed HTCs, ensure local
jurisdictions submit monthly files of redeemed
HTCs, and verify reimbursement requests; and
 take the recommended actions to improve controls
over information security and cash receipts.
State Department of Assessments and Taxation
Page 8