Title: Presentation to the Senate Budget and Taxation Full Committee – Department of Information Technology and Selected State Agencies - Telecommunication Resource Sharing Agreements


Related Report Dated (8/3/2018)
Date: 02/26/2019
Type: Presentations to the Legislature
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5c7404daa1ce5804703e6223
Extracted: 2025-06-18T22:25:33.018744
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Department of Information Technology
(DoIT)
Telecommunication Resource Sharing
Agreements
Report Dated August 3, 2018

--- Page 2 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Audit Background
Our audit included five objectives designed to assess
the State’s execution, control, and monitoring of
telecommunication resource sharing agreements
(RSAs) entered into by State agencies under the
Department of Information Technology’s (DoIT)
authority.
 RSAs are contractual agreements with private
companies for the non-exclusive, long-term use of
State rights-of-way (land), communications
infrastructure (telecommunication towers), and real
estate (buildings).
 State law establishes that DoIT is responsible for
reviewing, valuing, and approving RSAs entered into
by State agencies under its authority.
 State law requires that monetary compensation
from certain State agencies’ RSAs is to be
deposited into the State’s Major Information
Technology Development Project (MITDP) Fund.
DoIT is responsible for the MITDP Fund.
Telecommunication Resource Sharing Agreements Page 2
Performance Audit

--- Page 3 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Audit Overview
RSAs typically involve a private company:
• leasing space to install equipment on a State
telecommunication tower
• installing fiber optic cable across State property
• leasing State-owned land or a building to install a
tower or other wireless communication equipment
• leasing space from a utility company on an electric
transmission tower located on State land
We identified 141 RSAs with an estimated value of
$264.1 million at 11 State agencies.
Telecommunication Resource Sharing Agreements Page 3
Performance Audit

--- Page 4 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Key Findings
 DoIT had not established comprehensive policies to
guide State agencies on the proper execution, control,
and monitoring of RSAs.
 DoIT and most State agencies did not maintain
comprehensive records of RSAs and inventories of
State-owned telecommunication towers and fiber optic
cables, and there was also a lack of inventories of
privately owned equipment on towers.
 State agencies did not treat certain agreements as
RSAs, resulting in a lost opportunity to maximize
compensation. Additionally, RSAs were not always
monitored to ensure compensation was received and
deposited in the MITDP Fund as required.
 DoIT did not have a strategic plan for marketing RSA
opportunities to generate revenues and to help achieve
Statewide telecommunication infrastructure goals
(such as expanding rural broadband).
 State agencies did not always obtain the required
approvals when executing or renewing RSAs and
include key provisions to address significant risks.
Telecommunication Resource Sharing Agreements Page 4
Performance Audit

--- Page 5 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Policies and Procedures (Finding 1)
DoIT had not established comprehensive policies to
guide State agencies on the proper execution, control,
and monitoring of RSAs. DoIT’s limited guidance on
RSAs did not include the following key elements:
• A description of the types of agreements covered
under the State’s resource sharing law.
• A description of the methodology for determining
the value of RSAs and for establishing appropriate
annual compensation escalation clauses to
maximize the State’s revenue.
• Standards for RSA duration and renewal options.
• Instructions and expectations for ensuring
monetary compensation is received and deposited
in appropriate accounts.
• A delineation of DoIT and State agency respective
responsibilities for monitoring compliance with the
RSAs.
Telecommunication Resource Sharing Agreements Page 5
Performance Audit

--- Page 6 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Policies and Procedures (Finding 1)
DoIT’s lack of comprehensive policies and procedures
contributed to the numerous deficiencies with RSAs
at State agencies.
Findings Findings Findings
Finding 4 Finding 12
2 & 3 5 & 6 9, 10 & 11
New RSAs and
Lack of
Lack of RSA Compensation Renewals not
inventories of
Agency Records Agreements not received, not properly
privately
and/or not Treated verified, or not approvedor
owned
Tower/Fiber as RSAs deposited into executed,and
equipment on
Inventories MITDP Fund missing key
towers
provisions
DoIT X X X
BCCC X X
DNR X X X X X
DSP X X X
MIEMSS X X
MPBC X
MSA X X X
MSDE X X
MDOT-MTA X X X
MDOT-MdTA X X X X
MDOT-SHA X X X X X
MDOT-MAA X
Totals 8 4 7 11 4
Telecommunication Resource Sharing Agreements Page 6
Performance Audit

--- Page 7 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Policies and Procedures (Findings 2 & 3)
DoIT and most State agencies did not have
comprehensive records of RSAs and/or inventories of
State-owned telecommunication towers and fiber optic
cables.
 DoIT and five agencies, did not have complete
records of RSAs to assist in the monitoring of
compensation and renewal terms. For example,
DoIT’s master list of RSAs included only 39 of the
141 RSAs. DoIT did not have a mechanism for
agencies to periodically report the status of RSAs
(Finding 2).
 DoIT’s inventory of State-owned telecommunication
towers was not accurate or complete. For example,
the inventory only accounted for 131 of the 170
towers we identified. DoIT also did not coordinate
with the Maryland Department of Transportation
(MDOT), which maintained independent records, to
ensure the State maintained an accurate and
comprehensive database of State-owned fiber optic
cable (Finding 3).
Telecommunication Resource Sharing Agreements Page 7
Performance Audit

--- Page 8 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Compensation (Findings 4-6)
 State agencies did not treat agreements with
private telecommunication companies as RSAs,
resulting in lost opportunity to maximize
compensation. For example, MDOT-State Highway
Administration (SHA) allowed companies to install
cable and equipment on rights-of-way by issuing
no-cost utility permits instead of RSAs (Finding 4).
 Compensation was not received, was not verified,
or was not deposited into MITDP Fund. For
example, SHA, DoIT, and the Maryland
Transportation Authority (MdTA) did not collect
monetary compensation totaling $6.0 million on
four existing RSAs (Finding 5).
 DoIT did not monitor State agencies to ensure
resource sharing monetary compensation was
deposited into the MITDP Fund, as required by
State law. Our review disclosed that five agencies
improperly retained compensation totaling $7.3
million (Finding 6).
Telecommunication Resource Sharing Agreements Page 8
Performance Audit

--- Page 9 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Marketing (Findings 7 and 8)
 DoIT did not have a strategic plan for marketing
RSA opportunities to generate revenues and to
help achieve statewide telecommunication
infrastructure goals. Consequently, the State may
not be maximizing opportunities to obtain revenue
and to address the wireless and broadband
telecommunication infrastructure needs of the
State government and Maryland citizens in rural
areas that lack access to broadband (Finding 7).
 DoIT did not monitor existing RSAs with a
nonprofit organization to ensure it was expanding
its broadband networks in rural and underserved
areas, as required. In addition, DoIT had not
made any attempts since 2013 to negotiate
additional RSAs to further expand the broadband
in other rural areas (Finding 8).
Telecommunication Resource Sharing Agreements Page 9
Performance Audit

--- Page 10 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
RSA Execution & Approval (Findings 9 - 11)
 RSAs did not always contain key provisions to
address significant risks. For example, 15 of the
25 RSAs reviewed did not contain all appropriate
compensation and fee provisions, including
language addressing the State’s right of audit
(Finding 9).
 State agencies did not always obtain the required
DoIT, Legislative Policy Committee, and Board of
Public Works (BPW) approvals when executing
RSAs as required by law (Finding 10).
 State agencies did not always obtain the required
BPW approvals when renewing RSAs. In addition,
several agencies had not renegotiated expired
agreements, including one that was expired for 9
years. These agencies allowed the expired RSAs
to continue at the same rates (Finding 11).
Telecommunication Resource Sharing Agreements Page 10
Performance Audit

--- Page 11 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Tracking & Monitoring Equipment (Finding 12)
 State agencies did not always maintain
inventories of private telecommunication
equipment on its telecommunication towers. All
attached equipment should be inventoried to
help ensure that only appropriate
communications equipment is deployed on
State towers, which are constructed at
significant State expense.
Telecommunication Resource Sharing Agreements Page 11
Performance Audit

--- Page 12 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Conclusions
DoIT and applicable State agencies, as appropriate,
should
• establish comprehensive policies to guide State
agencies in the proper execution, control, and
monitoring of RSAs;
• maintain comprehensive records of all RSAs and
assets (towers/fiber) for RSA opportunities;
• establish RSAs that contain appropriate provisions
for all qualified agreements;
• ensure the proper amount of RSA compensation is
received and deposited into the MITDP Fund as
applicable;
• strategically market RSA opportunities and use
RSAs to strategically expand broadband in rural
areas;
• ensure RSAs are properly approved and renewed;
and
• maintain inventories of all private equipment
attached to State-owned towers.
Telecommunication Resource Sharing Agreements Page 12
Performance Audit