Title: Presentation to the House Appropriations Subcommittee - Maryland Department of Transportation - Maryland Transit Administration


Related Report Dated (11/20/2018)

Related Report Dated (1/7/2019)
Date: 02/25/2019
Type: Presentations to the Legislature
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5c753ac1a1ce58088405e7d1
Extracted: 2025-06-18T22:25:42.683287
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Maryland Department of Transportation
Maryland Transit Administration
(MTA)
Combined Presentation On
Fiscal Compliance Audit
Report Dated November 20, 2018
and
Special Review
Allegations Regarding Potential Violations of Laws
Report Dated January 7, 2019

--- Page 2 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Fiscal Compliance Audit Overview
Our fiscal compliance (FC) report contained 11
findings, including 2 repeat findings from the
preceding FC audit report and 2 repeat findings from
our February 3, 2015 special report on MTA’s
Interagency Agreements with a State University.
Key findings:
 MTA used contracts to obtain certain services that
were outside their scope, thereby circumventing
competitive procurement requirements and
incurring unnecessary administrative fees.
 Additional contract procurement and monitoring
deficiencies and questionable activities were
identified in a January 7, 2019 special report, also
included in this presentation, beginning on page
11.
 MTA did not always adhere to State procurement
regulations regarding sole source procurements,
contract award requirements, and bid
documentation, and certain monitoring efforts were
inadequate.
Maryland Transit Administration Page 2

--- Page 3 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Fiscal Compliance Audit Overview (cont.)
Key findings (cont.):
 MTA used interagency agreements (IAA) with
institutions of higher education to procure
unrelated services, circumventing competitive
bidding requirements and incurring excessive
administrative fees.
 MTA did not recover IAA overpayments; did not
adequately monitor work performed under these
agreements; and certain payments were made for
work that was not authorized or supported.
 Employees had improper access to both initiate
and approve purchase orders or disbursements,
and certain employees had access capabilities
granting them complete control over payroll and
pension transactions.
 Sufficient controls were not in place over Mobility
Paratransit Program eligibility determinations,
MTA’s computers were not sufficiently protected,
and internal control deficiencies existed over
certain cash receipts and equipment.
Maryland Transit Administration Page 3

--- Page 4 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Procurement & Monitoring (FC Finding 1)
Labor Negotiation Consulting Services
 MTA used a management services contract to
obtain $257,000 in labor negotiation services that
were unrelated to the contract’s scope, including
$14,000 in unnecessary management fees.
 The related task order lacked specific deliverables;
the hourly service rate increased 31 percent from
the preceding contract for these services; and the
service provider’s resume did not reference any
experience in labor negotiations.
Employment of Support Staff
 MTA improperly used two task orders under
architectural and engineering contracts to direct
subcontractors to hire an individual to perform
unrelated general accounting services.
 The two task orders’ payments totaled $319,000
from August 2014 through May 2017, including
$129,000 for direct services and $190,000 for
subcontractor payments. During this period, the
individual’s hourly rate increased 30 percent.
Maryland Transit Administration Page 4

--- Page 5 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Procurement & Monitoring (FC Finding 2)
MTA did not always adhere to certain State
procurement regulations (Repeat).
 Our test of 23 sole source procurements found that
MTA lacked sufficient evidence to support that, for 10
purchases totaling $2 million, no other vendors could
supply the items purchased.
 For a $36.8 million contract to overhaul its rail
commuter fleet, MTA had no record that bids were
received on time and of the bid opening process.
Technical evaluations were not individually signed.
 Corporate purchasing cards were repeatedly used
to procure bus repair services and parts from two
vendors without competitive bids and written
contracts. MTA made 1,550 payments to these two
vendors totaling $1.4 million for a 3-year period.
 For a $6.1 million light rail vehicles (LRV) cleaning
contract, MTA did not require the contractor to
submit documentation of actual services provided,
but paid the contractor a fixed monthly fee
regardless of the number of hours worked, staffing
levels provided, or the number of LRVs cleaned.
Maryland Transit Administration Page 5

--- Page 6 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Interagency Agreements (FC Finding 4)
MTA used interagency agreements (IAAs) with
higher education institutions, primarily to
circumvent State procurement regulations
(Repeat).
 MTA used IAAs with two higher education
institutions, which were to provide training
courses and related services, to circumvent
competitive bidding requirements. MTA directed
the institutions to contract with a vendor to
provide services that were outside the scope of
the agreements. Competitive bids were not
obtained.
 The institutions also had minimal involvement in
the work performed by the vendor.
 The administrative fees charged by the
institutions appeared excessive. MTA paid $1.8
million for these vendor services during the
period from fiscal years 2012 to 2017, including
$529,000 to the institutions as administrative
fees (rates ranging between 25% and 51%).
Maryland Transit Administration Page 6

--- Page 7 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Interagency Agreements (FC Findings 5 & 6)
Identified Overpayments Not Recovered (Finding 5)
 In response to a preceding OLA audit, MTA reviewed
$10.7 million in interagency agreement (IAA)
payments to a State university, but did not follow up
on the results of its own review.
 MTA’s review disclosed $725,000 in duplicate
payments and overpayments, including $416,000
in administrative fees. MTA also could not verify
receipt of deliverables for $6.5 million in billings. In
consultation with legal counsel, MTA advised it
would not pursue recovery of these funds.
IAAs Not Adequately Monitored (Finding 6)
 Our review of 9 task orders under three IAAs
disclosed that 4 task orders valued at $755,000
lacked a description of the work to be performed,
which precluded effective monitoring.
 Our review of 12 payments under these task orders
disclosed $53,000 in payments for work that was
not authorized or adequately supported (Repeat).
Maryland Transit Administration Page 7

--- Page 8 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Other FC Findings
Finding 3 – Purchasing and Disbursements
Proper controls were not established over the
processing of purchasing and disbursement
transactions (Repeat). Five employees had system
access to both initiate and approve purchase orders,
and one employee could both initiate and approve
disbursements. These transactions were not manually
reviewed.
Finding 7 – Mobility Paratransit Program (MPP)
Controls were not in place to ensure that MPP
eligibility determinations were proper and that ID
cards were only issued to eligible individuals. Fiscal
year 2017 MPP payments were $76 million.
Finding 8 – Union Payroll and Pensions
Six payroll employees had access capabilities
granting them virtually complete control over union
payroll and pension transactions. Calendar year
2017 union payroll and pension payments were
$216.8 million.
Maryland Transit Administration Page 8

--- Page 9 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Other FC Findings (cont.)
Finding 9 – Cash Receipts
Certain collections were not adequately controlled.
For example, Consignment Center and Transit Store
collections were not adequately verified from initial
receipt to deposit. These collections totaled $13.3
million during fiscal year 2016.
Finding 10 – Equipment
MTA did not ensure that all equipment purchases
were recorded in its detailed equipment records.
Our test of 40 items found 27 were not recorded.
Finding 11 – Information Systems Security & Control
Malware protection was not sufficient to provide
MTA with adequate assurance its computers were
properly protected. For example, our test of 10 MTA
workstations and 2 servers disclosed that 2
workstations had no malware protection software
installed, and the remaining 8 workstations and 2
servers had outdated versions.
Maryland Transit Administration Page 9

--- Page 10 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Fiscal Compliance Audit Conclusions
MTA should
• discontinue the practice of using existing contracts
and interagency agreements to circumvent
competitive procurement requirements;
• ensure task orders specify required deliverables
that can be used for monitoring services provided
and payments made;
• comply with State procurement regulations
regarding sole source procurements, maintain
adequate bid documentation, consolidate
procurements of similar goods to maximize buying
power, and monitor contractual services provided;
• ensure that appropriate controls are established
and followed over purchases and disbursements,
the MPP eligibility process, union payroll and
pension transactions, collections, and equipment
inventory; and
• ensure that all computers have proper malware
protection software and are up-to-date for critical
security-related updates.
Maryland Transit Administration Page 10

--- Page 11 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Special Review Overview
 We conducted a special review (SR) of allegations
received through our fraud, waste, and abuse
hotline regarding possible violations of State laws,
regulations, and policies by an MTA Light Rail
Operations management employee.
 In our report dated January 7, 2019, we noted that
this employee directed a prime contractor to use
specific vendors as subcontractors, including one
vendor with which the employee had less than an
arm’s-length relationship (hereinafter referred to
as the “related vendor”).
 We identified certain questionable matters as
described in the findings which we referred to the
Office of the Attorney General – Criminal Division.
We also identified possible violations of State
ethics law that may require referral to the State
Ethics Commission. Finally, we noted violations of
State procurement regulations and MTA policy, as
well as poor contract administration procedures
and controls.
Maryland Transit Administration Page 11

--- Page 12 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Special Review Overview (cont.)
Key findings:
 Language in certain contracts allowed employees
to circumvent State procurement regulations. The
management employee used this capability to
direct work to the related vendor.
 Competition may have been limited on two
contracts, and another contract was awarded to
contractors that did not appear to meet the
technical qualifications.
 Task orders were improperly issued for projects
that should have been procured separately; critical
task order and bid documents were not retained,
required approvals were not obtained; and task
order payments were not monitored.
 The management employee directed and
monitored 4 snow and ice removal contracts
involving the related vendor, raising questions
about the integrity of the award and related
payments.
Maryland Transit Administration
Page 12

--- Page 13 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Ancillary Contracts (SR Finding 1)
Contract Language Allowed MTA to Circumvent State
Procurement Regulations
 Contract language allowed MTA employees to
direct prime contractors to use certain vendors as
subcontractors, circumventing State procurement
regulations. Prime contractors could charge higher
overhead rates for using the vendors selected by
MTA employees.
MTA Management Employee Had a Relationship with
a Vendor
 The management employee directed prime
contractors on two $9 million contracts to
subcontract work to a vendor. Two employees of
the vendor were close relatives of the
management employee. Two other employees of
the vendor resided at properties owned by the
management employee. The vendor’s Chief
Financial Officer operated a business out of a
property owned by the management employee.
Maryland Transit Administration Page 13

--- Page 14 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Ancillary Contracts (SR Finding 1 cont.)
Questionable Payments
 The related vendor was paid $192,000 to perform
snow removal and train cleaning services that
should have been provided under other existing
contracts. The rates paid to perform these
services exceeded the rates on the existing
contracts.
 Certain tasks performed by the related vendor did
not appear to be appropriate under the contracts.
For example, one $15,420 invoice for multiple
services included charges for driving a light rail
operations employee to a hardware store to
purchase cleaning supplies.
These questionable payments, coupled with the
relationships we described previously, raise
questions about a possible conflict of interest
between the management employee and the related
vendor.
Maryland Transit Administration Page 14

--- Page 15 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Ancillary Contracts (SR Finding 2)
 MTA may have limited competition on the light rail
ancillary service contracts by combining
specialized maintenance and repair of light rail
tracks with maintenance and repairs at MTA
facilities. Our review disclosed that the majority of
work performed under the contract was related to
maintenance of MTA facilities (such as painting,
electrical, plumbing, and HVAC).
 The method used to award the two light rail
contracts provided no assurance that the State
received the most advantageous pricing and may
have enabled the management employee to direct
work to the related vendor.
 Two of the three prime contractors awarded a
security and wireless ancillary contract did not
demonstrate that they met the contract’s technical
experience and qualification requirements. MTA
used this contract to subcontract work to two
incumbent vendors whose contracts had expired.
Maryland Transit Administration Page 15

--- Page 16 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Ancillary Contracts (SR Finding 3)
MTA did not properly administer task orders issued
under the three ancillary contracts and did not
monitor the related payments.
 MTA improperly issued task orders for projects
that exceeded $500,000 which, according to MTA
policy, should have been competitively procured
as separate contracts. The management
employee controlled three such task orders
totaling $5.8 million.
 MTA did not retain copies of task orders and
critical bid documents, and did not obtain required
approvals. For example, 8 task orders totaling
$8.5 million (of 12 tested) were not approved by
MTA's Task Order Review Committee.
 MTA did not properly monitor the amounts paid
under the task orders and obtain support for the
related invoices. For example, MTA did not ensure
documentation was provided by the contractors to
support subcontractor charges.
Maryland Transit Administration Page 16

--- Page 17 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Snow Removal Contracts (SR Finding 4)
The management employee directed and monitored
four light rail snow and ice removal contracts that
involved the related vendor.
 The related vendor and a second vendor bid on
each contract and listed each other as
subcontractors in their respective bid
submissions. Of the $3.6 million paid under these
contracts, $1.5 million was paid to the related
vendor as a prime contractor or a subcontractor.
 The management employee was responsible for
authorizing the number of hours the vendor could
work (including overtime). Therefore, the vendors
could have potentially submitted low hourly rates
to win the contract awards, with the knowledge
that the amount ultimately paid would be dictated
by the hours the management employee later
authorized.
Maryland Transit Administration Page 17

--- Page 18 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Special Review Conclusions
MTA should
• discontinue using contract language that permits
circumvention of State procurement regulations
and directing contractors to use specific vendors;
• take appropriate action regarding the MTA
employee’s involvement with the contracts;
• after consultation with the Office of the Attorney
General – Criminal Division, refer this matter to
the State Ethics Commission;
• ensure future contracts maximize competition,
provide the State with the most advantageous
pricing, and are only awarded to vendors who
meet the qualifications;
• administer task orders in accordance with MTA
policies and retain critical documents;
• obtain and review support for invoice charges; and
• verify the propriety of the procurement of and
invoices submitted under the four snow and ice
removal contracts.
Maryland Transit Administration Page 18