Title: Office of the Attorney General
Date: 03/08/2019
Type: Fiscal Compliance
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5c868426a1ce581208072380
Extracted: 2025-06-18T22:26:11.557897
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Audit Report
Office of the Attorney General
May 2023
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Senator Clarence K. Lam, M.D. (Senate Chair) Delegate Jared Solomon (House Chair)
Senator Joanne C. Benson Delegate Steven J. Arentz
Senator Paul D. Corderman Delegate Nicholas P. Charles II
Senator Katie Fry Hester Delegate Andrea Fletcher Harrison
Senator Shelly L. Hettleman Delegate Steven C. Johnson
Senator Cheryl C. Kagan Delegate Mary A. Lehman
Senator Cory V. McCray Delegate David Moon
Senator Justin D. Ready Delegate Julie Palakovich Carr
Senator Bryan W. Simonaire Delegate Stephanie M. Smith
Senator Craig J. Zucker Delegate M. Courtney Watson
To Obtain Further Information
Office of Legislative Audits
The Warehouse at Camden Yards
351 West Camden Street, Suite 400
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Phone: 410-946-5900
Maryland Relay: 711
TTY: 410-946-5401 · 301-970-5401
E-mail: OLAWebmaster@ola.state.md.us
Website: www.ola.state.md.us
To Report Fraud
The Office of Legislative Audits operates a Fraud Hotline to report fraud, waste, or abuse involving State
of Maryland government resources. Reports of fraud, waste, or abuse may be communicated anonymously
by a toll-free call to 1-877-FRAUD-11, by mail to the Fraud Hotline, c/o Office of Legislative Audits, or
through the Office’s website.
Nondiscrimination Statement
The Department of Legislative Services does not discriminate on the basis of age, ancestry, color, creed,
marital status, national origin, race, religion, gender, gender identity, sexual orientation, or disability in the
admission or access to its programs, services, or activities. The Department’s Information Officer has been
designated to coordinate compliance with the nondiscrimination requirements contained in Section 35.107
of the United States Department of Justice Regulations. Requests for assistance should be directed to the
Information Officer at 410-946-5400 or 410-970-5400.

--- Page 3 ---
May 25, 2023
Senator Clarence K. Lam, M.D., Senate Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Delegate Jared Solomon, House Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Members of Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Annapolis, Maryland
Ladies and Gentlemen:
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the Office of the Attorney
General (OAG) for the period beginning May 9, 2018 and ending June 15, 2022.
OAG is a public office established under the Constitution of Maryland, and acts
as legal counsel to the Governor, the General Assembly, the Judiciary, and State
agencies. OAG also enforces antitrust, consumer protection, and securities laws;
prosecutes Medicaid provider fraud; and monitors residential juvenile facilities.
Our audit disclosed that OAG did not adequately monitor certain critical
components of the contract it procured in June 2017 for implementation of a case
management system to ensure that all critical deliverables were received. As of
September 2022, the system had not been fully implemented, and we noted that
certain payments were not made in accordance with the contract.
Our audit also disclosed that OAG did not ensure all outstanding payroll errors
and discrepancies were resolved, and that adjustments to employee leave balances
were not subject to independent review and approval.
Finally, our audit included a review to determine the status of the two findings
contained in our preceding audit report. We determined that OAG satisfactorily
addressed those findings.
OAG’s response to this audit is included as an appendix to this report. We
reviewed the response to our findings and related recommendations, and have

--- Page 4 ---
concluded that the corrective actions identified are sufficient to address all audit
issues.
We wish to acknowledge the cooperation extended to us during the audit by
OAG. We also wish to acknowledge OAG’s willingness to address the audit
issues and implement appropriate corrective actions.
Respectfully submitted,
Gregory A. Hook, CPA
Legislative Auditor
2

--- Page 5 ---
Background Information
Agency Responsibilities
The Office of the Attorney General (OAG) is a public office established under the
Constitution of Maryland. OAG operates under the provisions of Title 6 of the
State Government Article. OAG acts as legal counsel to the Governor, General
Assembly, Judiciary, State agencies, boards, and commissions, and represents the
State in all legal matters of interest to the State. OAG also reviews legislation
passed by the General Assembly; enforces antitrust, consumer protection, and
securities laws; prosecutes Medicaid provider fraud; and monitors residential
juvenile facilities. According to the State’s records, OAG’s expenditures totaled
approximately $42.7 million (primarily salaries and wages) during fiscal year
2022. (See Figure 1 on the following page)
3

--- Page 6 ---
Figure 1
OAG Positions, Expenditures, and Funding Sources
Full-Time Equivalent Positions as of June 30, 2022
Positions Percent
Filled 259 89.3%
Vacant 31 10.7%
Total 290
Fiscal Year 2022 Expenditures
Expenditures Percent
Salaries, Wages, and Fringe Benefits $34,214,312 80.2%
Technical and Special Fees 1,720,312 4.0%
Operating Expenses 6,748,779 15.8%
Total $42,683,403
Fiscal Year 2022 Funding Sources
Funding Percent
General Fund $22,178,994 52.0%
Special Fund 10,903,632 25.5%
Federal Fund 3,671,686 8.6%
Reimbursable Fund 5,929,091 13.9%
Total $42,683,403
Source: State financial and personnel records
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report
Our audit included a review to determine the status of the two findings contained
in our preceding audit report dated March 8, 2019. We determined that OAG
satisfactorily addressed these findings.
4

--- Page 7 ---
Findings and Recommendations
Case Management System
Background
In June 2017, the Office of the Attorney General (OAG) procured a contract for
itself and the State’s Office of the Public Defender (OPD) for case management
systems. Although procured under a single contract, the vendor was required to
provide two separate systems for the functionality required by each office. Each
office was responsible for monitoring the deliverables for its system.1 With
respect to OAG, the system was to track and manage criminal and civil litigation
and non-litigation matters critical to the mission of OAG, such as investigations,
research, appeals, and consumer complaints. This case management system will
consolidate various existing OAG tracking systems, spreadsheets, word
processing files, and other manual processes currently being used.
According to the contract, OAG’s costs for system implementation and periodic
charges (software use and licensing, and maintenance) during the four year base
contract period totaled approximately $2 million, and periodic charges for two 2-
year renewal options totaled approximately $1.6 million.2 According to OAG’s
records, payments to the vendor totaled $914,000 as of August 2022.
Finding 1
OAG did not adequately monitor certain critical components of the case
management system contract to ensure that all critical deliverables were
received. As of September 2022, the system had not been fully implemented,
and we noted that certain payments were not made in accordance with the
contract.
Analysis
OAG did not adequately monitor certain critical components of this contract.
Specifically, OAG did not receive required critical scheduling and planning
documents from the contractor. As of September 2022, the system had not been
fully implemented, and we noted that certain payments were not made in
accordance with the contract.
1 The monitoring of deliverables for the Office of the Public Defender will be subject to review
during that audit.
2 Since the base period ended June 2021, OAG has exercised the first 2-year renewal option.
5

--- Page 8 ---
Critical Scheduling and Planning Documents Were Not Received
OAG did not receive critical scheduling and planning documents, which
significantly restricted its ability to monitor the contractor’s progress and
completion dates. For example, OAG did not receive a detailed project schedule
or a deliverable description and schedule, which were required by the contract to
be submitted within 10 days of OAG’s notice to proceed. These schedules were
to identify tasks, task estimates, and the proposed submission due date and
frequency of each deliverable. Similarly, a contractually required implementation
plan documenting the effort and resources necessary to fully implement the
system was not received by OAG. The due date for the plan was to be established
in the aforementioned project schedule. As a result, there was no formal
documentation of when deliverables were to be received and the project
completed.
Case Management System Was Not Fully Implemented
We were advised by OAG that, as of September 2022, approximately five years
after OAG entered into the contract, system implementation was still not complete
for two of the four core divisions as intended. The vendor’s financial proposal
and schedule3 provided that implementation would be complete by year two of the
four-year base period. We further noted that OAG did not disclose to the Board
of Public Works (BPW) that the system was not fully implemented when it
requested approval for the first renewal option in May 2021.
Payments Were Not Made in Accordance With the Contract
Our review of five of the seven payments made between July 2018 and August
2021 totaling approximately $911,000 (out of total payments of $914,000)
disclosed all five invoices were not billed in accordance with the contract.
Specifically, two invoices for implementation costs totaling $600,000 were paid
in July 2018, even though the contract provided that no implementation costs
were to be paid until the system was fully implemented. In addition, the
remaining three invoices for user license fees for the case management system
totaling $311,000 were not billed in accordance with contract rates, and there was
no contract modification to justify the different billing rates used. Specifically,
OAG paid a higher user license rate for one invoice paid in August 2019 resulting
in a potential overpayment of $10,000. For the other two invoices paid in April
and August of 2021, OAG paid a lower user license rate resulting in a potential
underpayment of $86,000 to the contractor.
3 This schedule was submitted as part of the contractor’s bid, and would have been superseded by
the aforementioned missing critical scheduling and planning documents.
6

--- Page 9 ---
Recommendation 1
We recommend that OAG
a. ensure that all required scheduling and planning documents are received
and use those documents to monitor the receipt of deliverables and
contract progress,
b. notify the BPW that the system had not been fully implemented prior to
the contract renewal,
c. ensure that payments are made in accordance with contract terms, and
d. review all payments to the contractor and determine the full extent of any
overpayments or underpayments and take appropriate action.
Payroll
Finding 2
OAG did not ensure all outstanding payroll errors and discrepancies were
resolved, and that adjustments to employee leave balances were subject to
independent review and approval.
Analysis
OAG did not ensure all outstanding payroll errors and discrepancies were
resolved, and that adjustments to employee leave balances were subject to
independent review and approval.
Payroll Discrepancies Were Not Resolved
OAG did not investigate and resolve all payroll discrepancies identified on error
reports generated from the State’s Statewide Personnel System (SPS). Although
OAG generated and reviewed these reports each pay period prior to submitting its
payroll to the Department of Budget and Management’s Office of Personnel
Services and Benefits (OPSB) for processing and shortly after submitting its
payroll, it did not continue to generate the reports in subsequent pay periods after
the payroll was processed to identify and resolve any unresolved errors and
discrepancies as directed by OPSB.
SPS generates several reports to help State agencies identify, investigate, and
correct payroll errors and other discrepancies, such as employee timesheets with
no time entered, submitted, or approved. If errors and discrepancies are not
resolved by the deadline for submission to OPSB, the payroll must still be
submitted and processed, and agencies must go back and address any unresolved
items.
7

--- Page 10 ---
We reviewed one error report as of July 12, 2022 that identifies employee
timesheets related to pay periods ending between January 1, 2021 and June 15,
2022 with entries that were never submitted for supervisory approval. The report
indicated that there were 24 employees with 553 hours that had not been
submitted for supervisory approval. Our review of four of these employees
disclosed 163 un-submitted hours that had remained unresolved for between 8 and
12 months.4 These four employees were paid $6,906 for those 163 hours. OAG
reviewed the four employees after we brought them to its attention. Two of the
employees did not appear and two employees did appear on error reports
generated by OAG shortly after the pay period had ended. However, OAG did
not continue to generate the reports in subsequent pay periods after the payroll
was processed to identify and resolve any errors as directed by OPSB, such as the
two employees who did not appear on the aforementioned reports originally
generated by OAG.
Leave Balance Adjustments Were Not Reviewed
Adjustments to employee leave balances were not adequately reviewed for
propriety. Although supervisory personnel approved adjustments prior to
recording on the automated system, available system output reports were not
reviewed to ensure that only authorized adjustments were processed.
Consequently, an invalid adjustment could be recorded on the system without
detection.
Our test of 12 adjustments processed for 5 employees between June 2020 and
February 20225 that increased leave balances by 5,787 hours, disclosed one
increase of 326 hours that was a duplicate of an adjustment that had already been
made. OAG personnel were not aware of the duplicate until we brought it to their
attention. Between January 2021 and June 2022, OAG processed 222 leave
adjustments that increased employee leave balances by approximately 37,000
hours.
Recommendation 2
We recommend that OAG
a. develop procedures to ensure that all outstanding payroll discrepancies
are resolved, including those noted in this finding; and
b. review available output reports of leave adjustments processed, at least
on a test basis, to ensure that only authorized adjustments have been
processed, and correct the duplicate adjustment we noted.
4 We selected employees to review based on time between the date the report was run and the pay
period with no time submitted as well as number of hours not submitted.
5 We selected adjustments based on the materiality of all adjustments related to an employee as
well as one adjustment that appeared to be an adjustment recorded twice.
8

--- Page 11 ---
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the Office of the Attorney
General (OAG) for the period beginning May 9, 2018 and ending June 15, 2022.
The audit was conducted in accordance with generally accepted government
auditing standards. Those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to
obtain sufficient, appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our
findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives. We believe that the
evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions
based on our audit objectives.
As prescribed by the State Government Article, Section 2-1221 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, the objectives of this audit were to examine OAG’s financial
transactions, records, and internal control, and to evaluate its compliance with
applicable State laws, rules, and regulations.
In planning and conducting our audit, we focused on the major financial-related
areas of operations based on assessments of significance and risk. The areas
addressed by the audit included procurements and disbursements, cash receipts,
special funds, non-budgeted funds, and payroll. We also determined the status of
the findings contained in our preceding audit report.
Our assessment of internal controls was based on agency procedures and controls
in place at the time of our fieldwork. Our tests of transactions and other auditing
procedures were generally focused on the transactions occurring during our audit
period of May 9, 2018 and ending June 15, 2022, but may include transactions
before or after this period as we considered necessary to achieve our audit
objectives.
To accomplish our audit objectives, our audit procedures included inquiries of
appropriate personnel, inspections of documents and records, tests of transactions,
and to the extent practicable, observations of OAG’s operations. Generally,
transactions were selected for testing based on auditor judgment, which primarily
considers risk, the timing or dollar amount of the transaction, or the significance
of the transaction to the area of operation reviewed. As a matter of course, we do
not normally use sampling in our tests, so unless otherwise specifically indicated,
neither statistical nor non-statistical audit sampling was used to select the
transactions tested. Therefore, unless sampling is specifically indicated in a
finding, the results from any tests conducted or disclosed by us cannot be used to
project those results to the entire population from which the test items were
selected.
9

--- Page 12 ---
We also performed various data extracts of pertinent information from the State’s
Financial Management Information System (such as revenue and expenditure
data) and the State’s Central Payroll Bureau (payroll data). The extracts are
performed as part of ongoing internal processes established by the Office of
Legislative Audits and were subject to various tests to determine data reliability.
We determined that the data extracted from these sources were sufficiently
reliable for the purposes the data were used during this audit. Finally, we
performed other auditing procedures that we considered necessary to achieve our
audit objectives. The reliability of data used in this report for background or
informational purposes was not assessed.
OAG’s management is responsible for establishing and maintaining effective
internal control. Internal control is a process designed to provide reasonable
assurance that objectives pertaining to the reliability of financial records;
effectiveness and efficiency of operations, including safeguarding of assets; and
compliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations are achieved. As
provided in Government Auditing Standards, there are five components of
internal control: control environment, risk assessment, control activities,
information and communication, and monitoring. Each of the five components,
when significant to the audit objectives, and as applicable to OAG, were
considered by us during the course of this audit.
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate.
Our reports are designed to assist the Maryland General Assembly in exercising
its legislative oversight function and to provide constructive recommendations for
improving State operations. As a result, our reports generally do not address
activities we reviewed that are functioning properly.
This report includes a finding relating to conditions that we consider to be
significant deficiencies in the design or operation of internal control that could
adversely affect OAG’s ability to maintain reliable financial records, operate
effectively and efficiently, and/or comply with applicable laws, rules, and
regulations. Our report also includes a finding regarding significant instances of
noncompliance with applicable laws, rules, or regulations. Other less significant
findings were communicated to OAG that did not warrant inclusion in this report.
OAG’s response to our findings and recommendations is included as an appendix
to this report. As prescribed in the State Government Article, Section 2-1224 of
10

--- Page 13 ---
the Annotated Code of Maryland, we will advise OAG regarding the results of our
review of its response.
11

--- Page 14 ---
APPENDIX
ANTHONY G. BROWN CANDACE MCLAREN LANHAM
Attorney General Chief of Staff
CAROLYN A. QUATTROCKI
Deputy Attorney General
STATE OF MARYLAND
OFFICE OF THE ATTORNEY GENERAL
FACSIMILE NO. WRITER’S DIRECT DIAL NO.
410-576-6447 410-576-6442
May 23, 2023
Via e-mail
Gregory A. Hook, CPA
Legislative Auditor
Department of Legislative Services
The Warehouse at Camden Yards
351 West Camden Street, Suite 400
Baltimore, MD 21201
response@ola.state.md.us
Dear Mr. Hook,
Thank you for your letter regarding the draft audit report for the Office of the Attorney
General (OAG) for the period beginning May 9, 2018 and ending June 15, 2022. Attached is the
OAG’s response to your report. We would like to thank your staff for their professionalism in
conducting this audit.
Should you need additional information or clarification, please contact Beverly Pivec,
Director of Administration by email at bpivec@oag.state.md.us or by phone at 410-576-6442.
Sincerely,
Anthony G. Brown
200 Saint Paul Place ❖ Baltimore, Maryland, 21202-2021
Main Office (410) 576-6300 ❖ Main Office Toll Free (888) 743-0023
www.marylandattorneygeneral.gov

--- Page 15 ---
Office of the Attorney General
Agency Response Form
Case Management System
Finding 1
OAG did not adequately monitor certain critical components of the case management
system contract to ensure that all critical deliverables were received. As of September
2022, the system had not been fully implemented, and we noted that certain payments were
not made in accordance with the contract.
We recommend that OAG
a. ensure that all required scheduling and planning documents are received and use those
documents to monitor the receipt of deliverables and contract progress,
b. notify the BPW that the system had not been fully implemented prior to the contract
renewal,
c. ensure that payments are made in accordance with contract terms, and
d. review all payments to the contractor and determine the full extent of any
overpayments or underpayments and take appropriate action.
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide
additional
comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation Agree Estimated Completion Date:
1a 2/9/2022
Please provide The OAG has assigned a new Project Manager who is working closely with the DoIT
details of Oversight group to work on the scheduling and planning documents.
corrective action
or explain
disagreement.
Recommendation Agree Estimated Completion Date:
1b 6/9/2023
Please provide We are in the process of renewing the contract and will notify BPW that the system is
details of not fully implemented.
corrective action
or explain
disagreement.
Recommendation Agree Estimated Completion Date:
1c 6/30/2023
Page 1 of 3

--- Page 16 ---
Office of the Attorney General
Agency Response Form
Please provide We will make the appropriate payments in accordance with the contract terms.
details of
corrective action
or explain
disagreement.
Recommendation Agree Estimated Completion Date:
1d 6/30/2023
Please provide We will review all payments to the contractor and determine the full extent of any
details of overpayments or underpayments and take appropriate action.
corrective action
or explain
disagreement.
Page 2 of 3

--- Page 17 ---
Office of the Attorney General
Agency Response Form
Payroll
Finding 2
OAG did not ensure all outstanding payroll errors and discrepancies were resolved, and
that adjustments to employee leave balances were subject to independent review and
approval.
We recommend that OAG
a. develop procedures to ensure that all outstanding payroll discrepancies are resolved,
including those noted in this finding; and
b. review available output reports of leave adjustments processed, at least on a test basis,
to ensure that only authorized adjustments have been processed, and correct the
duplicate adjustment we noted.
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide The OAG generates and reviews reports from the State’s Statewide
additional comments as Personnel System (SPS) and sends emails to employees and their
deemed necessary. supervisors who have no time entered, unsubmitted time or unapproved
time. These emails are sent at least two times during the week that
timesheets are due.
Recommendation 2a Agree Estimated Completion Date: Ongoing
Please provide details of We agree with this recommendation. We will continue to generate and
corrective action or review reports from SPS and send emails to employees and their
explain disagreement. supervisors who have no time entered, unsubmitted time or unapproved
time. We will continue to work with supervisors until all timesheets are
completed and approved for each pay period.
Recommendation 2b Agree Estimated Completion Date: Ongoing
Please provide details of The OAG has established procedures for reviewing leave adjustments to
corrective action or ensure they are processed correctly. We will also review any available
explain disagreement. report of leave adjustments processed to ensure that only authorized
adjustments have been processed. The duplicate adjustments noted have
been corrected.
Page 3 of 3

--- Page 18 ---
A T
UDIT EAM
Adam J. Westover, CPA
Audit Manager
Patrick J. Cavanaugh, CPA
Senior Auditor
Tari J. Covington
Staff Auditor