Title: Statewide Personnel System
Date: 03/07/2019
Type: Special Reports and Letters
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5c86ccf4a1ce58120807454c
Extracted: 2025-06-18T22:26:02.782085
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Special Review
Statewide Personnel System
Review of the Design and Implementation of Automated Controls
March 2019
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
For further information concerning this report contact:
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
301 West Preston Street, Room 1202
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Phone: 410-946-5900 · 301-970-5900
Toll Free in Maryland: 1-877-486-9964
Maryland Relay: 711
TTY: 410-946-5401 · 301-970-5401
E-mail: OLAWebmaster@ola.state.md.us
Website: www.ola.state.md.us
The Office of Legislative Audits operates a Fraud Hotline to report fraud, waste, or abuse
involving State of Maryland government resources. Reports of fraud, waste, or abuse may
be communicated anonymously by a toll-free call to 1-877-FRAUD-11, by mail to the Fraud
Hotline, c/o Office of Legislative Audits, or through the Office’s website.
The Department of Legislative Services does not discriminate on the basis of age, ancestry,
color, creed, marital status, national origin, race, religion, gender, gender identity, sexual
orientation, or disability in the admission or access to its programs, services, or activities. The
Department’s Information Officer has been designated to coordinate compliance with the
nondiscrimination requirements contained in Section 35.107 of the Department of Justice
Regulations. Requests for assistance should be directed to the Information Officer at 410-946-
5400 or 410-970-5400.

--- Page 5 ---
Table of Contents
Background Information 4
Statewide Personnel System (SPS) Overview and Implementation 4
Information System Security 5
Employee Complaints After Certain Agencies Transitioned to SPS 7
Review Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
Scope and Objectives 9
Methodology 9
System and Organization Controls (SOC) Review 11
Findings and Recommendations 12
Conclusions 12
User Access
Finding 1 – The Department of Budget and Management (DBM) 13
did not perform a comprehensive review to ensure that
access to all personally identifiable information (PII) for State
employees stored in SPS was properly restricted to
employees who needed this access for their job duties.
Finding 2 – DBM granted certain State employee user access 14
to SPS without formal authorization by agency personnel.
In addition, DBM had not established a policy requiring agencies
using SPS to periodically review user access for propriety.
Business Processes
Finding 3 – Certain critical business processes did not have approval 16
paths established.
Agency Response Appendix
3

--- Page 6 ---
Background Information
Statewide Personnel System (SPS) Overview and Implementation
The Statewide Personnel System (SPS) is an information system administered
by the Department of Budget and Management (DBM) that is used by 54
State agencies to process their payroll and human resources transactions.
SPS also supports an application for employee benefits for State employees.
SPS, which was implemented in three phases, replaced the State’s previous
human resources processing system (also maintained by DBM), as well as
numerous independent time processing systems previously used by the
participating State agencies. The goal of SPS was to integrate payroll and
human resources functions into a unified information system, allowing for
easier user access, better monitoring and controls over user actions, and
reduced time spent administering payroll functions at the participating
agencies.
The first two phases of the SPS system were implemented prior to the
commencement of our review, and the third and final phase was fully
implemented after our review was completed.
 Phase 1 is the human resources module that replaced the prior
automated human resource processing system maintained by DBM. The
human resources module handles transactions such as new employee
hires and employee terminations. This phase launched in November
2014.
 Phase 2 is the time and attendance module that handles timekeeping and
the calculation of gross payroll, including tracking employee leave
balances. This module launched for all participating agencies, excluding
one agency, in May 2016. The module launched for this final agency in
October 2016.
 Phase 3 is the benefits module that tracks and calculates employee
benefits, and will allow employees to process their own enrollment in
healthcare benefit plans. This module was functioning on a limited pilot
basis during our fieldwork and was launched January 1, 2019 after our
review was completed.
The State of Maryland hired a contractor to implement SPS and configure a
commercial off-the-shelf software platform to meet the needs of the State’s
human resources and payroll applications. In December 2013, the State’s
4

--- Page 7 ---
Department of Information Technology contracted with a software developer
for the implementation and use of the software for a five-year period for
approximately $43.9 million, with the option for two five-year extensions,
increasing the contract value to $104.6 million. Implementation of SPS was
overseen primarily by DBM’s Office of Personnel Services and Benefits
(OPSB).
The SPS platform is provided as a cloud-based service relying on data centers
maintained by the commercial software platform’s vendor in multiple
geographic locations. However, OPSB is responsible for the ongoing operation
and maintenance of SPS. Furthermore, as part of the goal to centralize
functionality within SPS, DBM absorbed the human resources and certain
payroll functions of several smaller agencies. We were informed by DBM
management that DBM absorbed 22 human resources positions from various
agencies, of which 10 were retained and continue to be used to support these
agencies, 10 were abolished, and 2 were moved to other units within OPSB.
As of June 2018, SPS was being used by 54 State agencies for processing the
personnel and payroll transactions of approximately 50,000 employees. In
accordance with the original SPS implementation plan, certain State agencies,
such as the Maryland Department of Transportation and the University System
of Maryland, continue to maintain separate personnel and payroll systems.
Information System Security
Application controls refer to security practices included within an information
system to ensure its operational integrity, and pertain to individual business or
application processes within the information system. For the purposes of this
review, properly designed application controls should ensure that (1) data
inputs are accurate, complete, and authorized; (2) data are processed as
intended and safeguarded; (3) outputs are accurate and complete; and (4) a
record is maintained to track the processing of data from input to storage and
to the eventual output.
The first two phases of the SPS system addressed two types of inter-
dependent transactions and processes – human resources and payroll.
Human resources transactions include, but are not limited to, the processes
and supporting documents used to hire or terminate an employee, to change
an employee’s rate of pay, and to transfer an employee between agencies.
Human resources transactions are considered proper if employees on the
payroll are valid and are being paid the proper rates. Payroll transactions
relate to processes that directly influence and control the amount an
employee is paid for a specified pay period. These include, but are not limited
to, recording and certifying employee hours worked, processing paid and
5

--- Page 8 ---
unpaid time off, and processing timekeeping adjustments for prior periods.
Payroll transactions are considered proper if employees are paid accurately
for all hours actually worked for a specified period.
Within the SPS software platform, application controls are designed to ensure
that transactions are processed properly by authorized individuals, and
include business process controls and user access controls. A well-controlled
SPS process should include both user roles that are adequately restricted and
limited to appropriate personnel, and business processes that are designed to
limit access to modify critical data to appropriate users and that enforce
adequate independent approvals, where appropriate. SPS application
controls are highly customizable and, accordingly, these controls can be
modified by DBM as security or business operations warrant.
Within SPS, a business process is a set of tasks defined by rules that direct
how a transaction is processed. Business process rules, which reflect
decisions to be made on transaction processing, include enforcing restrictions
on who can initiate a transaction type and who can approve the transaction at
various points in the process. These rules also dictate which data fields and
personnel records are modified, and apply error validation rules to help
ensure the accuracy of transactions being processed. A particular business
process may also launch other business processes and may be used to notify
users with important roles within the process of the occurrence of high-risk
transactions.
For example, the business process for submitting employee time worked and
leave used (the “Enter Time” process) contains system rules or logic (such as
approval paths) that will route work time submitted by an employee to the
employee’s supervisor for approval. Once the supervisor approves the time,
the process is complete.
User access controls within SPS include, but are not limited to a “supervisory
organization” assignment and a user “role.” User access controls define how
users are permitted to interact with SPS, including which records a user can
see and modify. The assignment of a user to a “supervisory organization”
restricts which groups of employees the user has access to, as defined by the
applicable “supervisory organization,” which could be an entire State agency
or a unit within that agency. The user’s role also defines what actions the
user can take within the supervisory organization, such as viewing certain
information and processing certain types of transactions, and what reporting
tools are available to the user.
6

--- Page 9 ---
There are numerous user roles in SPS. Two roles significant to our review are
the Timekeeper role and the Timekeeper Approver role. The Timekeeper role
is responsible for recording employee time and leave data into SPS, such as
from an employee’s timesheet, for employees who may not have access to a
computer to record their time directly. The Timekeeper Approver role is
responsible for approving such transactions for each employee.
While all State employees using SPS and their supervisors have access to SPS
to record or approve time records, as applicable to their position, there were
1,942 users as of December 5, 2017 that were assigned 4,831 other critical
roles.
Employee Complaints After Certain Agencies Transitioned to SPS
In October 2016, personnel in certain State agencies raised concerns about
potential underpayments after those agencies transitioned to SPS. We
discussed this matter with DBM management in January 2017 as part of this
application control review, and we were advised that they were aware of these
concerns. DBM identified three agencies affected by this issue, but advised
that the vast majority of the problems were concentrated within one agency
that had delayed its transition to SPS for payroll/timekeeping until October of
2016. DBM stated that similar problems occurred at two other agencies, but
on significantly smaller scales.
DBM management advised us that a substantial number of pay discrepancies
resulted from manual data entry errors and high-volume workloads for
timekeepers and timekeeper approvers, particularly at this agency.
Specifically, many of this agency’s employees were shift personnel and,
because they had no access to computer terminals, these shift employees
recorded their actual work time on paper logs, which was later entered into
SPS by designated timekeepers. This situation was believed to be worsened
by the fact that these employees frequently earned overtime and shift
differential pay, creating the need for retroactive pay adjustments. The sheer
volume of manual processing for time entry for these employees led to certain
processing delays and errors.
DBM management also advised us that corrective action was taken through
the agency’s implementation of automated biometric time clocks that
interface with and post time directly to SPS. According to DBM statistics, this
corrective action was successful in reducing the opportunity for errors
because work time was automatically recorded and there was a reduced need
for retroactive manually processed pay adjustments. As of May 2017, we
7

--- Page 10 ---
were advised that automated time clocks were in place in all the agency’s
facilities.
We analyzed the volume of the agency’s retroactive pay adjustments using
SPS records for the period from January 1, 2017 through July 31, 2017 to
assess the impact of these corrective actions. As noted in the table below,
the number and value of pay adjustments decreased significantly in May
2017 after the biometric time clocks were implemented. This trend held
steady through July 2017, the last month for which we obtained data. Based
on these results, we believe that it is reasonable to conclude that these
corrective actions were generally successful and resulted in reducing the
number of manual adjustments required and, consequently, the potential for
errors in processing those adjustments.
Aforementioned Agency’s Adjustments to Pay
Month Total Number of Total Dollar Value of
Payroll Adjustments Payroll Adjustments
January 2017 1,961 $377,013
May 2017 212 $ 99,497
Source: DBM records
8

--- Page 11 ---
Review Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
Scope and Objectives
We conducted an application control review to evaluate the reliability of the
automated system controls within the Statewide Personnel System (SPS).
SPS is the State of Maryland’s software platform for human resources and
payroll applications. The scope of our review included the human resources
(Phase 1) and time and attendance (Phase 2) modules that had been
implemented in 54 State agencies at the time our review commenced. The
scope of our review did not include the benefits module (Phase 3), which was
launched on January 1, 2019.
The objectives of our review were to
1. document and assess the appropriateness of current system controls
including user access, over certain critical transactions to ensure the
proper functioning of the SPS payroll and human resources applications;
and
2. validate the salary data within SPS to confirm that proper salary scales
were being used for all job classifications in SPS.
Methodology
To complete our first objective, we determined, based on our professional
judgement, that 55 of the 86 total active business processes as of April 25,
2018 were critical (such as transactions that change employee pay data,
change employment status, or affect time and leave records). We reviewed
the system controls and business process rules for these 55 business
processes. In making this determination, we first obtained an understanding
of the 86 active processes with the aid of the Department of Budget and
Management (DBM). The identity of the 55 processes selected for review
were shared with DBM, which generally agreed with our assessment of their
critical nature.
Our review was primarily concerned with two types of automated controls —
user access to system capabilities and business process controls — that
govern the steps the associated transactions must take to be completed,
including transaction approval paths. For the purposes of this review, we
considered a transaction to have adequate approval paths when initiating
users were adequately restricted, independent approvals were required from
9

--- Page 12 ---
appropriate user types at the appropriate time(s) in a transaction’s
processing, and any additional context-sensitive system logic routed
transactions to appropriate individuals within a user group if needed. For
example, if the routine approver for a transaction also initiated the
transaction, an adequate approval path would require the system to find an
alternate approver or backup approver.
Our review consisted of discussions with DBM personnel, direct inspection of
system configurations within SPS, and substantive testing of transactions
processed through the system to validate our conclusions in this area. In
addition, we reviewed the reported results of the System and Organization
Controls (SOC 2 Type 2) review of the underlying software platform conducted
by an independent accounting firm for the period November 1, 2015 through
September 30, 2016 and for the period October 1, 2016 through September
30, 2017. We conducted other procedures as we deemed necessary to
achieve our objectives.
For our second objective, we reconciled the salary information from SPS as of
October 20, 2017 to the approved salary data as of January 1, 2014 from the
State’s previous human resources processing system, accounting for cost-of-
living adjustments and other approved salary changes during the period.
This review did not examine or comment on any separate manual controls
that may exist, either centrally at DBM or at agencies using SPS. The review
of such controls is subject to audit during our fiscal compliance audits of the
applicable State agencies.
Our review did not constitute an audit conducted in accordance with generally
accepted government auditing standards. Had we conducted an audit in
accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards, other
matters may have come to our attention that would have been included in this
report.
Our review was conducted primarily during the period from March 2017
through December 2017, and certain information was updated as of April
2018. DBM’s response to this application control review is included as an
appendix to this report. As prescribed in the State Government Article,
Section 2-1224 of the Annotated Code of Maryland, we will advise DBM
regarding the results of our review of its response.
10

--- Page 13 ---
System and Organization Controls (SOC) Review
The software platform’s vendor obtained, from an independent accounting
firm, a SOC review of the software platform that is shared by all platform
customers, including the State of Maryland. The exact scope and level of
such reviews may vary. In this case, the firm prepared a SOC 2 Type 2 report.
This type of system security report includes the results of the firm’s review of
controls placed in operation and tests of operating effectiveness for the
period under review, including its data center used by the State.
While not a specific audit objective, due to the significance of the software
platform to SPS, we performed a detailed review of the report for the period
from November 1, 2015 through September 30, 2016. We concluded that
the review’s scope provided adequate assurance that the underlying
infrastructure and State data were adequately secured. We also obtained the
SOC 2 Type 2 report issued for the period from October 1, 2016 through
September 30, 2017. For both reports, we noted that the independent
auditor did not identify any material control weaknesses in the design and
sufficiency of the software developer’s internal controls.
11

--- Page 14 ---
Findings and Recommendations
Conclusions
Based solely on the work we conducted and the processes in place at the time
of our review, we concluded that application controls for the State’s recently
implemented Statewide Personnel System (SPS) appeared to be adequately
designed and implemented. Further, we concluded that the risk for significant
payroll irregularities appeared to be mitigated by those automated controls in
place at the time of our review, and with the understanding that they were
functioning as designed and intended. The conclusions contained in this
review are not intended to provide future assurance regarding the adequacy
of those processes reviewed, which are subject to modification by the
Department of Budget and Management (DBM).
Specifically, for the 55 business processes that we reviewed, we concluded
that rules, such as approval paths, had been established in a way that
appeared to minimize risk and restrict access to critical data and functions
only to necessary user roles. Except for certain business processes as
described on page 16, we also determined that these business processes had
adequate approval paths established which, if adhered to, would provide
adequate assurance that the related transactions were independently
reviewed and approved. Although the description of each of the processes we
reviewed are not included in this report, we did share our findings about the
specific 55 business processes with DBM during the course of our review.
In addition, we found that all salary data within SPS were valid and accurate.
Finally, we identified certain areas for improvement with respect to user
access reviews and authorizations. Certain users were granted access to SPS
without formal authorization by agency personnel, and DBM had not
established a policy requiring agencies to periodically review SPS user access.
In addition, we noted that adequate safeguards were not in place to restrict
access to sensitive personally identifiable information (PII) for State
employees. Specifically, 237 employees were assigned to 5 user roles with
access to PII which was not needed for their job duties.
User Access
Background
DBM is responsible for processing critical user access requests for the SPS.
State agencies using SPS submit SPS access request forms that create new
12

--- Page 15 ---
user access capabilities for their employees. Specifically, user access
controls define how users are able to interact with SPS, including the records
they may view and data they may modify (via the transactions they can initiate
and/or approve). As of December 5, 2017, there were approximately 50,000
State employees on SPS, and 4,831 role assignments in SPS held by 1,942
users with critical access. For the purposes of this review, we defined “critical
access” as an employee’s ability to process transactions within SPS that
affect payroll or human resources records other than their own.
Finding 1
DBM did not perform a comprehensive review to ensure that access to all PII
for State employees stored in SPS was properly restricted to employees who
needed this access for their job duties.
Analysis
DBM had not conducted a comprehensive review to ensure that access to PII
within SPS was restricted to only employees who needed it for their job duties.
We identified 36 active user roles within SPS that permitted assigned users to
view employee social security numbers (SSNs) in the employee profiles within
their assigned supervisory organizations. We discussed the necessity of PII
access for these 36 user roles with DBM during our review. After our
discussion, DBM determined that, as of September 2018, 5 of the 36 user
roles (with 237 assigned employees) had PII access that was not needed for
the related employees to perform their job duties.
Each employee in SPS is assigned a unique identification number (worker
number) which is not considered PII. However, each employee’s profile also
includes personnel information including the employee’s name, address,
employee performance evaluations, and education, as well as employee
SSNs, which are often displayed in plain text on numerous SPS screens. DBM
advised us that certain user roles require access to employee SSNs because
of necessary interaction with other State agencies, such as the Central Payroll
Bureau (CPB) and the State Retirement Agency (SRA), that use SSNs as the
only unique identifiers in their automated systems. For example, SPS
timekeepers must use employee SSNs to identify employee pay records on
CPB reports to routinely review and reconcile overtime and other payments
between SPS and CPB.
After our inquiry and review, DBM subsequently advised us that it had
removed access to PII from the aforementioned five user roles. In our
opinion, this condition highlights the need for DBM to periodically ensure that
PII in SPS is as limited as practicable, and that access to PII recorded in SPS
is restricted to employees who require it for their job duties.
13

--- Page 16 ---
State law defines any record containing an individual’s name combined with a
SSN as PII. The State of Maryland Information Security Policy states that this
information must be restricted only to users who require it to perform their job
duties.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that DBM
a. perform a periodic review to ensure that PII stored in SPS is properly
restricted to those user roles for which it is required and delete its access
from user roles where it is found to be unnecessary, and
b. take steps to mask SSNs from user view to the extent practicable.
Finding 2
DBM granted certain State employee user access to SPS without formal
authorization by agency personnel. In addition, DBM had not established a
policy requiring agencies using SPS to periodically review user access for
propriety.
Analysis
DBM had not established sufficient procedures to help ensure that user
access within SPS was appropriately restricted. Under certain situations, DBM
granted State employee user access to SPS without formal authorization by
appropriate personnel at the employee’s agency. Furthermore, DBM had not
established a policy requiring agencies to periodically review SPS user access
for their employees to ensure each employee’s user access was necessary
and did not result in incompatible duties.
Certain user access was granted by DBM without agency authorization
Under certain situations, DBM granted State employee user access to SPS
without formal authorization by appropriate personnel at the respective
agency. Typically, DBM processed requests for new or revised user access
based on an authorization for SPS access request form submitted by
appropriate agency personnel. However, under DBM’s policy at the time of
our review, when an employee with SPS access vacated his or her position at
the agency, the next employee assigned to that position was automatically
assigned the same user access held by the former employee. In other words,
a new properly approved authorization form was not required from the agency
nor expected by DBM. While it is reasonable to assume that, in many
instances, the new employee would require the same level of access, this may
not always be the case. A new authorization for SPS access request form
should be required as a means to assess employee access needs and to
control and account for access granted.
14

--- Page 17 ---
During our review of user access granted in March 2018, we identified 73
vacant employee positions within 24 agencies that had been assigned one or
more critical SPS user roles. As of August 3, 2018, 27 of these positions had
been filled and the new employees had the same user access as the former
employees. We did not evaluate the propriety of the user access granted in
these 27 instances.
Periodic agency review of user access was not required by DBM
DBM had not established a policy requiring agencies to periodically review
SPS user access for their employees to ensure each employee’s user access
is necessary and does not result in incompatible duties. Furthermore, DBM
had not created an SPS report that captures each user’s access that could be
periodically provided to or produced by agencies to facilitate this review.
Periodic reviews of SPS access granted to employees would help ensure that
access to perform critical functions and sensitive data in SPS is properly
restricted and controlled.
The State of Maryland Information Security Policy requires agencies to
monitor the security controls over their information systems periodically to
ensure that the access is strictly controlled and restricted to appropriate
personnel. Because DBM would not have specific knowledge of the job duties
of every SPS user within an agency, DBM, as the agency responsible for
administering SPS, should establish a policy requiring user agencies to
perform periodic reviews of their respective employees’ user access. The
DBM policy should also contain instructions on how to perform this review and
DBM should develop any tools necessary for the review.
Recommendation 2
We recommend that DBM
a. establish a formal procedure requiring that documented State agency
authorization for SPS user access request forms be submitted for each
employee requiring access,
b. establish a formal policy requiring agencies to periodically review SPS user
access to ensure that user access granted to each of their employees is
necessary and proper, and
c. provide agencies with appropriate reports of access granted to employees
at their agencies to facilitate user access reviews.
15

--- Page 18 ---
Business Processes
Finding 3
Certain critical business processes did not have approval paths established.
Analysis
Certain critical business processes did not have established approval paths to
ensure that data modified through the business processes were proper and
independently approved. In other words, one employee could unilaterally
modify potentially critical SPS data.
We identified 55 business processes in SPS as of April 2018 as critical to the
functioning of human resources or payroll processes. Examples include the
Hire process, which adds new employees to the payroll, and the Enter Time
process, which allows employees to enter their actual work time for
processing in SPS (in place of a traditional timesheet). Of these 55, we
determined that 5 lacked adequate approval paths, and sufficient
compensating controls did not exist to mitigate the risk posed by the lack of
approval paths. For example, one business process permitted users to
modify, without independent review and approval, a critical date that affects
the calculation of employee leave earnings. Another business process
allowed users to move workers to a different supervisory organization, which
would prevent the worker from appearing on an agency’s SPS reports,
preventing supervisory review of the access granted to the worker.
Consequently, there was a lack of assurance that data processed through
these 5 business processes were proper.
For 26 of the remaining 50 business processes, while we determined that
approval paths were not present, sufficient mitigating system controls did
exist to reduce the risk of improper transactions. Finally, for the remaining 24
business processes, we determined that sufficient approval paths existed to
ensure that transactions were subject to independent supervisory review and
approval.
As the agency responsible for administering SPS, DBM was responsible for
establishing the automated controls for the system’s business processes. We
shared the results of our review of all 55 business processes with DBM. DBM
management agreed that approval paths had not been established for some
business processes during the implementation of SPS. DBM advised us that
approval paths generally were established only for those processes related to
and for which a corresponding approval requirement existed in law or
regulation. As evidenced by our review, and as agreed to by DBM, other
16

--- Page 19 ---
business processes exist in SPS that are deemed to be critical to ensuring the
proper processing of human resources and payroll transactions.
Recommendation 3
We recommend that DBM review business processes in SPS for which no
approval paths exist, and establish approval paths or other mitigating
controls, as necessary, to ensure independent review and approval of critical
data and transactions processed.
17

--- Page 21 ---
Department of Budget and Management
Office of Personnel Services and Benefits (OPSB)
Response to Legislative Audits Findings and Recommendations
Special Review of the Design and Implementation of Automated Controls of the
Statewide Personnel System
February 2019
Finding 1
DBM did not perform a comprehensive review to ensure that access to all PII for State
employees stored in SPS was properly restricted to employees who needed this access for their
job duties.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that DBM
a. perform a periodic review to ensure that PII stored in SPS is properly restricted to those
user roles for which it is required and delete its access from user roles where it is found to
be unnecessary, and
b. take steps to mask SSNs from user view to the extent practicable.
DBM OPSB Response 1:
We agree with the recommendations.
a. DBM OPSB agrees to re-evaluate user roles periodically to ensure that PII stored in SPS is
properly restricted to those user roles for which it is required. Specifically, such evaluations
will be performed after final implementation (of Phase 3) in July 2019 and, going forward,
when there are any significant changes made to or that affect the SPS. Where determined
unnecessary, we will delete a user roles’ access to PII.
b. DBM OPSB will review the possibility of masking SSNs from user view in the SPS and will
take appropriate action to the extent practicable.

--- Page 22 ---
Department of Budget and Management
Office of Personnel Services and Benefits (OPSB)
Response to Legislative Audits Findings and Recommendations
Special Review of the Design and Implementation of Automated Controls of the
Statewide Personnel System
February 2019
Finding 2
DBM granted certain State employee user access to SPS without formal authorization by
agency personnel. In addition, DBM had not established a policy requiring agencies using SPS
to periodically review user access for propriety.
Recommendation 2
We recommend that DBM
a. establish a formal procedure requiring that documented State agency authorization for
SPS user access request forms be submitted for each employee requiring access,
b. establish a formal policy requiring agencies to periodically review SPS user access to
ensure that user access granted to each of their employees is necessary and proper, and
c. provide agencies with appropriate reports of access granted to employees at their agencies
to facilitate user access reviews.
DBM OPSB Response 2:
We agree with the recommendations.
a. As the auditor brought these issues to the attention of DBM OPSB, additional measures were
established to address the issues noted, specifically that of ‘inheriting’ access of another
employee. Currently, SPS user access request forms are required to be submitted for access
to SPS. These forms will be maintained for audit verification purposes.
It is important to note that the inheritance process in SPS is something that cannot be
changed within the system. However, most support positions have mandatory training
required and related to their position. Access to the SPS is not provided until the training has
been completed. As an added control, training will not be assigned until the SPS user access
request form has been received. This additional control will help to ensure user roles are
appropriately assigned.
b. DBM OSPB implemented procedures that require HR Directors or their designee to review
quarterly reports of SPS user access. Per the review procedures, the review should be
completed within 30 days of receipt and will be conducted to ensure that all user access
granted to employees at their agencies is necessary and proper. Agencies are required to
document their review and maintain records for audit verification purposes. After review,
agencies are required to submit an OPSB Security Form to Shared Services to remove any
access levels determine improper or not needed. These quarterly reviews began January
2019.

--- Page 23 ---
Department of Budget and Management
Office of Personnel Services and Benefits (OPSB)
Response to Legislative Audits Findings and Recommendations
Special Review of the Design and Implementation of Automated Controls of the
Statewide Personnel System
February 2019
c. For these quarterly reviews, DBM OPSB created a new report to provide detailed
information on access granted to employees by agency. Beginning January 2019, DBM
OPSB will generated and send these reports quarterly to HR Directors or their designee for
the quarterly reviews of user access (mentioned in the response to Recommendation 2b). In
addition, agencies may request this report on an ad-hoc basis, as needed. Separately,
agencies may also run an access report within SPS to review individual security roles.

--- Page 24 ---
Department of Budget and Management
Office of Personnel Services and Benefits (OPSB)
Response to Legislative Audits Findings and Recommendations
Special Review of the Design and Implementation of Automated Controls of the
Statewide Personnel System
February 2019
Business Processes
Finding 3
Certain critical business processes did not have approval paths established.
Recommendation 3
We recommend that DBM review business processes in SPS for which no approval paths exist,
and establish approval paths or other mitigating controls, as necessary, to ensure independent
review and approval of critical data and transactions processed.
DBM OPSB Response 3
We agree with the recommendation. As mentioned in the audit analysis, our aim, as part of the SPS
Project, was to require approval paths with business processes where there was a related or
corresponding approval required by law or regulation. During the implementation of SPS, we
reviewed each event in order to determine whether an approval path was appropriate and necessary.
As clarification, there is a difference between business process and task in SPS. Some events
identified as a business process by the auditors are actually Tasks. These events were configured as
Tasks and do not have approval steps. Tasks are set up to stand-alone and cannot be assigned an
approval path. In order to establish an approval path, an event would have to change from a Task to
a Business Process with separate steps that could include establishing an approval path.
Of the 55 events identified by the auditors, DBM agreed to perform an additional review of five
events to determine any possible improvements, including the reconsideration of whether an
approval path is necessary and appropriate. Four of these five events are currently Tasks. Thus, this
review will include determination of whether the Task should be re-established as a Business
Process that could include steps, such as an approval path. Resources will be available to start this
additional review in April 2019.

--- Page 25 ---
A T
UDIT EAM
Michael J. Murdzak, CPA
Audit Manager
Evan E. Naugle
Senior Auditor
Christopher J. Fowler
Staff Auditor