Title: Maryland State Department of Education - Interagency Commission on School Construction
Date: 03/06/2019
Type: Fiscal Compliance
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5c87cf32a1ce580bec7a9285
Extracted: 2025-06-18T22:25:53.130607
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Audit Report
Maryland State Department of Education
Interagency Commission on School Construction
March 2023
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Senator Clarence K. Lam, M.D. (Senate Chair) Delegate Jared Solomon (House Chair)
Senator Joanne C. Benson Delegate Steven J. Arentz
Senator Paul D. Corderman Delegate Nicholas P. Charles II
Senator Katie Fry Hester Delegate Andrea Fletcher Harrison
Senator Shelly L. Hettleman Delegate Steven C. Johnson
Senator Cheryl C. Kagan Delegate Mary A. Lehman
Senator Cory V. McCray Delegate David Moon
Senator Justin D. Ready Delegate Julie Palakovich Carr
Senator Bryan W. Simonaire Delegate Stephanie M. Smith
Senator Craig J. Zucker Delegate M. Courtney Watson
To Obtain Further Information
Office of Legislative Audits
The Warehouse at Camden Yards
351 West Camden Street, Suite 400
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Phone: 410-946-5900
Maryland Relay: 711
TTY: 410-946-5401 ꞏ 301-970-5401
E-mail: OLAWebmaster@ola.state.md.us
Website: www.ola.state.md.us
To Report Fraud
The Office of Legislative Audits operates a Fraud Hotline to report fraud, waste, or abuse involving State
of Maryland government resources. Reports of fraud, waste, or abuse may be communicated anonymously
by a toll-free call to 1-877-FRAUD-11, by mail to the Fraud Hotline, c/o Office of Legislative Audits, or
through the Office’s website.
Nondiscrimination Statement
The Department of Legislative Services does not discriminate on the basis of age, ancestry, color, creed,
marital status, national origin, race, religion, gender, gender identity, sexual orientation, or disability in the
admission or access to its programs, services, or activities. The Department’s Information Officer has been
designated to coordinate compliance with the nondiscrimination requirements contained in Section 35.107
of the United States Department of Justice Regulations. Requests for assistance should be directed to the
Information Officer at 410-946-5400 or 410-970-5400.

--- Page 3 ---
March 14, 2023
Senator Clarence K. Lam, M.D., Senate Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Delegate Jared Solomon, House Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Members of Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Annapolis, Maryland
Ladies and Gentlemen:
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the Interagency Commission on
School Construction (IAC) for the period beginning July 1, 2018 and ending July
31, 2022. IAC is an independent commission within the Maryland State
Department of Education that oversees and provides funding for public school
construction in Maryland.
Our audit did not disclose any findings that warrant mention in this report.
We wish to acknowledge IAC’s efforts to satisfactorily address the finding
contained in our preceding report. We also wish to acknowledge the cooperation
extended to us during the audit by IAC.
Respectfully submitted,
Gregory A. Hook, CPA
Legislative Auditor

--- Page 4 ---
2

--- Page 5 ---
Background Information
Agency Responsibilities
The Interagency Commission on School Construction (IAC) is an independent
commission within the Maryland State Department of Education. In fiscal year
2022, IAC had 41 authorized positions and is governed by a nine-member
committee including the State Superintendent of Schools, the Secretary of
Planning, the Secretary of General Services, two members of the public appointed
by the Governor, two members of the public appointed by the President of the
Senate, and two members of the public appointed by the Speaker of the House of
Delegates.
The purpose of IAC is to develop and approve policies, procedures, guidelines,
and regulations on State public school construction allocations to local
jurisdictions in an independent and merit-based manner. IAC prepares
projections of school construction and capital improvement needs, approves
school construction and capital improvement projects based on these projections,
and provides associated financial aid to the counties and Baltimore City for
approved projects. According to State records, during fiscal year 2022, IAC
disbursed approximately $381.3 million in capital funds for 366 projects,
(primarily for public school construction), and its operating expenditures totaled
approximately $3.2 million.
Built to Learn Act
The Built to Learn (BTL) Act, effective February 12, 2021, allows for the
Maryland Stadium Authority (MSA) to issue up to $2.2 billion in revenue bonds
to fund school construction projects. Eligible BTL projects address existing
buildings, new construction, and relocatable classrooms. As required by the Act,
IAC and MSA entered into a memorandum of understanding effective July 23,
2021, to establish responsibilities for each party. MSA is required to manage
school construction projects, which must be approved for funding and scope by
IAC. Additionally, the Act includes the following:
 Creates the Public School Facilities Priority Fund, which uses the results
of the Statewide Facilities Assessment required by State law to prioritize
funding to schools with the highest needs;
 Makes design and other project expenses eligible for State participation;
 Mandates an increase to Enrollment Growth and Relocatable Classroom
funding beginning in fiscal year 2026; and
3

--- Page 6 ---
 Extends the Healthy School Facility Fund, which provides allocation for
local education agencies to improve school conditions.
IAC advised us that MSA had issued revenue bonds for BTL projects totaling
$699.3 million as of August 2022. According to IAC records, as of August 2022,
it had budgeted BTL funds for 29 projects totaling approximately $750 million
and its BTL expenditures totaled approximately $2.2 million.
Status of Finding From Preceding Audit Report
Our audit included a review to determine the status of the finding contained in our
preceding audit report dated March 6, 2019. We determined that IAC
satisfactorily addressed this finding.
Findings and Recommendations
Our audit did not disclose any significant deficiencies in the design or operation
of IAC’s internal control. Our audit also did not disclose any significant instances
of noncompliance with applicable laws, rules, or regulations. A finding that did
not warrant inclusion in this report was separately communicated to IAC.
A draft copy of this report was provided to IAC. Since there are no
recommendations in this report, a written response was not necessary.
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the Interagency Commission on
School Construction (IAC), an independent commission within the Maryland
State Department of Education (MSDE), for the period beginning July 1, 2018
and ending July 31, 2022. The audit was conducted in accordance with generally
accepted government auditing standards. Those standards require that we plan
and perform the audit to obtain sufficient, appropriate evidence to provide a
reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives.
We believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings
and conclusions based on our audit objectives.
As prescribed by State Government Article, Section 2-1221 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, the objectives of this audit were to examine IAC’s financial
4

--- Page 7 ---
transactions, records and internal control, and to evaluate its compliance with
applicable State laws, rules, and regulations.
In planning and conducting our audit, we focused on the major financial-related
areas of operations based on assessments of significance and risk. The areas
addressed by the audit included capital funds used to finance the cost of public
school construction and renovation projects, public school maintenance
inspections, construction project closeout procedures, cash receipts, and certain
payroll functions not performed by MSDE for IAC’s benefit. We also determined
the status of the finding contained in our preceding audit report.
Our audit did not include a review of certain support services provided to IAC by
MSDE. These support services (such as payroll, maintenance of certain
accounting records, and related fiscal functions) are included within the scope of
our audit of MSDE.
Our assessment of internal controls was based on agency procedures and controls
in place at the time of our fieldwork. Our tests of transactions and other auditing
procedures were generally focused on the transactions occurring during our audit
period of July 1, 2018 to July 31, 2022, but may include transactions before or
after this period as we considered necessary to achieve our audit objectives.
To accomplish our audit objectives, our audit procedures included inquiries of
appropriate personnel, inspections of documents and records, tests of transactions,
and to the extent practicable, observations of IAC operations. Generally,
transactions were selected for testing based on auditor judgment, which primarily
considers risk, the timing or dollar amount of the transaction, or the significance
of the transaction to the area of operation reviewed. As a matter of course, we do
not normally use sampling in our tests, so unless otherwise specifically indicated,
neither statistical nor non-statistical audit sampling was used to select the
transactions tested. Therefore, unless sampling is specifically indicated in a
finding, the results from any tests conducted or disclosed by us cannot be used to
project those results to the entire population from which the test items were
selected.
We also performed various data extracts of pertinent information from the State’s
Financial Management Information System (such as revenue and expenditure
data) and the State’s Central Payroll Bureau (payroll data). The extracts are
performed as part of ongoing internal processes established by the Office of
Legislative Audits and were subject to various tests to determine data reliability.
We determined that the data extracted from these sources were sufficiently
reliable for the purposes the data were used during this audit. We also extracted
5

--- Page 8 ---
data from IAC’s construction project accounting system for the purpose of testing
certain areas, including capital project transactions, and IAC’s monitoring efforts.
We performed various tests of the relevant data and determined that the data were
sufficiently reliable for the purposes the data were used during the audit. Finally,
we performed other auditing procedures that we considered necessary to achieve
our objectives. The reliability of data used in this report for background or
informational purposes was not assessed.
IAC’s management is responsible for establishing and maintaining effective
internal control. Internal control is a process designed to provide reasonable
assurance that objectives pertaining to the reliability of financial records;
effectiveness and efficiency of operations, including safeguarding of assets; and
compliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations are achieved. As
provided in Government Auditing Standards, there are five components of
internal control: control environment, risk assessment, control activities,
information and communication, and monitoring. Each of the five components,
when significant to the audit objectives, and as applicable to IAC, were
considered by us during the course of this audit.
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate.
Our reports are designed to assist the Maryland General Assembly in exercising
its legislative oversight function and to provide constructive recommendations for
improving State operations. As a result, our reports generally do not address
activities we reviewed that are functioning properly.
6

--- Page 9 ---
A T
UDIT EAM
Mark S. Hagenbuch, CPA
Audit Manager
Ken H. Johanning, CPA, CFE
Senior Auditor
Matthew P. Henry
Staff Auditor