Title: Maryland Department of Health - Deer's Head Hospital Center
Date: 03/14/2019
Type: Fiscal Compliance
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5c8bf34ea1ce5812706c12aa
Extracted: 2025-06-18T22:26:43.003131
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Audit Report
Maryland Department of Health
Deer’s Head Hospital Center
March 2019
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
For further information concerning this report contact:
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
301 West Preston Street, Room 1202
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Phone: 410-946-5900 ꞏ 301-970-5900
Toll Free in Maryland: 1-877-486-9964
Maryland Relay: 711
TTY: 410-946-5401 ꞏ 301-970-5401
E-mail: OLAWebmaster@ola.state.md.us
Website: www.ola.state.md.us
The Office of Legislative Audits operates a Fraud Hotline to report fraud, waste, or abuse
involving State of Maryland government resources. Reports of fraud, waste, or abuse
may be communicated anonymously by a toll-free call to 1-877-FRAUD-11, by mail to the
Fraud Hotline, c/o Office of Legislative Audits, or through the Office’s website.
The Department of Legislative Services does not discriminate on the basis of age, ancestry, color,
creed, marital status, national origin, race, religion, gender, gender identity, sexual orientation,
or disability in the admission or access to its programs, services, or activities. The Department’s
Information Officer has been designated to coordinate compliance with the nondiscrimination
requirements contained in Section 35.107 of the Department of Justice Regulations. Requests for
assistance should be directed to the Information Officer at 410-946-5400 or 410-970-5400.

--- Page 5 ---
Background Information
Agency Responsibilities
The Deer’s Head Hospital Center (DHHC) is located in Salisbury, Maryland, and
provides chronic care and treatment to patients requiring a hospital-level
rehabilitation program, long-term nursing home care, and inpatient and outpatient
kidney dialysis services. During fiscal year 2017, DHHC had a licensed capacity
of 146 inpatients, a budgeted average daily population of 56 inpatients, and an
actual daily population of 46 inpatients. DHHC’s dialysis unit also provided
8,830 dialysis treatments to 62 patients. DHHC is accredited by The Joint
Commission, an independent, non-profit organization which evaluates, monitors,
and accredits health care organizations in the United States to ensure the highest
quality of care is provided. According to the State’s records, during fiscal year
2017, DHHC expenditures totaled approximately $24.7 million.
Findings and Recommendations
Procurements
Finding 1
DHHC allowed a contract with a medical supply vendor to expire prior to
initiating a new competitive contract procurement to replace it. For 11
months, DHHC continued to purchase supplies from the vendor at
significantly higher prices than provided for in both the expired and
subsequent contracts.
Analysis
DHHC allowed a contract with a medical supply vendor to expire prior to
initiating a new competitive contract procurement to replace it. For 11 months,
DHHC continued to purchase supplies from the vendor without a contract in place
and at significantly higher prices than provided for in both the expired and
subsequent contracts. Specifically, DHHC continued to purchase certain supplies
routinely used for kidney dialysis treatments from this vendor after its contract
expired in June 2016. DHHC later initiated a competitive procurement process to
replace the contract and a new contract was eventually awarded to the same
vendor, but not until June 2017.
3

--- Page 6 ---
During the period from July 2016 through May 2017, DHHC continued to
purchase the supplies from the
same vendor without a
Table 1
contract, at significantly higher
Kidney Dialysis Medical Supply
prices, resulting in increased Expenditures with Vendor
payments to the vendor; see
Percent
Table 1. For example, we
Fiscal Total Dollar Change From
reviewed the prices paid for
Year Purchases Change Prior Year
three items routinely purchased
2015 $162,573
from the vendor. On an April
2016 $176,604 $14,031 9%
2016 invoice, we noted that the
2017 $459,430 $282,826 160%
prices charged ranged from
2018 $169,824 -$289,606 -63%
$96 to $150 per item. On the
Source: State accounting records
April 2017 invoice (after the
contract expired), the prices
charged for the same items ranged from $354 to $498 per item, representing an
average increase of 247 percent.
State procurement regulations require purchases in excess of $25,000, such as
these supplies, to be awarded by competitive sealed bidding and that purchases
greater than $5,000 be supported by a written contract.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that DHHC
a. comply with State procurement regulations by establishing written
contracts and competitively procuring supplies,
b. monitor contract terms to enable the timely procurement of new
contracts, and
c. consult with legal counsel to determine if action can be pursued to
recover any portion of the increased costs paid to the vendor when no
contract was in place.
4

--- Page 7 ---
Kidney Dialysis Unit Billing
Finding 2
DHHC did not ensure that responsible third-party insurers were billed for
all treatments provided to dialysis patients, and did not independently verify
the propriety of non-cash credits recorded in the Kidney Dialysis Unit’s
accounts receivable records.
Analysis
DHHC did not establish sufficient controls to ensure that all billable kidney
dialysis treatments provided were billed to responsible third parties, and that the
propriety of non-cash credit adjustments to related accounts receivable records
were independently verified.
 Adequate controls were not in place to ensure that insurers were billed for all
treatments provided. Nurses recorded the treatments provided to patients in
an automated system, and this treatment information was transferred
electronically to a DHHC billing system at the end of each month. As part of
the billing process, and based on patient records, an employee manually
selected the treatments to be included on an invoice sent to each insurer. Our
review disclosed that there was no independent review of the invoices to
ensure all treatments received by patients with insurance were included. As a
result, through omission, all treatments covered by third-party insurance may
not be invoiced. During fiscal year 2018, there were 8,859 treatments
provided with billings totaling $3.6 million, according to agency records. Our
test of 15 billings during the period from February 2017 to April 2018
disclosed that all treatments provided and covered by third-party insurers
appeared to have been properly billed.
 Non-cash credits recorded in the accounts receivable records by the
aforementioned DHHC employee were not subject to independent supervisory
review and approval. In addition, DHHC did not have an output report of
these transactions to enable an independent verification. According to agency
records, during fiscal year 2018, non-cash credit adjustments totaled
approximately $2.6 million, the majority of which related to differences
between actual charges and amounts allowed by insurance providers. The
Comptroller of Maryland’s Accounting Procedures Manual requires a
supervisory review and approval of non-cash adjustments to accounts
receivable records.
5

--- Page 8 ---
Recommendation 2
We recommend that DHHC
a. establish an independent review process to ensure all treatments are
properly billed to third party insurers, and
b. ensure that non-cash credits to the accounts receivable records are
subject to a documented independent supervisory review.
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the Deer’s Head Hospital Center
(DHHC) of the Maryland Department of Health (MDH) for the period beginning
January 6, 2014 and ending June 10, 2018. The audit was conducted in
accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards. Those
standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient,
appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and
conclusions based on our audit objectives. We believe that the evidence obtained
provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit
objectives.
As prescribed by the State Government Article, Section 2-1221 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, the objectives of this audit were to examine DHHC’s financial
transactions, records, and internal control, and to evaluate its compliance with
applicable State laws, rules, and regulations.
In planning and conducting our audit, we focused on the major financial-related
areas of operations based on assessments of significance and risk. The areas
addressed by the audit included cash receipts, accounts receivable, procurements
and disbursements, materials and supplies, corporate purchasing cards, and
payroll. Our audit included certain support services (billing and collection for
kidney dialysis services) provided to the MDH – Western Maryland Center
(WMC) until July 1, 2016 when WMC discontinued providing these kidney
dialysis services.
Our audit did not include certain support services provided by MDH’s Office of
the Secretary. These support services (such as certain payroll and purchasing
functions, maintenance of accounting records, and related fiscal functions) are
included within the scope of our audit of MDH’s Office of the Secretary and
Other Units.
To accomplish our audit objectives, our audit procedures included inquiries of
appropriate personnel, inspections of documents and records, observations of
6

--- Page 9 ---
DHHC’s operations, and tests of transactions. Generally, transactions were
selected for testing based on auditor judgment, which primarily considers risk.
Unless otherwise specifically indicated, neither statistical nor non-statistical audit
sampling was used to select the transactions tested. Therefore, the results of the
tests cannot be used to project those results to the entire population from which
the test items were selected.
We also performed various data extracts of pertinent information from the State’s
Financial Management Information System (such as revenue and expenditure
data) and the State’s Central Payroll Bureau (payroll data), as well as from the
contractor administering the State’s Corporate Purchasing Card Program (credit
card activity). The extracts are performed as part of ongoing internal processes
established by the Office of Legislative Audits and were subject to various tests to
determine data reliability. We determined that the data extracted from these
sources were sufficiently reliable for the purposes the data were used during this
audit. Finally, we performed other auditing procedures that we considered
necessary to achieve our objectives. The reliability of data used in this report for
background or informational purposes was not assessed.
DHHC’s management is responsible for establishing and maintaining effective
internal control. Internal control is a process designed to provide reasonable
assurance that objectives pertaining to the reliability of financial records;
effectiveness and efficiency of operations, including safeguarding of assets; and
compliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations are achieved.
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate.
Our reports are designed to assist the Maryland General Assembly in exercising
its legislative oversight function and to provide constructive recommendations for
improving State operations. As a result, our reports generally do not address
activities we reviewed that are functioning properly.
This report includes a finding relating to conditions that we consider to be
significant deficiencies in the design or operation of internal control that could
adversely affect DHHC’s ability to maintain reliable financial records, operate
effectively and efficiently, and/or comply with applicable laws, rules, and
regulations. Our audit also disclosed significant instances of noncompliance with
applicable laws, rules, or regulations. Other less significant findings were
communicated to DHHC that did not warrant inclusion in this report.
7

--- Page 10 ---
The response from MDH, on behalf of DHHC, to our findings and
recommendations is included as an appendix to this report. As prescribed in the
State Government Article, Section 2-1224 of the Annotated Code of Maryland,
we will advise MDH regarding the results of our review of its response.
8

--- Page 12 ---
Maryland Department of Health
Deer’s Head Hospital Center
Agency Response Form
Procurements
Finding 1
DHHC allowed a contract with a medical supply vendor to expire prior to initiating a new
competitive contract procurement to replace it. For 11 months, DHHC continued to
purchase supplies from the vendor at significantly higher prices than provided for in both
the expired and subsequent contracts.
We recommend that DHHC
a. comply with State procurement regulations by establishing written contracts and
competitively procuring supplies,
b. monitor contract terms to enable the timely procurement of new contracts, and
c. consult with legal counsel to determine if action can be pursued to recover any
portion of the increased costs paid to the vendor when no contract was in place.
Agency Response
Analysis Factually Accurate
Please explain any
concerns with factual
accuracy.
Recommendation 1a Agree Estimated Completion Date: 12/05/2018
Please provide details of DHHC concurs with the recommendation. We have renewed a written
corrective action or contract. In addition, DHHC has recently hired an agency buyer which
explain disagreement. allows us to competitively procure supplies. This was completed on
12/05/2018.
Recommendation 1b Agree Estimated Completion Date: 12/05/2018
Please provide details of DHHC concurs with the recommendation. We have recently hired an
corrective action or agency buyer to assist with the daily processing of purchase orders which
explain disagreement. will allow contract renewals to be processed prior to expiration by the
Procurement Manager to enable the timely procurement of new contracts.
This was completed on 12/05/2018.
Recommendation 1c Agree Estimated Completion Date: 02/01/2019
Please provide details of DHHC concurs with the recommendation. DHHC has submitted the
corrective action or question to consult with the AG’s office to determine if action can be
explain disagreement. pursued to recover any portion of the increased costs paid to the vendor
when no contract was in place and to determine the feasibility and process.
This was completed on 2/1/09.
Page 1 of 2

--- Page 13 ---
Maryland Department of Health
Deer’s Head Hospital Center
Agency Response Form
Kidney Dialysis Unit Billing
Finding 2
DHHC did not ensure that responsible third-party insurers were billed for all treatments
provided to dialysis patients, and did not independently verify the propriety of non-cash
credits recorded in the Kidney Dialysis Unit’s accounts receivable records.
We recommend that DHHC
a. establish an independent review process to ensure all treatments are properly billed
to third party insurers, and
b. ensure that non-cash credits to the accounts receivable records are subject to a
documented independent supervisory review.
Agency Response
Analysis Factually Accurate
Please explain any
concerns with factual
accuracy.
Recommendation 2a Agree Estimated Completion Date: 01/01/2019
Please provide details of DHHC concurs with the recommendation. DHHC is in the process of
corrective action or establishing an independent review process to ensure all treatments in the
explain disagreement. Electronic Medical Record (EMR) will be reconciled to the billing system
by the CFO on a monthly basis. The new procedure will entail the CFO
receiving a listing of the total treatments by month per the EMR. This
total treatment report will be reconciled against the treatments billed and
adjusted in the billing system. This was completed on 01/01/2019.
Recommendation 2b Agree Estimated Completion Date: 01/01/2019
Please provide details of DHHC concurs with the recommendation. DHHC will ensure that non-
corrective action or cash credits to the accounts receivable records are subject to a documented
explain disagreement. independent supervisory review. To ensure the reasonableness of non-
cash credits, a new procedure will be implemented which will entail a
monthly “hard close” of the billing system. The CFO will selectively
review items billed, by patient account, and review the adjustments made
by the billing program, along with adjustments made by the billing person
upon receipt of payment, against the adjustments listed in the insurance
remittance advice and dated, with CFO’s initials on document. This was
completed on 01/01/2019.
Page 2 of 2

--- Page 14 ---
A T
UDIT EAM
Adam J. Westover, CPA
Audit Manager
Ken H. Johanning, CPA, CFE
Senior Auditor
Elliot Ortiz, CFE
Staff Auditor