Title: Maryland Department of Health - Thomas B. Finan Hospital Center
Date: 03/26/2019
Type: Fiscal Compliance
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5c9bd80da1ce580cb8e9b3d4
Extracted: 2025-06-18T22:27:15.888243
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Audit Report
Maryland Department of Health
Thomas B. Finan Hospital Center
March 2019
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
For further information concerning this report contact:
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
301 West Preston Street, Room 1202
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Phone: 410-946-5900 ꞏ 301-970-5900
Toll Free in Maryland: 1-877-486-9964
Maryland Relay: 711
TTY: 410-946-5401 ꞏ 301-970-5401
E-mail: OLAWebmaster@ola.state.md.us
Website: www.ola.state.md.us
The Office of Legislative Audits operates a Fraud Hotline to report fraud, waste, or abuse
involving State of Maryland government resources. Reports of fraud, waste, or abuse
may be communicated anonymously by a toll-free call to 1-877-FRAUD-11, by mail to the
Fraud Hotline, c/o Office of Legislative Audits, or through the Office’s website.
The Department of Legislative Services does not discriminate on the basis of age, ancestry, color,
creed, marital status, national origin, race, religion, gender, gender identity, sexual orientation,
or disability in the admission or access to its programs, services, or activities. The Department’s
Information Officer has been designated to coordinate compliance with the nondiscrimination
requirements contained in Section 35.107 of the Department of Justice Regulations. Requests for
assistance should be directed to the Information Officer at 410-946-5400 or 410-970-5400.

--- Page 5 ---
Background Information
Agency Responsibilities
The Thomas B. Finan Hospital Center is a State-operated psychiatric facility
located in Cumberland, Maryland. The Center, a unit of the Maryland Department
of Health’s Behavioral Health Administration, provides mental health services to
adults in the State of Maryland. The Center is accredited by The Joint
Commission, which evaluates and monitors health care organizations nationwide
to promote safe, high-quality care, treatment, and services. During fiscal year
2018, the Center had a licensed capacity of 110 inpatients, a budgeted average
daily population of 88 inpatients, and an actual average daily population of 82
inpatients. According to the State’s records, the Center’s expenditures totaled
approximately $20.9 million during fiscal year 2018.
Findings and Recommendations
Purchases of Fuel and Security Equipment
Finding 1
The Center did not use an available statewide contract and/or competitively
procure fuel and security equipment, in accordance with State regulations.
Analysis
The Center did not use an available statewide contract and/or competitively
procure fuel and security equipment, in accordance with State regulations.
Specifically, during the period from July 1, 2015 through June 30, 2018, the
Center made repeated purchases of heating oil and gasoline, totaling $627,000,
from one vendor and repeated purchases of security and computer equipment,
totaling $165,000, from another vendor. These purchases were made without
conducting public solicitations, obtaining competitive bids, executing written
contracts, and obtaining control agency approvals, as required by State
regulations. In addition, the Center did not use a Department of General Services
(DGS) statewide fuel contract, which was available for these heating oil and
gasoline purchases.
State procurement regulations generally require the use of available statewide
commodity contracts for purchases and DGS approval for commodity purchases
over $10,000. The regulations further require a competitive procurement and
publication of the solicitation on eMaryland Marketplace for procurements
3

--- Page 6 ---
exceeding $15,000, as well as Board of Public Works and/or control agency
approval for larger procurements.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that the Center
a. use the available statewide fuel contract; and
b. use public solicitation, competitive bids, and written contracts, and obtain
control agency approvals, as required by State regulations.
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the Thomas B. Finan Hospital
Center of the Maryland Department of Health (MDH) for the period beginning
September 22, 2014 and ending October 21, 2018. The audit was conducted in
accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards. Those
standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient,
appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and
conclusions based on our audit objectives. We believe that the evidence obtained
provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit
objectives.
As prescribed by the State Government Article, Section 2-1221 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, the objectives of this audit were to examine the Center’s
financial transactions, records, and internal control, and to evaluate its compliance
with applicable State laws, rules, and regulations.
In planning and conducting our audit, we focused on the major financial-related
areas of operations based on assessments of significance and risk. The areas
addressed by the audit included procurements and disbursements, payroll, and
pharmaceutical inventories.
Our audit did not include certain support services provided to the Center by
MDH’s Office of the Secretary. These support services (such as certain payroll
and purchasing functions, maintenance of accounting records, and related fiscal
functions) are included within the scope of our audit of MDH’s Office of the
Secretary and Other Units.
To accomplish our audit objectives, our audit procedures included inquiries of
appropriate personnel, inspections of documents and records, observations of the
Center’s operations, and tests of transactions. Generally, transactions were
selected for testing based on auditor judgment, which primarily considers risk.
4

--- Page 7 ---
Unless otherwise specifically indicated, neither statistical nor non-statistical audit
sampling was used to select the transactions tested. Therefore, the results of the
tests cannot be used to project those results to the entire population from which
the test items were selected.
We also performed various data extracts of pertinent information from the State’s
Financial Management Information System (such as expenditure data) and the
State’s Central Payroll Bureau (payroll data), as well as from the contractor
administering the State’s Corporate Purchasing Card Program (credit card
activity). The extracts are performed as a part of ongoing internal processes
established by the Office of Legislative Audits and were subject to various tests to
determine data reliability. We determined that the data extracted from these
various sources were sufficiently reliable for the purposes the data were used
during this audit. Finally, we performed other auditing procedures that we
considered necessary to achieve our objectives. The reliability of data used in this
report for background or informational purposes was not assessed.
The Center’s management is responsible for establishing and maintaining
effective internal control. Internal control is a process designed to provide
reasonable assurance that objectives pertaining to the reliability of financial
records; effectiveness and efficiency of operations, including safeguarding of
assets; and compliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations are achieved.
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate.
Our reports are designed to assist the Maryland General Assembly in exercising
its legislative oversight function and to provide constructive recommendations for
improving State operations. As a result, our reports generally do not address
activities we reviewed that are functioning properly.
This report includes a finding relating to conditions that we consider to be
significant instances of noncompliance with applicable laws, rules, or regulations.
Our audit did not disclose any significant deficiencies in the design or operation
of internal control that could adversely affect the Center’s ability to maintain
reliable financial records, operate effectively and efficiently, and/or comply with
applicable laws, rules, and regulations. Other less significant findings were
communicated to the Center that did not warrant inclusion in this report.
5

--- Page 8 ---
The response from MDH, on behalf of the Center, to our findings and
recommendations is included as an appendix to this report. As prescribed in the
State Government Article, Section 2-1224 of the Annotated Code of Maryland,
we will advise the MDH regarding the results of our review of its response.
6

--- Page 10 ---
Maryland Department of Health
Thomas B. Finan Hospital Center
Agency Response Form
Purchases of Fuel and Security Equipment
Finding 1
The Center did not use an available statewide contract and/or competitively procure fuel
and security equipment, in accordance with State regulations.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that the Center
a. use the available statewide fuel contract; and
b. use public solicitation, competitive bids, and written contracts, and obtain control
agency approvals, as required by State regulations.
Agency Response
Analysis Factually Accurate
Please explain any None.
concerns with factual
accuracy.
Recommendation 1a Agree Estimated Completion Date: 03/19/2019
Please provide details of The Center concurs with the recommendation. The Center will
corrective action or begin utilizing the DGS statewide contract for fuel for all future
explain disagreement. purchases. Procurement and maintenance personnel responsible for
ordering fuel were advised of the new process and told to cease
utilizing the current vendor on March 19, 2019.
Recommendation 1b Agree Estimated Completion Date: 03/19/2019
Please provide details of The Center concurs with the recommendation. The Center will use
corrective action or public solicitation, competitive bids, and written contracts, and
explain disagreement. obtain control agency approvals when purchasing equipment in the
future. Procurement personnel were instructed to utilize this
process on March 19, 2019.
Page 1 of 1

--- Page 11 ---
A T
UDIT EAM
Joshua S. Adler, CPA, CFE
Heather A. Warriner, CPA
Audit Managers
Marissa L. Riddle, CPA
Senior Auditor
Ian T. Pontius
Staff Auditor