Title: Department of Information Technology as a Service Provider
Date: 03/21/2019
Type: Fiscal Compliance
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5c9ba6e5a1ce580cb8e909af
Extracted: 2025-06-18T22:26:52.736354
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Audit Report
Department of Information Technology
as a Service Provider
March 2019
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
For further information concerning this report contact:
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
301 West Preston Street, Room 1202
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Phone: 410-946-5900 ꞏ 301-970-5900
Toll Free in Maryland: 1-877-486-9964
Maryland Relay: 711
TTY: 410-946-5401 ꞏ 301-970-5401
E-mail: OLAWebmaster@ola.state.md.us
Website: www.ola.state.md.us
The Office of Legislative Audits operates a Fraud Hotline to report fraud, waste, or abuse
involving State of Maryland government resources. Reports of fraud, waste, or abuse
may be communicated anonymously by a toll-free call to 1-877-FRAUD-11, by mail to the
Fraud Hotline, c/o Office of Legislative Audits, or through the Office’s website.
The Department of Legislative Services does not discriminate on the basis of age, ancestry, color,
creed, marital status, national origin, race, religion, gender, gender identity, sexual orientation,
or disability in the admission or access to its programs, services, or activities. The Department’s
Information Officer has been designated to coordinate compliance with the nondiscrimination
requirements contained in Section 35.107 of the Department of Justice Regulations. Requests for
assistance should be directed to the Information Officer at 410-946-5400 or 410-970-5400.

--- Page 5 ---
Table of Contents
Background Information 4
Agency Responsibilities 4
Findings and Recommendations 6
Information Security Policy
Finding 1 – The Department of Information Technology (DoIT) had 6
not updated the State of Maryland Information Security Policy
applicable to Executive Branch and independent State agencies
for almost six years despite new and increasing IT security risks.
Information Systems Security and Control
Finding 2 – DoIT did not have an information technology disaster 8
recovery plan for its third-party operated enterprise services hosting
data center to aid in the recovery of related information systems
operations.
Finding 3 – DoIT lacked assurance that adequate information technology 9
security and operational controls existed over its State enterprise
services operations hosted by its third-party data center hosting
service provider.
Finding 4 – Operating system software updates were not applied to 10
network devices in use on DoIT-managed customer agencies’ networks
and on DoIT-only networks.
Finding 5 – DoIT’s enterprise services operation lacked procedures for 11
maintaining malware protection controls on customer agencies’
workstations relative to workstation administrative rights assignment
and updating certain vulnerable application software products.
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology 14
Agency Response Appendix
3

--- Page 6 ---
Background Information
Agency Responsibilities
The Department of Information Technology (DoIT) was established by Chapter 9,
Laws of Maryland 2008 effective July 1, 2008. DoIT is responsible for
information technology policies, procedures, and standards for the State’s
Executive Branch agencies and commissions, including publishing and
maintaining the State of Maryland Information Security Policy and its related
security requirements.1
DoIT also provides various information technology (IT) enterprise services to
customer State agencies on a centralized, uniform basis. As of August 2018,
enterprise services provided by DoIT included: Managed Security Services for
maintaining agencies networks’ firewalls; End User Services for supporting
agencies computer workstations, providing malware protection software,
encryption and host intrusion prevention system software; and Infrastructure
Services for hosting agency virtual servers at a third-party service provider’s
hosting data center, and managing agencies’ onsite and branch locations’ local
area networks including wireless network segments.
DoIT provided enterprise services to customer State agencies from both within
the DoIT agency network, and by using substantial IT hardware and software
resources installed at the third-party service provider’s hosting data center facility
which is located in Baltimore.
DoIT’s enterprise services support fundamental daily agency IT activities
including Internet and Statewide Intranet access, email, computer server
operations, and file sharing. DoIT began providing enterprise services to State
customer agencies in February 2015. Additional State agencies became enterprise
services customers over time, in a phased approach. As of October 2017, 30
separate State agencies were utilizing enterprise services. The Department of
Legislative Services Analysis of the fiscal year 2019 Executive Budget noted that
9,529 employees worked within the State customer agencies receiving DoIT
enterprise services.
During implementation of enterprise services to State customer agencies,
numerous IT employee positions were transferred from customer State agencies to
1 By Law, DoIT does not have authority or responsibility for the University System of Maryland,
Morgan State University, St. Mary’s College, or the Maryland Port Administration.
Additionally, Chapter 150 of the Laws of Maryland 2018, effective July 1, 2018, exempts the
Maryland Stadium Authority from DoIT’s authority or responsibility.
4

--- Page 7 ---
DoIT. According to DoIT’s records, between November 2015 and November
2016, 115 customer State agencies’ IT employee positions were transferred to
DoIT. At the time of these transfers, 7 positions were vacant and 2 positions were
abolished. Since the noted transfers, 14 positions were subsequently transferred
back to the Department of Juvenile Services and the Department of Housing and
Community Development, which discontinued use of certain DoIT enterprise
services. Additionally, DoIT has relied, to a significant degree, on a contractor
for providing personnel and technical expertise related to varying portions of the
aforementioned enterprise services.
According to DoIT’s records, fiscal year 2018 expenditures related to supporting
the aforementioned enterprise services totaled approximately $21.3 million.
This audit focuses on DoIT’s role as an IT enterprise service provider to other
State agencies. Our Office also performs a separate fiscal compliance audit of
DoIT which includes DoIT’s fiscal operations and other functions not related to
its enterprise service provider role. Our Office also separately audits the
enterprise service customer agencies during which we examine information
system security controls in place at the agencies to whom DoIT provides IT
services.
5

--- Page 8 ---
Findings and Recommendations
Information Security Policy
Background
The State Finance and Procurement Article of the Annotated Code of Maryland
establishes the duties of the Secretary of the Department of Information
Technology (DoIT). Under State law, DoIT is responsible for developing,
maintaining, revising, and enforcing information technology policies, procedures,
and standards.
Historically, DoIT has maintained and published a single comprehensive State of
Maryland Information Security Policy, with the current version having been
published in February 2013. The Information Security Policy describes security
requirements that Executive Branch and independent State agencies must meet in
order to protect the confidentiality, integrity, and availability of State-owned
information. Information technology (IT) and IT systems are essential assets of
the State of Maryland and vital resources to Maryland citizens. All State
agencies, employees, and contractors are responsible for protecting such assets
from unauthorized access, modification, disclosure, and destruction. The
Information Security Policy has historically identified the minimum security
requirements necessary for protecting the State’s IT assets.
Finding 1
DOIT had not updated the Information Security Policy applicable to
Executive Branch and independent State agencies for almost six years despite
new and increasing IT security risks.
Analysis
DoIT had not updated the Information Security Policy applicable to Executive
Branch and independent State agencies for almost six years despite new and
increasing IT security risks. Our review determined that during 2016 and 2017
DoIT developed a collection of 26 new or updated draft IT security requirements
categorized by IT functions, but these had not been finalized and published. DoIT
personnel advised us that these new IT security requirements were developed
under management personnel who were no longer employed with DoIT and that,
as of December 2017, they were under review by existing DoIT management.
Subsequently, in December 2018, DoIT management personnel further advised us
that the goal was to finalize and publish these new IT security requirements, via a
revised Information Security Policy in the very near future.
6

--- Page 9 ---
Furthermore, during 2017 and 2018, DoIT advised State legislative committees
concerning the State of Maryland cybersecurity policies and represented the new,
non-published IT security requirements as the official Information Security
Policy.
 The April 2017 Joint Chairmen’s Report required the Judicial Information
Systems (JIS) and DoIT to submit a report by November 1, 2017, detailing the
current status of the State’s cybersecurity policies and the feasibility of
creating and adopting a unified cybersecurity policy for the Executive and
Judicial branches. In response, DoIT advised the Senate Budget and Taxation
Committee and House Appropriations Committee, in part, that DoIT
maintained 26 separate policies for cybersecurity that were tied to the Federal
National Institute of Standards and Technology Cybersecurity Framework.
These policies were the same IT security requirements which DoIT
management personnel advised us had not been finalized and published and
hence were not yet official.
 During the 2017 and 2018 Legislative Sessions as part of its fiscal year 2018
and 2019 operating budget hearings, DoIT advised pertinent State Senate and
House Committees that the new, non-published security requirements
comprising the Information Security Policy and were issued throughout the
Executive Branch of State government.
Without updated information security requirements, State agencies were not
assisted in addressing the increasing security risks arising from new information
system technologies and security threats. According to industry literature, for the
almost six-year period since the Information Security Policy was last updated
(February 2013), IT security risks have grown in scope and at an increasing rate
with industry groups recognizing the increased risks related to IT security. For
example, the National Association of State Chief Information Officers’
(NASCIO’s) annually surveys state CIOs to identify and prioritize the top IT
policy and technology issues facing state governments, and publishes a related
annual Top Ten Priorities list. For each year from 2015 to 2018, the described
NASCIO IT surveys ranked IT Security and Risk Management as the number one
priority among all state CIOs.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that DoIT
a. complete its review of the draft IT security requirements and finalize an
updated State of Maryland Information Security Policy in a timely
manner;
7

--- Page 10 ---
b. publish and disseminate the updated Policy with related implementation
guidance;
c. advise the budget committees that the previously described Policy
updates did not occur, and when the updated Policy is subsequently
finalized and issued; and
d. develop procedures to periodically update the Policy, on an as needed and
timely basis.
Information Systems Security and Control
Finding 2
DoIT did not have an information technology disaster recovery plan (DRP)
for its third-party operated enterprise services hosting data center to aid in
the recovery of related information systems operations.
Analysis
DoIT did not have an information technology DRP for its third-party operated
enterprise services hosting data center to aid in the recovery of computer
operations from disaster scenarios (for example a fire). DoIT utilized a third-
party data center service provider to host portions of its enterprise services
operations. A substantial number of DoIT enterprise services servers, supporting
network devices, and related Statewide network connections existed within
DoIT’s enterprise services hosting data center. According to DoIT’s enterprise
services records as of August 2018, 24 State customer agencies were fully using
DoIT enterprise services which were operating on this third-party hosted data
center’s infrastructure, and 8 other State customer agencies were partially using
some form of the aforementioned hosted enterprise services.
The State of Maryland Information Technology Disaster Recovery Guidelines for
State agencies provide minimum required elements needed for a DRP. Examples
of minimum required elements include alternate site processing arrangements,
required hardware and software components, and restoring network connectivity.
DoIT’s disaster recovery plan for State enterprise services would need to
incorporate and rely upon some portion of the third-party data center hosting
service provider’s own DRP.
Without a complete and tested DRP, a disaster could cause significant delays (for
an undetermined period of time) in restoring information systems operations for
over 30 State enterprise services customer agencies, beyond the expected delays
that would exist in a planned recovery scenario.
8

--- Page 11 ---
Recommendation 2
We recommend that DoIT develop and implement a comprehensive DRP,
including related testing, to cover all of its enterprise services information
technology operations, incorporating and relying on the third-party data
center hosting provider’s DRP as needed, in order to comply with the
requirements identified in the Information Technology Disaster Recovery
Guidelines.
Finding 3
DoIT lacked assurance that adequate information technology security and
operational controls existed over its State enterprise services operations
hosted by its third-party data center hosting service provider.
Analysis
DoIT lacked assurance that adequate information technology security and
operational controls existed over its State enterprise services operations hosted by
its third-party data center hosting service provider, under a contract effective
September 8, 2014 through September 17, 2019. DoIT’s contract did not require
the service provider to obtain an independent security assurances report such as a
System and Organization Controls (SOC) report. As of September 2017, DoIT
had not obtained a SOC report or any other similar independent security
assurances report from the service provider.
After our inquires, DoIT contacted the service provider and found that the service
provider had a SOC 2 Type 2 review performed, with a related report issued on
December 12, 2016, covering the period of November 1, 2015 to October 31,
2016. In response to our request, DoIT obtained the SOC report from the service
provider. Our review of the report disclosed that it identified seven control
weaknesses for the service organization’s system description and the suitability of
the design and operating effectiveness of controls, but the control issues pertained
to the hosting service provider’s data centers in locations other than the Baltimore
location.
The American Institute of Certified Public Accountants has issued guidance
concerning examinations of service providers. Based on this guidance, service
providers may contract for an independent review of controls and resultant
independent auditor’s report referred to as a SOC report. There are several types
of SOC reports, with varying scopes and levels of review and auditor testing. One
type of report, referred to as a SOC 2 Type 2 report, contains the service
organization’s description of its system and the results of the auditor’s
examination of the suitability of the system design, operating effectiveness for the
9

--- Page 12 ---
period under review, and can include an evaluation of system security, data
availability, processing integrity, confidentiality, and privacy trust criteria. Due to
the significance of the State enterprise hosting service provided at the third-party
provider’s data center, it is necessary that DoIT obtain and review a periodic SOC
2 Type 2 report covering the service provider’s operations.
Recommendation 3
We recommend that DoIT
a. ensure that future enterprise services contracts include provisions
requiring third-party service organizations to annually obtain SOC 2
Type 2 reviews for DoIT’s outsourced services, and
b. obtain and review these SOC 2 Type 2 reports and take appropriate
action to ensure that all critical operational and security-related controls
are properly addressed.
Finding 4
Operating system software updates were not applied to network devices in
use on DoIT-managed customer agencies’ networks and on DoIT-only
networks.
Analysis
Operating system software updates were not applied to network devices used on
DoIT-managed customer agencies’ networks and on DoIT-only networks.
According to DoIT’s enterprise services records as of August 2018, 30 State
customer agencies were receiving network device management services.
 DoIT lacked procedures for updating operating system software for network
devices within managed customer agency networks and DoIT’s own
infrastructure network segments. DoIT personnel advised that formal
procedures did not exist for ensuring that managed network devices were
running the most current version of the network device operating system
software in order to reduce risk related to such devices having software-
related security vulnerabilities.
 Our November 2017 test of 10 customer agency and/or DoIT network devices
disclosed that 8 of the 10 network devices had outdated operating system
software installed with 4 of these devices running a software version that was
no longer supported by the device manufacturer. Additionally, we determined
from DoIT’s enterprise network device management console server records
that 101 other DoIT managed network devices were operating using the same
outdated operating system software identified during our test. As of
10

--- Page 13 ---
September 2017, records from an enterprise network device management
console server identified 1,363 network devices under DoIT management.
When questioned, DoIT personnel advised us that, upon assuming initial
responsibility for certain agencies’ network devices, it was determined that
certain network devices’ installed operating system software was already no
longer supported by the manufacturer.
Accordingly, all of the DoIT-managed enterprise customer agency and DoIT
network devices, including those operating with outdated or unsupported
operating system software, were subject to increased security risks from software
vulnerabilities and possible related attacks, which could potentially result in
disruption of critical network services. The State of Maryland Information
Security Policy states that system hardening procedures shall be created and
maintained to ensure up-to-date security best practices are deployed at all levels
of IT systems (operating systems, applications, databases, and network devices).
Recommendation 4
We recommend that DoIT, for managed enterprise network devices’
operating system software,
a. identify all critical network devices with obsolete operating system
software (no longer supported by the manufacturer) and develop a plan
to migrate those devices to manufacturer-supported operating software;
b. develop procedures to regularly identify software updates necessary to
eliminate significant security or operational vulnerabilities; and
c. ensure that all managed network devices operate with current vendor
supported versions of operating system software, and apply updates for
the operating system software in a timely manner.
Finding 5
DoIT’s enterprise services operation lacked procedures for maintaining
malware protection controls on customer agencies’ workstations relative to
workstation administrative rights assignment and updating certain
vulnerable application software products.
Analysis
DoIT’s enterprise services operation lacked procedures for maintaining malware
protection controls on customer agencies’ workstations relative to administrative
rights assignment and updating certain vulnerable application software products.
11

--- Page 14 ---
 DoIT did not properly control the assignment of local administrative rights on
enterprise services customer agencies’ workstations. We were advised by
DoIT personnel that their enterprise services policy was to not assign local
administrative rights on managed customer agency workstations to non-IT
personnel. However, our review of DoIT procedures as of November 2017
determined that a formal policy for controlling administrative rights defined
on customer agency workstations did not exist. Furthermore, related control
procedures did not exist, including reviewing employee workstations to
identify all administrative rights previously assigned before agencies became
enterprise services customers, removing such administrative rights that are not
needed, and maintaining schedules of customer agency employees needing
assignment of the rights on an authorized exception basis.
Administrative rights are the highest permission level that can be granted to
users and allow users to install software and change configuration settings. If
these customer agencies’ workstations were infected with malware, the
malware would run with administrative rights and expose these workstations
to a greater risk of compromise than if the workstations’ user accounts
operated with only user rights.
 DoIT supported customer agencies’ workstations had not been updated with
the latest releases for three application software products that are known to
have ongoing security-related vulnerabilities. Vendors for these software
products frequently provide software patches to address these vulnerabilities;
however, DoIT personnel advised us that, as of December 2017, customer
agencies’ workstations were not being regularly updated with these software
patches. Accordingly, the DoIT managed agencies’ workstations running
these applications were subject to increased security risks from attacks
focused on the related vulnerable applications software.
We review DoIT’s results for controlling administrative rights and updating
vulnerable application software during our separate State agency audits of many
enterprise customers. Since November 2015, we have audited five State customer
agencies that used DoIT enterprise services, with each agencies’ information
system security controls being examined. During the audit of three of these five
agencies, we found reportable conditions related to the failure to properly control
the assignment of administrative rights and/or the failure to promptly update
vulnerable software products.
12

--- Page 15 ---
Recommendation 5
We recommend that DOIT, for its enterprise services managed customer
agencies’ workstations
a. limit the assignment of administrative rights on workstations to system
and network administrators and those users specifically requiring such
rights to perform their job functions, with any such assignments to non-
IT administrators being justified, approved, documented, and regularly
reviewed to determine whether such rights are still needed; and
b. ensure that all workstations are promptly updated with software patches
issued by vendors for recognized vulnerable software products to address
known vulnerabilities.
13

--- Page 16 ---
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the Department of Information
Technology (DoIT) as a Service Provider. Fieldwork associated with our audit of
DoIT was conducted during the period from August 2017 to December 2017. The
audit was conducted in accordance with generally accepted government auditing
standards. Those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain
sufficient, appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and
conclusions based on our audit objectives. We believe that the evidence obtained
provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit
objectives.
As prescribed by the State Government Article, Section 2-1221 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, the objectives of this audit were to examine DoIT’s internal
control over its enterprise services information technology operations and
network, and to evaluate its compliance with applicable State laws, rules, and
regulations.
In planning and conducting our audit, we focused on the major areas of operations
based on assessments of significance and risk. The areas addressed by the audit
included procedures and controls over the enterprise services network
infrastructure security and data center hosting. Our audit included an assessment
of the security controls for enterprise malware protection management and
software maintenance for enterprise devices. The audit also assessed DoIT’s
procedures for enterprise disaster recovery and maintenance of the State of
Maryland Information Security Policy.
Our audit did not include DoIT’s fiscal operations related to its information
technology enterprise services or the computer operations of DoIT as it relates to
services primarily received by DoIT itself as an enterprise services customer.
DoIT’s fiscal operations and own use of its enterprise services are audited
separately as part of our fiscal compliance audit of DoIT. At this report’s
publication, the latest report that covered DoIT’s fiscal compliance audit was
issued on September 12, 2016. Our audit also did not include certain provided
enterprise support services involving network.Maryland and the State’s office
productivity software suite. These support services are also included within the
scope of our audit of DoIT fiscal compliance operations.
To accomplish our audit objectives, our audit procedures included inquiries of
appropriate personnel, inspections of documents and records, and observations of
DoIT’s operations.
14

--- Page 17 ---
We also extracted data from a DoIT network device management system for the
purpose of testing network device software updating. We performed various tests
of the relevant data and determined that the data were sufficiently reliable for the
purposes the data were used during the audit. Finally, we performed other
auditing procedures that we considered necessary to achieve our audit objectives.
The reliability of data used in this report for background or informational
purposes was not assessed.
DoIT’s management is responsible for establishing and maintaining effective
internal control. Internal control is a process designed to provide reasonable
assurance that objectives pertaining to the reliability of financial records;
effectiveness and efficiency of operations, including safeguarding of assets; and
compliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations are achieved.
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate.
Our reports are designed to assist the Maryland General Assembly in exercising
its legislative oversight function and to provide constructive recommendations for
improving State operations. As a result, our reports generally do not address
activities we reviewed that are functioning properly.
This report includes findings relating to conditions that we consider to be
significant deficiencies in the design or operation of internal control that could
adversely affect DoIT’s ability to operate its enterprise services effectively and
efficiently, and/or comply with applicable laws, rules, and regulations. Our report
also includes findings regarding significant instances of noncompliance with
applicable laws, rules, or regulations. Other less significant findings were
communicated to DoIT that did not warrant inclusion in this report.
DoIT’s response to our findings and recommendations is included as an appendix
to this report. As prescribed in the State Government Article, Section 2-1224 of
the Annotated Code of Maryland, we will advise the DoIT regarding the results of
our review of its response.
15

--- Page 19 ---
Responses to Findings and Recommendations
Information Security Policy
Finding 1
DOIT had not updated the Information Security Policy applicable to
Executive Branch and independent State agencies for almost six years despite
new and increasing IT security risks.
Office of Legislative Audits Recommendation 1
We recommend that DoIT
a. complete its review of the draft IT security requirements and finalize an
updated State of Maryland Information Security Policy in a timely
manner;
b. publish and disseminate the updated Policy with related implementation
guidance;
c. advise the budget committees that the previously described Policy
updates did not occur, and when the updated Policy is subsequently
finalized and issued; and
d. develop procedures to periodically update the Policy, on an as needed and
timely basis.
DoIT Response to Recommendation 1
DoIT agrees with the recommendations and is taking corrective actions as
noted below.
a. The updated State of Maryland Information Security Policies have
completed an initial legal review and are undergoing revisions as a part of
an outreach campaign to solicit feedback and ensure alignment with agency
business practices. This outreach campaign is expected to reduce the time
and effort associated with dissemination and implementation, once
published. The updated policies contain substantially more implementation
guidance than previously found in State security policy; this implementation
guidance is adapted from guidance from the National Institutes of
Standards and Technology (NIST) for implementing similar standards in
federal government. The updated policies are expected to be finalized and
published second quarter of CY2019.
b. As noted in response to recommendation “1a”, we are expecting to finalize
and publish the updated policies by the second quarter of CY2019. At that
time, the updated policies will also be disseminated to Executive Branch and
independent State agencies, as applicable. As noted in response to

--- Page 20 ---
recommendation “1a”, the policies contain relevant implementation
guidance.
c. DoIT acknowledges that the previously described policy updates did not
occur and agrees to advise the budget committees of this. Once finalized,
DoIT will also provide a copy of the updated Policy.
d. The updated policies are to be reviewed on a yearly basis and updated as
needed based on findings made during the review cycle or as otherwise
deemed necessary by DoIT. These reviews will be documented and
maintained for future reference.
Information Systems Security and Control
Finding 2
DoIT did not have an information technology disaster recovery plan (DRP)
for its third-party operated enterprise services hosting data center to aid in
the recovery of related information systems operations.
Office of Legislative Audits Recommendation 2
We recommend that DoIT develop and implement a comprehensive DRP,
including related testing, to cover all of its enterprise services information
technology operations, incorporating and relying on the third-party data
center hosting provider’s DRP as needed, in order to comply with the
requirements identified in the Information Technology Disaster Recovery
Guidelines.
DoIT Response to Recommendation 2
DoIT acknowledges that the Disaster Recovery Plan (DRP) in effect at the time
of the audit did not adequately address all of the requirements identified in the
aforementioned guidelines. At the time of the audit DoIT was circulating a
revised version of its DRP for comment which addressed many of the items
identified by the auditors such as, the increased importance of our data center
for hosting agency applications and data, the formalized processes for
activating our secondary data center in the event of a disaster, the restoration
priority assigned to critical applications and data, and test procedures. DoIT did
provide a draft of the revised plan to the auditors during the time of the audit.
DoIT expects the updated DRP will be approved and implemented during the
second quarter of 2019. This DRP will comply with the requirements identified
in the Information Technology Disaster Recovery Guidelines. Testing of the
DRP will occur consistent with requirements in the Information Technology
Disaster Recovery Guidelines.

--- Page 21 ---
Finding 3
DoIT lacked assurance that adequate information technology security and
operational controls existed over its State enterprise services operations
hosted by its third-party data center hosting service provider.
Office of Legislative Audits Recommendation 3
We recommend that DoIT
a. ensure that future enterprise services contracts include provisions
requiring third-party service organizations to annually obtain SOC 2
Type 2 reviews for DoIT’s outsourced services, and
b. obtain and review these SOC 2 Type 2 reports and take appropriate
action to ensure that all critical operational and security-related controls
are properly addressed.
DoIT Response to Recommendation 3
DoIT agrees with the recommendations and is taking corrective actions as
noted below.
a. DoIT’s current contract for third-party hosting is due to expire in
September 2019. DoIT will ensure that all future contracts for third-party
hosting services will require the service provider to annually obtain a SOC 2
Type 2 audit and to provide DoIT a copy of the SOC 2 audit within 30 days
of it being provided to the service provider. All SOC 2 audits received will
be reviewed to ensure the sufficiency of controls. Appropriate action will be
taken as necessary. All such reviews and follow-up actions needed will be
documented.
b. DoIT has received a copy of the provider’s most recent SOC 2 audit (dated
December 2018) and has reviewed the report to ensure the sufficiency of
controls. DoIT has documented its review. No deficiencies were noted at the
Baltimore location. DoIT will continue to request a copy of the provider’s
related SOC 2 audit(s) that cover the period of the contract term and will
conduct a documented review to ensure adequate information technology
security and operational controls existed over its State enterprise services
operations.
Finding 4

--- Page 22 ---
Operating system software updates were not applied to network devices in
use on DoIT-managed customer agencies’ networks and on DoIT-only
networks.
Office of Legislative Audits Recommendation 4
We recommend that DoIT, for managed enterprise network devices’
operating system software,
a. identify all critical network devices with obsolete operating system
software (no longer supported by the manufacturer) and develop a plan
to migrate those devices to manufacturer-supported operating software;
b. develop procedures to regularly identify software updates necessary to
eliminate significant security or operational vulnerabilities; and
c. ensure that all managed network devices operate with current vendor
supported versions of operating system software, and apply updates for
the operating system software in a timely manner.
DoIT Response to Recommendation 4
As outlined in the Background Information and in the analysis of the finding,
between 2015 - 2017 DoIT assumed responsibility for the IT operations of 30
Executive branch agencies. In assuming that responsibility, DoIT assumed the
legacy network infrastructure in place at the time. A number of the assumed
network devices were end-of-life and end-of-support, running on operating
system software no longer being supported by the manufacturer. DoIT agrees
generally with the auditors recommendations that DoIT should identify these
devices, develop a plan to either replace these devices or upgrade the operating
system software with supported versions, and implement processes to ensure
software is patched. In circumstances where replacement or updates would
negatively impact the functionality of systems that depend upon these devices,
DoIT should identify and develop other compensating controls, where possible,
to mitigate associated risk. DoIT is addressing the above recommendations as
follows:
a. DoIT is aware of critical network devices with obsolete operating system
software and has developed two paths to fund the replacement of those
devices which are end-of-life. DoIT has established a MITDP to modernize
its voice and data infrastructure at a number of locations throughout the
State. As a component of that project, DoIT is upgrading network switching
appliances that are incapable of supporting Power Over Ethernet (POE).
This represents a subset of the network appliances that require replacement.
In addition, our FY2020 budget includes funds to replace 20% of the legacy
switches deployed at DoIT supported agencies. We believe that these two
sources of funding will allow us to remediate all end-of-life switches by the
end of calendar year 2020.
b. DoIT is in the process of replacing its current device monitoring software
with a product that is capable of detecting all devices, the version of

--- Page 23 ---
operating system that they are running, whether or not they are running on
a supported operating system, and whether they are patched and include the
most current vendor supported versions of the operating system software.
The new product will also support the patching and software updates of
these devices.
c. After implementation of this device monitoring software, DoIT will be able
to identify all devices representing a risk and will be able to patch and
update software on those devices within the managed network which are on
supported systems. As mentioned above, updates will be applied in a timely
manner, as feasible. Where updates are determined to have a negative
impact on the functionality of related systems, an effort will be taken to
identify and develop other compensating controls, where possible, to
mitigate associated risk.
Finding 5
DoIT’s enterprise services operation lacked procedures for maintaining
malware protection controls on customer agencies’ workstations relative to
workstation administrative rights assignment and updating certain
vulnerable application software products.
Office of Legislative Audits Recommendation 5
We recommend that DOIT, for its enterprise services managed customer
agencies’ workstations
a. limit the assignment of administrative rights on workstations to system
and network administrators and those users specifically requiring such
rights to perform their job functions, with any such assignments to non-
IT administrators being justified, approved, documented, and regularly
reviewed to determine whether such rights are still needed; and
b. ensure that all workstations are promptly updated with software patches
issued by vendors for recognized vulnerable software products to address
known vulnerabilities.
DoIT Response to Recommendation 5
DoIT assumed operational responsibility of a number of State agencies during
the period 2015 - 2017. Prior to assuming responsibility, DoIT performed an
assessment of the state of each agency’s IT infrastructure and corresponding
operations. This assessment identified deficiencies and developed specific plans
for remediating the most significant deficiencies. For all other issues, DoIT
developed longer-term plans to triage these deficiencies with the ultimate goal
of migrating the agency’s infrastructure and operations to a more secure
operating environment known as “the fort”. Standard PC images, more

--- Page 24 ---
hardened firewall rules, and “least privileged access” are all components of the
fort.
Regarding the specific recommendations made related to this finding, DoIT has
taken the following corrective actions:
a. DoIT also recognizes the occasional need for agency personnel to have
shared and/or privileged access to workstations, for instance, in times of
emergency response. DoIT is establishing a process for the justification and
approval of such requests, to be evaluated based on a legitimate business
need, balanced with security and operational risk. Agencies will be expected
to internally comply with this procedure by verifying that the business need
is justified and the associated risks are deemed acceptable to that agency.
Administrative rights, and more specifically the granting and management
of local administrative rights, was an area where the processes employed by
the agencies prior to DoIT assuming responsibility varied greatly. DoIT has
addressed the most egregious instances identified in its assessments, but
acknowledges that there is still work to be done to get each agency to a
status where least privileged access and the processes to support it are in
place.
DoIT has begun a more extensive discovery and review of local
administrative rights. Each instance will be vetted to identify whether or not
a legitimate business need exists for the user rights. Where a legitimate
business need exists, it will be documented as an exception. Where a
business need does not exist, it will be removed. We expect to have this work
completed by end of calendar year 2019.
Once this project has been completed and going forward, DoIT will
establish procedures so that a periodic review will be conducted to determine
administrative rights have been properly assigned. This review will be
documented and maintained for future reference.
b. DoIT acknowledges that operating system and application patching of
workstations significantly enhances the State’s security posture. It is for this
reason that DoIT has expended considerable resources improving our
processes and procedures. At the time of the audit, DoIT had improved
patching significantly in relation to what was inherited. As of this response
DoIT’s workstations are now 99.81% compliant in relation to critical
operating system patches. With processes in place to support operating
system compliance, we are now identifying and addressing vulnerabilities in

--- Page 25 ---
regards to specific off-the-shelf applications. In many instances,
uninstalling legacy applications that are no longer being used will resolve
the vulnerability. In other instances, replacing a legacy application with a
functionally equivalent product which is better supported will resolve the
issue. While we are working to address all vulnerabilities, there is a subset
which cannot be addressed because of how they are used by custom-
developed legacy applications. These issues will have to be addressed by
either replacing/re-writing the application or by implementing
compensating controls to reduce the vulnerability.
Going forward and as noted in the response to recommendations for finding
4, DoIT is in the process of replacing its current device monitoring software
with a product that is capable of detecting all devices and whether they are
patched with the most current versions. The new product will also support
the patching updates of these devices to ensure that updates will occur in a
timely manner, when appropriate.

--- Page 26 ---
A T
UDIT EAM
R. Brendan Coffey, CPA, CISA
Stephen P. Jersey, CPA, CISA
Information Systems Audit Managers
J. Gregory Busch, CISA
Information Systems Senior Auditor
Roman J. Gouin
Justin P. Vlahacos
Information Systems Staff Auditors