Title: Department of Human Services - Family Investment Administration
Date: 03/21/2019
Type: Fiscal Compliance
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5c9ba6d0a1ce580cb8e8f815
Extracted: 2025-06-18T22:27:04.992363
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Audit Report
Department of Human Services
Family Investment Administration
October 2022
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Senator Clarence K. Lam, M.D. (Senate Chair) Delegate Mark S. Chang (House Chair)
Senator Malcolm L. Augustine Delegate Steven J. Arentz
Senator Adelaide C. Eckardt Delegate Nicholas P. Charles II
Senator George C. Edwards Delegate Andrea Fletcher Harrison
Senator Katie Fry Hester Delegate Trent M. Kittleman
Senator Cheryl C. Kagan Delegate Carol L. Krimm
Senator Benjamin F. Kramer Delegate David Moon
Senator Cory V. McCray Delegate Julie Palakovich Carr
Senator Justin D. Ready Delegate Elizabeth G. Proctor
Senator Craig J. Zucker Delegate Geraldine Valentino-Smith
To Obtain Further Information
Office of Legislative Audits
The Warehouse at Camden Yards
351 West Camden Street, Suite 400
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Phone: 410-946-5900
Maryland Relay: 711
TTY: 410-946-5401 · 301-970-5401
E-mail: OLAWebmaster@ola.state.md.us
Website: www.ola.state.md.us
To Report Fraud
The Office of Legislative Audits operates a Fraud Hotline to report fraud, waste, or abuse involving State
of Maryland government resources. Reports of fraud, waste, or abuse may be communicated anonymously
by a toll-free call to 1-877-FRAUD-11, by mail to the Fraud Hotline, c/o Office of Legislative Audits, or
through the Office’s website.
Nondiscrimination Statement
The Department of Legislative Services does not discriminate on the basis of age, ancestry, color, creed,
marital status, national origin, race, religion, gender, gender identity, sexual orientation, or disability in the
admission or access to its programs, services, or activities. The Department’s Information Officer has been
designated to coordinate compliance with the nondiscrimination requirements contained in Section 35.107
of the United States Department of Justice Regulations. Requests for assistance should be directed to the
Information Officer at 410-946-5400 or 410-970-5400.

--- Page 3 ---
October 21, 2022
Senator Clarence K. Lam, M.D., Senate Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Delegate Mark S. Chang, House Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Members of Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Annapolis, Maryland
Ladies and Gentlemen:
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the Department of Human Services
(DHS) – Family Investment Administration (FIA) for the period beginning May 1, 2017
and ending May 31, 2021. FIA oversees a number of public assistance programs which
help vulnerable Marylanders buy food, pay energy bills, and obtain medical assistance.
These programs are administered statewide by the 24 local departments of social services
(LDSSs) and include Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program (SNAP), Temporary
Cash Assistance (TCA), Temporary Disability Assistance Program (TDAP), and the
home energy assistance programs. According to DHS’ records, payments made during
fiscal year 2021 for programs under FIA’s oversight totaled approximately $2.3 billion.
These fiscal year 2021 expenditures were significantly greater than FIA’s expenditures in
the past due to an influx of federal funds related to the COVID-19 pandemic.
Our audit disclosed that FIA inadvertently disabled a system control resulting in SNAP
benefits being awarded to applicants whose income exceeded the federally-established
income thresholds. The programming change was not readily detected until March 2021
when FIA noted the issue as part of the implementation of its new automated system.
Additionally, FIA allowed numerous recipients to continue receiving TCA benefits
beyond the five years allowed by federal and State regulations. According to FIA
records, as of May 2021 there were 3,273 recipients receiving benefits for more than five
years. While federal and State regulations provide for an exemption from the five-year
limit in cases of hardship, we noted that FIA allowed extended benefits without issuing
an exemption.
We also noted that FIA did not conduct comprehensive quality assurance reviews of
TCA cases to ensure that eligibility determinations and related benefits were proper.
Quality assurance reviews, when conducted properly, are important to help FIA ensure
the LDSSs are complying with the legal and regulatory requirements of each program.

--- Page 4 ---
In addition, we noted that FIA did not ensure the LDSSs maintained application
documentation to support the propriety of eligibility determinations and other requirements
for SNAP, TCA, and TDAP. For example, we tested 60 TCA cases and requested FIA to
provide supporting documentation; however, FIA could not provide us with numerous
documents including 26 Social Security Number verifications. We also found that FIA did
not always determine whether TCA applicants received unemployment income, as required
by federal regulations. FIA management advised it was unaware of the requirement to
verify unemployment income during the first three months TCA benefits were issued.
Although FIA had established computer matches designed to help ensure recipient
eligibility and to detect potential fraud, it did not ensure that the resultant alerts were
recorded timely and that timely and appropriate actions were taken. For example, our test
of 46 alerts based on FIA benefits or income data with similar data from other states or
federal government agencies via the Public Assistance Reporting Information System
(PARIS) disclosed that for 43 alerts the LDSSs did not take timely or appropriate actions.
Our audit also disclosed that FIA made significant modifications to an existing contract
relating to TCA and TDAP that increased vendor compensation without formally
determining the practicality or appropriateness of conducting a new contract procurement.
Finally, our audit included a review to determine the status of the eight findings
contained in our preceding audit report. We determined that FIA satisfactorily addressed
three of these eight findings. The remaining five findings are repeated in this report.
DHS’ response to this audit, on behalf of FIA, is included as an appendix to this report. In
accordance with State law, we have reviewed the response and, while FIA agrees with
certain recommendations in this report, we identified numerous instances in which
statements in the response conflict with or disagree with the report findings. In each
instance, we reviewed and reassessed our audit documentation, and reaffirmed the validity
of our finding. In accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards, we
have included “auditor’s comments” within DHS’ response to explain our position.
Finally, for the remaining findings and recommendations we have concluded that the
corrective actions identified are sufficient to address those issues.
We wish to acknowledge the cooperation extended to us during the audit by FIA. We also
wish to acknowledge DHS’ and FIA’s willingness to address the audit issues and implement
appropriate corrective actions.
Respectfully submitted,
Gregory A. Hook, CPA
Legislative Auditor
2

--- Page 5 ---
Table of Contents
Background Information 5
Agency Responsibilities 5
Clients’ Automated Resource and Eligibility System (CARES) 6
Replacement by Eligibility and Enrollment System
COVID-19 Policy Changes 7
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report 7
Findings and Recommendations 9
Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program (SNAP)
Finding 1 – The Family Investment Administration (FIA) inadvertently 9
disabled a critical system control resulting in SNAP benefits being
awarded to applicants whose income exceeded the federally-established
income thresholds.
Temporary Cash Assistance (TCA)
* Finding 2 – FIA allowed numerous recipients to continue receiving 11
TCA benefits beyond the five years allowed by federal and State regulations.
Quality Assurance Reviews
Finding 3 – FIA did not conduct comprehensive quality assurance 13
reviews of TCA cases to ensure that eligibility determinations and
related benefits were proper. In addition, FIA did not ensure that errors
identified through the Temporary Disability Assistance Program (TDAP)
quality assurance reviews were corrected timely.
SNAP, TCA, and TDAP Eligibility
Finding 4 – FIA did not ensure that the local departments of social 14
services (LDSSs) maintained application documentation to support the
propriety of SNAP, TCA, and TDAP eligibility determinations and other
requirements.
Finding 5 – FIA did not always determine whether TCA applicants 16
received unemployment income, as required by federal regulations.
* Denotes item repeated in full or part from preceding audit report
3

--- Page 6 ---
Follow-up on Computer Matches
* Finding 6 – FIA did not ensure that all social security number alerts 17
were recorded in CARES for follow-up purposes.
* Finding 7 – FIA did not ensure that the LDSSs conducted timely and 18
appropriate follow-up on Public Assistance Reporting Information
System alerts. Our review disclosed that the LDSSs did not take timely
or appropriate action for 43 of the 46 alerts we tested.
Energy Assistance Programs
Finding 8 – FIA did not conduct monitoring reviews of certain local 20
administering agencies in accordance with its policy and did not always
execute agreements with energy suppliers.
Contract Monitoring
* Finding 9 – FIA did not adequately administer certain contracts and 21
agreements related to its public assistance programs.
Grants Management
* Finding 10 – FIA did not obtain supporting documentation to support 24
grant funds were spent as intended.
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology 26
Exhibit 1 – SNAP Quality Control Error Rate Announcements for 29
Federal Fiscal Year 2020 and 2021
Exhibit 2 – Temporary Suspension of Claims Collections Guidance 31
Agency Response Appendix
* Denotes item repeated in full or part from preceding audit report
4

--- Page 7 ---
Background Information
Agency Responsibilities
The Family Investment Administration (FIA) is a unit of the Department of Human
Services (DHS) and oversees a number of public assistance programs that are
administered statewide by the 24 local departments of social services (LDSSs).1
While the LDSSs are responsible for the daily operations, State law requires FIA to
supervise the public assistance activities of the LDSSs. FIA administers three major
public assistance programs: the Temporary Cash Assistance Program (TCA) and the
home energy assistance programs, both of which are funded by State and federal
funds, and the Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program (SNAP), which is
entirely funded by federal funds.
According to DHS’ records, during fiscal year 2021, programs under FIA’s
jurisdiction included, on average, approximately 1.3 million monthly recipient
records2 for which payments totaled approximately $2.3 billion (as detailed in Figure
1 on the following page). For both the SNAP and TCA programs, there was a
significant increase in recipients and expenditures in fiscal year 2021, compared to
fiscal year 2020. This was largely attributable to the impact of the COVID-19
pandemic. In addition, 57,924 medical assistance (Medicaid) recipients were
approved for eligibility through LDSSs to receive health-related benefits through the
Maryland Department of Health (MDH) during fiscal year 2021.
1 LDSSs administer a number of programs for FIA as well as other units of DHS. The LDSSs are
audited separately during our audits of DHS – Local Department Operations.
2 Many recipients receive assistance from more than one program.
5

--- Page 8 ---
Figure 1
Fiscal Years 2020 and 2021
Public Assistance Program Recipient and Expenditure Data
Fiscal Year 2020 Fiscal Year 2021
Average Average
Program Expenditures Expenditures
Monthly Monthly
(In Millions) (In Millions)
Recipients Recipients
SNAP 648,705 $1,107 816,579 $1,963
TCA 45,541 122 62,552 202
Home Energy Assistance 192,072 106 212,845 126
Temporary Disability 12,929 33
10,465 38
Assistance
Other Assistance Programs 211,388 12 213,930 8
Totals 1,110,6351 $1,380 1,316,3511 $2,337
Source: DHS records
1- Totals include individual recipients enrolled in one or more programs.
LDSSs are responsible for ensuring applicants meet all financial and technical
eligibility factors, and recording recipient and benefit data for TCA, SNAP, and
Temporary Disability Assistance Program (TDAP) in DHS’ automated benefits
system, the Clients’ Automated Resource and Eligibility System (CARES). CARES
also includes data for several other assistance programs, as well as a Medicaid
database for certain recipients who originally applied for Medicaid through the
LDSSs. This Medicaid recipient database serves as the basis for Medicaid benefits,
which are processed on a separate automated benefits system (MMIS II) maintained
by MDH. Home energy assistance programs automated records are not included in
CARES and are maintained by FIA in a separate computer system.
CARES Replacement by Eligibility and Enrollment System
In November 2021, FIA fully implemented the Eligibility and Enrollment (E&E)
System a web based application which replaced CARES. This system evaluates new
applications, interim changes to existing applications, as well as the recertification
process for eligible recipients. E&E is part of the Maryland Total Human Services
Integrated Network (MD THINK) which is a cloud-based platform that will allow
multiple State agencies to share and manage data in one convenient place. Since
CARES was the automated benefits system in effect during our audit period, our
audit scope included CARES rather than the recently implemented E&E System.
6

--- Page 9 ---
The scope of our next audit of the FIA will include an assessment of the E&E
System.
COVID-19 Policy Changes
Due to the COVID-19 pandemic, certain federal and State requirements related to
FIA’s assistance programs were modified. For example, for SNAP and for TCA,
FIA received federal waivers so that recipients did not need to comply with work
requirements. We took these changes into consideration during the course of our
audit.
Status of Findings from Preceding Audit Report
Our audit included a review to determine the status of the eight findings contained in
our preceding audit report dated March 21, 2019. As disclosed in Figure 2 on the
following page, we determined that FIA satisfactorily addressed three of these
findings. The remaining five findings are repeated in this report.
7

--- Page 10 ---
Figure 2
Status of Preceding Findings
Preceding Implementation
Finding Description
Finding Status
The Family Investment Administration (FIA) allowed
certain recipients to continue to receive Temporary
Repeated
Finding 1 Cash Assistance benefits beyond the five-year federal
(Current Finding 2)
and State limit at an estimated annual cost of at least
$6.6 million.
FIA did not ensure that the local departments of social
service (LDSSs) conducted timely and appropriate
follow-up on certain computer match alerts, including Repeated
Finding 2
attempts to recover improper payments. Our review (Current Finding 7)
disclosed that the LDSSs did not take appropriate
action for 29 of the 31 alerts tested.
FIA did not ensure that all social security number alerts
were recorded in its computer system for follow-up Repeated
Finding 3
purposes, and the alerts that were recorded were not (Current Finding 6)
dispositioned for extended periods.
FIA did not take adequate follow-up action when
LDSSs failed to conduct the required number of quality
Finding 4 assurance reviews and did not ensure that errors were Not repeated
corrected. Certain reviews conducted by FIA were not
comprehensive.
FIA did not obtain required documentation from
recipients, resulting in the failure to recover certain
Finding 5 Not repeated
federal reimbursements; and did not close certain cases
timely, allowing improper benefits to be issued.
FIA did not adequately monitor costs and deliverables
Repeated
Finding 6 for certain contracts and agreements related to its
(Current Finding 9)
public assistance programs.
FIA did not verify that certain grant funds were spent Repeated
Finding 7
as intended. (Current Finding 10)
FIA did not periodically review and adequately restrict
user access to its Office of Home Energy Programs
Finding 8 computer system, resulting in several hundred Not repeated
employees with unnecessary access to recipients’
personally identifiable information.
8

--- Page 11 ---
Findings and Recommendations
Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program
Background
The Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program (SNAP) helps low-income
households buy food. Applicants must meet certain financial (such as income not
exceeding federal thresholds) and technical requirements (such as Maryland
Resident, US Citizen, or Qualified Immigrant). Generally, the amount of benefits is
based on household size and income. Specifically, a household may not exceed both
a gross and a separate net income threshold, with the exception of households with
qualifying elderly or disabled individuals which only need to meet the net income
threshold, or households that are categorically eligible due to qualification for
another means tested program. According to Department of Human Services (DHS)
records, during fiscal year 2021, SNAP benefit payments totaled approximately
$1.96 billion.
Annually, the United States Department of Agriculture (USDA) monitors SNAP
using a calculated error rate. The error rate is a key indicator of payment accuracy,
measuring a state’s ability to determine a household’s eligibility for SNAP and issue
benefits in the correct amount. Errors include incorrect amounts paid to an eligible
client, payments made to a client incorrectly determined as eligible, and payment for
which insufficient or no documentation was found. According to the USDA, the
nationwide error rate for federal fiscal year 2019 (the most recent calculated) was
7.36 percent and Maryland was ranked 20th with an error rate of 8.43 percent. High
error rates are significant because USDA sanctions high-error states ($43.5 million
in sanctions were assessed on 12 high-error states during fiscal year 2019). Due to
issues with data collection related to the COVID-19 pandemic, the USDA could not
establish error rates for federal fiscal years 2020 and 2021 (see Exhibit 1 – SNAP
Quality Control Error Rate Announcements for Federal Fiscal Year 2020 and 2021).
Finding 1
The Family Investment Administration (FIA) inadvertently disabled a critical
system control resulting in SNAP benefits being awarded to applicants whose
income exceeded the federally-established income thresholds.
Analysis
The Family Investment Administration (FIA) inadvertently disabled a critical system
control resulting in SNAP benefits being awarded to applicants whose income
exceeded the federally-established income thresholds. FIA advised that in April
2020, as part of changes to SNAP in response to the COVID-19 pandemic, it
inadvertently disabled a system control within its automated benefits system that
9

--- Page 12 ---
limited SNAP benefits to individuals who met appropriate income thresholds set by
the federal government. The programming change was not readily detected until
March 2021 when FIA noted the issue as part of the implementation of its new
automated system. FIA advised that it notified the USDA of the error when the issue
was identified, and in August 2021, USDA requested FIA to provide additional
information to quantify the number of applicants and total benefits improperly
issued. As of August 2022, FIA could not provide documentation that they
responded to this request.
Our analysis of SNAP data for April 2021 obtained from FIA disclosed that 86,479
of the 465,038 households that received SNAP benefits had gross and/or net income
that exceeded the maximum threshold limits. Although recipients could be exempt
from the SNAP income thresholds (such as, when a household included a qualifying
elderly or disabled individuals), FIA was unable to determine if the aforementioned
86,479 households qualified for an exemption. We provided FIA with eight
applications that received a total of $8,938 in monthly SNAP benefits and FIA
confirmed that the aforementioned eight applicants did not have a documented
income exemption. While FIA informed us that it reestablished the system income
thresholds in November 2021, we noted that as of February 2022, six of the
aforementioned eight applicants continued to receive benefits.
FIA management advised us that they do not intend on implementing any collection
actions for the payments made in error. Specifically, they referred to a notice on the
USDA website that indicated collection action during the COVID pandemic had
been suspended (see Exhibit 2 – Temporary Suspension of Claims Collections
Guidance). However, the suspension of such activity expired in March 2022 and
FIA has not attempted to take subsequent collection actions. FIA management
advised that they interpret the website notice as a permanent waiver to collect any
overpayment that occurred during this period, although the notice specifically does
not address the issue of the waiver being deemed permanent. However, they could
not provide clarifying documentation from the USDA to support these assertions.
If in the future the federal government determines that reimbursement of amounts
improperly paid will be required, the State may have to fund that request. In
addition, the lack of controls over critical programming changes and resulting
overpayments could have a significant impact on the State’s error rate and result in
sanctions if similar conditions occur in the future (as noted above, the USDA could
not establish the error rate during this period).
10

--- Page 13 ---
Recommendation 1
We recommend that FIA
a. establish sufficient procedures to ensure critical programming changes are
subject to independent review and approval,
b. respond to federal granting agency requests for overpayment information,
and
c. collect the overpayments noted above unless written guidance is obtained
from the USDA stating that reimbursement of amounts improperly paid will
not be required.
Temporary Cash Assistance
Background
Maryland’s Temporary Cash Assistance (TCA) program, provides cash assistance to
families with dependent children when available resources do not fully address the
family’s needs. Eligible families must meet financial and technical requirements and
develop a plan for independence with their case manager. Generally, the amount of
benefits a family may receive is based on their household size and income.
According to DHS records, during fiscal year 2021, TCA benefit payments totaled
approximately $202.1 million.
Finding 2
FIA allowed numerous recipients to continue receiving TCA benefits beyond
the five years allowed by federal and State regulations.
Analysis
FIA allowed numerous recipients to continue receiving TCA benefits beyond the
five years allowed by federal and State regulations. Federal and State regulations
limit each TCA recipient’s benefits to a five-year lifetime period, unless the recipient
was granted a hardship exemption by the Family Investment Program Supervisor
and approved by the Director of the LDSS, or their designee; for example, because
of domestic abuse. State regulations require the recipient’s case manager at the
LDSSs to document the applicable reason(s) for any hardship exemption before
making a recommendation to the Family Investment Program Supervisor and
Director of the LDSS or designee to extend the TCA benefits. In addition, the case
manager is required to develop a plan, designed to achieve recipient independence,
within 60 days after the hardship exemption is granted.
According to FIA records, as of May 2021 there were 3,273 recipients receiving
benefits beyond the 5-year period, which totaled approximately $2.1 million
11

--- Page 14 ---
monthly. We tested 15 recipients3 from 6 different LDSSs who, as of September
2021, had received benefits beyond the five-year period. Our test disclosed that FIA
did not have documentation of a hardship exemption for 9 of these recipients
receiving TCA benefits from 4 to 12 years beyond the five-year limit totaling
approximately $797,000. These 9 recipients included 2 individuals for whom the
respective case manager recommended not to grant a hardship exemption, so it was
unclear who authorized these long-term exemptions and the basis for the exemptions
(i.e., why the case managers’ recommendations were ignored). For example, 1 of
these recipients without a hardship exemption had continuously received TCA
benefits for 12 years beyond the 5-year limit, which totaled $150,826 over that
period of time. We also noted that 13 of these recipients lacked a plan designed to
achieve recipient independence.
This condition was caused in part because FIA’s automated system did not
automatically terminate TCA benefits from recipients after the five-year lifetime
period. In addition to violating State regulations, to the extent that these TCA
benefits are determined to be improper, FIA may need to reimburse the federal
government for the related federal fund expenditures.
A similar condition was commented upon in our preceding audit report. The
Department’s response, on behalf of FIA, indicated that FIA was working with IT
developers to build enhanced technology features to prevent an automatic extension
without a hardship exemption and independence plan. However, we were advised
by FIA management that as of September 1, 2022, the aforementioned technology
features have not been implemented.
Recommendation 2
We recommend that FIA
a. comply with existing federal and State regulations by terminating TCA
benefits to all recipients after five years unless a documented hardship
exemption and related independence plan is prepared and approved, as
required (repeat);
b. determine the extent of improper payments and, in conjunction with the
federal granting agency, develop a plan to address any amounts improperly
recovered from the federal granting agency, and notify the General
Assembly budget committees and the Department of Budget and
Management of the extent of State payments made in violation of the
aforementioned State regulations (repeat); and
c. collect overpayments identified in accordance with its policy.
3 We selected the recipients for testing based on the materiality of payments made to them.
12

--- Page 15 ---
Quality Assurance Reviews
Finding 3
FIA did not conduct comprehensive quality assurance reviews of TCA cases to
ensure that eligibility determinations and related benefits were proper. In
addition, FIA did not ensure that errors identified through the Temporary
Disability Assistance Program (TDAP) quality assurance reviews were
corrected timely.
Analysis
FIA did not conduct comprehensive quality assurance reviews of TCA cases to
ensure that eligibility determinations and related benefits were proper. In addition,
FIA did not ensure that errors identified through the TDAP quality assurance
reviews were corrected timely.
• FIA did not conduct comprehensive quality assurance reviews of TCA cases to
ensure that eligibility determinations and related benefits were proper.
Specifically, our test of 10 of the 1,494 “reviews” performed between July 2019
and May 2021 by FIA staff, disclosed that the applicable reviewer did not review
the cases to ensure the eligibility determinations were proper and the amount of
the benefit was accurate. Rather, they only documented improper payments that
had been previously identified and corrected by the case manager.
• TDAP quality assurance reviews did not ensure that identified errors were
corrected timely. Our test of 10 TDAP quality assurance cases reviewed during
January 2020 and January 2021 disclosed that 4 cases were not corrected timely.
The reviews of these cases concluded that TDAP payments should stop
immediately for various reasons, such as the recipient being deceased, but
payments continued for 5 to 9 months after the reviews. During that time, TDAP
benefits totaling $9,300 were issued.
The aforementioned findings were caused, in part, because certain FIA quality
assurance staff advised us they were unaware of the related policies and procedures;
and our review disclosed that those policies and procedures were not always
comprehensive. For example, the TCA quality assurance policies and procedures
did not include guidance on how to review a payment for accuracy. Quality
assurance reviews, when conducted properly, are important to help FIA ensure the
LDSSs are complying with the legal and regulatory requirements of each program,
including eligibility criteria and aid in identifying errors such as payments to
ineligible recipients.
13

--- Page 16 ---
Recommendation 3
We recommend that FIA
a. develop comprehensive quality assurance policies to be used by all quality
assurance staff and conduct quality assurance reviews of TCA cases to
ensure that eligibility determinations and related benefits were proper,
b. ensure that errors identified during the TDAP quality assurance reviews are
corrected timely, and
c. collect overpayments identified in accordance with its policy.
SNAP, TCA, and TDAP Eligibility
Finding 4
FIA did not ensure that the Local Department of Social Services (LDSSs)
maintained application documentation to support the propriety of SNAP, TCA,
and TDAP eligibility determinations and other requirements.
Analysis
FIA did not ensure that the LDSSs maintained application documentation to support
the propriety of SNAP, TCA, and TDAP eligibility determinations and other
requirements. State regulations require an individual applying for benefits to submit
an application, the LDSS to perform certain verifications of eligibility requirements
(such as Social Security Number and Income Verifications), and other requirements
(such as development of a Family Independence Plan). FIA policy required the
LDSS to scan into its electronic document management system all customer
documents, including paper applications and verifications conducted by LDSS staff.
We tested 60 TCA, 30 SNAP, and 10 TDAP cases, approved during fiscal years
2020 and 2021, and requested FIA to provide us with the supporting documentation
scanned into the system4. FIA advised us that certain documents were not scanned
in the system by the LDSS as required, and therefore, they would need to obtain the
documents from the LDSS. Despite our repeated requests over a 5-month period,
ultimately FIA could not provide us with a significant number of documents needed
to support eligibility determinations. See Figure 3 below for a summary of the
missing documentation associated with the aforementioned cases (certain cases were
missing multiple documents).
4 FIA did not provide us direct access to the document management system.
14

--- Page 17 ---
Figure 3
Missing Documentation Noted During OLA Casefile Review
Number of Missing
Type of Document Documents*
TCA SNAP TDAP
Number of Casefiles Reviewed: 60 30 10
Eligibility Documents
Application 5 5 N/A
Social Security Number / Immigration
26 8 N/A
Verification
Criminal Record Verification 52 25 N/A
Substance Abuse Screening 44 N/A N/A
Income Verification 22 4 N/A
Physicians Medical Report N/A N/A 3
Other Required Documents
Family Independence Plan 44 N/A N/A
Child Support Agreement 32 N/A N/A
N/A attribute not applicable or not tested for selected cases.
* Some cases were missing several documents so the numbers total more than the number of cases tested.
The average monthly payment for the aforementioned TCA, SNAP, and TDAP cases
with missing documentation was $1,382, $1,638, and $243 respectively. Our recent
audit report of the DHS Local Department Operations dated March 30, 2022 noted
that the DHS Office of the Inspector General identified similar conditions during its
audits of the LDSS.
Recommendation 4
We recommend that FIA
a. ensure that the LDSSs scan all documentation as required to support the
propriety of eligibility determinations, and
b. obtain the missing documents noted in our finding and take corrective
action for any unsupported eligibility determinations or other program
requirements.
15

--- Page 18 ---
Finding 5
FIA did not always determine whether TCA applicants received unemployment
income, as required by federal regulations.
Analysis
FIA did not always determine whether TCA applicants received unemployment
income5 as required. Federal regulations require a verification of unemployment
income at the time of application and for each of the first three months benefits are
received, as this may impact applicant eligibility and the TCA benefits. Our test of
30 TCA applications approved during fiscal years 2020 and 2021 disclosed that FIA
could not document that it performed a verification of unemployment income for 15
applications and could only document it verified unemployment benefits for the
initial application but not the subsequent three months for the other 15 applications.
We obtained unemployment income records for these 30 individuals from the
Maryland Department of Labor’s Division of Unemployment Insurance and noted
that two recipients received $9,613 in unemployment income during the first three
months TCA benefits were issued, which may have resulted in overpayment of TCA
benefits.
FIA management advised it was not aware of the requirement to verify
unemployment income during the first three months TCA benefits were issued.
However, the federal single audit for fiscal year 2019 (issued in December 2019)
identified this issue and reported it to Maryland Department of Human Services
(DHS). In response to that finding, DHS concurred that it did not have a process to
perform a monthly verification of unemployment compensation and agreed to
develop a process to correct this finding. According to FIA records, 26,100 and
11,000 TCA applications were approved during fiscal years 2020 and 2021,
respectively.
Recommendation 5
We recommend that FIA
a. verify unemployment compensation as required by federal regulations and
maintain documentation of the related results;
b. identify and record unemployment income for TCA recipients, including
those noted above, and take appropriate corrective action; and
c. collect overpayments identified in accordance with its policy.
5 Our review was focused on regular unemployment benefits and excluded pandemic unemployment
benefits which is not counted towards income for TCA.
16

--- Page 19 ---
Follow-up on Computer Matches
Background
FIA periodically performs certain computer matches and related data verification
procedures to help ensure recipients are eligible for public and medical assistance
benefits and detect potential fraud. The computer matches compare recipient
assistance data in CARES with outside data sources, such as federal Social Security
Administration (SSA) records, prisoner records from the State’s Department of
Public Safety and Correctional Services, and new hire registry data from the
National Directory of New Hires. Computer matches are also performed by
comparing CARES benefits or income data with similar data from other state or
federal government agencies via the Public Assistance Reporting Information
System (PARIS).
The results of these matches are generally referred to the applicable LDSSs for
investigation and resolution (referred to as being “dispositioned”) via “system alerts”
recorded in CARES. A CARES system alert indicator is also generated when a
recipient’s social security number (SSN) has not been obtained from the recipient or
has not been verified through FIA’s matching process with SSA records.
Finding 6
FIA did not ensure that all social security number alerts were recorded in
CARES for follow-up purposes.
Analysis
FIA did not ensure that all social security number (SSN) alerts were recorded in
CARES for follow-up purposes. As a result, there is a lack of assurance that all the
alerts for active public assistance cases were properly recorded, investigated, and
dispositioned. FIA periodically compares recipient SSNs with SSA records and
identifies recipients whose SSNs were not verified as accurate, as well as recipients
with missing SSNs. The results of these SSN matches are subject to filtering
techniques to eliminate certain match results (such as inactive recipients), and the
final results are to be recorded in CARES by FIA as system alerts for LDSS
investigation.
Our December 2021 review of the results of SSN matches conducted for the month
of May 2021 disclosed that 188 of the 681 new match results were not recorded as
alerts in CARES. FIA could not readily explain why these alerts were not in the
system.
Federal and State regulations require the disclosure of SSNs by recipients during the
benefits eligibility determination process, except for certain situations (such as a
17

--- Page 20 ---
child in foster care or a newborn under one year of age). If a recipient does not have
a SSN, State regulations allow the recipient to provide evidence that one has been
applied for in order to begin receiving benefits and thus these recipients were able to
obtain benefits properly for a certain period. In cases in which the recipient does not
provide the needed SSN, the case manager is to follow the appropriate program
policy. For example, the case manager may need to subsequently remove the
individual from TCA if SSA did not accept the SSN application because the family
did not provide evidence of age, identity, or citizenship needed to apply for a SSN.
A similar condition was commented upon in our preceding audit report. The
Department’s response, on behalf of FIA, to our prior report, indicated that FIA
agreed to establish procedures to ensure that all SSN match results were recorded in
CARES. However, as noted above, these procedures were not sufficiently
comprehensive to ensure all alerts were recorded in the system.
Recommendation 6
We recommend that FIA ensure all SSN match alerts are properly recorded in
the system for follow up (repeat).
Finding 7
FIA did not ensure that the LDSSs conducted timely and appropriate follow-up
on PARIS alerts. Our review disclosed that the LDSSs did not take timely or
appropriate action for 43 of the 46 alerts we tested.
Analysis
FIA did not ensure that the LDSSs conducted timely and appropriate follow-up on
system alerts resulting from PARIS matches. According to FIA procedures, the
PARIS alerts were to be investigated by LDSS staff who were also responsible for
processing any needed adjustments in CARES (such as, to record previously
unrecorded income which could affect the benefit payment). Management from FIA
and one LDSS informed us that supervisory personnel did not verify the propriety of
the follow-up efforts to ensure they were performed and performed timely.
According to CARES generated reports, there were 7,148 PARIS alerts in December
2019 and 22,312 alerts in March 2021.
Our test of 46 alerts resulting from the December 2019 and March 2021 matches of
CARES data with similar data from PARIS disclosed that the LDSSs did not take
timely or appropriate follow-up action for 43 alerts (or record such follow-up action
in CARES).
18

--- Page 21 ---
• For 26 alerts, the LDSS did not take timely action to investigate and disposition
the alerts. Specifically, alerts were dispositioned 61 to 177 days after the system
due date.
• For 29 alerts, related to 23 households receiving concurrent benefits in another
state, the LDSSs did not perform appropriate follow-up. Specifically, system
notes indicate that alerts were dispositioned when the case manager reached out
to the other state, but did not include any conclusion as to what actions were
taken such as closing the case in one state and recouping improper payments.
• For 8 alerts, related to unreported federal income, there were no case notes to
support what action was taken or any indication that the unreported income was
added to the system.
In addition, our review of the 17,103 PARIS alerts that the LDSSs had recorded as
being investigated and dispositioned in March 2021 disclosed that 843 of these alerts
were dispositioned on average 87 days (ranging from 61 to 259 days) after the alerts
were generated. While range of days till dispositioning is lower than noted in our
prior audit report, additional efforts are still needed to comply with FIA policy which
requires that alerts be dispositioned within 20 days from the date generated.
Recommendation 7
We recommend that FIA monitor LDSSs PARIS alert activity to ensure that
the LDSSs
a. conduct timely and appropriate follow-up of PARIS alerts (repeat), and
b. update the system and case notes for unreported income identified by the
PARIS reports (repeat).
Energy Assistance Programs
FIA’s Office of Home Energy Programs administers two energy assistance
programs.
• Maryland Energy Assistance Program (MEAP) is a federally funded program
that provides low-income Maryland residents financial assistance with bill
payment, natural gas arrearage, and crises for a variety of heat and electric
customers. Annually, the federal government approves Maryland’s Low Income
Home Energy Assistance Plan (LIHEAP) (referred to as a State Plan) which
includes the rates and guidelines for the program.
19

--- Page 22 ---
• Electrical Universal Service Program (EUSP) is a State funded6 program that
provides financial assistance to help low-income Maryland residents with home
electric bills.
Local administering agencies (LAAs) primarily process applications for these
programs and determine applicant eligibility. The 20 LAAs in the State are
comprised of 9 LDSSs and 11 local community action agencies. Once approved,
payments are generally made by FIA directly to energy suppliers (such as utility
companies) on the customer’s behalf. FIA pays the energy suppliers for each
consumer in advance based on their income and historical energy usage.
Finding 8
FIA did not conduct monitoring reviews of certain LAAs in accordance with its
policy and did not always execute agreements with energy suppliers.
Analysis
FIA did not conduct monitoring reviews of certain LAAs in accordance with its
policy and did not always execute agreements with energy suppliers. According to
FIA records, during fiscal year 2021, energy assistance payments totaled $125.6
million. Our review disclosed the following:
• FIA did not conduct the required number of monitoring reviews, and the reviews
that were done were not performed in accordance with FIA’s Operations
Manual. Specifically, the Manual requires a review of 8 LAAs to be completed
each year with at least one review of each of the 20 LAAs every 3 years. The
reviews are to include at least 25 cases to ensure applications were adequately
documented (such as verification of cases that report zero income). The Manual
further requires FIA to issue a final report to the LAA at the conclusion of each
review and a corrective action plan (CAP) for all reports with one or more
material weaknesses (as defined by the Manual).
For example, during the three-year period ending June 2021, FIA did not conduct
the required monitoring reviews for 3 of the 20 LAAs which accounted for $40.9
million of the $130.4 million in benefits issued during fiscal year 2021. In
addition, FIA did not review case files or issue a final report for 11 of the
reviews conducted during fiscal year 2021.
6 EUSP is funded by a combination of sources: (1) a ratepayer surcharge on electric bills; (2) an
allocation of revenue from the Regional Greenhouse Gas Initiative carbon dioxide emission
allowance auctions (budgeted through the Strategic Energy Investment Fund ); and (3) when
available, if needed, LIHEAP.
20

--- Page 23 ---
Furthermore, during the three-year period ending June 2020, FIA did not execute
a CAP for 3 of the 6 monitoring reports we reviewed that contained a material
weakness.
• As of September 2021, FIA did not have a current energy agreement, with 4 of
15 energy suppliers we tested that received payments totaling $12.9 million in
fiscal year 2021. At the time of our testing, 3 of the 4 agreements had been
expired between a month (August 2021) and 28 months (April 2019), and FIA
was unable to provide any prior agreement with 1 energy supplier. FIA’s
Manual requires energy suppliers to sign an agreement to participate in this
program.
Recommendation 8
We recommend that FIA
a. conduct all the required monitoring reviews and execute a CAP for reports
that contain a material weakness, including those noted above; and
b. ensure a current agreement is executed with energy suppliers, as required.
Contract Monitoring
Finding 9
FIA did not adequately administer certain contracts and agreements related to
its public assistance programs.
Analysis
FIA did not adequately administer certain contracts and agreements related to its
public assistance programs. FIA was responsible for monitoring contracts and
agreements related to its public assistance programs including those procured by
DHS (centralized) and those procured by the LDSS. We noted several issues during
our review of FIA procedures and controls over centralized contracts and agreements
and FIA’s monitoring of the LDSS contracts and agreements.
Centralized Contracts
According to FIA records, during our audit period, there were 287 centralized
contracts and agreements valued at $292.4 million. We tested 15 invoices totaling
$10.3 million from 5 of these centralized contracts and agreements totaling $70.7
million and noted the following:
• FIA did not obtain documentation to support deliverables were received and
amounts invoiced were proper for 9 invoices totaling $5.6 million related to three
contracts totaling $39.4 million, as required by its policy. For example, FIA did
21

--- Page 24 ---
not obtain documentation to support actual expenditures for payroll totaling $3.5
million out of $4.9 million tested for the food supplement nutrition education
program. FIA’s Contract Monitoring and Invoice Protocol requires supporting
documentation to be submitted and reviewed prior to payment of invoices. A
similar condition regarding a lack of documentation supporting billed costs has
been commented upon in our four preceding audit reports dating back to
November 2007.
• FIA made significant modifications to vendor payment terms of an existing
contract, to assist TCA and TDAP recipients in obtaining federal benefits,
without formally determining
the practicality or Figure 4
appropriateness of Total Vendor Payments
conducting a new contract Fiscal Years 2016-2021
procurement. The original
$1,200,000
contract was procured in June
$1,000,000
2015 and had a total contract
price of $19.9 million $800,000
covering the five-year period $600,000
ending May 31, 2020. Under $400,000
the terms of the original
$200,000
contract, the vendor was to
$0
be paid for each case for 16 17 18 19 20 21
which the vendor
Source: State records
successfully obtained
approved federal benefits. In
September 2020, FIA modified the contract payment terms through May 2022 so
the vendor was paid based on reported effort in screening individuals to obtain
federal benefits regardless of whether they successfully obtained benefits. For
example, we noted one vendor invoice paid under the modified contract totaled
$189,695, which under the original contract terms would have been $1,698.
Although the contract modification was approved by the Board of Public Works,
the potential for significantly greater vendor payments in relation to work
performed was not explained. As noted in Figure 4, this contract modification
has significantly increased the amount paid to the vendor, although FIA could
not readily document enhanced vendor performance or outcomes (such as
obtaining additional federal benefits for FIA clients).
LDSS contracts
FIA did not have an established process to oversee and approve LDSS contracts and
agreements with State and local entities for public assistance programs and did not
22

--- Page 25 ---
maintain a record of certain agreements. We reviewed the FIA listing of contracts
and tested five agreements totaling $26.4 million related to four LDSS. Based on
our review and testing, we noted the following:
• FIA did not have a record of contracts and agreements procured by two
significant LDSSs, which together represent 40 percent of FIA benefits issued
within the State. Specifically, our review of FIA’s records which included 51
active contracts and agreements valued at $20.6 million, did not include any
contracts and agreements procured by these two LDSSs. Accordingly, FIA was
unable to monitor the related activity.
• Our test of five contracts and agreements relating to four LDSSs valued at $26.4
million disclosed that none were monitored by FIA and two totaling $7.8 million
were approved by FIA between six and nine months after the execution of the
contract and agreement. Additionally, FIA did not review invoices, on a test
basis, to ensure payments were in accordance with the contract or agreement.
A similar condition was commented upon in our preceding audit report. FIA
management advised us that it currently does not believe FIA is responsible for
monitoring LDSS contracts and agreements. This current position is contrary to the
Department’s response on FIA’s behalf to our prior report that FIA established a
Contract Compliance Office to monitor the LDSS contracts. State law requires FIA
to supervise LDSSs public assistance activities. Accordingly, since these contracts
and agreements are for public assistance services, we continue to believe FIA should
have procedures in place to ensure the services are being provided as intended.
Recommendation 9
We recommend that FIA
a. obtain adequate documentation, including payroll records, timesheets, and
receipts, to verify the accuracy of billings, as required by policy (repeat);
b. ensure contract modifications are adequately supported and justified, and
consider competitively procuring new contracts when significant changes to
the terms of the contract are required; and
c. in conjunction with DHS, formally determine which entity is responsible for
LDSS contract oversight and establish processes to oversee and approve
LDSS public assistance contracts and agreements to ensure that the related
invoices are consistent with the agreements and that the agreed-upon
services are received (repeat).
23

--- Page 26 ---
Grants Management
Finding 10
FIA did not obtain supporting documentation to support grant funds were
spent as intended.
Analysis
FIA did not obtain supporting documentation to support grant funds were spent as
intended. FIA’s Office of Grants Management provides funding to a network of
community and faith based organizations, LDSSs, and other State and local
agencies. According to State records, during fiscal years 2020 and 2021, FIA made
grant payments totaling approximately $52.4 million to 578 grantees. Our test of
eight fiscal year 2020 and 2021 payments totaling approximately $12.1 million to
four grantees under three grant programs, such as, the Emergency Food Assistance
Program, disclosed that FIA did not verify that certain grant funds related to three
grantees were spent as intended.
Specifically, the grant agreements required grantees to submit quarterly reports
detailing the number of individuals and/or families served, as well as annual
independent financial audit reports. For all eight of the disbursements we tested,
FIA had obtained the independent audit reports and the related quarterly reports, but
did not obtain documentation (such as, timesheets and receipts) to support charges of
those served related to five disbursements to three grantees with grants totaling $2.1
million. FIA did obtain this type of information for three of the tested disbursements
and used the information provided to assess the propriety of payments made.
A similar condition was commented upon in four prior audit reports (our most recent
audit report of FIA and three preceding audit reports of the DHS – Office of the
Secretary7) dating back to January 2011. In its response on behalf of FIA, the
Department agreed with our recommendation in the most recent report issued in
March 2019 and FIA’s 2018 written policies (the most current available during our
audit) required grantees to submit supporting documentation. However, as noted
above, FIA did not include the documentation requirement in its grant agreements
and still did not obtain the documentation that would be useful in determining the
appropriateness of grantee disbursements.
7 An organizational change effective July 1, 2015, transferred the Office of Grants Management and
the responsibility for monitoring these grants to FIA.
24

--- Page 27 ---
Recommendation 10
We recommend that FIA
a. independently verify, at least on a test basis, that grant funds are spent as
intended by obtaining and reviewing documentation to support the
propriety of payments (repeat); and
b. ensure grant agreements include provisions to submit supporting
documentation in accordance with its written policies.
25

--- Page 28 ---
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the Department of Human Services
(DHS) – Family Investment Administration (FIA) for the period beginning May 1,
2017 and ending May 31, 2021. The audit was conducted in accordance with
generally accepted government auditing standards. Those standards require that we
plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient, appropriate evidence to provide a
reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives. We
believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and
conclusions based on our audit objectives.
As prescribed by State Government Article, Section 2-1221 of the Annotated Code
of Maryland, the objectives of this audit were to examine FIA’s financial
transactions, records, and internal control, and to evaluate its compliance with
applicable State laws, rules, and regulations.
In planning and conducting our audit, we focused on the major financial-related
areas of operations based on assessments of significance and risk. The areas
addressed by the audit included the quality assurance processes used by FIA to
monitor the local departments of social services’ administration of the Supplemental
Nutrition Assistance Program (SNAP), Temporary Cash Assistance, and the
Temporary Disability Assistance Program; FIA’s administration of the home energy
assistance programs and the Temporary Disability Assistance Program; contracts;
grants; and criminal or unethical employee conduct. We also determined the status
of the findings contained in our preceding audit report.
Our audit did not include certain support services provided to FIA by DHS – Office
of the Secretary. These support services (such as payroll, purchasing, maintenance
of accounting records, and related fiscal functions) are included within the scope of
our audit of the DHS – Office of the Secretary.
Our audit also did not include an evaluation of internal controls over compliance
with federal laws and regulations for federal financial assistance programs and an
assessment of FIA’s compliance with those laws and regulations because the State of
Maryland engages an independent accounting firm to annually audit such programs
administered by State agencies, including FIA. We did review certain aspects of the
federal SNAP program because of the potential impact on the annual error rate,
which could result in sanctions.
26

--- Page 29 ---
Our assessment of internal controls was based on agency procedures and controls in
place at the time of our fieldwork. Our tests of transactions and other auditing
procedures were generally focused on the transactions occurring during our audit
period of May 1, 2017 to May 31, 2021, but may include transactions before or after
this period as we considered necessary to achieve our audit objectives.
To accomplish our audit objectives, our audit procedures included inquiries of
appropriate personnel, inspections of documents and records, tests of transactions,
and to the extent practicable, observations of FIA operations. Generally,
transactions were selected for testing based on auditor judgment, which primarily
considers risk, the timing or dollar amount of the transaction, or the significance of
the transaction to the area of operation reviewed. As a matter of course, we do not
normally use sampling in our tests, so unless otherwise specifically indicated, neither
statistical nor non-statistical audit sampling was used to select the transactions
tested. Therefore, unless sampling is specifically indicated in a finding, the results
from any tests conducted or disclosed by us cannot be used to project those results to
the entire population from which the test items were selected.
We also performed various data extracts of pertinent information from the State’s
Financial Management Information System (such as revenue and expenditure data).
The extracts are performed as part of ongoing internal processes established by the
Office of Legislative Audits and were subject to various tests to determine data
reliability. We determined that the data extracted from these sources were
sufficiently reliable for the purposes the data were used during this audit. We also
extracted data from the Clients’ Automated Resource and Eligibility System and
automated records relating to energy assistance programs for purposes of testing
selected attributes relating to recipient eligibility, program payments, and FIA’s
monitoring efforts. We performed various tests of the relevant data and determined
that the data were sufficiently reliable for the purposes the data were used during the
audit. Finally, we performed other auditing procedures that we considered necessary
to achieve our audit objectives. The reliability of data used in this report for
background or informational purposes was not assessed.
FIA’s management is responsible for establishing and maintaining effective internal
control. Internal control is a process designed to provide reasonable assurance that
objectives pertaining to the reliability of financial records; effectiveness and
efficiency of operations including safeguarding of assets; and compliance with
applicable laws, rules, and regulations are achieved. As provided in Government
Auditing Standards, there are five components of internal control: control
environment, risk assessment, control activities, information and communication,
and monitoring. Each of the five components, when significant to the audit
27

--- Page 30 ---
objectives, and as applicable to FIA, were considered by us during the course of this
audit.
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may nevertheless
occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of internal control to
future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may change or compliance with
policies and procedures may deteriorate.
Our reports are designed to assist the Maryland General Assembly in exercising its
legislative oversight function and to provide constructive recommendations for
improving State operations. As a result, our reports generally do not address
activities we reviewed that are functioning properly.
This report includes findings relating to conditions that we consider to be significant
deficiencies in the design or operation of internal control that could adversely affect
FIA’s ability to maintain reliable financial records, operate effectively and
efficiently, and/or comply with applicable laws, rules, and regulations. Our report
also includes findings regarding significant instances of noncompliance with
applicable laws, rules, or regulations. Other less significant findings were
communicated to DHS that did not warrant inclusion in this report.
The response from DHS, on behalf of FIA, to our findings and recommendations is
included as an appendix to this report. As prescribed in the State Government
Article, Section 2-1224 of the Annotated Code of Maryland, we will advise DHS
regarding the results of our review of its response.
28

--- Page 31 ---
Exhibit 1
SNAP Quality Control Error Rate Announcements for Federal Fiscal Year 2020 and 2021
Foodand DATE: February19,2021
Nutrition
Service
SUBJECT: Supplemental Nutrition AssistanceProgram (SNAP)–Quality
Control (QC)ErrorRate Announcements forFiscal Year (FY)
1320BraddockPlace 2020andFY2021
Alexandria,VA
22314
TO: All SNAP StateAgencies
All FoodandNutritionServiceRegional SNAP Directors
Issuing FNS/SNAP
Agency/Office:
Supplemental Nutrition AssistanceProgram (SNAP)–Quality
Titleof
Control (QC)ErrorRate Announcements forFiscal Year (FY)2020
Document:
andFY2021
DocumentID:
Z-RIN:
Dateof Issuance: February19,2021
Replaces: N/A
Informs SNAP StateAgenciesthat USDAwill not issuepayment
error rates,national and StatebyState,forfiscal years 2020and2021
Summary:
dueto flexibilities providedto StatesbySection4603(a)(2)ofthe
ContinuingAppropriations Act, 2021andOther Extensions Act.
Disclaimer: Thecontentsof this guidancedocumentdonot havetheforce
and effectof law and arenot meanttobind thepublicorFNS in
anyway. This documentisintended only toprovideclarityto
thepublicregardingexistingrequirements underthelaw or
agencypolicies.
TheFood andNutrition Service(FNS)wouldliketo thankall ofits Stateagency
partners andstakeholders fortheirpatienceas the agencyassessedits statutory
requirements in light oftheQC flexibilities providedto States bySection
4603(a)(2)oftheContinuingAppropriations Act, 2021andOtherExtensions
Act. FNS has completed this reviewandhas determined that theagencycannot
establishNationalandStatelevel payment errorratesfor Fiscal Year2020 and
2021.
Section16(c)(2)ofthe FoodandNutrition Act of 2008,as amended,1 defines
“overpayment errorrate” and“underpayment errorrate”in terms ofthevalueof
All SNAP StateAgencies
17U.S.C.2025(c)(2)
USDAisanEqualOpportunityProvider,EmployerandLender
29

--- Page 32 ---
Page2
all allotments issuedin afiscal year. Flexibilitiesprovidedbyappropriations legislation
as well as the FNS-issuedblanket approval dated April 30,2020, however, providedState
agenciestheoptionto suspendcertain QC regulatoryrequirements from March2020
untilJune30,20212 in responseto the COVID-19 publichealthemergency. Asaresult
ofStates optingto suspendtheQC regulatoryrequirements, FNS has onlyfivemonths of
validateddataforFY2020,coveringOctober2019through February2020, and expects
to haveonlythreemonths ofvalidateddata for FY2021,coveringJuly2021through
September2021. Becauseofincompletedatasets that do not reflect the full fiscal year
valueofallotments issuedbyStates, FNS cannot determineunderpayment and
overpayment error rates. FNS thereforehas determinedtheagencycannot establish
National andStatelevel payment errorrates for Fiscal Year2020and2021,andas such,
cannot assessliabilityamounts for thoseFederal Fiscal Years.
Duringthesuspension of certainQC regulatoryrequirements, FNS has encouragedState
agenciesto continue conductingQC casereviews, as thedatacollectedprovidesinsight
intotheeffectiveness of certification and recertification processes neededtoensure
payment accuracy. FNS is awareState agencies mayelect to continueconductingQC
casereviewsforpayment accuracyand program improvement purposes despiteoptingto
suspendtheQC requirements. FNS applaudstheseefforts and remains availableto
coordinate Federal reviewsofStateagencies’casereviewsduringthesuspension period
in orderto providetechnical assistance forourmutual responsibilityto preserveprogram
integrity. Additionally, FNS continues to providesupport forStateagencies to entercase
reviews conductedforpayment accuracypurposes intotheautomatedQC system for
Stateagencies (SNAP-QCS)duringthesuspension. FNS andStateagencies share a
responsibilityto ensureproperstewardshipoftaxpayerdollars, andtheagencystands by
to assist Stateagencieswiththeirpayment accuracyresponsibilities.
FNS looks forwardto workingwith ourpartners to resumenormaloperations in July
2021whenall regulatoryrequirements forQC casereviews will bein effect. If youhave
anyquestions orneed additionalinformation, pleasecontact your FNS Regional Office.
Pursuant to theCongressional ReviewAct andExecutiveOrder13891,the Officeof
Information andRegulatoryAffairs has designatedthis documentas not majorandnot
significant.
Signed
JessicaShahin
AssociateAdministrator
SupplementalNutritionAssistanceProgram
All SNAP StateAgencies
2WhiletheContinuingAppropriationsAct,2021andOtherExtensionsAct(P.L.116-159)providedthe
optiontosuspendcertainQCregulatoryrequirementsthroughSeptember30,2021,theConsolidated
AppropriationsAct,2021(P.L.116-260)reducedthesuspensionperiodtothroughJune30,2021.
30

--- Page 33 ---
Temporary Suspension of Claims Collections Guidance | Food and Nutri... https://www.fns.usda.gov/snap/temporary-suspension-claims-collections
Exhibit 2 - Temporary Suspension of Claims Collections Guidance
An o�icial website of the United States government Here's how you know
Food and Nutrition Service
MENU
U.S. DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE
Temporary Suspension of Claims Collections
Guidance
PROGRAMS FNS DISASTER ASSISTANCE FNS RESPONDS TO COVID-19 SNAP COVID-19 WAIVERS CLAIMS
TEMPORARY SUSPENSION OF CLAIMS COLLECTIONS
EO Guidance Document #
FNS-GD-2020-0127
Resource Type
Auditor's Note: FIA management advised that the extension expired in March 2022
Policy Memos
Guidance Documents
Resource Materials
Policy Memo (200.87 KB) See pages 2 through 5 for Policy Memo.
FNS will allow state agencies to suspend SNAP regulations at 7 CFR 273.18(d) by allowing flexibility in the
time frame for establishing or disposing of new claims. States are also permitted to suspend SNAP
regulations at 7 CFR 273.18(e)(1) and (e)(5) by not requiring collection of active recoupment of SNAP
overpayments, delaying collection on newly established overpayments, and not considering any
payments delayed due to this suspension to be delinquent.
2021
May Extensions
Maryland Massachusetts North Carolina
April Extensions
Maryland Massachusetts New Jersey North Carolina
31
1 of 4 Excerpt (only included page 1 in this exhibit) 9/16/2022, 5:00 PM

--- Page 34 ---
Exhibit 2 - Temporary Suspension of Claims Collections Guidance (Policy Memo)
Date: April 13,2020
FoodandNutrition
Service
RE: SupplementalNutrition AssistanceProgram (SNAP)–Temporary
WaiverofClaims CollectionActivities Dueto Novel Coronavirus
1320BraddockPlace
(COVID-19)–Blanket Approval
Alexandria,VA
22314
DearSNAP Stateagencies,
AsauthorizedbySNAP regulations at 7CFR 272.3(c)(1)(i),the Foodand Nutrition
Service(FNS)will allow Stateagenciesto suspend:
• SNAP regulations at 7CFR 273.18(d)byallowingflexibilityin thetime
frameforestablishingor disposingofnew claims.
• SNAP regulations at 7CFR 273.18(e)(1)and (e)(5)bynot requiringcollection
ofactiverecoupment of SNAP overpayments, delayingcollectiononnewly
establishedoverpayments,andnot consideringanypayments delayeddueto
this suspension to bedelinquent.
Undertheauthorityof7 CFR 272.3(c)(1)(i), FNS mayauthorizetemporarywaivers
to deviatefrom specificregulatoryprovisionswhentheycannot beimplemented
dueto extraordinarytemporarysituations. FNS has receivedmultiplerequests
from Stateagenciesfortheseflexibilities andhas determinedthat approval is
appropriatedueto theCOVID-19PublicHealth Emergency.
Theseflexibilities areavailablethroughMay31, 2020. This waiveris contingent
uponaStateagency’s compliancewith theconditions andevaluationrequirements
detailedin theattachedenclosures, which aredue 45days after expiration
(July15,2020).1
If theStateagencyelects to implementtheseflexibilities,it must notifyits
respective FNS Regional Office whowill acknowledgereceipt. Stateresponses
will berelayedto the FNS StateAdministrationBranch.
FNS is readyto providetechnical assistanceto Stateagencies as theyseekto
maintain operationsand serveclientsduringthe current PublicHealth
Emergency. If youhave anyquestionsorneed additional information, please
contact yourrespectiveRegional Officerepresentative.
Sincerely,
4/13/2020
X Ronald K. Ward
RonaldK.Ward
Director,ProgramAccountabilityandAdministrati...
Signedby:DepartmentofAgriculture
Enclosure
USDAisanEqualOpportunityProvider,EmployerandLender
32
1 - FIA management advised that this date was subsequently extended through March 2022.

--- Page 35 ---
Enclosure
Page1
TEMPORARYWAIVEROFTIME FRAME FORESTABLISHINGNEW CLAIMS
1. Regulatorycitation: 7CFR 273.18(d)
2. Regulatoryrequirements: SupplementalNutritionAssistanceProgram (SNAP)
regulations at 7CFR 273.18(d)requireStateagenciestoestablish aclaim beforethelast
dayofthequarterfollowingthequarterin whichtheoverpayment ortraffickingincident
was discoveredand ensurethatnoless than90percent of all claim referrals areeither
establishedordisposedofaccordingto this timeframe.
3. Description of alternativeprocedures: State agenciesareallowedflexibilityin thetimeframe
forestablishingordisposingofnewclaims.
4. Action and reason forapproval ordenial: Undertheauthorityof7CFR 272.3(c)(1)(i), FNS
mayauthorizetemporarywaivers to deviatefrom specificregulatoryprovisions whenthey
cannot beimplementeddueto extraordinarytemporarysituations. FNS has determinedthat
approval oftheseflexibilitiesis appropriatedueto theCOVID-19PublicHealth Emergency.
FNS is approvingtheflexibilityforaperiod of3 months, effectiveMarch 1,2020,through
May31,2020.
5. Conditions of approval: FNS is approvingthis flexibilitysubject to thefollowing
conditions:
• Stateagencieswill meet theregulatorydeadlinewhenpossibleandwill only
exercisethis flexibilitywhenit is not possibleto doso.
• If theStateagencyelects to implementtheseflexibilities,it must notifyits
respective FNS Regional Office whowill acknowledgereceipt. Stateresponses
will berelayedto the FNS StateAdministrationBranch.
6. Evaluation DataRequirements: TheStateagencymust provideto FNS thedataand
analysis listedbelow requiredforevaluation ofthis waiver:
• Thenumberofhouseholds andaggregatedollar amount ofnewlyestablished
claims affectedbythis adjustment
7. Expiration date: May31,2020
8. Qualitycontrol procedures: Atemporarydelayin theestablishment ordispositionof
someclaims shouldhave noimpact onqualitycontrol procedures.
33

--- Page 36 ---
Enclosure
Page2
TEMPORARYWAIVEROFCLAIMS COLLECTIONACTION
1. Regulatorycitation: 7CFR 273.18(e)(1)and7 CFR(e)(5)
2. Regulatoryrequirements: Supplemental NutritionAssistanceProgram (SNAP)
regulations at 7CFR 273.18(e)(1)requireStateagencies to begin collectionaction on
claims unlessit is not cost effective.
SNAP regulations at 7CFR 273.18(e)(5)require Stateagenciesto consideraclaim
delinquent iftheclaim has not beenpaid bytheduedateand asatisfactorypayment
arrangement has not beenmade; orifapayment arrangement has been establishedanda
scheduledpaymenthas not beenmadebythedue date.
3. Description of alternativeprocedures: State agenciesmaytemporarilysuspendcollectionof
activeclaims,delaycollectionactiononnewlyestablishedclaims,anddelaydelinquency
determination.
4. Action and reason forapproval ordenial: Undertheauthorityof7CFR 272.3(c)(1)(i), FNS
mayauthorizetemporarywaivers to deviatefrom specificregulatoryprovisions whenthey
cannot beimplementeddueto extraordinarytemporarysituations. FNS has determinedthat
approval oftheseflexibilitiesis appropriatedueto theCOVID-19PublicHealth Emergency.
FNS is approvingtheadjustment foraperiod of3 months,effectiveMarch 1,2020,through
May31,2020.
5. Conditions of approval: FNS is approvingthis adjustment subject to thefollowing
conditions:
• TheStateagencywill not considerpayments delayedduetothis suspension to be
delinquent.
• SNAP claims suspendedunderthiswaivermust not besubject to theaccrual of
interest duringthesuspensionperiod.
• Households remain liable fortheiroutstandingdebtsandtheStateagencywill
restart collectionactivityanddelinquencydeterminations at theendofthe
suspension period.
• If theStateagencyelects to implement theseflexibilities, it must notifyits
respective FNS Regional Office whowill acknowledgereceipt. Stateresponses
will berelayedto the FNS StateAdministrationBranch.
6. Evaluation DataRequirements: TheStateagencymust provideto FNS thedataand
analysis listedbelow requiredforevaluation ofthis adjustment:
• Thenumberofhouseholds andaggregatedollar amount ofactiveclaims affected
bythis adjustment
• Anestimatednumberof households andaggregatedollaramount ofclaims that
wouldhavebeennewlyestablishedfrom March1, 2020,throughMay31,2020,
thatwill bedeferreduntil thesuspension period ends.
7. Expiration date: May31,2020
34

--- Page 37 ---
Enclosure
Page3
8. Qualitycontrol procedures:Atemporaryclaims suspension shouldhavenoimpact on
qualitycontrol procedures.
35

--- Page 38 ---
APPENDIX
October 11, 2022
Mr. Gregory A. Hook
Legislative Auditor
Office of Legislative Audits
The Warehouse at Camden Yards,
351 West Camden Street, Suite 400,
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Dear Mr. Hook:
Enclosed is the Department of Human Services’ (DHS) response to the draft Legislative Audit
Report on the Family Investment Administration (FIA) for the period beginning May 1, 2017 and
ending May 31, 2021.
If there are any questions regarding the response, please contact the Inspector General, Marva Sutherland
at 443-378-4060 or marva.sutherland@maryland.gov.
Sincerely,
Lourdes R. Padilla
Secretary
Enclosures:
cc:
Gregory James, Deputy Secretary for MD THINK & Operations
Daniel Wait, Acting Deputy Secretary of Administration
Timothy Schuster, Special Assistant to the Secretary
La Sherra Ayala, Executive Director, Family Investment Administration
Marva M. Sutherland, Inspector General
Stafford Chipungu, Chief Financial Officer
Shelly-Ann Dyer, Assistant Inspector General for Audits
William C. Niner, Director, Bureau of Audit Compliance & Reporting, FIA

--- Page 39 ---
311 W. Saratoga Street, Baltimore, MD 21201-3500 | Tel: 1-800-332-6347 | TTY: 1-800-735-2258 |www.dhs.maryland.gov

--- Page 40 ---
Department of Human Services
Family Investment Administration
Agency Response Form
Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program
Finding 1
The Family Investment Administration (FIA) inadvertently disabled a critical system
control resulting in SNAP benefits being awarded to applicants whose income exceeded the
federally-established income thresholds.
We recommend that FIA
a. establish sufficient procedures to ensure critical programming changes are subject to
independent review and approval,
b. respond to federal granting agency requests for overpayment information, and
c. collect the overpayments noted above unless written guidance is obtained from the
USDA stating that reimbursement of amounts improperly paid will not be required.
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide FIA observed a federally approved waiver to suspend SNAP
additional comments as overpayment collection. FIA has no outstanding items relating to this
deemed necessary. matter.
Recommendation 1a Agree Estimated Completion Date: December
2022
Please provide details of FIA concurs with the recommendation. The E&E system is following
corrective action or the eligibility guidelines as required by federal and state regulations. To
explain disagreement. ensure that all guidelines are met, FIA’s Operations and Policy teams
along with the MD THINK team attend a daily Scrum Call to discuss the
progress of projects under development. The projects are analyzed,
developed, and tested by the MD THINK team. Validation of each
project is completed independently by the FIA team. A critical part of
the validation is regression testing which ensures that the introduction
of new features have not inadvertently interfered with critical system
controls.
Recommendation 1b Agree Estimated Completion Date: Completed
Please provide details of FIA concurs with the recommendation. The original request from our
corrective action or federal partner was received in August 2021 and FIA responded in the
explain disagreement. same month. FNS required a Post-Conversion Clean-Up Plan as a
deliverable for E&E rollout. An element of our plan provided that our
conversion process produced Work Items for cases where eligibility was
different in E&E than what was converted, e.g. household is overscale
Page 1 of 19

--- Page 41 ---
Department of Human Services
Family Investment Administration
Agency Response Form
income based on the determination in E&E. Case Managers were
required to review the Assigned Conversion Work Items and take the
appropriate case actions. FNS evaluated and accepted our Post-
Conversion Clean-Up Plan with no additional comments. Maryland
resumed Quality Control (QC) Reviews effective July 2021 in an effort
to identify and correct SNAP payment errors. Maryland also completed
a project to close SNAP cases that were identified as ineligible.
Collection activities are in progress and ongoing. FIA subsequently
followed up with our federal partner. FNS has required no additional
information at the time.
Recommendation 1c Disagree Estimated Completion Date: N/A
Please provide details of FIA disagrees with the recommendation. The overpayments noted
corrective action or above occurred during the pandemic period in which the State had a
explain disagreement. federal waiver to suspend Quality Control reviews. FIA does not plan a
retroactive review, accordingly. FIA will pursue overpayments
identified as part of its ongoing payment accuracy reviews.
Auditor’s Comment: FIA’s response reiterates the position included in our analysis that
it interprets the USDA website notice as a permanent waiver. As stated in our analysis,
and based on our interpretation of the website’s plain language, the suspension of
collection action expired in March 2022 and there was no clear intent that the language
was a permanent waiver on collections. Since FIA could not provide clarifying
documentation from the USDA to support its position, we continue to recommend that
FIA either collect the noted overpayments or obtain written guidance from the USDA
that the reimbursements of amounts improperly paid will not be required.
Page 2 of 19

--- Page 42 ---
Department of Human Services
Family Investment Administration
Agency Response Form
Temporary Cash Assistance
Finding 2
FIA allowed numerous recipients to continue receiving TCA benefits beyond the five years
allowed by federal and State regulations.
We recommend that FIA
a. comply with existing federal and State regulations by terminating TCA benefits to all
recipients after five years unless a documented hardship exemption and related
independence plan is prepared and approved, as required (repeat);
b. determine the extent of improper payments and, in conjunction with the federal
granting agency, develop a plan to address any amounts improperly recovered from the
federal granting agency, and notify the General Assembly budget committees and the
Department of Budget and Management of the extent of State payments made in
violation of the aforementioned State regulations (repeat); and
c. collect overpayments identified in accordance with its policy.
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide FIA does not deem this to be a widespread issue. After conducting a
additional comments as follow-up review of the cases cited by the auditor, we confirmed that the
deemed necessary. recipients were eligible to receive TCA benefits based on hardship, with
the exception of 3 cases which are being assessed for further action
accordingly.
Recommendation 2a Agree Estimated Completion Date: March 2023
Please provide details of FIA concurs with the recommendation. Effective March 2022, FIA
corrective action or resumed the process for reviewing cases reaching the 60 month or
explain disagreement. greater time limit. With this new process, the FIA reporting team
provides a monthly report showing all cases approaching the time
limit. The report is shared with local departments of social services with
instructions to review each case to determine if a hardship exemption
should be established and ensure an updated independence plan is
completed. An FIA Headquarters team member samples the cases to
confirm that the cases were closed after the 60 month time limit or has a
hardship exemption in place. FIA is updating the E&E system to create
an alert for case managers that will automatically flag cases at 60 months
with no hardship documentation.
Recommendation 2b Disagree Estimated Completion Date: N/A
Page 3 of 19

--- Page 43 ---
Department of Human Services
Family Investment Administration
Agency Response Form
Please provide details of FIA disagrees with the recommendation. After conducting a follow-up
corrective action or review of the cases cited by the auditor, we confirmed that the recipients
explain disagreement. were eligible to receive TCA benefits based on hardship, with the
exception of 3 cases which are being assessed for further action
accordingly. However, the evidence of hardship was not always
consistently documented in the case file. For example, medical
documentation was in the case file to identify a disability which meets
the criteria for a hardship, but the hardship form was not completed by
the local department. FIA has taken measures to ensure the
documentation for hardship is adequately included in the case file. A
report of cases that exceeded the 60-month time limit was compiled and
shared with the locals including instructions to assess the recipient's
situation, document the hardship, and upload the documentation into
E&E via the Enterprise Content Management System (ECMS).
Effective March 2022, FIA resumed the process for reviewing cases
reaching the 60 month or greater time limit. With this new process, the
FIA reporting team provides a monthly report showing all cases
approaching the time limit. The report is shared with local departments
of social services with instructions to review each case to determine if a
hardship exemption should be established. An FIA Headquarters team
member samples the cases to confirm that the cases were closed after the
60-month time limit or has a hardship exemption in place. FIA will also
be conducting annual refresher training on the 60-month TCA policy.
Auditor’s Comment: FIA disagrees with our recommendation 2b but indicates in its
response that it conducted a follow-up review of the 15 recipients we tested. FIA
reported that 3 of the 15 cases were being assessed for further action and implied that
another 6 cases lacked documentation of the hardship exemption. Since 9 of the 15 cases
we cited were deemed by FIA to be non-compliant or potentially non-compliant with
federal regulations, it is unclear the basis for FIA’s comment that the broader problems
identified in the finding were not widespread, and required further action to identify the
extent of the problems, developing a plan to recover the improper payments, and
notifying control agencies.
Recommendation 2c Agree Estimated Completion Date: January 2023
Please provide details of FIA concurs with the recommendation. FIA agrees to collect
corrective action or overpayments identified in accordance with our policy.
explain disagreement.
Page 4 of 19

--- Page 44 ---
Department of Human Services
Family Investment Administration
Agency Response Form
Quality Assurance Reviews
Finding 3
FIA did not conduct comprehensive quality assurance reviews of TCA cases to ensure that
eligibility determinations and related benefits were proper. In addition, FIA did not ensure
that errors identified through the Temporary Disability Assistance Program (TDAP)
quality assurance reviews were corrected timely.
We recommend that FIA
a. develop comprehensive quality assurance policies to be used by all quality assurance
staff and conduct quality assurance reviews of TCA cases to ensure that eligibility
determinations and related benefits were proper,
b. ensure that errors identified during the TDAP quality assurance reviews are corrected
timely, and
c. collect overpayments identified in accordance with its policy.
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 3a Agree Estimated Completion Date: December
2022
Please provide details of FIA concurs with the recommendation. FIA will continue to take the
corrective action or appropriate actions to ensure that our quality assurance policies are
explain disagreement. comprehensive and that all staff conducting such reviews are trained to
ensure that eligibility determinations and related benefits are correctly
determined. In the calendar year 2020, FIA had planned to take a
broader approach to address TCA payment errors, including payments
issued to individuals participating in the program beyond the 60-month
timeline. FIA worked with the University of Maryland School of Social
Work to develop an evidence-based strategy for sampling TCA cases for
payment accuracy. FIA chose the Stratified Simple Random
Sample. This methodology is valid statewide with statistical weighting
while also providing accuracy rate by jurisdiction. The percentage of
cases sampled for each jurisdiction will be determined by the number of
unique cases in each jurisdiction. Consistent with national trends,
quality assurance reviews, including the TCA payment error reviews,
Page 5 of 19

--- Page 45 ---
Department of Human Services
Family Investment Administration
Agency Response Form
were temporarily suspended due to the COVID-19 Public Health
Emergency.
Recommendation 3b Agree Estimated Completion Date: December
2022
Please provide details of FIA concurs with the recommendation. FIA will ensure that payment
corrective action or errors identified during the TDAP reviews are shared with the LDSSs for
explain disagreement. timely corrections.
Recommendation 3c Agree Estimated Completion Date: December
2022
Please provide details of FIA concurs with the recommendation. FIA will follow pre-existing
corrective action or processes to recoup overpayments identified as part of the payment error
explain disagreement. reviews.
Page 6 of 19

--- Page 46 ---
Department of Human Services
Family Investment Administration
Agency Response Form
SNAP, TCA, and TDAP Eligibility
Finding 4
FIA did not ensure that the Local Department of Social Services (LDSSs) maintained
application documentation to support the propriety of SNAP, TCA, and TDAP eligibility
determinations and other requirements.
We recommend that FIA
a. ensure that the LDSSs scan all documentation as required to support the propriety of
eligibility determinations, and,
b. obtain the missing documents noted in our finding and take corrective action for any
unsupported eligibility determinations or other program requirements.
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 4a Agree Estimated Completion Date: January 2023
Please provide details of FIA concurs with the recommendation. FIA will review and update
corrective action or existing policy manuals to establish clear case file documentation
explain disagreement. requirements for each program and develop a standard process for
document repository. After the manuals have been updated, FIA will
conduct a statewide training on case file documentation. After the initial
training, we will conduct an annual refresher training on the subject to
reiterate the importance of proper case file documentation.
Recommendation 4b Agree Estimated Completion Date: January 2023
Please provide details of FIA concurs with the recommendation. FIA will obtain the required
corrective action or missing documents identified in the audit and take corrective action for
explain disagreement. any unsupported eligibility determinations or other program
requirements.
Page 7 of 19

--- Page 47 ---
Department of Human Services
Family Investment Administration
Agency Response Form
Finding 5
FIA did not always determine whether TCA applicants received unemployment income, as
required by federal regulations.
We recommend that FIA
a. verify unemployment compensation as required by federal regulations and maintain
documentation of the related results;
b. identify and record unemployment income for TCA recipients, including those noted
above, and take appropriate corrective action; and
c. collect overpayments identified in accordance with its policy.
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide No concerns with the factual accuracy, except that FIA’s management
additional comments as was aware of the requirement to verify unemployment income during the
deemed necessary. first three months TCA benefits are issued, accordingly.
Auditor’s Comment: FIA’s assertion that FIA management was aware of the
requirement to verify unemployment income during the first three months of TCA
benefits is inconsistent with information provided to us during our fieldwork.
Specifically, we had multiple meetings with FIA management officials in which we were
informed that FIA management was unaware of such a requirement; a condition which
appears to be consistent with our test results.
Recommendation 5a Agree Estimated Completion Date: December
2022
Please provide details of FIA concurs with the concept of verifying Unemployment Income
corrective action or Benefits (UI) as it is already a standard practice. UI benefits are verified
explain disagreement. at application, redetermination, and when a customer submits an interim
change. While regular Unemployment Insurance (UI) payments are
considered unearned income for the purpose of determining TCA
eligibility, Pandemic Unemployment benefits including Pandemic
Unemployment Assistance (PUA), Federal Pandemic Unemployment
Compensation (FPUC), Pandemic Emergency Unemployment
Compensation (PEUC), and Mixed Earner Unemployment
Compensation Program (MEUC) were excluded from April 2020 -
September 2021. Required information was not always available to
DHS FIA to verify UI due to the delays in processing UI claims at the
onset of the COVID-19 pandemic at the claims processing state agency
Page 8 of 19

--- Page 48 ---
Department of Human Services
Family Investment Administration
Agency Response Form
as noted in publicly available information. As such, it is conceivable
that a household may have applied and received TCA while their UI
benefits were pending and would have continued to receive TCA until
redeterminations resumed if they did not report a change in household
circumstances.
Normal practice dictates that FIA eligibility workers verify UI payments
at application, 3 consecutive months after application, redetermination,
and when a recipient reports a change in household
circumstances. However, observing a federally approved COVID-19
waiver, FIA suspended redeterminations from April 2020 until
December 2021, which means that the three-month UI payment
monitoring after redeterminations was also waived. Our normal practice
resumed in January 2022.
FIA will be conducting refresher training for all FIA case managers on
verifying UI payments in accordance with standard practices. FIA is
also continuing to work with the development team for E&E to create UI
Review alerts for case managers after E&E has been integrated with the
Beacon system (Maryland Department of Labor’s UI benefit
management system).
Auditor’s Comment: Although FIA agrees with Recommendation 5a, the subsequent
comments are inconsistent with our test results and certain other information was not
relevant to our finding. Specifically, FIA states that it verified unemployment income
(UI) when an individual applied for benefits and the three consecutive months after
application; however, as noted in our analysis, for 15 of 30 applications tested, there was
no documented verification when the TCA applicant applied for benefits and for 30 of 30
applications, there was no documentation for the three months after the initial application.
In an apparent attempt to explain those test results, FIA stated that UI information was
not always available to verify the benefits; however, FIA had no documentation
supporting this assertion or its applicability to the specific items tested.
FIA also stated that various types of pandemic unemployment were not considered
income for TCA purposes and therefore, did not need to be verified. As stated in our
report, our review was focused on regular unemployment benefits and excluded
pandemic unemployment benefits. Lastly, FIA states that the three-month payment
monitoring after redeterminations was suspended in accordance with a federal waiver;
however, our testing was focused on initial applications not redeterminations and
accordingly, the waiver and related suspension were not applicable.
Page 9 of 19

--- Page 49 ---
Department of Human Services
Family Investment Administration
Agency Response Form
Recommendation 5b Agree Estimated Completion Date: December
2022
Please provide details of FIA concurs with the recommendation. As FIA resumes the established
corrective action or TCA payment accuracy reviews, overpayments will be pursued when we
explain disagreement. identify incidents where a customer failed to report a change in
household circumstance including receipt of UI. We will also follow-up
on the specific cases identified in the audit and take appropriate action if
traditional UI (not Pandemic UI) benefits were issued and were not
reported to the agency.
Recommendation 5c Agree Estimated Completion Date: Completed
Please provide details of FIA concurs with the recommendation. FIA will collect overpayments
corrective action or identified in accordance with our policy on overpayments. Specifically,
explain disagreement. FIA will pursue overpayments identified as part of its ongoing payment
accuracy reviews.
Page 10 of 19

--- Page 50 ---
Department of Human Services
Family Investment Administration
Agency Response Form
Follow-up on Computer Matches
Finding 6
FIA did not ensure that all social security number alerts were recorded in the Clients’
Automated Resource and Eligibility System (CARES) for follow-up purposes.
We recommend that FIA ensure all SSN match alerts are properly recorded in the system
for follow up (repeat).
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide This is factually accurate; however, this issue was directly related to
additional comments as CARES, the legacy eligibility system which has now been retired and
deemed necessary. replaced by the E&E system.
Recommendation 6 Agree Estimated Completion Date: Completed
Please provide details of FIA concurs with the recommendation. The CARES legacy system has
corrective action or since been replaced with the E&E system and we have enhanced our
explain disagreement. procedures to ensure that all SSN match results are properly recorded in
E&E. E&E has adequate controls and enhancements to ensure that all
SSN match results are properly recorded in the system and Work Item
alerts are generated to case managers. FIA continues to provide on-
going training to remind staff to properly narrate all case actions in E&E.
Page 11 of 19

--- Page 51 ---
Department of Human Services
Family Investment Administration
Agency Response Form
Finding 7
FIA did not ensure that the LDSSs conducted timely and appropriate follow-up on the
Public Assistance Reporting Information System (PARIS) alerts. Our review disclosed that
the LDSSs did not take timely or appropriate action for 43 of the 46 alerts we tested.
We recommend that FIA monitor LDSSs PARIS alert activity to ensure that the LDSSs
a. conduct timely and appropriate follow-up of PARIS alerts (repeat), and
b. update the system and case notes for unreported income identified by the PARIS
reports (repeat).
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide No concerns with the factual accuracy. However, it is important to note
additional comments as that due to the
deemed necessary. COVID-19 national pandemic health emergency the collection of
overpayments was
placed on hold. The federal overpayment flexibilities waiver expired on
March 31, 2022, with normal overpayment activities resuming. Prior to
COVID-19, the FIA Bureau of Program Evaluation (now the Bureau of
Audit Compliance & Reporting (BACR) completed a monthly review of
the system generated PARIS report for overdue alerts and communicated
results in a memorandum to each Local Department of Social Services
(LDSS). BACR conducted a third layer of monitoring by sampling
cases within the monthly overdue alerts tracking sheet submitted to the
LDSSs. This review helped ensure alerts were dispositioned in the
eligibility system (previously CARES, now E&E). It is important to
note that based on the analysis, the 844 PARIS alerts noted are less than
5% of the total PARIS alerts that were dispositioned beyond the 20 day
time period. Furthermore, PARIS alerts that go beyond the 20 day time
limit generally have external factors, beyond the control of FIA, that
cause the alert to be dispositioned past the time limit (i.e. waiting on out-
of-state confirmation).
Recommendation 7a Agree Estimated Completion Date: January 2023
Please provide details of FIA concurs with this recommendation. The LDSSs are responsible for
corrective action or processing their PARIS alerts, determining the months of overpayments,
explain disagreement. and updating the eligibility system (previously CARES, now E&E) to
establish the overpayment and/or close the case. FIA’s BACR will
resume completing a monthly review of the system generated PARIS
report for overdue alerts and communicate results in a memorandum
Page 12 of 19

--- Page 52 ---
Department of Human Services
Family Investment Administration
Agency Response Form
to each LDSS. A third layer of monitoring will be done by sampling
cases within the monthly overdue alerts tracking sheet submitted to the
LDSSs. However, it is important to note that due to the COVID-19
national pandemic health emergency, the monitoring of PARIS alerts
and the collection of overpayments were placed on hold. The
overpayment flexibilities waiver expired on March 31, 2022, with
normal overpayment activities resuming.
Recommendation 7b Agree Estimated Completion Date: January 2023
Please provide details of FIA concurs with this recommendation. The LDSSs are responsible for
corrective action or completing updates of the eligibility system (previously CARES, now
explain disagreement. E&E) to follow-up on discovered unreported income. FIA monitors
improper Temporary Cash Assistance (TCA) and Supplemental
Nutrition Assistance Program (SNAP) benefit payments
resulting in payment errors. BACR alerts LDSSs monthly of benefit
error groups (BEGs) in need of processing within six months of formal
written communication. However, it is important to note that due to the
COVID-19 national pandemic health emergency the monitoring of
BEGs and the collection of overpayments were put on hold. The
overpayment flexibilities waiver expired on March 31, 2022, with
normal overpayment activities resuming. However, FIA anticipates that
it will be current with PARIS alerts by January 2023.
Page 13 of 19

--- Page 53 ---
Department of Human Services
Family Investment Administration
Agency Response Form
Energy Assistance Programs
Finding 8
FIA did not conduct monitoring reviews of certain LAAs in accordance with its policy and
did not always execute agreements with energy suppliers.
We recommend that FIA
a. conduct all the required monitoring reviews and execute a CAP for reports that contain
a material weakness, including those noted above; and
b. ensure a current agreement is executed with energy suppliers, as required.
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 8a Agree Estimated Completion Date: Completed
Please provide details of FIA concurs with the recommendation. Since this audit was conducted,
corrective action or the FIA’s Office of Home Energy Programs (OHEP) has hired a
explain disagreement. dedicated position for Quality Assurance. This position has since
completed required monitoring reviews in accordance with our own
Operations Manual and has completed all year end close out monitoring.
This position was previously vacant. To ensure continuity of service
during the pandemic, priority was given to ensuring remaining staff
focused on benefit remittance. Moving forward corrective action plans
(CAPs) will be executed and enforced for any material weakness
identified during an internal monitoring review.
Recommendation 8b Agree Estimated Completion Date: Completed
Please provide details of FIA concurs with the recommendation. FIA has since hired a staff
corrective action or member to ensure all agreements are current, valid, and signed. OHEP
explain disagreement. has also inventoried and corrected all previous agreements that may have
been missing a signature or were otherwise deemed incomplete. This
project was completed in December 2021 and the dedicated staff will be
responsible for ensuring compliance on an on-going basis.
Page 14 of 19

--- Page 54 ---
Department of Human Services
Family Investment Administration
Agency Response Form
Contract Monitoring
Finding 9
FIA did not adequately administer certain contracts and agreements related to its public
assistance programs.
We recommend that FIA
a. obtain adequate documentation, including payroll records, timesheets, and receipts, to
verify the accuracy of billings, as required by policy (repeat);
b. ensure contract modifications are adequately supported and justified, and consider
competitively procuring new contracts when significant changes to the terms of the
contract are required; and
c. in conjunction with DHS, formally determine which entity is responsible for LDSS
contract oversight and establish processes to oversee and approve LDSS public
assistance contracts and agreements to ensure that the related invoices are consistent
with the agreements and that the agreed-upon services are received (repeat).
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide While a portion of this analysis and recommendation is factually
additional comments as accurate, we deem our process to be sufficient.
deemed necessary.
Centralized Contracts
FIA has shared with the auditors that each contract is unique and
monitored differently based on its size and scope of services. As such,
invoice documentations for contracts under certain offices (i.e. Maryland
Office for Refugees and Asylees, SNAP Employment and Training
Programs) are fully reviewed before payments are issued. For most
emergency food contracts, the administration reviews the invoices on
test basis and during contract monitoring visits. During the audit, OLA
auditors acknowledged that invoice verifications existed for certain
invoices.
LDSS Contracts
FIA has established a process for reviewing LDSS contracts related to
public assistance programs administration. The five contracts that FIA
did not have on record were executed before the newly established
review process was established in 2019. In addition to FIA review, each
contract in the amount of $25,000 or greater is reviewed by the DHS
Page 15 of 19

--- Page 55 ---
Department of Human Services
Family Investment Administration
Agency Response Form
Office of Procurement, the State Office of Procurement, and the Board
of Public Works (BPW).
Recommendation 9a Disagree Estimated Completion Date: N/A
Please provide details of FIA disagrees with this recommendation as each contract is unique and
corrective action or monitored differently based on its size and scope of service. As noted,
explain disagreement. invoice documentations for contracts under certain offices (i.e. Maryland
Office for Refugees and Asylees, SNAP Employment and Training
Programs) are fully reviewed before payments are issued. However, for
most emergency food contracts, the administration reviews the invoices
on test basis and during contract monitoring.
Auditor’s Comment: We concluded that FIA’s assertion in its response to the Analysis
and Recommendation 9a that each contract is to be monitored differently is inconsistent
with FIA’s Contract Monitoring and Invoice Protocol which states that, “Through the
protocol, we seek to establish consistency in how FIA contracts are monitored and
technical assistance is provided. The protocol will be used to ensure that invoices are
received, reviewed, and paid in accordance with legislative requirements and internal
policies.”
Despite numerous requests by OLA during the audit, FIA was unable to provide relevant
documentation to support the accuracy of billings, nor were such documents provided in
response to the audit report. Furthermore, while FIA maintains that is has an established
process for reviewing LDSS contracts, we continue to believe that this process is
inadequate. For example, as noted in our analysis, FIA had no record of contracts for two
significant LDSSs from which 40 percent of FIA benefits were issued.
Recommendation 9b Disagree Estimated Completion Date: N/A
Please provide details of FIA disagrees with the finding regarding its adherence to contract
corrective action or modification requirements. The audit conclusion is subjective and not
explain disagreement. based on specific state or federal rules. The contract referred in the
report underwent a multistep review process which included a review by
the State Office of Procurement and the Board of Public Works. Based
on our expertise of delivering public assistance, the changes to the cost
structure of the contract were just and fair and did not violate a specific
law or regulatory requirement.
Auditor’s Comment: FIA’s response to Recommendation 9b states that the finding’s
conclusion was subjective. However, it does not address the objective facts in our
analysis that 1) the modifications were made without the formal determination of the
Page 16 of 19

--- Page 56 ---
Department of Human Services
Family Investment Administration
Agency Response Form
practicality or appropriateness of conducting a new procurement and 2) that the Board of
Public Works was not advised of the potential for FIA making greater vendor payments
in relation to the work provided.
Furthermore, FIA’s assertion that the modification was “just and fair” was not supported
with evidence of the methodology for deciding on the updated pricing, which would be a
key element in validating such an assertion.
Recommendation 9c Agree Estimated Completion Date: January 2023
Please provide details of FIA concurs with the recommendation. Following the prior audit
corrective action or finding, FIA developed a three-pronged strategy to address this concern.
explain disagreement. The strategy included the provision of period training to local contract
managers who are responsible for drafting scopes of work, reviewing
invoices, processing invoices, and monitoring contracts. It also included
a plan to develop a central team to provide oversight of local contracts
and ongoing technical assistance. Two of the three prongs including
technical assistance and ongoing training have been implemented. Over
the last two years, we have committed most personnel resources to the
COVID-19 response. We are committed to revisiting the possibility of
establishing the local contract oversight role as we transition to post-
pandemic normalcy.
Page 17 of 19

--- Page 57 ---
Department of Human Services
Family Investment Administration
Agency Response Form
Grants Management
Finding 10
FIA did not obtain supporting documentation to support grant funds were spent as
intended.
We recommend that FIA
a. independently verify, at least on a test basis, that grant funds are spent as intended by
obtaining and reviewing documentation to support the propriety of payments (repeat);
and
b. ensure grant agreements include provisions to submit supporting documentation in
accordance with its written policies.
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide Independent verification on a test basis is the current method used. As
additional comments as noted in the audit analysis, the audit disclosed that FIA obtained and
deemed necessary. reviewed documentation to support propriety of payments for 3 of the 8
disbursements reviewed which is evident of our test-based review. FIA
respectfully requests that this condition be considered a discussion note
item only.
Recommendation 10a Disagree Estimated Completion Date: N/A
Please provide details of FIA disagrees with the recommendation as FIA already reviews invoice
corrective action or supporting documents on a test basis.
explain disagreement.
Auditor’s Comment: FIA disagrees with Recommendation 10a, by claiming that it
reviews invoice support on a test basis. However, during our audit fieldwork, FIA did
not inform us that it reviewed grant invoice support on a test basis nor did it define its
methodology for selecting test items in its existing written policy. Finally, when OLA
requested documentation for the eight disbursements for testing, FIA did not advise us
that three of these disbursements were previously reviewed. Consequently, based on
available audit evidence (or lack thereof) we were compelled to conclude that such a
review was not performed by FIA. Nevertheless, regardless of the disagreement, FIA’s
response indicates that it agrees that recommended invoice reviews are appropriate and a
necessary control.
Page 18 of 19

--- Page 58 ---
Department of Human Services
Family Investment Administration
Agency Response Form
Recommendation 10b Agree Estimated Completion Date: July 2023
Please provide details of FIA agrees with the recommendation. The administration is reviewing
corrective action or its grant process to ensure that each agreement includes invoice
explain disagreement. documentation requirements. Depending on the scope and complexity of
the services in the agreement, the grantees will be required to either
submit the verifications along with the invoice or maintain the for onsite
inspection during monitoring visits. FIA will ensure that each grantee
complies with the invoice verification requirements specific to their
agreement.
Page 19 of 19

--- Page 59 ---
A T
UDIT EAM
Catherine M. Clarke, CPA, CIA, CFE
Audit Manager
Robert J. Smith, CPA
Senior Auditor
Malik A. Farooq
Kareem R. Jackson
Andrew W. Mills
Stacey D. Streett
Staff Auditors