Title: Board of License Commissioners for Prince George’s County
Date: 03/29/2019
Type: Performance
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5ca399d7a1ce5805a496c0a5
Extracted: 2025-06-19T06:13:16.062172
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Performance Audit Report
Board of License Commissioners
for Prince George’s County
March 2019
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
For further information concerning this report contact:
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
301 West Preston Street, Room 1202
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Phone: 410-946-5900 · 301-970-5900
Toll Free in Maryland: 1-877-486-9964
Maryland Relay: 711
TTY: 410-946-5401 · 301-970-5401
E-mail: OLAWebmaster@ola.state.md.us
Website: www.ola.state.md.us
The Office of Legislative Audits operates a Fraud Hotline to report fraud, waste, or abuse
involving State of Maryland government resources. Reports of fraud, waste, or abuse may
be communicated anonymously by a toll-free call to 1-877-FRAUD-11, by mail to the Fraud
Hotline, c/o Office of Legislative Audits, or through the Office’s website.
The Department of Legislative Services does not discriminate on the basis of age, ancestry,
color, creed, marital status, national origin, race, religion, gender, gender identity, sexual
orientation, or disability in the admission or access to its programs, services, or activities. The
Department’s Information Officer has been designated to coordinate compliance with the
nondiscrimination requirements contained in Section 35.107 of the Department of Justice
Regulations. Requests for assistance should be directed to the Information Officer at 410-
946-5400 or 410-970-5400.

--- Page 6 ---
Table of Contents
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology 7
Audit Scope 7
Objectives and Methodology 7
Fieldwork and Agency Response 8
Background Information 9
Agency Responsibilities 9
Consultant Study 9
Criminal Matters Related to Certain Board Officials and Others 10
Findings and Recommendations 12
Objective 1 – Licensing
Objective and Methodology 12
Background 13
Conclusion 16
Findings
Finding 1 – Licensing procedures and controls were inadequate, as 17
there was a lack of separation of application processing, approval
and recording functions. In addition, an independent supervisory
review of these functions was not performed.
Finding 2 – The Board of License Commissioners for Prince George’s 18
County (BOLC) did not ensure that all required documents were
obtained prior to the issuance of licenses and permits as
required.
Finding 3 – BOLC did not adequately document criminal background 20
checks of license applicants and had not established a process to
receive updates of subsequent changes to licensee criminal
records, as required by law.
Finding 4 – BOLC did not always verify that license applicants had no 22
undisputed taxes due to the State or Prince George’s County prior
to issuing licenses as required by State law.
4

--- Page 7 ---
Finding 5 – BOLC had not established adequate record keeping 24
procedures and internal controls over license fees and other
office collections.
Objective 2 – Inspections
Objective and Methodology 28
Background 29
Conclusion 30
Findings
Finding 6 – Not all licensees were subject to periodic inspection, 32
as required by State law.
Finding 7 – Inspection reports were not comprehensive, properly 34
completed, or subject to an independent documented supervisory
review.
Finding 8 – No procedures had been established to ensure all 36
completed inspection reports were properly recorded in the BOLC
inspection database and all scheduled inspections were
performed.
Finding 9 – Adequate procedures had not been established for the 38
follow-up of inspections aborted because the licensee’s business
was closed at the time of the inspector’s visit.
Finding 10 – Licensee complaints received both directly by BOLC 39
and through the County’s 311 System were not always timely
investigated and resolved or subject to supervisory review.
Further, employee access to complaint records was not
controlled.
Objective 3 – Disciplinary Procedures
Objective and Methodology 41
Background 41
Conclusion 43
Findings
Finding 11 – The Board delegated its discretionary functions, in 45
certain cases, to its staff in conflict with State law. The Board did
not review and approve administrative staff decisions to refer
violations for a hearing or make offers of compromise and the
disposition of all reported violations was not verified.
5

--- Page 8 ---
Finding 12 – Formal accounts receivable records had not been 47
established for fines assessed by the Board and related late fees
due were sometimes not collected.
Finding 13 – The Board did not adequately explain the basis for its 48
decisions regarding the continued active status of two licensees
who had pleaded guilty to criminal charges.
Objective 4 – Management Oversight
Objective and Methodology 51
Conclusion 51
Findings
Finding 14 – Written policies and procedures governing BOLC 51
operations were not sufficiently comprehensive and had not been
formally adopted by the Board.
Finding 15 – The Board had not adopted formal measures to 53
evaluate inspector performance and determine annual workload
requirements.
Finding 16 – User access to critical BOLC data files was not 57
adequately monitored and restricted to BOLC employees whose
job duties required such access, and user transaction reports
were not available to review for propriety.
Finding 17 – BOLC had not established procedures to monitor 59
employee compliance with statutory independence restrictions
concerning secondary employment, business investments, and
political activities.
Agency Response Appendix
6

--- Page 9 ---
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
Audit Scope
The State Government Article, Section 2-1220(f) of the Annotated Code of
Maryland requires that beginning on July 1, 2017, and at least once every
three years thereafter, the Office of Legislative Audits shall conduct a
performance audit of the Board of License Commissioners for Prince George’s
County (BOLC). The law states that the audit is to evaluate the effectiveness
and efficiency of the management practices of BOLC and the economy with
which BOLC uses resources. The law also states the audit shall focus on
operations relating to liquor inspections, licensing, disciplinary procedures,
and management oversight.
Our audit was performed in accordance with generally accepted government
auditing standards. Those standards require we plan and perform the audit to
obtain sufficient, appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our
findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives. We believe that the
evidence obtained for our findings and conclusions met those standards.
Objectives and Methodology
Our audit included the following objectives:
1. Evaluate the adequacy of procedures for alcoholic beverage licensing and
the maintenance of related records, and determine if the licensing process
complied with State law and Board requirements.
2. Evaluate the adequacy of BOLC policies and procedures for conducting
inspections of alcoholic beverage licensees and maintaining related
records, and determine whether inspections were properly performed in
accordance with governing laws, policies, and procedures.
3. Evaluate the disciplinary process and determine if BOLC complied with
applicable State law, enforced applicable Board rules and regulations
governing licensees, and maintained accurate disciplinary records.
4. Evaluate management processes to determine whether proper oversight
exists over BOLC operations.
To accomplish our objectives, we reviewed applicable State laws, and the
policies and procedures established by the Board and BOLC administrative
personnel governing the licensing process and related records. We also
reviewed pertinent sections of the BOLC Policy and Procedures Manual that
governs BOLC administrative functions and what the Board refers to as the
7

--- Page 10 ---
Rules and Regulations for the Board of License Commissioners for Prince
George’s County; an internal document that governs the conduct of licensee
business operations. Furthermore, as part of our review of State law, we
sought clarification from counsel to the Maryland General Assembly about the
Board’s responsibility for retention of documents obtained and reviewed
during the licensing process.
Additionally, we interviewed BOLC staff to determine the processes used to
issue licenses, conduct inspections, administer disciplinary proceedings, and
maintain related records. We also observed the licensing, inspection, and
disciplinary hearing processes. We obtained data files of active BOLC
licensees for the 2016-2017 license year, and liquor inspections performed
and licensee violations for fiscal years 2015 to 2017. These files were
obtained from the BOLC licensing database, stored on the shared drive
maintained by the Prince George’s County Office of Information Technology.
We used the data files to perform various tests of the licensing, inspection,
and disciplinary process, and performed various tests of the relevant data and
determined it was sufficiently reliable for the purposes it was used for during
the audit. We also reviewed the licensee paper files and the minutes for
Board hearings that evidenced the decisions and actions taken by the Board.
Furthermore, we obtained records of complaints received by BOLC, as well as
complaints registered through the Prince George’s County 311 Community
Relations Service Request System (311 System), to evaluate the BOLC
process for complaint-initiated inspections.
Finally, we reviewed available information on internet sites for the National
Alcohol Beverage Control Association, the National Liquor Law Enforcement
Association, National Conference of State Liquor Administrators, and the
Maryland State Licensed Beverage Association. We also reviewed available
reports of audits performed of other state and county liquor boards.
Fieldwork and Agency Response
We conducted our fieldwork from July 2017 to June 2018. BOLC’s response
to our findings and recommendations is included as an appendix to this audit
report. As prescribed in the State Government Article, Section 2-1224 of the
Annotated Code of Maryland, we will advise BOLC regarding the results of our
review of its response.
8

--- Page 11 ---
Background Information
Agency Responsibilities
The Board of License Commissioners for Prince George’s County (BOLC) is an
agency of the County. BOLC operations are governed by Title 26 of the
Alcoholic Beverages Article of the Annotated Code of Maryland. BOLC is
responsible for processing applications for and renewals of licenses to sell
beer, wine, and liquor; conducting periodic inspections of businesses licensed
to sell alcoholic beverages; collecting all license fees and fines; and fining
licensees, or suspending, or revoking their licenses, for violations of alcoholic
beverage laws. BOLC also issues licenses for special venues (a casino,
convention center or stadium), as well as permits for alcoholic beverage sales
during special events (such as beer and wine festivals) and when providing
entertainment (such as music, dancing, or adult). According to BOLC records,
which we verified through testing, there were 618 active alcoholic beverage
licenses as of July 24, 2017 (for the 2016-2017 license year)1.
All revenues from licenses issued, fines, and late fees collected are paid to
the BOLC and deposited in a County bank account, and all BOLC expenditures
are paid by the County. Furthermore, BOLC is included in the County’s annual
budget and its financial activity is included in the County’s Comprehensive
Annual Financial Report. BOLC’s budget for fiscal year 2017 was $1,403,800
with provision for 8 full-time and 32 part-time employees. According to County
records, BOLC fiscal year 2017 revenues and expenditures totaled $2.3
million and $1.2 million, respectively.
Prior to May 2017, BOLC was governed by a five-person board, who were
appointed by the Governor with the advice and consent of the Senate.
However, Chapter 812, Laws of Maryland, 2017, amended the appointment
process whereby the County Executive of Prince George’s County is now
responsible for those appointments, subject to confirmation by the Maryland
Senate. As of August 2017, BOLC had five full-time staff, which included one
executive staff position, one supervising inspector, and three support staff;
BOLC also had 23 part-time inspectors.
Consultant Study
The 2017 State law that amended the appointment process also required
that the Prince George’s County Executive hire an outside professional
1 Licenses are valid for one year and renew in April, May, or June of each year depending on
the type of license.
9

--- Page 12 ---
consultant on or before September 1, 2017 to review the standard operating
procedures of the Board and BOLC administrative personnel. It further
provided that in conducting the review, the consultant shall compare the
Board’s standard operating procedures to best practices in the area as well as
to the standard operating practices of other boards of license commissioners
throughout the State; and recommend changes to improve the operations and
efficiencies of the Board. Finally, it required the consultant to submit a report
detailing its findings and recommendations to the County Executive, the
Prince George’s County Council, and Prince George’s County House and
Senate delegations to the General Assembly of Maryland.
A consultant was hired by the County Executive, as required, who conducted
its review of Board and BOLC administrative operations between October and
November of 2017 and issued the related report in January 2018. In
accordance with the law, the consultant reviewed Board operations and
compared them with best practices in place at four other Maryland liquor
boards, as well as those of two bordering states. The consultant’s report on
the Board’s operations and efficiency was organized into five topic areas:
administration, administrative policies, license restrictions and regulations,
inspections and violations, and board of license commissioners. The report
contained 22 detailed recommendations, which according to the consultant, if
implemented, would likely result in a more efficient regulation of alcoholic
beverages licensing and enforcement. We noted that certain of the
consultant’s findings were similar to those independently developed by the
Office of Legislative Audits and included in this report. The consultant also
made a number of other recommendations, such as modernizing the Board’s
web site and implementing automated application and inspection processes,
which we excluded from our audit scope.
Criminal Matters Related to Certain Board Officials and Others
The United States Attorney’s Office disclosed that two business owners
licensed by BOLC had been indicted and pleaded guilty in April and May 2017,
respectively, to bribery of State and local officials of Prince George’s County in
return for favorable actions concerning their liquor licenses. In addition, a
former Chief Liquor Inspector and BOLC Commissioner were also indicted and
pleaded guilty in October 2017 and December 2017, respectively for soliciting
and facilitating bribes from lobbyists and business owners for elected state
officials. The former Chief Liquor Inspector was also indicted for and pleaded
guilty to obstruction of justice.
Furthermore, a former Maryland legislator was indicted and pleaded guilty in
January 2017 to bribery, while a federal grand jury convicted another
10

--- Page 13 ---
Maryland legislator in March 2018 of bribery and conspiracy in connection
with schemes in which they accepted bribes in exchange for influencing the
performance of their duties, as related to matters associated with Prince
George’s County liquor licensing and sales. For example, according to
evidence presented at trial, from January 2015 through April 2016, a
legislator conspired with a former BOLC Chief Liquor Inspector and liquor
store owners to advance and vote for favorable legislation in exchange for
cash payments. All six individuals mentioned above were sentenced to
federal prison terms ranging from one to five years.
As part of the investigation of the aforementioned conspiracy, bribery, and
obstruction of justice charges, the Federal Bureau of Investigation removed
certain records from the BOLC premises in January 2017. These records
related to Sunday sales licenses, which accounted for approximately 10
percent of BOLC fiscal year 2017 revenue, were unavailable for our review.
However, we reviewed other transactions involving the parties in question
during the audit (see Finding 13).
11

--- Page 14 ---
Findings and Recommendations
Objective 1 - Licensing
Objective and Methodology
Our objective for BOLC licensing was to evaluate the adequacy of procedures
for alcoholic beverage licensing and the maintenance of related records, and
to determine, based on the evaluation and transaction testing, if the licensing
process complied with State law and Board requirements. To accomplish our
objective, we reviewed applicable State laws, and the policies and procedures
established by the Board and BOLC administrative personnel governing the
licensing process and related records. We also reviewed pertinent sections of
the BOLC Policy and Procedures Manual and the Board’s Rules and
Regulations Book for the Board of License Commissioners for Prince George’s
County.
Additionally, we interviewed BOLC staff to determine the processes used to
screen applicants; collect fees; issue, renew, or transfer licenses; and
maintain related records. We obtained a data file of all active BOLC licensees
for the 2016-2017 license year as of July 24, 2017 from the BOLC licensing
database, stored on the shared drive maintained by the Prince George’s
County Office of Information Technology. We used the licensee data file to
perform various tests of the licensing process including issuance of new
licenses, license renewals, license transfers, and collection of related cash
receipts. We performed various tests of the relevant data and determined
that the data were sufficiently reliable for the purposes the data were used for
during the audit.
Finally, as part of our review of State law, we sought clarification from counsel
to the Maryland General Assembly about the Board’s responsibility for
retention of documents obtained and reviewed during the licensing process.
Specifically, we asked if the law requires the retention of Board documents,
including criminal history record information (CHRI), until audited. We were
advised by counsel that the law requires the retention of certain licensing
records for at least three years or until they have been audited, and further
requires that they be disposed of in compliance with the record management
and disposition of records provisions of the law. Further, in counsel’s view,
the license application and related documents were public records subject to
compliance with those provisions. Additionally, although the law limits the
dissemination of CHRI solely for the purpose requested and it would not have
to be offered to the State Archives prior to disposal, it would still have to be
retained until audited.
12

--- Page 15 ---
Background
BOLC processes applications for new licenses, license renewals and
modifications, and transfers of existing licenses to sell beer, wine, and liquor
to businesses in Prince George’s County. There are four different classes of
licenses and each are valid for one year. Class A licenses are issued to liquor
stores and expire on April 30. Class B licenses are issued to restaurants and
expire on May 31. Class C and D licenses are issued to private membership
clubs (such as veterans’ organizations) and to taverns and convenience
stores, respectively, and both expire on June 30. BOLC also issues licenses
for special venues (casino, convention center, or stadium), as well as permits
for alcoholic beverage sales during special events (such as beer and wine
festivals) and when providing entertainment (such as music, dancing, or
adult).
According to BOLC records, there were 732 alcoholic beverage licenses and
12 entertainment permits issued during fiscal year 2017.2 Annual fees for
alcoholic beverage licenses issued are established in State law and vary
depending on the type of establishment and what beverages are sold. The
annual fee for an entertainment permit is $1,500, which is in addition to the
business’ alcoholic beverage license fee. See Table 1 for the types of Class A,
B, C, and D licenses issued by BOLC along with the related license fees. Also,
additional permits and other privileges with fees can be found in Table 2 and
a summary of fiscal year 2017 revenues is located in Table 3.
Applicants (new licenses, license renewals, or license transfers) submit a
completed application form along with certain required documents (such as a
driver’s license for identification) and an application fee. The applications are
processed and added to the next scheduled public Board hearing agenda to
be discussed and voted on. If approved by the Board, applicants must submit
certain additional documents (such as a certificate of liability insurance and
proof of personal property tax payment) and pay the applicable license fee
before BOLC prints and issues the license. License renewals account for over
83 percent of the annual licensing activity and BOLC e-mails all current
licensees a renewal notice in January each year, but the expiration dates vary
by class of license. License transfers occur when there is a change in
ownership, location, or more than 50 percent of the stock or membership
interest in the business. However, a new license must also be processed
whenever there is a change in a licensee’s corporate officers. The licensing
records are maintained by BOLC on a database on the Prince George’s County
2 During FY 2017, BOLC processed applications that resulted in the issuance of 744 licenses
(617 renewals, 40 transfers, 32 Substitute of Corporate Officers, 25 conversions, 18 new,
and 12 permits).
13

--- Page 16 ---
government’s network.
Table 1
Annual License Fees for Fiscal Year 2017
Annual
License Type License
Fee
Class A Beer $500
Class A Beer and Wine $500
Class A Beer, Wine, and Liquor $910
Class B Beer $365
Class B Beer and Wine $365
Class B Beer and Wine (Baseball Stadium) $2,420
Class B Beer, Wine, and Liquor $2,305
Class B Beer, Wine, and Liquor (Arts & Entertainment) $3,600
Class B Beer, Wine, and Liquor (Caterer) $4,480
Class B Beer, Wine, and Liquor (Convention Center) $22,000
Class B Beer, Wine, and Liquor (Development District) $3,025
Class B Beer, Wine, and Liquor (Education Conference $8,275
Facility/Dining Service)
Class B Beer, Wine, and Liquor (Educational Conference Facility) $5,175
Class B Beer, Wine, and Liquor (Entertainment Concessionaire) $5,000
Class B Beer, Wine, and Liquor (Entertainment Facility) $22,000
Class B Beer, Wine, and Liquor (Equestrian Center Restaurant) $2,420
Class B Beer, Wine, and Liquor (Golf Course) $500
Class B Beer, Wine, and Liquor (Hotel) $5,000
Class B Beer, Wine, and Liquor (Luxury-Type Restaurant) $3,875
Class B Beer, Wine, and Liquor (Plus) $3,270
Class B Beer, Wine, and Liquor (Stadium) $21,780
Class B Beer, Wine, and Liquor (Theme Park) $4,290
Class B Liquor (MB/22) $1,090
Class C Beer and Wine $245
Class C Beer, Wine and Liquor (Concessionaire) $1,815
Class C Beer, Wine and Liquor (Fraternal/Sororal/Service $910
Organization)
Class C Beer, Wine and Liquor (Veterans' Organization or Club) $910
Class D Beer $500
Class D Beer and Wine $500
Source: BOLC’s licensing database
License Type Classes: A-Package Goods; B-Restaurant; C-Private Membership Club; D-
Tavern and Convenience Stores
Note: The license types above exclude certain special event licenses for beer, wine, and/or
liquor tastings and festivals.
14

--- Page 17 ---
Table 2
Additional Permits and Privileges and Related Fees
Permits and Other Privileges Annual Fee
Beer Tasting License $120
Beer and Wine Tasting License $120
Beer, Wine, and Liquor Tasting License $220
Draft Beer Container Permit $500
Special Entertainment Permit $1,500
Sunday Off-Sale Permit - Class A Beer, Wine, and Liquor Only $2,590
Sunday Off-Sale Permit - Class B Beer, Wine, and Liquor with
$1,080
an Off-Sale Privilege Only
Source: Annotated Code of Maryland and BOLC’s rules and regulations book
Table 3
Revenues for Fiscal Year 2017
Description Amount
Class A License and Permit Fees $378,016
Class B License and Permit Fees $1,360,597
Class C License and Permit Fees $75,045
Class D License and Permit Fees $48,379
Administrative Fees $173,029
Fines $293,500
Total $2,328,566
Source: Prince George’s County’s accounting system
Notes:
1. The revenues include the annual license fees and any additional fees due to permits (such as
entertainment permit) or additional privileges (such as beer tasting) attached to the license.
2. The administrative fees includes the application fees, alcohol awareness training fees, and late
fees for extending renewals.
3. Fines are addressed in Objective 3 - Disciplinary Procedures.
15

--- Page 18 ---
Conclusion
BOLC licensing procedures and controls were inadequate, as there was a lack
of separation of application processing, approval, and recording functions,
and an independent supervisory review of these functions was not performed.
Specifically, clerks who processed applications were also responsible for
recording the license data in the database, printing the license, embossing it
with the County Seal, and stamping it with the signature of the Board Chair.
Additionally, BOLC did not ensure that applications were properly completed
and evidence was lacking that all required documents were obtained prior to
the issuance of licenses and permits as required. For example, our review of
73 applications disclosed they all lacked documentation supporting the
identity and legal status of the applicant business owners or principals.
BOLC also did not adequately document criminal background checks of
license applicants and had not established a process to receive updates of
licensee criminal records as required by law. Specifically, after an employee
reviewed the background information results requested for applicants
received electronically from the criminal justice information system, they
would immediately delete the record without any other individual’s review.
Consequently, assurance was lacking that background checks were properly
performed.
BOLC did not always verify that license applicants had no undisputed
Maryland State or Prince George’s County taxes payable prior to issuing
licenses, as required by law. For example, our review of 58 license
applications submitted from February 2016 to April 2017 disclosed that for
the 26 non-renewal applications tested, no verifications of unpaid County
taxes were performed by BOLC prior to the issuance of the related licenses as
required by law. Rather, BOLC’s procedure for identifying unpaid County taxes
was to review an annual list of debts previously received in December each
year. Furthermore, our review of the 49 business entities, for the 58
applications tested, who received a new license, or transferred or renewed a
license during fiscal year 2017, disclosed that BOLC did not request a
verification from the Comptroller of Maryland or County for unpaid taxes for
any of the related 87 owners or principals, as required by law.
Finally, BOLC had not established adequate record keeping procedures and
internal controls over license fees and other office collections, which totaled
$2.3 million in fiscal year 2017. For example, the BOLC employees
responsible for collecting licensing payments, also recorded receipts in the
accounting and licensing records, sometimes made deposits, and also printed
and issued the licenses. As a result, payments could be misappropriated and
licenses issued without detection.
16

--- Page 19 ---
Findings
Finding 1
Licensing procedures and controls were inadequate, as there was a lack of
separation of application processing, approval, and recording functions. In
addition, an independent supervisory review of these functions was not
performed.
Analysis
Licensing procedures and controls were inadequate, as there was a lack of
separation of application processing, approval, and recording functions. In
addition, an independent supervisory review of these functions was not
performed. As a result, there was no assurance that licenses were properly
issued and recorded in the licensing database.
License applications were received, reviewed, approved, and recorded in the
licensing database by any one of three BOLC clerks. Additionally, the same
clerks who processed the applications also were responsible for printing the
license or permit from the database, embossing it with the County Seal, and
stamping it with the signature of the Chairman of the Board. Further, the
embosser and ink stamp were kept in unsecured locations during the workday
and overnight, leaving them accessible to all BOLC employees.
The three BOLC clerks are responsible for verifying that applicants submit all
required documentation. Additionally, these clerks were responsible for
preparing the monthly hearing agenda for the Board, and for providing a
binder of applications and related document copies for the commissioners’
review. However, there was no documented supervisory oversight of the
application processing, recording, and hearing preparation process by
supervisory personnel such as the BOLC Director or Administrative Assistant.
Consequently, assurance was lacking that the clerks properly performed their
application processing and hearing agenda preparation duties. Specifically,
the concerns raised by the lack of segregation of duties and independent
supervisory review include that applications were properly completed,
accompanied by all required documents, applicants met all licensing
requirements, all fees were paid in accordance with governing law,
applications were accurately recorded, and complete information was
provided to the Commissioners at their monthly hearings.
Our tests of licenses and permits issued (see Finding 2) disclosed many
documentation deficiencies that impaired our ability to assess the propriety of
the licenses and permits issued. During fiscal year 2017, BOLC issued 744
licenses and permits (including 18 new licenses, 617 renewals, and 40
17

--- Page 20 ---
transfers) and collected approximately $2 million in license, permit, and
application fees (excluding fines).
Recommendation 1
We recommend that BOLC establish adequate procedures and controls over
the licensing process. Specifically, the BOLC should ensure that
a. application processing duties are properly segregated and the embosser
with the County seal and ink stamp with the Board Chair’s signature are
properly safeguarded; and
b. there is a documented independent supervisory review over the licensing
and hearing process that verifies required documents are received,
complete information is provided to the Commissioners at monthly
hearings, and applications are accurately recorded in the licensing
database.
We advised BOLC how to achieve the necessary segregation of duties using
existing personnel.
Finding 2
BOLC did not ensure that all required documents were obtained prior to the
issuance of licenses and permits as required.
Analysis
There was a lack of evidence that all required documents were obtained prior
to the issuance of licenses and permits as required, resulting in a lack of
assurance that all licenses were appropriately issued. Our review of 73
applications (8 new, 5 conversion, 10 transfer, 10 substitution of corporate
officers, 32 renewals, and 8 special entertainment permits) disclosed that
each of them lacked certain information or documentation required by Board
policy. Specifically, our test disclosed the following conditions:
 Documentation supporting the identity, residency, and/or legal status of
the applicant business owners or principals was lacking for each of the 73
applications reviewed. For example, there were no copies of driver’s
licenses, passports, or permanent resident cards in the individual
application file. The lack of information may have been due, in some
cases, to the shredding of documents per established BOLC policy or it
may not have been received.
 Twenty-five applications reviewed by us were not completed as required,
had incorrect information, or both. Examples included application
questions or explanations not answered or provided, incorrect ownership
18

--- Page 21 ---
or officer information, and/or lacked a required current consent statement
allowing BOLC access to the premises3.
 Twenty-three applications did not have one or more documents required to
process and issue the related license within the license holder's file. For
example, the missing documentation included worker’s compensation
certificates, certificates of good standing, security plans, and leases or
deeds.
In accordance with State law, applications are to include documentation
related to certain requirements such as an applicant’s residency and
citizenship, and a license renewal application shall be accompanied by a
consent statement signed by the owner of the license premises allowing
Board staff access to the premises in the same manner as for an original
application to be approved. Further, the BOLC has established policies to
govern licensees, which stipulate the information and form of documentation
that applicants are required to submit, to comply with State law, in order for
the Board to issue them a license. For example, all applications must be fully
completed and filed on or before the filing date designated for the Board
hearing.
However, the BOLC Policy and Procedure Manual instructs the administrative
personnel not to retain any personal information in the application file.
Specifically, after proof of compliance with the various requirements of the
license or permit applied for is verified by staff4, original documents were to
be returned to the applicant and any copies received shredded.
Consequently, we were unable to assess the propriety of the applications
tested and the resultant Board action. Further, in response to this situation,
we requested advice from counsel to the Maryland General Assembly
regarding this issue and were informed that State law requires that the
Board’s licensing records, including the application and related documents,
must be retained for at least three years or until they have been audited. We
provided the Board with a copy of the related advice.
3 State law does allow a license holder to renew the license without obtaining a consent
statement if the license holder has a lease on the entire building for at least the term of the
renewed license and the building owner had previously filed a consent statement with the
original or another renewal application. However, since BOLC does not maintain a copy of
the licensee’s lease agreement on file, we could not determine whether the lease term
extended for the entire renewal period allowing for an exemption from the consent
statement.
4 The applicant writes their name and address on the application and there is a check-off box
for the Clerk to indicate that legal status was verified. The application is also notarized.
19

--- Page 22 ---
Recommendation 2
We recommend that BOLC ensure that, in accordance with governing statues
and BOLC rules and regulations
a. all license applications are properly completed and all required
documentation is received before the applications are processed, and
b. all required documentation is retained on file for at least three years or
until audited.
Finding 3
BOLC did not adequately document criminal background checks of license
applicants and had not established a process to receive updates of
subsequent changes to licensee criminal records, as required by law.
Analysis
BOLC did not adequately document criminal background checks of license
applicants and had not established a process to receive updates of
subsequent changes to licensee criminal records, as required by law.
 BOLC’s review of the results of Maryland Criminal Justice Information
System (CJIS) criminal background checks was not adequately
documented or subject to independent confirmation. CJIS results were e-
mailed to the deputy chief liquor inspector, who logged the name of the
applicant on an electronic spreadsheet (no other information was
recorded) and then immediately deleted the CJIS e-mail record. The
clerks, who subsequently processed the applications, reviewed the
spreadsheet for the name of the applicant to verify compliance with the
criminal background check requirement.
We were informed by BOLC management that any significant infractions
noted by the deputy chief liquor inspector would be discussed with the
Board’s administrative assistant (who would not necessarily review the
CJIS record) and, if need be, brought to the attention of the Board.
However, neither party could recall such an instance happening.
Consequently, disregarding the electronic spreadsheet, there was no
independent documentation that background checks were performed or
the results received.
When we questioned the rationale for destroying the CJIS records, we were
told that the CJIS e-mails were deleted in order to comply with State law
that required the Board to destroy the criminal history record information
on completion of its “necessary use”. We requested advice from counsel
to the Maryland General Assembly on this issue and were told that
20

--- Page 23 ---
“necessary use” includes the need to accomplish a governmental purpose,
which would extend to having all audit requirements complied with5.
Counsel advised that in accordance with State law, criminal history record
information, like other licensing records, should now be retained by BOLC
until next audit, after which time it may be destroyed.
 BOLC did not receive available updates to criminal background
information on licensees after the initial CJIS background checks were
completed. State law allows BOLC to receive updates on licensee criminal
records that are available from CJIS; however, BOLC had not made any
inquiries about such updates or arranged to receive them. As a result,
BOLC had continued to rely on the licensee reporting on annual renewal
applications as to whether the licensees had been convicted of any
crimes.
Although we did not have access to CJIS reports, our review of the criminal
history records of the applicants for 60 applications for licenses issued in
license fiscal year 2017 did not disclose any with criminal infractions per
Maryland court records.
State law provides that a local licensing board may apply to CJIS for a
Maryland and national criminal history records check for each applicant for a
license. The law also provides for boards to receive updates on licensee
criminal records. In accordance with State law and its policy, BOLC requires
applicants for a new license, transfer, or substitution of corporate officers to
undergo a criminal background check (be fingerprinted at a licensed facility
and remit the required fees) and have the results e-mailed directly to the
BOLC. State law and BOLC policy also specify that the Board shall deny a
license application if, in the judgment of the Board, the applicant is not a fit
person to receive the license or for other reasons the Board considers
sufficient; and the Board may revoke a license for a felony conviction of a
license holder.
Recommendation 3
We recommend that BOLC
a. adequately document criminal background checks of license applicants,
by retaining criminal records received from CJIS for at least three years or
until the next legislative audit;
5 This records retention provision generally applies to any audit requirement and has existed
in some form since 1951, although until July 1, 2017, the Board was not subject to an
Office of Legislative Audit’s performance audit requirement.
21

--- Page 24 ---
b. require all criminal records received from CJIS be reviewed by the
processor of the application and supervisor and that the reviews be
documented; and
c. establish a process to periodically obtain and review updates to licensee
criminal records from CJIS and take appropriate licensing actions based
on the updates received.
Finding 4
BOLC did not always verify that license applicants had no undisputed taxes
due to the State or Prince George’s County prior to issuing licenses as
required by State law.
Analysis
The BOLC did not always verify that license applicants had no undisputed
taxes due to the State or Prince George’s County prior to issuing licenses as
required by State law. Although procedures had been established to identify
the unpaid State and Prince George’s County taxes of certain applicants and
license holders, we determined that such tax status obtained may not
necessarily be current.
Specifically, it was not clear if a verification of taxes due for non-renewal
licenses was performed based on current tax debt information. Additionally,
the verification of renewals was performed based on annual listings of
business debtors received from the Comptroller of Maryland (Comptroller) and
the Prince George’s County Office of Finance (County) in December each year,
so current tax debt information was not used at the time licenses were issued.
Instead, the prior December’s listings were used as a reference when licenses
were renewed in April, May, and June to determine if the renewals needed to
be put on hold until the taxes were paid. In addition, BOLC did not obtain
verification from the State and County that each owner or principal of an entity
applying, transferring, or renewing a license did not owe unpaid taxes as
required by law. For example, our review of 58 business license applications
submitted from February 2016 to April 2017 disclosed that:
Test of License Applications
 For the 26 non-renewal (new, transfer, permit) applications of the 58
applications tested, there were letters received from the Comptroller in the
applicant’s file for 24 of the 26 applications that stated that all [State]
taxes had been paid. However, that information may not necessarily be
22

--- Page 25 ---
current. Specifically, the BOLC sends listings6 of non-renewal license
applications being considered by the Board to the Comptroller, under the
presumption they will be notified of any taxes owed. In response the
Comptroller sends a letter advising that no taxes are owed, which
according to our discussion with Comptroller’s Office personnel, may not
be based on a current search of taxes owed databases taken as a direct
response to the Board’s listing. Consequently, the State tax information
request response may not be based on the most current available.
 Additionally, for the 26 non-renewal applications of the 58 applications
tested, no verifications of unpaid County taxes were performed by BOLC
prior to the issuance of the related licenses as required by law. Rather,
BOLC’s procedure for identifying unpaid County taxes was to send a listing
of trade and business names of all active licensees to the County each
December. The County in turn sends a spreadsheet to the BOLC indicating
if any taxes were owed, or not, for each applicant (no amounts are
provided). However, BOLC only reviews this spreadsheet during the
license renewal period (not for the original license issuance).
 For the 32 renewal applications of the 58 applications tested, our test
disclosed that the verification and consideration of unpaid State and
County taxes for the related licensed businesses was properly performed
(although later in this finding, we comment on the inadequacy of the
unpaid tax verification for the owners and principals of the licensed
businesses).
BOLC Tax Verification Procedural Inadequacies
 BOLC did not obtain verification from the Comptroller and Prince George’s
County that each owner or principal of an entity applying, transferring, or
renewing a license did not owe unpaid taxes to the Comptroller and the
County. Our review of 49 entities, of the 58 applications tested, that
received a new license, or transferred or renewed a license during fiscal
year 2017 disclosed that no verification was requested from the
Comptroller or County for unpaid taxes for any of the related 87 owners or
principals. We could not readily determine whether the owners or
principals of the licensed entities had unpaid taxes to the Comptroller or
County because BOLC does not require the aforementioned individuals to
provide their social security numbers.
6 The Board had established a process where the Comptroller of Maryland is copied on the
periodic hearing agendas, which includes a listing of the names of the businesses and
related individuals who submitted license applications for consideration by the Board
(excludes renewals).
23

--- Page 26 ---
State law stipulates that the Board may not issue or transfer a license to an
applicant unless the Board is provided verification from the Comptroller and
the County that the new license applicant or license transferor has paid all
undisputed taxes or provided for payment of the taxes. The law also
stipulates the same requirement for license renewals, requiring that before a
license may be renewed, the Board shall verify through the Comptroller and
County that the license holder has paid all undisputed taxes payable to the
Comptroller and the County or provided for payment of the taxes. In addition,
the law stipulates that if an application was made on behalf of a corporation,
club or other entity (including sole proprietor), the tax verification
requirements also apply to the undisputed taxes payable by each owner or
principal of the entity.
Recommendation 4
We recommend that BOLC take appropriate actions to ensure that license
applicants had no undisputed State or County taxes payable prior to issuing
and renewing licenses as required by law. Specifically, we recommend that
BOLC
a. determine if they can initiate a process that ensures applicants for new
and transfer licenses and renewals do not have undisputed unpaid taxes
at the time of Board action, and
b. ensure verifications of unpaid taxes include the owners and principals of
the businesses applying for or holding existing licenses.
Finding 5
BOLC had not established adequate record keeping procedures and internal
controls over license fees and other office collections.
Analysis
BOLC had not established adequate record keeping procedures and internal
controls over license fees and other office collections. According to the
County’s records, all collections deposited by BOLC during fiscal year 2017
totaled approximately $2.3 million, with the vast majority comprised of license
fees.
 Collections were not immediately recorded upon receipt. Although checks
and money orders were restrictively endorsed and date stamped by the
clerk who opened the mail or received over-the-counter collections, a
money mail listing or cash receipts log was not maintained as an initial
record of collection to establish accountability over collections. Instead,
collections were stored in a safe until the bank deposit was prepared. At
that time, the collections were recorded on a pre-numbered two-part cash
24

--- Page 27 ---
receipts form, with the original remaining with the application and the
duplicate kept with the check to be deposited. There was no receipt book
copy to serve as the initial record of collection and the customer did not
receive a copy as a receipt, as there was no customer copy to issue and it
was not prepared at the time of payment.
 In addition, although a pre-numbered cash receipt form was issued, there
was no accountability created by its issuance. Specifically, an
accountability of the pre-numbered cash receipt forms as to issued, void
and on-hand was not performed and access to the blank forms, which
were kept in a box in the unlocked mailroom accessible to all BOLC
employees, was not adequately secured. The pre-numbered receipt forms
issued for each collection were ultimately recorded on an electronic
spreadsheet, but the spreadsheet was maintained by the same employee
who recorded the collections and was not reconciled to deposits.
Furthermore, our review of this spreadsheet for the period of January
2015 to December 2017 disclosed that 4,405 pre-numbered receipt
forms were issued, but 15 numbers within the sequence, including 9 in
consecutive order, were not listed and the related form copies could not
be located in the application files.
 Collections were not deposited daily, but rather usually two or three times
per week, and were not adequately safeguarded prior to deposit. We
observed checks during the day that were left in unsecured areas clipped
to applications in-process. Collections were stored in a locked safe
overnight, but the two front desk employees and another administrative
employee responsible for verification of deposits had access to the safe.
During fiscal year 2017, BOLC made 76 deposits ranging in amounts from
about $5,600 to $103,000 (an average of about $30,678 per deposit).
 Collection, recordkeeping, deposit, and licensing duties were not
adequately segregated. Specifically, the employees responsible for
collecting licensing payments, also recorded receipts in the accounting
and licensing records, sometimes made deposits, and also printed and
issued licenses. As a result, customer payments could be misappropriated
and the related licenses issued without detection.
 An independent verification was not performed to ensure all collections
received were properly deposited. A BOLC administrative employee
performed a documented reconciliation of monthly County revenue reports
to the related detailed deposit records and cash receipt forms (from the
electronic spreadsheet). However, the individual performing the
verification was not independent, as this individual had access to receipts
25

--- Page 28 ---
prior to deposit, and as previously commented upon, no record of initial
accountability existed, which is necessary to perform a proper deposit
verification.
BOLC accepts money orders, cashier’s checks, and certified checks for
payment of licensing applications, fees, penalties, and fines through the mail
or in-person at the BOLC’s office. Collections are deposited into a Prince
George’s County bank account. The County government has established a
standard procedure for the collection, transmittal, and depositing of revenues
to provide instructions to County departments and agencies, which require
adequate internal controls be established that safeguard revenue.
Specifically, County collections should be recorded in a permanent register
when received, customers should be issued a receipt, duties should be
properly segregated where possible, collections should be deposited daily
when in excess of $100, and collections should be independently verified to
deposit. In response to a law change that brought the BOLC under direct
County authority, BOLC made some procedural changes in November 2017 to
address the County’s guidelines, but this occurred subsequent to the start of
our fieldwork in June 2017 and after our related review and testing in this
area. Although our review did not disclose any license application or issuance
fees that were not deposited, the aforementioned lack of controls, could allow
the manipulation of records and misappropriation of collections without timely
detection.
Recommendation 5
We recommend that BOLC establish adequate record keeping procedures and
internal controls over office collections in accordance with County standards.
Specifically, we recommend that BOLC
a. record collections immediately upon receipt in a permanent record such
as a money mail listing or cash receipts log;
b. issue pre-numbered receipts for all payments collected;
c. perform periodic (such as monthly) accountabilities of pre-numbered cash
receipt forms as to issued, voided, and on-hand, properly safeguard
unused forms on-hand, reconcile used forms to deposit, and investigate
the missing forms identified that were mentioned above;
d. deposit collections daily and adequately safeguard them prior to deposit;
e. segregate collection, recordkeeping, deposit, and licensing duties to the
extent possible; and
f. perform a documented independent verification, using an employee that
does not have access to or handle collections, that all collections received
were properly deposited using a record of initial accountability.
26

--- Page 29 ---
We advised BOLC how to achieve the necessary segregation of duties using
existing personnel.
27

--- Page 30 ---
Objective 2 - Inspections
Objective and Methodology
Our objective for the inspection process was to evaluate the adequacy of
Board policies and procedures for conducting inspections of alcoholic
beverage licensees and maintaining related records, and to determine
whether inspections selected for review and testing were performed in
accordance with governing laws, policies, and procedures.
To accomplish our objective, we reviewed applicable State laws, and the
policies and procedures established by the Board and BOLC administrative
personnel governing the inspection process and related records. We
interviewed BOLC staff to determine the processes used to schedule, conduct,
record, and monitor inspections. We also observed the inspection process by
accompanying BOLC staff on inspections.
We obtained a data file from the inspection database maintained on the
Prince George’s County Network that listed 13,779 liquor inspections
performed during fiscal years 2015 through 2017; we deemed the data file
reliable for our purposes. We randomly selected a preliminary sample of 20
inspection reports to determine if inspections were properly conducted,
documented, and recorded. We intended to use this preliminary sample as a
basis for determining and conducting a random statistical sample, but
deemed the resulting error rate too high to make practical use of statistical
sampling. Consequently, we selected an additional 30 inspection test items
from fiscal years 2016 and 2017 on a judgmental basis, which means that
the results of our test of 50 transactions cannot be projected to the
population of all inspections. We also obtained electronic spreadsheets used
by BOLC to schedule certain types of inspections, and we matched them to
the database of inspections performed to identify licensees who were not
inspected.
Finally, we tested inspections related to telephone complaints received by
BOLC, as well as complaints registered through the Prince George’s County
311 Community Relations Service Request System (311 System), to evaluate
the BOLC process for complaint-initiated inspections.
28

--- Page 31 ---
Background
BOLC conducts periodic inspections of businesses licensed to sell alcoholic
beverages (licensees), including those who have also been issued permits to
provide entertainment in Prince George’s County. State law requires that an
inspector visit and inspect periodically every licensed premise, although no
frequency of inspection is specified. BOLC conducts three primary types of
inspections, routine, focused, and compliance. During fiscal year 2017, BOLC
inspectors conducted 4,790 inspections, which consisted of 1,756 routine,
2,494 focused, 526 compliance, and 14 other types of inspections. For each
inspection, BOLC inspectors prepare an Inspector’s Report, which is a paper
form used to document the areas reviewed (such as valid and current licenses
and cleanliness of the premises) as well as any violations and corrective
actions needed.
 Routine inspections are standard in scope, and cover the basic business
operating requirements as established for licensees in various Board
policies, including having a current license properly displayed, having
applicable permits, not serving minors, and not serving after hours.
Routine inspections are to be assigned to all inspectors to be completed
monthly according to established physical routes in designated areas, with
the informal goal of inspecting all licensees at least quarterly (the
inspection goal has not been formalized by Board-approved policy).
 Focused inspections are narrow in scope and address a specific
requirement, complaint, or common problem with licensees. A schedule is
prepared, based on public complaints or issues recently noted by
inspectors, and selected inspectors are assigned the focused inspections
to be completed that week. For example, the area of focus could be
whether licensees with off sales only privileges had patrons who loitered
or consumed alcohol while on the licensee’s premises.
 Compliance inspections are conducted to identify licensees that allow
minors (under age 21) to illegally purchase alcoholic beverages. There is
no set number of inspections to be conducted monthly or annually, as they
are scheduled on an intermittent basis depending on the availability of
minor operatives, but may also be performed in response to a complaint.
The inspection is performed using at least two inspectors and a minor
operative, who attempts to purchase an alcoholic beverage at the selected
licensed establishment.
As previously mentioned, certain inspections are conducted to follow-up on
complaints, which are received at the BOLC via telephone, e-mail, or in-person
and are logged on an electronic spreadsheet. In addition, complaints about
29

--- Page 32 ---
licensees are received from the 311 System. BOLC can access the complaint
records from the 311 System website and update it with the current status
and ultimate resolution. However, there is no written County or Board criteria
for the timely resolution of complaints. According to BOLC and County
records, BOLC received 31 complaints in fiscal year 2017, 22 from the 311
System and 9 at the BOLC.
The rules for inspections were promulgated by the Board policy under the
authority of State law, as early as November 2014, which also established
rules of conduct to govern licensee business operations (available in paper
form or on the BOLC web site). The inspection policies stipulate that all
license holders must cooperate with representatives of the BOLC whenever
these persons are on the licensed premises on official business. In addition,
the BOLC internal Policy and Procedures Manual, established by the BOLC
Director in September 2016, established general written guidelines for liquor
inspectors. As of July 2017, BOLC employed 1 supervising inspector (deputy
chief inspector) and 23 part-time inspectors. Subsequently, 10 part-time
inspectors resigned (see Finding 15), while 13 part-time inspectors remained
employed as of May 2018.
Conclusion
Our review of the BOLC inspection process disclosed that BOLC policies and
procedures for conducting inspections of alcoholic beverage licensees and
maintaining related records were inadequate. In addition, our review of
inspections selected for testing disclosed they were not performed on a
sufficiently frequent and comprehensive basis in accordance with governing
laws, policies, and procedures or BOLC’s goals, and that there were
inadequacies in the related records.
Not all licensed businesses were subject to periodic inspection, as required by
State law, as many were not included on the inspection schedules because of
scheduling omissions and a lack of scheduling oversight. Although it was
BOLC’s policy or goal to perform quarterly routine inspections of all licensees,
no written scheduling procedures or criteria that had been formally adopted
by the Board were in place, and inspections were scheduled at the discretion
of the deputy chief inspector. For example, our review of the fiscal year 2017
inspection schedules disclosed that routine type inspections for the third
quarter of 2017 were not assigned, nor performed, for 102 of the existing
618 licensed businesses.
Reports of inspections completed were not comprehensive, properly
completed, or subject to an independent documented supervisory review. Our
review of the results of 50 inspections performed disclosed that evidence was
30

--- Page 33 ---
lacking that 25 of the inspections were properly completed. For example, for
10 of the recorded inspections, the inspection reports were incomplete or
inaccurate as they had missing or erroneous information. In addition, for four
of the recorded inspections the inspection reports were not signed by the
owner or manager of the licensed business to confirm the inspection was
actually performed.
Also, no procedure had been established to ensure all completed inspection
reports were properly recorded in the BOLC inspection database. Completed
inspection reports were submitted to the BOLC Office for recordation, often
delivered in-person outside of BOLC’s business hours, and left in an unsecure
location where office employees and inspectors had 24-hour access.
Furthermore, although many inspection reports were pre-numbered, the
numbers were not recorded in the inspection database, and the numbering
sequence was not used to ensure all reports were accounted for. Inspection
reports received were recorded in the inspection database by one or more
BOLC clerks as they were received; however, the inspection data entered was
not compared to the related inspection report for accuracy or completeness
by supervisory personnel.
The completion of scheduled inspections that have been assigned to
inspectors was not monitored. Specifically, the total numbers of scheduled
inspections completed and not completed were not tracked and reported
periodically to BOLC management and the Board to assess the effectiveness
of BOLC inspection efforts. As a result, we found BOLC management were
unaware that all scheduled inspections assigned were not completed. For
example, our review of scheduled inspections disclosed that of the 536
routine inspections selected, which were scheduled to be completed monthly
from January to June 2017, 231 had not been performed as of January 2018
(6 to 11 months later). Additionally, of the 219 focused inspections selected,
which were scheduled to be completed weekly from July to October 2016,
114 had not been performed as of July 2017 (9 to 12 months later). In
addition, formal procedures had not been established to follow-up on
inspections cancelled, because the licensee’s business was found to be
closed at the time of the inspector’s visit.
Complaints regarding licensees received both directly by BOLC and through
the County’s 311 System were not always investigated or resolved timely. No
documented independent supervisory reviews were performed of the
complaints received for timely and appropriate follow-up. Additionally, BOLC
had not established any written policies or procedures specifying how
complaints were to be investigated and how timely they should be resolved.
During fiscal years 2015, 2016, and 2017 there were 53 complaints reported
31

--- Page 34 ---
directly to BOLC, which as of July 2018 according to BOLC records, 17
remained unresolved from 12 to 45 months after receipt. In addition, liquor
related complaints from the 311 System were not always addressed, with
several open for 5 to 48 months.
Finally, access to the various complaint records was not adequately
controlled. Complaints received directly at the BOLC Office were logged in an
electronic spreadsheet by one of several employees, but access to the
spreadsheet was not restricted and any office employee or field inspector
could make entries or delete complaints from the log. Further, complaints
received through the 311 System could be accessed and modified by
numerous users, and our review found 15 of the 22 BOLC users did not need
access to the 311 System, which included 3 former inspectors no longer
employed by BOLC.
Findings
Finding 6
Not all licensees were subject to periodic inspection, as required by State law.
Analysis
Not all licensees were subject to periodic inspection, as required by State law.
Further, no written scheduling procedures or criteria had been adopted by the
Board. Rather, inspections, including routine inspections, were scheduled on
a judgmental basis at the discretion of the deputy chief inspector. In addition,
there was no independent supervisory review of the inspection scheduling
process or verification that all licensed establishments were included on the
applicable inspection schedules. For example, our review of 2017 inspection
schedules, prepared by the deputy chief inspector, disclosed the following
conditions:
 For routine inspections, which per BOLC’s informal policy are to be
assigned and completed quarterly for all licensed establishments, 4 of the
24 required inspection routes for the third quarter of fiscal year 2017,
were not assigned per the route schedule. We were advised by the deputy
chief inspector that it was the intent that each licensed establishment be
assigned to a routine inspection route in a designated area. Further, each
route was to be assigned to an inspector and completed each quarter.
The 4 unassigned routes included 103 of the 618 licensed businesses,
and only 1 of those 103 businesses received a routine inspection that
quarter. Of the remaining 102 businesses, 25 did not receive any type of
32

--- Page 35 ---
inspection that quarter; however, we did note that the other 77 did receive
one or more focused and/or compliance inspection.
 For focused inspections, 164 of 357 licensed businesses were not
scheduled for inspection, nor actually inspected, although they met the
focused inspection selection criteria for at least one of five established
target issues. The target issues tested were established by the deputy
chief inspector for the period from July 2016 to October 2016. For
example, the target issues included, verifying businesses without
entertainment permits in designated areas were not providing
entertainment, and businesses with certain types of license were in
compliance with related signage criteria. Licensees would also be subject
to a focused inspection or a compliance inspection due to a public
complaint or other concern also at the discretion of the deputy chief
inspector.
State law stipulates that an inspector shall visit and inspect periodically every
licensed premise. However, without established criteria and supervisory
oversight, there is a lack of assurance that all eligible licensed businesses will
be scheduled for inspection, as supported by our review results.
We discussed our findings with BOLC management staff who advised that
businesses had been omitted from the inspection schedules due to error or a
lack of familiarity with the file matching and filtering capabilities of the
electronic licensing spreadsheet that could be useful in identifying eligible
uninspected businesses. We believe that this situation reinforces the
desirability for a formal comprehensive Board-approved inspection policy,
coupled with supervisory and Board oversight of the inspection scheduling
process and related decisions to ensure that inspections are performed in
accordance with State law and Board intent.
Recommendation 6
We recommend that BOLC
a. establish written Board-approved inspection scheduling procedures and
criteria which define the scheduling methodology and required frequency
for each type of inspection,
b. require that the inspection schedules and scheduling process are subject
to independent supervisory review,
c. periodically reconcile the population of licensees subject to inspection to
the related inspection schedule to ensure all eligible licensees are
scheduled for inspection, and
d. periodically report the results of inspection activity to the Board.
33

--- Page 36 ---
Finding 7
Inspection reports were not comprehensive, properly completed, or subject to
an independent documented supervisory review.
Analysis
Inspection reports were not comprehensive, properly completed, or subject to
an independent documented supervisory review. Reports submitted by
inspectors that we reviewed were often incomplete, making it difficult to
formulate definitive conclusions on the related inspection. Although reports
submitted by inspectors were to be subject to a review for any reported
violations and completion of certain key fields (such as date, time) by a BOLC
clerk and the chief deputy inspector, this review was not documented and
certain questionable inspector conclusions appeared to be unaddressed. Our
review of the results of 50 inspections performed (including focused, routine,
and compliance), per the inspection database during the three year period of
fiscal year 2015 to fiscal year 2017 disclosed that evidence was lacking that
25 of the inspections were properly completed. For example,
 For 10 of the recorded inspections, the inspection reports were incomplete
or inaccurate as they had missing or erroneous information. For example,
there were four instances where the inspector did not document the
entertainment observed during the inspection for businesses with such
permits. This information is necessary because licensees are restricted as
to the type of entertainment that can be provided based on the terms of
their entertainment permit. In another instance, we found a blank
inspection report that was signed by the inspector, where the only
information recorded was the name of the business and the time and date
of the inspection, with all of the inspection questions left unanswered. In
another instance, an inspection report indicated the business had no
Sunday sales or entertainment permits despite the fact that it did have
such permits.
 For four of the recorded inspections (including one of the ten above) the
inspection reports (for two focused and two compliance inspections) were
not signed by the owner or manager of the licensed business. We were
advised by the BOLC deputy chief inspector that only inspection reports
with violations have to be signed by the business owner or manager.
Conversely, the Board’s Policy and Procedures Manual states that only
focused inspection reports must be signed by the business owner or
manager. However, 40 (4 compliance, 20 focused and 16 routine) of the
50 inspection reports tested were signed by the owner or manager. (Of
the remaining 10 of the 50, four were not signed, four were closed at the
time of inspection, and the other two reports were missing.) Without a
34

--- Page 37 ---
signature from the business owner, there is no independent assurance
that the inspection was actually performed.
 For four of the recorded inspections (one routine, two focused, and one
compliance), the report indicated that the business was closed so the
inspection could not be performed. However, a timely follow-up inspection
was not performed within 30 days for three of the four businesses. In
such cases, a timely rescheduling of the inspection is important to ensure
that the closure was not over a 30 days’ duration and as such, subject to
Board action (such as license revocation provided for in State law). See
Finding 9 for additional comments.
 For two of the recorded inspections, no related inspection report could be
located on file. See Finding 8 for related comments.
We also noted that the type of inspection report form used was not always
appropriate for the type of inspection performed. Specifically, the general
inspection report used for routine inspections was sometimes used for
focused inspections. In such cases, the specific objective of the focused
inspection was not defined, and sufficient pointed questions and detailed
conclusions related to the area or areas of focus were not provided. In our
opinion, tailoring the inspection form to fit the purpose of the inspection would
better document the inspection. Finally, without a supervisory review of the
adequacy of inspection reports, there is a lack of assurance that inspections
will be properly performed.
Recommendation 7
We recommend that BOLC ensure all inspection reports are
a. tailored for the type of inspection to be performed, include specified
objectives, sufficient questions to achieve a comprehensive
understanding, and require detailed conclusions;
b. properly completed with all requested information provided and all
checklist questions answered with clarifying information as necessary;
c. signed by the owner or manager of the licensed business to provide
assurance that the inspection was actually performed; and
d. subject to an independent documented supervisory review to ensure the
appropriateness of the conclusions and proper completion of the
inspection.
35

--- Page 38 ---
Finding 8
No procedures had been established to ensure all completed inspection
reports were properly recorded in the BOLC inspection database and all
scheduled inspections were performed.
Analysis
BOLC had not established procedures to ensure all completed inspection
reports were properly recorded in the BOLC inspection database and all
scheduled inspections were performed.
 Completed inspection reports submitted by the part-time inspectors to the
BOLC Office for recordation were not adequately controlled and accounted
for. Inspectors could submit inspection reports by scanning and emailing
copies of the completed paper report or delivering the paper version of the
report in-person. Inspections were often performed outside of BOLC’s
office hours, so customarily inspectors left the paper reports in a non-
secure location, available to all office employees and inspectors at all
times. Furthermore, although routine and compliance inspection reports
were pre-numbered, the form numbers were not recorded in the
inspection database and the numbering sequence was not used to ensure
all inspection reports were accounted for. Consequently, reports could be
misplaced, altered, or stolen without detection and related violations
identified by inspectors would not be recorded and acted upon. Since the
form numbers were not recorded in the database, we could not readily
determine if any completed inspection reports were missing, although, as
noted previously, there were many scheduled inspections for which no
completed inspection was recorded in the database.
 The accuracy and validity of inspection results recorded in the inspection
database was not independently verified to the supporting inspection
reports. Inspection reports received were recorded in the inspection
database by one or more BOLC clerks as they are received. However, the
inspection data entered was not compared to the related inspection report
for accuracy or legitimacy by independent supervisory personnel.7 As a
result, there was a lack of assurance all reports received were accurately
recorded. Nevertheless, our test of 20 inspections found that 19 were
accurately recorded in the database.
7 The inspection records are an electronic database on the Prince George’s County Network,
which does not have the ability to generate a transaction report for a defined period for
review. Consequently, the inspection report itself would have to be compared to the system
entry by a supervisor.
36

--- Page 39 ---
 The completion of scheduled inspections assigned to inspectors was not
monitored by BOLC administrative personnel nor were the results reported
to the Board. Specifically, completed inspection reports were not
periodically reconciled to the related inspection schedule prepared by the
deputy chief inspector, to ensure all scheduled inspections assigned were
actually performed. Furthermore, the total number of scheduled
inspections completed or not completed was not tracked nor reported
periodically (such as quarterly) to BOLC management and the Board to
assess the effectiveness of BOLC inspection efforts. As a result, we found
that BOLC management was unaware that all scheduled inspections
assigned were not completed. For example, our test of scheduled
inspections disclosed they were not always completed as scheduled (see
below).
 Of the 536 scheduled routine inspections selected (applicable to 18
inspection routes assigned to 16 inspectors), which were to be
completed during a month assigned from January to June 2017, 231
had not been performed by the assigned 11 inspectors as of January
2018 (6 to 11 months later).
 Of the 219 scheduled focused inspections selected, which were to be
completed during a week assigned from July to October 2016, 114
had not been performed as of July 2017 (9 to 12 months later).
 Of the 615 scheduled compliance inspections to be completed at least
annually for businesses during calendar year 2017, 145 of the
businesses were not inspected during that calendar year.
Recommendation 8
We recommend that BOLC establish procedures that ensure
a. all completed inspection reports are properly controlled and accounted
for, by providing a locked drop box, using pre-numbered inspection report
forms for all inspections, and performing periodic accountabilities;
b. all completed inspection reports are accurately recorded by having
independent administrative personnel verify the data entered for each
inspection recorded to the related supporting paper report;
c. all scheduled inspections are completed by having independent
supervisory personnel monitor periodic reconciliations of recorded
inspection reports with the related inspection schedules; and
d. the Board is kept informed as to the status of inspection efforts, by
periodically compiling and reporting the number of inspections scheduled
and completed.
37

--- Page 40 ---
Finding 9
Adequate procedures had not been established for the follow-up of
inspections aborted because the licensee’s business was closed at the time
of the inspector’s visit.
Analysis
Adequate procedures had not been established for the follow-up of
inspections aborted because the licensee’s business was found to be closed
at the time of the inspector’s visit. Timely follow-up of such aborted
inspections is necessary to ensure that the closure was not over a 30 days
duration, which would subject the licensee to Board action (such as license
revocation provided for in State law).
The results of our test of scheduled inspections as described in Finding 7
disclosed three instances where inspections were aborted because the
business was closed when the inspector visited the premises, and no
subsequent re-inspection or documented follow-up action was taken within 30
days of the initial inspection to determine if any licensing action was
warranted. Further, a review of the inspection database as of January 9,
2018 disclosed that during fiscal year 2017 the scheduled inspections of 112
businesses were recorded as aborted because the business was closed at the
time of the attempted inspection. Our review of these 112 businesses with
135 aborted inspections (32 compliance, 63 focused, and 40 routine
inspections) disclosed that no follow-up inspection of any type had been
performed for 7 of the businesses from 7 to 15 months after the initially
scheduled inspection. We found that for another 38 of the businesses a
follow-up inspection of some type was performed, but it was over 30 days past
the date of the original aborted inspection (from 1 to 11 months beyond the
original inspection date).
Although the BOLC had an aborted inspection policy, which required the
inspector to return to the business at various times for the next 20 days, this
policy was not comprehensive. Specifically, it only applied to routine
inspections and did not address any alternative actions, such as contacting
the owners of the business via telephone or written correspondence if no
contact was made within the 20-day period. Without timely follow-up of
aborted inspections, the Board cannot determine if any licensing action is
required. State law provides that the Board may revoke the license for the
closing of licensed premises for more than 30 days without the approval of
the Board, while the BOLC policies stipulate that the Board will revoke,
suspend, or fine the licensee in such cases.
38

--- Page 41 ---
Recommendation 9
We recommend that BOLC enhance its procedures for the timely follow-up of
aborted inspections to determine if licensing actions are warranted. Such
efforts should include both contacting owners and rescheduling inspections.
Finding 10
Licensee complaints received both directly by BOLC and through the County’s
311 System were not always timely investigated and resolved or subject to
supervisory review. Further, employee access to complaint records was not
controlled.
Analysis
Licensee complaints received both directly by BOLC and through the County’s
311 System were not always timely investigated and thereby remained
unresolved for extended periods and their status was not subject to
supervisory review. Further, employee access to related complaint records
was not controlled. During the period from July 1, 2014 to June 30, 2017
there were 53 complaints reported directly to BOLC, of which, according to
BOLC records as of July 2018, 17 remained unresolved from approximately
12 to 45 months after receipt. In addition, liquor related complaints from the
County’s 311 System were also not always resolved timely. Based on County
records, which we did not audit for reliability, as of July 2018 there were 66
liquor-related complaints received since fiscal year 2015, of which 21 had
been open for 5 to 48 months. BOLC management could not readily provide
an explanation for the general lack of timely complaint follow-up.
We also noted that documented independent supervisory reviews were not
performed of the status of complaints and their subsequent resolution.
Additionally, BOLC had not established any written policies or procedures
specifying how liquor-related complaints were to be investigated and how
timely they should be resolved.
Finally, access to the various complaint records was not adequately
controlled. Complaints received directly at the BOLC Office by telephone, e-
mail, or in-person were recorded in an electronic spreadsheet by one of
several employees. Access to the spreadsheet was not restricted and any
office employee or field inspector could make entries or delete complaints
from the spreadsheet. Further, complaints received through the County 311
system could be accessed by numerous users, who could add comments
about the complaint follow-up and enter a closed status. Our review of user
access disclosed that 15 of the 22 BOLC users did not need access to the
39

--- Page 42 ---
311 System as of July 2018. Specifically, the 15 users included 12
inspectors and 3 former inspectors.
Recommendation 10
We recommend that BOLC
a. establish comprehensive written policies and procedures for investigating
and resolving complaints on a timely basis;
b. ensure all complaints are reviewed by an independent supervisor to
ensure their timely resolution and the appropriateness of the resolution
reached; and
c. restrict access to the BOLC complaint records and the 311 System, to the
extent possible, to BOLC employees who require access based on their job
responsibilities.
40

--- Page 43 ---
Objective 3 – Disciplinary Procedures
Objective and Methodology
Our objective for BOLC’s disciplinary procedures was to evaluate the
disciplinary process, BOLC’s compliance with applicable State law, its
enforcement of applicable Board rules and regulations governing licensees,
and its maintenance of disciplinary records. To accomplish this objective, we
interviewed BOLC employees to determine the types of disciplinary
proceedings that existed and the process for each. We also attended two
public Board hearings. Additionally, we performed testing, using the BOLC’s
database of licensee violation activity for fiscal years 2015 to 2017, to
evaluate (for the specific activity tested) whether the disciplinary process was
properly administered and documented. We also reviewed the licensee paper
files and the minutes for Board hearings, that evidenced the decisions and
actions taken for the violations tested.
Background
Most disciplinary proceedings are generated from the periodic inspections of
the businesses licensed to sell alcoholic beverages. Other proceedings result
from County and municipality police referrals, Board order violations, and
reports from the Comptroller of Maryland. Using the BOLC violation database,
we summarized the sources and number of reported violations for fiscal years
2015 to 2017; see Table 4.
Table 4
Reported Number of Violations by Source from Fiscal Years 2015 to 2017
Fiscal Fiscal Fiscal
Total Percent
Source Year Year Year
Violations of Total
2015 2016 2017
Inspector 60 165 85 310 89.6%
Prince George’s County
0 14 5 19 5.5%
Police
Board 1 0 4 2 6 1.7%
Local Municipality Police 1 1 1 3 0.9%
Comptroller 3 5 0 8 2.3%
Grand Total 64 189 93 346 100.0%
Source: BOLC violation database
1 A Board violation occurs when a licensee fails to follow an order of the Board.
41

--- Page 44 ---
Although BOLC inspectors, County police, and the Comptroller of Maryland
may note instances of licensee noncompliance with laws and Board rules and
regulations, the Board is responsible for adjudicating cases to determine if
violations have actually occurred and for setting the related penalties.
State law provides that a local licensing board may revoke or suspend a
license at its discretion for any reason to promote the peace or safety of the
community in which the premises are located. The law further provides that a
board may adopt regulations regarding the conduct of business by license
holders. Additionally, the law states that a board shall revoke or suspend a
license under certain specific circumstances (such as making any material
false statement in any application for a license or permit). The law also allows
that, for a first offense, instead of or in addition to suspending or revoking the
license, a board may impose a fine not exceeding $1,500 (unless the offense
is furnishing for or allowing underage consumption in which case the
minimum fine is $1,500). For a second offense in the same 24-month period,
a fine not exceeding $6,000, or for a third offense a fine of $7,500, may be
imposed.
While State law provides the Board may initiate revocation or suspension
procedures, it also provides that a license holder against whom proceedings
are brought shall be entitled to a hearing. The Board meets twice a month in
public hearing sessions to adjudicate cases resulting from violations and once
a month to grant new licenses and license transfers. The hearings are quasi-
judicial and include testimony from inspectors, police, licensees, and their
legal representatives.
BOLC administrative staff are responsible for screening reported violations
received to determine those that warrant being placed on the Board’s monthly
administrative hearing schedule. The Board determines during the
administrative hearing whether a violation warrants having a public hearing.
However, administrative staff are permitted by the Board under certain
circumstances, to offer compromises to licensees that allows them, in
exchange for a written admission of guilt, to avoid having to attend a public
Board hearing, and pay a fine, possibly for a reduced amount. After the fact,
via the next proposed hearing agenda, the Board is advised that a
compromise was reached, but the terms of the compromise are neither
disclosed to nor approved by the Board.
During a Board hearing, the Board determines the guilt or innocence of the
licensee based upon the evidence presented. Licensees may be represented
by counsel, and the Board will hear testimony and obtain other information
(such as any violation of the licensee over the preceding three years) prior to
42

--- Page 45 ---
making a decision and determining whether a penalty is appropriate.
Licensees are provided the Board’s rulings verbally at the hearing and in
writing if the ruling results in a penalty (fine, suspension, or revocation) via a
Penalty Assessment Notice. The Notice includes the law or rule violated, the
amount of the penalty, and the amount of time the licensee has to pay the
fine (usually up to 21 days). The Board’s decision is documented in the
meeting minutes and a copy of the Penalty Assessment Notice is also
included in the licensee files to document the Board’s action. Licensees may
appeal the decisions of the Board to the Circuit Court.
Conclusion
BOLC had not established adequate procedures and internal controls over its
disciplinary process and the maintenance of related records. Specifically,
certain critical enforcement actions and decisions were made by
administrative staff without the benefit of management oversight and in
contradiction with State law. The Board’s practice of permitting and offering
an administrative compromise in lieu of a formal Board hearing is not
permitted under the law, based on a 2015 Attorney General’s Opinion.
Further, formal accounts receivable records were not established for fines
assessed by the Board and related late fees due were sometimes not
collected.
There is a lack of assurance that all violations were properly considered and
adjudicated. Specifically, decisions to schedule reported violations of liquor
license holders for a Board administrative hearing, or to offer a compromise
instead of requiring the licensee to attend a Board public hearing, were made
by administrative staff without documented independent oversight or approval
by the Board).8 Administrative staff were responsible for screening reported
licensee violations received and determining whether each violator should be
included on the administrative hearing docket. In addition, the administrative
staff decided whether the violators, whom the Board determined warranted a
public hearing, should instead be offered an administrative offer of
compromise in lieu of attending the public hearing. These staff decisions
were not subject to Board review or approval. Finally, this type of delegation
of the Board’s discretionary authority to punish licensee misconduct was
found in an April 15, 2015 Attorney General’s Opinion on the similar process
by another local board to not be allowed under State law.
8 Although this finding is now irrelevant, based on the aforementioned Opinion of the Attorney
General that deemed the practice of administrative compromise contrary to State law, it
was developed prior to us becoming aware of the legal opinion and is still included as a
further example of the lack of Board oversight of BOLC operations at the time of the audit.
43

--- Page 46 ---
Although the fines assessed by the Board for violations were generally
consistent with the amounts allowed by law, offers of compromise made by
administrative staff were not always consistent with the Board’s informal
compromise policy. There were 89 offers in compromise made by the BOLC
administrative staff accepted by licensees, with fines totaling $156,500 in
fiscal year 2017. Specifically, our test of the disposition of 20 inspection
violations, per the inspections database from June 2016 to June 2017,
disclosed 7 violations were properly scheduled for a public hearing at which
they were fined by the Board, 3 violations were not scheduled for a Board
hearing without a documented explanation, and for 10 violations the
licensees accepted a compromise offer from the administration staff.
However, we determined that 3 of the 10 compromises tested did not comply
with the informal compromise policy, having been fined a combined $5,500
instead of a combined $17,500, if assessed in accordance with policy.
The amount of all fines due, whether established by a Board hearing or by
administrative staff through the compromise process, were documented via
letter correspondence mailed to the license holder, which represented the
official record of debt due. Therefore, formal accounts receivable records
were not established or maintained for fines assessed and late fees due were
sometimes not collected.
Finally, the Board did not adequately explain the formal basis for its decisions
regarding the continuation of an active status of two licensees who had plead
guilty to criminal charges. Although two licensees pleaded guilty to federal
felony charges in April and May 2017 and therefore became eligible for
license revocation, the Board did not take any related action regarding the
active status of the two licensees. Although State law permits the Board
latitude in such a situation there was no record to explain why the two
licenses were not revoked as allowed by law.
44

--- Page 47 ---
Findings
Finding 11
The Board delegated its discretionary functions, in certain cases, to its staff in
conflict with State law. The Board did not review and approve administrative
staff decisions to refer violations for a hearing or make offers of compromise
and the disposition of all reported violations was not verified.
Analysis
The Board delegated its discretionary functions, in certain cases, to its staff in
conflict with governing law. An Attorney General Opinion issued in 2015 at
the request of the Board of Liquor License Commissioners for Baltimore City,
stated that that board did not have statutory authority to delegate to its staff
the discretionary functions of deciding whether, and in what amount, to fine
an offender9. The Opinion went on to conclude there was no authority in the
law that would allow staff to decide whether to omit violations from the public
record. We confirmed with the counsel to the Maryland General Assembly
that this Opinion is applicable to the Board’s use of the administrative
compromise process to punish licensee misconduct, without a formal public
hearing of the Board.
During the audit, we performed a review of the compromise process and
conducted a test of compromises, before becoming aware of the
aforementioned Opinion of the Attorney General and determining its relevance
to the BOLC. Since the scope of our audit is intended to assess Board
oversight of BOLC operations in general, we deemed it useful to present the
results of this work in this audit report, as a further example of the level and
extent of Board oversight during the period under review.
Compromise Process
Administrative staff reviewed reported licensee violations per inspection
reports and correspondence from other organizations, such as the
Comptroller and the County police, and unilaterally decided which violations
should be included on the Board administrative hearing agenda based on
staff’s personal judgement without any documented rational. For certain
violations, after being reviewed by the Board during an administrative hearing
and being judged as worthy of a public Board hearing, administrative staff
were allowed to make offers of compromise to the related licensees in lieu of
them attending the public Board hearing. However, these referral and
9 Opinion 100OAG029: Alcoholic Beverages – Board of Liquor License Commissioners –
Scope of Administrative Authority.
45

--- Page 48 ---
compromise decisions were not subject to a documented Board review as
provided for in State law.
Furthermore, a log of violations reported by other organizations was not
maintained and the violations reported on inspection reports were not
accounted for to ensure the proper disposition of all reported violations.
Finally, there was no verification of the accuracy of the recordation of Board
hearing results in the violation database.
Test of Compromises
From our test of the disposition of 20 inspection violations from June 2016 to
June 2017, we identified 10 violations where the licensee was offered a
compromise and the decisions were made solely by administrative staff
without supervisory oversight or Board approval. Although the name of a
licensee who accepted an offer of compromise is reported on the next hearing
agenda, the details of the compromise, such as the amount of the fine, which
may have been reduced from the statutorily permitted fine, were not reported
and the compromise was not approved by the Board.
Further, 3 of the 10 compromises tested did not appear to comply with the
BOLC’s informal compromise policy, which allows licensees to pay a fine in
lieu of attending a Board hearing for certain violations, such as liquor sales to
a minor, that were a first or second offense. Specifically, two of the three
compromises were for a third offense and should have been included in a
Board hearing in accordance with the informal policy and the licensees
possibly fined $7,500 instead of the fine compromise amounts of $2,500 and
$1,500, respectively. Also, one was a second offense and should have been
fined a minimum of $2,500 according to the policy, instead of the fine
compromise amount of $1,500.
The BOLC offer of compromise policy was approved by the Board in April 2014
in an effort to reduce the volume of cases included on the Board’s hearing
docket, but the specifics of what was approved is not clear, since the policy
details were not disclosed in the Board minutes.
Recommendation 11
We recommend that, in order for the Board to carry out its required statutory
duties, the Board should
a. require BOLC administrative staff to maintain a log of all reported
violations received from outside entities;
b. establish clear written guidelines for the scheduling of violations for
hearings, and when the Board would consider offers of compromise for its
own use; and
46

--- Page 49 ---
c. not delegate its discretionary functions to staff.
Finding 12
Formal accounts receivable records had not been established for fines
assessed by the Board and related late fees due were sometimes not
collected.
Analysis
Formal accounts receivable records had not been established for fines
assessed by the Board and related late fees due were sometimes not
collected.
Procedural Issues
BOLC does not maintain detail accounts receivable records or a control
account to determine the total dollar amount of, or account for, unpaid fines
outstanding. Further, the folder containing copies of the unpaid fine letters,
which serves as the detailed records, is not properly secured, as it is kept
within an unlocked rolling file cabinet. We have observed that this file cabinet
is left unlocked at all times even at the end of the business day. Since all
BOLC staff and inspectors have 24-hour access to the office, a fine letter
could be removed or misplaced without detection.
Licensed businesses that have been assessed a fine are given 21 days to
submit payment from the date of the letter. If the fine amount is not
submitted to the Board before the late date specified in the letter, a $500 late
fee is due and payable. Both the 21-day period and additional $500 late fee
are disclosed in the original letter mailed to the licensee. We were advised by
BOLC management that no employee had been assigned the duty to monitor
the timely payment of the fines assessed or send follow-up collection letters.
We were further advised that the date of payment was not always recorded in
the collection (cash receipt forms and deposit listing) or licensing records.
OLA Testing Results
Due to a lack of formal receivable records, we used Board hearing minutes,
the violation database, and available cash receipt records to identify fines
assessed by the Board and offers of compromise fines accepted, in an
attempt to identify receivables due and paid during the period tested. Our
review of those records identified fines assessed totaling approximately
$300,000 during fiscal year 2017, with total related collections (fines and
fees) of approximately $294,000. Our test of 49 fines totaling $149,500
either assessed by the Board (39 fines totaling $132,500) or through offer
and compromise (10 fines totaling $17,000) between June 2016 and
47

--- Page 50 ---
February 2018 disclosed that as of May 2018, all had been paid except for
one fine of $1,500. Further, 29 of the 49 fines had been generally paid
timely, but for those paid late the collection of the late fee was inconsistent.
For example, there were 7 fines paid from 9 to 66 days late (averaging 24
days late) for which a $500 late fee was properly collected, but another 12
fines paid from 3 to 15 days late (averaging 6 days late) for which no late fee
was collected.
All fines that are due, whether established by Board action or by
administrative staff through the compromise process, are documented via a
letter mailed to the license holder. After a fine is assessed, one of the three
administrative staff will draft, mail, and place copies of the letter in the license
holder’s manual file and in a manual folder, known as the “money folder”,
which serves as the accounts receivable record for the unpaid fines for all
open accounts. Once the payment is received, the letter is removed from the
“money folder” and put into the license holder’s file with documentation of
payment. The same administrative staff who handle the fine letters also
collect and process related fine payments.10
Recommendation 12
We recommend that BOLC
a. establish formal detail accounts receivable records and a related control
account for fines and late fees assessed licensees, segregating these
from the related collection functions to the extent practicable;
b. ensure that receivable records are adequately safeguarded;
c. establish a formal follow-up process to aid in the timely collection of fines
and the assessment and collection of all late payment fees; and
d. require documented independent supervisory oversight of the debt
recording, collection, and follow-up recordkeeping processes.
Finding 13
The Board did not adequately document the basis for its decisions regarding
the continued active status of two licensees who had pleaded guilty to
criminal charges.
Analysis
The Board did not adequately document the basis for its decisions regarding
the continued active status of two licensees who had pleaded guilty to
criminal charges. BOLC administrative staff were made aware the Federal
10 Segregation of duties and BOLC accountability over the cash receipt and collection
function is addressed in Finding 5.
48

--- Page 51 ---
Bureau of Investigation (FBI) was investigating these two licensees in January
2017 when the BOLC was served with a search and seizure warrant by the FBI
related to these licensees’ records. According to a federal Department of
Justice website, the two licensees pleaded guilty to federal felony charges in
April and May 2017, and therefore appeared to become eligible for license
revocation. No Board action regarding the status of the two licensees was
initiated until they submitted license ownership transfer applications to the
Board in April and May 2017. After a number of hearings, the Board ruled in
August 2017 to allow one of the two applicants to transfer (sell) their license,
while it ruled in September 2017 to deny the other transfer, but allowed the
licensee to continue in business until their license expired in April 2018 when
their renewal request was denied by the Board. There was nothing on record
to explain why the Board did not formally consider the possible revocation of
the two licenses as allowed by law.
Ultimately, the Board approved one of the license holders in question to
transfer their license, which enabled them to benefit from its transfer, via its
sale for an undisclosed amount. According to Board hearing records, during a
June 2017 meeting, the Board acknowledged the federal indictment and
voted to withdraw the transfer application, but the Board later agreed to hear
arguments from the licensee’s legal counsel. Licensee counsel argued that
the licensee was not under indictment, had not been convicted of a felony, the
application question being considered sought information not required by
law,11 and that provisions of State law supporting the Board’s position did not
apply under the circumstances. (The application included a question
confirming that there were no indictments or complaints pending against the
applicant in any federal or state court of the United States.) However, there
was no evidence the Board challenged any of those claims by seeking advice
from its own legal counsel and the Board approved the license transfer in
August 2017. There was no explanation on record regarding why the Board
did not seek legal counsel or challenge the aforementioned attorney claims.
The other licensee, who had also pleaded guilty to federal felony charges in
April 2017, attempted to transfer the license to a spouse, but the transfer
application was denied by the Board in September 2017. However, the
licensee was allowed to continue business operations under the license until
the next license renewal period in April 2018 when the renewal application
was denied. The Board had no explanation on record as to why this licensee
was allowed to continue in business until the license expired, instead of the
license being revoked when the licensee pleaded guilty to felony charges.
11 We noted that the Board has taken no subsequent action to address the legality of the
application form question challenged by the licensee’s attorney.
49

--- Page 52 ---
State law provides that a local licensing board may revoke or suspend a
license for any reason to promote the peace and safety of the community. It
further provides that a local licensing board shall revoke or suspend a license
for making a material false statement in an application for a license.
Additionally, State law provides that the Board of License Commissioners for
Prince George's County may revoke a license for a felony conviction of a
license holder, and the law defines conviction to include a verdict or plea of
guilty.
Recommendation 13
We recommend that in the future the Board adequately document the basis
for its legal decisions on criminal matters affecting licensees.
50

--- Page 53 ---
Objective 4 – Management Oversight
Objective and Methodology
Our objective was to review management processes to determine whether
adequate oversight exists over BOLC operations. To accomplish this
objective, we reviewed Board policies, interviewed BOLC employees, and
reviewed BOLC’s procedures with respect to payroll, employee performance
evaluations, employee work load requirements, user access to critical data
files, financial disclosures, and employee compliance with statutory
independence restrictions. We also tested payroll processing, employee
productivity, user access to critical data files, and employee independence.
Conclusion
BOLC’s established management practices were not comprehensive and did
not necessarily ensure efficient and effective operations. Specifically,
although the Board had adopted certain rules and regulations to govern
licensees, they had not formally approved a policy and procedures manual
drafted by the BOLC staff to govern its employee and management policies
and related operations. Further, although the manual included policies on
topics such as employee conduct, revenue collection and application
processing, it was not sufficiently comprehensive. For example, it did not
establish requirements for independent supervisory reviews of inspector
performance, the maintenance of time records, or document retention.
Additionally, inspector performance measures had not been established to
assist in the determination of annual workload requirements. Moreover, user
access capabilities to critical data files were not monitored for necessity, and
certain user transaction reports were not generated for review. Finally,
although key personnel were required to file financial disclosure forms with
the State Ethics Commission, no process had been established to monitor
employee compliance with statutory independence restrictions concerning
secondary employment, business investment, and political activities.
Findings
Finding 14
Written policies and procedures governing BOLC operations were not
sufficiently comprehensive and had not been formally adopted by the Board.
Analysis
Written policies and procedures governing BOLC operations were not
sufficiently comprehensive, and while generally followed, had not been
51

--- Page 54 ---
formally adopted by the Board. A policy and procedures manual was created
under the direction of a former Chief Liquor Inspector during calendar year
2016, and was subsequently amended in June 2017; however, as of
September 2017, the manual had not been submitted to the Board for review
and approval.
Furthermore, although the manual included key statutory requirements for
BOLC functions such as licensing, inspections, disciplinary actions, and
certain administrative tasks, it lacked specificity and failed to provide staff
with adequate guidance in a number of areas as noted earlier in this report.
For example, policies or standards had not been established addressing
adequate internal controls, including a documented supervisory review
process for critical transactions, such as the proper processing of license
applications and performance of inspections. In addition, a policy had not
been established requiring all completed inspection reports to be signed by
the business owner or manager for all types inspections. Further, there were
no requirements for maintenance of inspector time records, completion of
annual employee evaluations, or document retention in general.
Consistent with these findings, we were advised that BOLC’s part-time
inspectors were not required to complete positive time records or work a
minimum number of hours until March 2018. Administrative staff advised us
that at that time a policy was implemented that established a 20-hour
minimum workweek and required positive time records. However, the policy
on the 20-hour minimum work week and positive time records was not
included in the policy and procedures manual and was not formally approved
by the Board, County, or BOLC Director. We did not test compliance with that
policy which was implemented during the course of our audit fieldwork.
However, we did confirm that during the three-year period under review (fiscal
years 2015 to 2017), the part-time inspectors were paid a salary of $10,900
for fiscal year 2015 and $13,900 for fiscal years 2016 and 2017 with no
related minimum work hour requirements or positive time records. In
addition, BOLC management advised us that routine annual performance
evaluations were neither completed nor required for any BOLC employees.
Recommendation 14
We recommend that BOLC
a. develop comprehensive written policies and procedures that address the
internal control, time record keeping, annual performance evaluations,
document retention, the signing of inspection reports and other issues
commented on in this report; and
b. obtain formal Board approval of its written policies and procedures.
52

--- Page 55 ---
Finding 15
The Board had not adopted formal measures to evaluate inspector
performance and determine annual workload requirements.
Analysis
The Board had not adopted formal measures to evaluate inspector
performance and determine annual workload requirements. Further, we
noted that recorded productivity between individual inspectors varied greatly
and the lack of measures would make it difficult for the BOLC to determine
the optimum number of inspectors needed. Complicating matters is the
status of vacant inspector positions. Specifically, between March 2, 2018
and June 29, 2018, 10 of the 24 part-time inspectors resigned (we were
advised by BOLC management that the resignations were related to the newly
established minimum workweek). This was preceded by the resignation of
two other part-time inspectors during calendar year 2017. As of June 30,
2018, the BOLC had 13 Liquor inspectors (one full-time and 12 part-time) and
14 vacant inspector positions (two full-time and 12 part-time). Two of the
three full-time inspector positions have been vacant since December 2015
and January 2017, respectively.
No Inspector Performance Standards
Although position descriptions had been developed for inspectors, they did not
include any measurable performance standards. Additionally, as previously
commented upon, annual employee performance evaluations were not
prepared for inspectors. While certain measured activity data, such as the
number of inspectors and inspections performed, were reported in the annual
budget, no inspector output or efficiency measures and goals had been
established. Furthermore, a documented analysis of the optimum number of
inspectors actually needed, that considered the number of inspections
required and the number of inspections that reasonably could be completed
within a specified time period, had not been performed.
We were advised by BOLC administrative staff that the number of part-time
inspectors was originally set at 24 in State law in order to provide each of the
8 county legislators with 3 inspector appointments, but the law was amended
in 2017 to provide for ‘up to’ 24 inspectors. The amended law further
provides that, under the direction of the Board, the chief inspector shall
regulate the duties, hours, and assignments of the inspectors. However, while
the part-time inspectors received an offer letter that specified the amount of
their salary when they were hired, no contract was executed and no related
written work requirements were established.
53

--- Page 56 ---
Although all inspectors were paid the same salary, we found that the actual
individual workload (the number of inspections performed by each inspector)
varied greatly. We calculated, considering only those inspectors employed for
an entire fiscal year period, during fiscal year 2015, 2016 and/or 2017, the
least number of completed inspections (of all types) by an inspector for any
year was 123, while the greatest number was 441, with the average number
of annual inspections for an inspector over the entire 3 year period ranging
from 189 to 334. In addition, there were 10 inspectors who averaged less
than 275 inspections per year (see Table 5). When this result was brought to
its attention, BOLC management could not readily provide an explanation for
the disparity in inspections completed.
54

--- Page 57 ---
Table 5
Number of Inspections Completed by Part-Time Inspectors Employed
for the Entire Fiscal Year
(Fiscal Years 2015 to 2017)
Average Inspections Fiscal Fiscal Fiscal
Inspector Completed by Fiscal Year Year Year Year
(One, Two or Three-Year Period) 2015 2016 2017
Inspector 1 123 - 123 -
Inspector 2 166 - - 166
Inspector 3 189 221 191 156
Inspector 4 220 273 244 144
Inspector 5 228 328 183 172
Inspector 6 232 - 267 196
Inspector 7 233 - - 233
Inspector 8 237 237 - -
Inspector 9 249 275 205 266
Inspector 10 272 318 235 264
Inspector 11 282 310 272 264
Inspector 12 289 285 273 308
Inspector 13 295 344 223 319
Inspector 14 300 346 270 284
Inspector 15 310 334 296 299
Inspector 16 317 375 318 259
Inspector 17 320 368 284 308
Inspector 18 328 391 281 312
Inspector 19 329 - - 329
Inspector 20 330 284 414 292
Inspector 21 334 341 349 313
Inspector 22 344 344 - -
Inspector 23 374 - 441 307
Inspector 24 382 382 - -
Annual Number of Inspections Completed 5,756 4,869 5,191
Least Number of Inspections Completed 221 123 144
Greatest Number of Inspections Completed 391 441 329
Average Number of Inspections Completed 320 270 260
Source: BOLC inspection database as of July 24, 2017
55

--- Page 58 ---
Pre-March 2018 Inspector Attendance Policy
In February 2014, the Board approved an inspector absentee policy, which
stated that inspector attendance was expected to remain above 75 percent
and that failure to comply could result in disciplinary action to include
termination, with each case determined on a case-by-case basis. The
baseline “attendance” to which the 75 percent was to be applied, was not
specified, but this vaguely defined policy appeared to be purposely left open
to interpretation. We were advised that it was interpreted by administrative
staff as requiring that each inspector submit one inspection report, or sign-in
one day, each week to be counted present for the week, with the goal of being
in “attendance” for at least 75 percent of the weeks in a year. An ‘attendance
record’ was established to track policy compliance where each inspector was
marked as absent or present each week based on that interpretation.
Without opining on the appropriateness of this ”attendance policy”, we
reviewed calendar year 2017 attendance records for a period of 50 weeks12
for all of the employed part-time inspectors and found that 2 of the 24
inspectors failed to achieve an attendance percentage of at least 75 percent
and one of the two resigned during the period tested. The remaining
inspector had attended 64 percent of the 50-week period, but was not
reported to the Board and no disciplinary action was taken.
State law provides that the part-time inspectors receive a salary as provided in
the county budget. BOLC did not keep time records (an employee time sheet
with work start and end times recorded each day) or track the number of
hours that part-time inspectors worked until March 4, 2018 when a minimum
workweek was established for part-time inspectors of 20 hours, and their
salaries were converted to an hourly rate. We were advised by BOLC
administrative staff that the standard written work week schedule was
prepared based on the input of County officials, but as noted previously in
Finding 14, the new minimum workweek schedule and time-keeping policy
had not been formally approved by the Board, County, or current BOLC
Director.
Optimal Number of Inspectors Not Known
BOLC had not performed a study to determine the required number of part-
time inspectors necessary to complete all required and necessary inspection
activity. Further, since BOLC has not established any formal criteria regarding
the number of inspections that should be performed by each inspector during
a given period, and did not maintain time records during the complete fiscal
12 We observed that there was a week in both November and December 2017, for which no
attendance records were maintained, so the records included 50 instead of 52 weeks.
56

--- Page 59 ---
years under audit, we were not readily able to estimate the number of
inspectors required. We did observe that if information gathered from
previous audits conducted by the Office of Legislative Audits of the Board of
Liquor License Commissions for Baltimore City (for example, where full-time
inspectors are required to complete four inspections per day), were applied to
BOLC, approximately 12 part-time inspectors (working a 20-hour week) might
be indicated to conduct the approximately 5,300 inspections that BOLC
completed during fiscal year 2017. Our estimation was only based on the
aforementioned Baltimore City information and actual inspections completed
by BOLC, rather than the inspections required and necessary for the proper
performance of its mission. Consequently, it should not be construed as
authoritative or prescribing a standard.
Recommendation 15
We recommend that, in order to efficiently carry out its regulatory
responsibilities and meet its performance goals, BOLC should
a. adopt measurable standards for inspector performance and include them
in their position descriptions;
b. monitor the number of hours worked and inspections completed by each
inspector;
c. perform annual employee evaluations for inspectors; and
d. consider performing a formal staffing analysis, and periodically evaluate
inspector workloads, making staffing decisions as appropriate.
Finding 16
User access to critical BOLC data files was not adequately monitored and
restricted to BOLC employees whose job duties required such access, and
user transaction reports were not available to review for propriety.
Analysis
User access to critical BOLC data files (maintained by the Prince George’s
County government) was not adequately monitored and restricted to BOLC
employees whose job duties required such access, and user transaction
reports were not available to review for propriety.13 Furthermore, a periodic
review of the propriety of BOLC user access capabilities was not performed.
Additionally, we were advised by County Information Technology (IT) staff that
the information edited on the BOLC’s databases was overwritten when
updated and no transaction history was saved on the system. Consequently,
no user transaction reports could be generated by the system for review.
13 We did not review or assess Prince George’s County government employee access to BOLC
records, as this was deemed to be beyond the scope of this audit.
57

--- Page 60 ---
From our review of system records provided by County IT staff; we concluded
that, as of May 2018, 26 of the 30 active BOLC network users had been
assigned unnecessary update access to the licensing, inspection, and
violation databases, as well as other critical BOLC files, such as the internal
complaint log and completed criminal background investigation list. This
update access included the ability to unilaterally add, edit, and delete data
such as approved licenses, completed inspections, or criminal background
checks performed. These 26 employees included 7 former employees who
resigned in either January, 2017, or March or April 2018 and 19 current
employees (5 commissioners, 13 part-time inspectors, and BOLC legal
counsel) that did not require such access to perform their job duties. We were
advised by County IT personnel that assigned users could access BOLC files
from anywhere in the County network.
Furthermore, no procedure had been established for reporting terminated
employees to County IT for removal of access. In addition, although County IT
personnel advised us that any user account not used for 45 days would be
automatically inactivated by the system, we found one BOLC account that was
still active 15 months after the employee’s separation. As a result, there was
a lack of assurance as to the propriety of information recorded on the BOLC
databases and other critical files.
System access to BOLC data files was requested through an informal process
where a BOLC administrative aide would e-mail the County IT staff requesting
access for a specific individual. Although an assigned logon identification
code and password was needed to access BOLC’s shared drive on the County
network, once assigned, they provided unlimited update access to the BOLC
licensing, inspection, and violation databases. We also found that individual
BOLC workstation files were not password protected. Best practices as stated
in the State of Maryland Information Security Policy require that passwords be
used to authenticate users to protect critical databases and individual files.
Recommendation 16
We recommend that BOLC, in conjunction with the County, establish adequate
access controls over its critical data files. Specifically, they should
a. establish a formal documented process, subject to supervisory review, for
assigning and restricting user access commensurate with each
employee’s duties, monitoring user access, and removing access for
terminated employees;
b. make system changes that enable the saving of a user’s transaction
history and the generation of a report for independent documented review;
and
58

--- Page 61 ---
c. establish logon and password controls over critical databases and
individual workstation files.
Finding 17
BOLC had not established procedures to monitor employee compliance with
statutory independence restrictions concerning secondary employment,
business investments, and political activities.
Analysis
Procedures had not been established to monitor employee compliance with
statutory independence restrictions concerning secondary employment,
business investments, and political activities; violations of which could be
grounds for termination of employment. Specifically, BOLC employees were
not required to sign an affidavit to attest to their knowledge of, and
compliance with, independence requirements when applying for employment
or periodically, such as annually, after they were hired.
In addition, during the course of our audit, it came to our attention that three
BOLC part-time inspectors and a commissioner were members of a political
committee and a full-time inspection employee held office in a local
municipality within the County. Additionally, another commissioner was the
campaign manager for a local candidate and a fourth commissioner was the
treasurer for a political campaign (but resigned from that position a month
after Board appointment). For example, regarding the three aforementioned
part-time employees and commissioner, we found a campaign finance report
submitted to the State Board of Elections that disclosed the political
committee in question had received certain contributions from individuals or
corporations that included $500 from two BOLC licensees. However, it was
not clear as to whether the County Executive and Board were aware of these
political activities, since the employees were not required to report them. In
our opinion, such political activities could, under certain circumstances
through either fact or appearance, impact employee independence,
reinforcing the need for the Board to provide specific guidance to its staff on
potential independence restrictions and requiring BOLC to establish related
procedures.
Ultimately, advice from Counsel to the Maryland General Assembly was sought
by interested parties on the permissibility of a person who is a member of a
county central committee or a campaign manager for a local candidate
serving on the Board. Counsel advised that such persons can be appointed to
the Board, but once appointed, they would have to avoid campaign activities
that are barred by law. We did not determine, and were not aware, of any of
59

--- Page 62 ---
the individuals’ direct involvement in barred activities, as such was beyond
the scope of this audit.
Finally, all BOLC employees were required to file annual disclosures with the
State Ethics Commission (SEC). Our review found that while all required
employees filed the required disclosures for 2016, one employee did not
report all of their secondary employment (holding public office) and political
activities. Specifically, SEC staff advised us that the current ethics law and
disclosure form does not require the disclosure of political fund raising
activities, but that holding public office should have been disclosed. In
addition, upon our raising the issue, SEC staff added that having the Board
commissioners and BOLC employees sign an annual internal affidavit
attesting to their knowledge of and compliance with applicable restrictions
and disclosing all political and fund raising activities would provide meaningful
transparency going forward.
State law provides that Board members be appointed by the County Executive
and confirmed by the State senate. The Board in turn appoints the BOLC
Director who hires the administrative staff and liquor inspectors. Additionally,
the law requires, among other things, that BOLC employees not have a direct
or indirect employment, business, or investment interest in the alcoholic
beverage industry or premises where alcoholic beverages are sold.
Additionally, employees are forbidden to solicit or accept a commission,
remuneration, gift, or political contribution from a person engaged in the
manufacture or sale of alcoholic beverages or a license holder. Finally, the
law requires that an employee of the Board who violates these restrictions
shall be removed.
Recommendation 17
We recommend that BOLC establish procedures to monitor employee
compliance with statutory independence restrictions. Specifically, the Board
should consider
a. requiring employees to sign an annual affidavit attesting to their
knowledge of and compliance with key statutory provisions, including
disclosure of all political and fund raising activities;
b. provide specific guidance to its staff on potential independence
restrictions; and
c. advise the aforementioned full time employee to revise their SEC
disclosure noting their holding of public office.
60

--- Page 64 ---
Board of License Commissioners
for Prince George’s County
Agency Response Form
Objective 1 - Licensing
Finding 1
Licensing procedures and controls were inadequate, as there was a lack of separation of
application processing, approval, and recording functions. In addition, an independent
supervisory review of these functions was not performed.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that BOLC establish adequate procedures and controls over the licensing
process. Specifically, the BOLC should ensure that
a. application processing duties are properly segregated and the embosser with the County
seal and ink stamp with the Board Chair’s signature are properly safeguarded; and
b. there is a documented independent supervisory review over the licensing and hearing
process that verifies required documents are received, complete information is provided
to the Commissioners at monthly hearings, and applications are accurately recorded in
the licensing database.
We advised BOLC how to achieve the necessary segregation of duties using existing
personnel.
Agency Response
Analysis Factually Accurate
Please explain any The Board of License Commissioners agrees that the licensing process
concerns with factual was not adequately segregated. The administrative staff incorporated a
accuracy.
supervisory review of the renewal applications during the time the audit
was being performed.
Recommendation 1a Agree Estimated Completion Date: January
2019
Please provide details of Procedures were developed to further segregate the duties of the
corrective action or licensing process. The process will first require applications be
explain disagreement. reviewed by one member of the administrative staff and then processed
by a second member of the staff. The embosser with the County seal
and the ink stamp are maintained in a locked cabinet, only accessible by
the supervisor. Licenses will be issued by the supervisor after a
documented review.
Recommendation 1b Agree Estimated Completion Date: January
2019
Page 1 of 19

--- Page 65 ---
Board of License Commissioners
for Prince George’s County
Agency Response Form
Please provide details of The Board of License Commissioners agrees that verification of a
corrective action or supervisory review for hearing documents was not always completed.
explain disagreement.
Applications are reviewed in a management meeting prior to each
hearing. The coversheet for each application will be revised to include
supervisory review as a requirement prior to the hearing.
Finding 2
BOLC did not ensure that all required documents were obtained prior to the issuance of
licenses and permits as required.
Recommendation 2
We recommend that BOLC ensure that, in accordance with governing statues and BOLC
rules and regulations
a. all license applications are properly completed, and all required documentation is
received before the applications are processed, and
b. all required documentation is retained on file for at least three years or until audited.
Agency Response
Analysis Factually Accurate
Please explain any
concerns with factual
accuracy.
Recommendation 2a Agree Estimated Completion Date: July 2019
Please provide details of To ensure all required documents are obtained prior to the issuance of a
corrective action or license or permit the Board of License Commissioners identified specific
explain disagreement. items that were missing from the master file. These items will be added
to the master check list ensuring completion in the future. Additionally,
the master files have been updated to include a section for identity
sensitive information. To ensure an application is thoroughly reviewed
for completeness and accuracy each reviewer is required to initial the
checklist.
Recommendation 2b Agree Estimated Completion Date: January
2019
Please provide details of All documentation will be retained in the file for at least three years.
corrective action or
explain disagreement.
Page 2 of 19

--- Page 66 ---
Board of License Commissioners
for Prince George’s County
Agency Response Form
Finding 3
BOLC did not adequately document criminal background checks of license applicants and
had not established a process to receive updates of subsequent changes to licensee
criminal records, as required by law.
Recommendation 3
We recommend that BOLC
a. adequately document criminal background checks of license applicants, by retaining
criminal records received from CJIS for at least three years or until the next legislative
audit;
b. require all criminal records received from CJIS be reviewed by the processor of the
application and supervisor and that the reviews be documented; and
c. establish a process to periodically obtain and review updates to licensee criminal
records from CJIS and take appropriate licensing actions based on the updates received.
Agency Response
Analysis Factually Accurate
Please explain any The Board of License Commissioners agrees that there was not a policy
concerns with factual in place to request updated Criminal Justice Information Systems (CJIS)
accuracy. Central Repository of the State of Maryland for updates on licensee
criminal records. However, the Board notes that Section 4-107(f)(1) of
the Alcoholic Beverage Article states “When criminal history record
information of an application or license holder is reported to the Central
Repository after the initial criminal history records check is completed,
the central Repository shall provide the local licensing board with a
revised printed statement of the criminal record of the application for
license holder.” Based upon this section of the law, the Board did not
believe that follow-up from this agency was required.
Recommendation 3a Agree Estimated Completion Date: July 2019
Please provide details of During the 2018 Renewal process the Board of License Commissioners
corrective action or required that licensees submit a background check prior to accepting the
explain disagreement.
application. The background checks were verified prior to the issuance
of the alcoholic beverage license in 2018. Pursuant to this finding a
filing system was established to retain the information for at least three
years.
Recommendation 3b Agree Estimated Completion Date: March 2019
Page 3 of 19

--- Page 67 ---
Board of License Commissioners
for Prince George’s County
Agency Response Form
Please provide details of To ensure all CJIS criminal background checks of license applicants are
corrective action or adequately documented each printed copy will be reviewed by a
explain disagreement.
supervisor and a staff member for processing, included in an electronic
database and maintained in the file.
Recommendation 3c Agree Estimated Completion Date: July 2019
Please provide details of The Director has requested from CJIS updated information be provided
corrective action or annually. Any updates to the licensee’s criminal records from CJIS will
explain disagreement. be reviewed by two supervisors. Appropriate licensing actions will be
taken based on the updates received.
Finding 4
BOLC did not always verify that license applicants had no undisputed taxes due to the State
or Prince George’s County prior to issuing licenses as required by State law.
Recommendation 4
We recommend that BOLC take appropriate actions to ensure that license applicants had no
undisputed State or County taxes payable prior to issuing and renewing licenses as required
by law. Specifically, we recommend that BOLC
a. determine if they can initiate a process that ensures applicants for new and transfer
licenses and renewals do not have undisputed unpaid taxes at the time of Board action,
and
b. ensure verifications of unpaid taxes include the owners and principals of the businesses
applying for or holding existing licenses.
Agency Response
Analysis Factually Accurate
Please explain any The Board of License Commissioners has consistently requested
concerns with factual verification of the tax status of the business but agrees that it did not
accuracy.
verify the information for individuals.
Recommendation 4a Agree Estimated Completion Date: July 2019
Please provide details of The Board of License Commissioners currently provides the
corrective action or Comptroller of Maryland a list of applicants for new and transfer
explain disagreement.
applications to verify the tax status of the entity issued the alcoholic
beverage licenses on a monthly basis. The Administrative Staff will
include Prince George’s County’s Office of Finance in the current
process for new and transfer applications. Additionally, to address the
timeliness the information related to renewals will be requested in
January of the license year.
Page 4 of 19

--- Page 68 ---
Board of License Commissioners
for Prince George’s County
Agency Response Form
Recommendation 4b Agree Estimated Completion Date: July 2019
Please provide details of The Board of License Commissioners implemented a process for
corrective action or verification that owners and principles of existing licenses do not have
explain disagreement.
any undisputed taxes due the Comptroller of Maryland or Prince
George’s County. The information was provided to the Comptroller of
Maryland and Prince George’s County early in 2019. The renewal of the
alcoholic beverage will not be issued until this verification process is
complete.
Finding 5
BOLC had not established adequate record keeping procedures and internal controls over
license fees and other office collections.
Recommendation 5
We recommend that BOLC establish adequate record keeping procedures and internal
controls over office collections in accordance with County standards. Specifically, we
recommend that BOLC
a. record collections immediately upon receipt in a permanent record such as a money mail
listing or cash receipts log;
b. issue pre-numbered receipts for all payments collected;
c. perform periodic (such as monthly) accountabilities of pre-numbered cash receipt forms
as to issued, voided, and on-hand, properly safeguard unused forms on-hand, reconcile
used forms to deposit, and investigate the missing forms identified that were mentioned
above;
d. deposit collections daily and adequately safeguard them prior to deposit;
e. segregate collection, recordkeeping, deposit, and licensing duties to the extent possible;
and
f. perform a documented independent verification, using an employee that does not have
access to or handle collections, that all collections received were properly deposited
using a record of initial accountability.
We advised BOLC how to achieve the necessary segregation of duties using existing
personnel.
Agency Response
Analysis Factually Accurate
Page 5 of 19

--- Page 69 ---
Board of License Commissioners
for Prince George’s County
Agency Response Form
Please explain any
concerns with factual
accuracy.
Recommendation 5a Agree Estimated Completion Date: June 2019
Please provide details of Revenue is immediately recorded by the staff member receiving the
corrective action or payment in to a spreadsheet maintained solely by that staff member. The
explain disagreement.
Standard Operating Procedure is being revised to incorporate this
requirement.
Recommendation 5b Agree Estimated Completion Date: January
2019
Please provide details of Upon acceptance of all revenue received transactions will be
corrective action or documented on a pre-numbered three-part receipt. One part of the
explain disagreement.
receipt will remain with the master file, one will be issued to the remitter
and one will be used to reconcile the revenue monthly.
Recommendation 5c Agree Estimated Completion Date: April 2019
Please provide details of The three-part prenumbered receipts will be reconciled with the
corrective action or spreadsheets as part of the monthly reconciliation of the revenue. The
explain disagreement.
reconciliation will be reviewed by the Board in Administrative Voting
Session. The receipts are maintained in a locked cabinet.
Recommendation 5d Agree Estimated Completion Date: February
2019
Please provide details of The Board of License Commissioners incorporated a teller scan digital
corrective action or check system to deposit the revenue. Deposits are made daily when
explain disagreement.
possible; when the deposit is not completed the same day, the funds will
be maintained in a locked safe.
Recommendation 5e Agree Estimated Completion Date: July 2019
Please provide details of A policy is being developed to incorporate the required segregation of
corrective action or revenue collection duties.
explain disagreement.
Recommendation 5f Agree Estimated Completion Date: July 2019
Please provide details of A reconciliation of all revenue will be performed monthly to ensure
corrective action or compliance with the requirements of this revenue collection operating
explain disagreement. procedure.
Page 6 of 19

--- Page 70 ---
Board of License Commissioners
for Prince George’s County
Agency Response Form
Objective 2 – Inspections
Finding 6
Not all licensees were subject to periodic inspection, as required by State law.
Recommendation 6
We recommend that BOLC
a. establish written Board-approved inspection scheduling procedures and criteria which
define the scheduling methodology and required frequency for each type of inspection,
b. require that the inspection schedules and scheduling process are subject to
independent supervisory review,
c. periodically reconcile the population of licensees subject to inspection to the related
inspection schedule to ensure all eligible licensees are scheduled for inspection, and
d. periodically report the results of inspection activity to the Board.
Agency Response
Analysis Factually Accurate
Please explain any
concerns with factual
accuracy.
Recommendation 6a Agree Estimated Completion Date: March 2019
Please provide details of The inspection staff is developing a procedure to address scheduling,
corrective action or criteria and frequency of inspections. The procedure will be presented to
explain disagreement. the Board for approval.
Recommendation 6b Agree Estimated Completion Date: February
2019
Please provide details of All inspections are scheduled by a supervisor and are periodically
corrective action or reviewed by the Chief Liquor Inspector. Trail Audits are also conducted
explain disagreement. weekly by supervisors to ensure compliance and accountability.
Recommendation 6c Agree Estimated Completion Date: April 2019
Please provide details of Supervisors will conduct a quarterly review of all scheduled inspections
corrective action or to ensure complete coverage. Any establishment assigned for inspection
explain disagreement. that was not inspected will be placed on the next inspection assignment
for the following shift.
Page 7 of 19

--- Page 71 ---
Board of License Commissioners
for Prince George’s County
Agency Response Form
Recommendation 6d Agree Estimated Completion Date: February
2019
Please provide details of The Board of License Commissioners will be provided a monthly report
corrective action or capturing statistics of the organization.
explain disagreement.
Finding 7
Inspection reports were not comprehensive, properly completed, or subject to an
independent documented supervisory review.
Recommendation 7
We recommend that BOLC ensure all inspection reports are
a. tailored for the type of inspection to be performed, include specified objectives,
sufficient questions to achieve a comprehensive understanding, and require detailed
conclusions;
b. properly completed with all requested information provided and all checklist questions
answered with clarifying information as necessary;
c. signed by the owner or manager of the licensed business to provide assurance that the
inspection was actually performed; and
d. subject to an independent documented supervisory review to ensure the
appropriateness of the conclusions and proper completion of the inspection.
Agency Response
Analysis Factually Accurate
Please explain any
concerns with factual
accuracy.
Recommendation 7a Agree Estimated Completion Date: January
2019
Please provide details of The Board of License Commissioners uses an electronic
corrective action or inspection program that uses two (2) distinct platforms:
explain disagreement. 1. The first platform assigns inspections to each inspection
team and tracks real-time performance using GPS
technology.
2. The second platform provides tailored reporting templates
that speed the collection process with predefined
questions that use logic and provide easy-to-fill answers.
Page 8 of 19

--- Page 72 ---
Board of License Commissioners
for Prince George’s County
Agency Response Form
Additionally, the program allows the uploading of images
for evidence collection.
There are numerous templates specifically designed to cover a
range of all BOLC reporting objectives and inspection types.
Recommendation 7b Agree Estimated Completion Date: April 2019
Please provide details of The reporting templates in the second platform require each
corrective action or report to be fully completed with all corresponding information
explain disagreement. including a signature before it can be closed and submitted.
Recommendation 7c Agree Estimated Completion Date: March 2019
Please provide details of The reporting templates in the second platform require each
corrective action or report to be fully completed with all corresponding information
explain disagreement. including a signature before it can be closed and submitted.
Recommendation 7d Agree Estimated Completion Date: March 2019
Please provide details of Reports are reviewed by the supervisor to whom the inspectors are
corrective action or assigned. A control has been added that documents and
explain disagreement. independent review of every report generated. Subsequently, when a
violation is submitted, an additional report written as a Word
document is required recording the time, date, location,
observations, and the specifics of the violation.
Finding 8
No procedures had been established to ensure all completed inspection reports were
properly recorded in the BOLC inspection database and all scheduled inspections were
performed.
Recommendation 8
We recommend that BOLC establish procedures that ensure
a. all completed inspection reports are properly controlled and accounted for, by providing
a locked drop box, using pre-numbered inspection report forms for all inspections, and
performing periodic accountabilities;
b. all completed inspection reports are accurately recorded by having independent
administrative personnel verify the data entered for each inspection recorded to the
related supporting paper report;
c. all scheduled inspections are completed by having independent supervisory personnel
monitor periodic reconciliations of recorded inspection reports with the related
inspection schedules; and
Page 9 of 19

--- Page 73 ---
Board of License Commissioners
for Prince George’s County
Agency Response Form
d. the Board is kept informed as to the status of inspection efforts, by periodically
compiling and reporting the number of inspections scheduled and completed.
Agency Response
Analysis Factually Accurate
Please explain any
concerns with factual
accuracy.
Recommendation 8a Agree Estimated Completion Date: December
2018
Please provide details of All inspections are generated electronically through the second platform
corrective action or and stored in a database. Only BOLC personnel have access to the
explain disagreement.
database. Printed violation summary reports are stored in the licensee’s
master file which is in a secured room.
Recommendation 8b Agree Estimated Completion Date: January
2019
Please provide details of The inspections are now completed electronically eliminating the data
corrective action or entry process previously used. The electronic process mitigates the
explain disagreement.
errors found during the audit.
Recommendation 8c Agree Estimated Completion Date: March 2019
Please provide details of A quarterly report of all completed inspections will be generated for the
corrective action or director’s review and approval.
explain disagreement.
Recommendation 8d Agree Estimated Completion Date: January
2019
Please provide details of Beginning January 2019, a monthly report will be provided to Board
corrective action or members which will include:
explain disagreement.
 the current number of completed inspections
 underage compliance checks and their accompanying violations
 violations incurred from special entertainment, and routine
inspections
Page 10 of 19

--- Page 74 ---
Board of License Commissioners
for Prince George’s County
Agency Response Form
Finding 9
Adequate procedures had not been established for the follow-up of inspections aborted
because the licensee’s business was closed at the time of the inspector’s visit.
Recommendation 9
We recommend that BOLC enhance its procedures for the timely follow-up of aborted
inspections to determine if licensing actions are warranted. Such efforts should include
both contacting owners and rescheduling inspections.
Agency Response
Analysis Factually Accurate
Please explain any
concerns with factual
accuracy.
Recommendation 9 Agree Estimated Completion Date: February
2019
Please provide details of The Board of License Commissioners will establish a comprehensive
corrective action or policy to ensure closed or uninspected establishments are inspected. The
explain disagreement. policy will ensure that the hours of operation are verified and that the
follow up inspection be included during the appropriate hours in the next
inspection cycle. Businesses found to be closed during reported hours of
operation will be contacted by the inspection staff to determine the status
of the business. If location is permanently closed, a twenty (20) day
monitoring process will be done by inspection staff to recommend
expiration of the license.
Finding 10
Licensee complaints received both directly by BOLC and through the County’s 311 System
were not always timely investigated and resolved or subject to supervisory review. Further,
employee access to complaint records was not controlled.
Recommendation 10
We recommend that BOLC
a. establish comprehensive written policies and procedures for investigating and resolving
complaints on a timely basis;
b. ensure all complaints are reviewed by an independent supervisor to ensure their timely
resolution and the appropriateness of the resolution reached; and
Page 11 of 19

--- Page 75 ---
Board of License Commissioners
for Prince George’s County
Agency Response Form
c. restrict access to the BOLC complaint records and the 311 System, to the extent
possible, to BOLC employees who require access based on their job responsibilities.
Agency Response
Analysis Factually Accurate
Please explain any
concerns with factual
accuracy.
Recommendation 10a Agree Estimated Completion Date: May 2019
Please provide details of The Board of License Commissioners will develop a written policy and
corrective action or procedure for investigating and resolving complaints in a timely manner.
explain disagreement. Each complaint received by phone, 311 system, e-mail or walk in, will
be sent to the Chief Liquor Inspector or his designee, logged in the
complaint log on the password protected document on the shared drive
and assigned to a Deputy Chief for investigation. The complaint should
be investigated and resolved within 30 days. If the complainant provides
contact information, the respective Deputy Chief will contact the
complainant for follow up and to close out the complaint. If additional
time is needed to investigate the complaint an extension request shall be
made by the respective Deputy Chief to the Chief Liquor Inspector. The
electronic complaint logbook will have restricted access to enhance
better control. Only Deputy Chiefs and above grade levels will have
access to the electronic logbook.
Recommendation 10b Agree Estimated Completion Date: May 2019
Please provide details of The Chief Liquor Inspector will be responsible for reviewing all
corrective action or complaints to ensure they are resolved completely in a timely manner.
explain disagreement.
Recommendation 10c Agree Estimated Completion Date: January
2019
Please provide details of The 311 system is restricted by log in. Access will be restricted to two
corrective action or supervisors and a member of the administrative staff.
explain disagreement.
Page 12 of 19

--- Page 76 ---
Board of License Commissioners
for Prince George’s County
Agency Response Form
Objective 3 – Disciplinary Procedures
Finding 11
The Board delegated its discretionary functions, in certain cases, to its staff in conflict with
State law. The Board did not review and approve administrative staff decisions to refer
violations for a hearing or make offers of compromise and the disposition of all reported
violations was not verified.
Recommendation 11
We recommend that, in order for the Board to carry out its required statutory duties, the
Board should
a. require BOLC administrative staff to maintain a log of all reported violations received
from outside entities;
b. establish clear written guidelines for the scheduling of violations for hearings, and when
the Board would consider offers of compromise for its own use; and
c. not delegate its discretionary functions to staff.
Agency Response
Analysis Factually Accurate
Please explain any
concerns with factual
accuracy.
Recommendation 11a Agree Estimated Completion Date: March 2019
Please provide details of The Board of License Commissioners has created a log for violations
corrective action or received from outside entities.
explain disagreement.
Recommendation 11b Agree Estimated Completion Date: February
2019
Please provide details of The Board of License Commissioners implemented a process of
corrective action or providing the information to the Commissioners in an Administrative
explain disagreement. Voting Session. This process including providing the Board with the
pertinent information and the ability to determine if the matter will be
resolved with an offer letter or a public hearing.
Recommendation 11c Agree Estimated Completion Date: January
2019
Page 13 of 19

--- Page 77 ---
Board of License Commissioners
for Prince George’s County
Agency Response Form
Please provide details of The Board of License Commissioner no longer delegates its
corrective action or discretionary functions to staff.
explain disagreement.
Finding 12
Formal accounts receivable records had not been established for fines assessed by the
Board and related late fees due were sometimes not collected.
Recommendation 12
We recommend that BOLC
a. establish formal detail accounts receivable records and a related control account for
fines and late fees assessed licensees, segregating these from the related collection
functions to the extent practicable;
b. ensure that receivable records are adequately safeguarded;
c. establish a formal follow-up process to aid in the timely collection of fines and the
assessment and collection of all late payment fees; and
d. require documented independent supervisory oversight of the debt recording, collection,
and follow-up recordkeeping processes.
Agency Response
Analysis Factually Accurate
Please explain any
concerns with factual
accuracy.
Recommendation 12a Agree Estimated Completion Date: March 2019
Please provide details of A coversheet will be developed for each fine assessed incorporating
corrective action or the due date for each violation and the late fee will be assessed. The
explain disagreement. collection function will be assigned to one member of the
administrative staff with supervisory oversight.
Recommendation 12b Agree Estimated Completion Date: January
2019
Please provide details of The letter assessing the fine with the corresponding coversheet will
corrective action or be mainlined in a locked filing cabinet.
explain disagreement.
Recommendation 12c Agree Estimated Completion Date: July 2019
Page 14 of 19

--- Page 78 ---
Board of License Commissioners
for Prince George’s County
Agency Response Form
Please provide details of A formal follow up process will be formulated. The process will
corrective action or include required timeframe for reminder notices and contract
explain disagreement. information for each business.
Recommendation 12d Agree Estimated Completion Date: July 2019
Please provide details of The coversheets will be provided to the Director monthly for review
corrective action or and supervisory oversight.
explain disagreement.
Finding 13
The Board did not adequately document the basis for its decisions regarding the continued
active status of two licensees who had pleaded guilty to criminal charges.
Recommendation 13
We recommend that in the future the Board adequately document the basis for its legal
decisions on criminal matters affecting licensees.
Agency Response
Analysis Factually Accurate
Please explain any
concerns with factual
accuracy.
Recommendation 13 Agree Estimated Completion Date: July 2019
Please provide details of The Board will adopt a policy that any time a licensee is
corrective action or convicted/guilty of a crime the matter will be heard in Regular
explain disagreement. Session with the decision made on the record.
Objective 4 – Management Oversight
Finding 14
Written policies and procedures governing BOLC operations were not sufficiently
comprehensive and had not been formally adopted by the Board.
Recommendation 14
We recommend that BOLC
Page 15 of 19

--- Page 79 ---
Board of License Commissioners
for Prince George’s County
Agency Response Form
a. develop comprehensive written policies and procedures that address the internal
control, time record keeping, annual performance evaluations, document retention, the
signing of inspection reports and other issues commented on in this report; and
b. obtain formal Board approval of its written policies and procedures.
Agency Response
Analysis Factually Accurate
Please explain any
concerns with factual
accuracy.
Recommendation 14a Agree Estimated Completion Date: July 2019
Please provide details of Comprehensive written policies are being developed to address
corrective action or internal controls for time recordkeeping, annual performance
explain disagreement. evaluations and document retention.
Recommendation 14b Agree Estimated Completion Date: July 2019
Please provide details of As they policies are developed they will be presented to the
corrective action or Commissioners for approval.
explain disagreement.
Finding 15
The Board had not adopted formal measures to evaluate inspector performance and
determine annual workload requirements.
Recommendation 15
We recommend that, in order to efficiently carry out its regulatory responsibilities and meet
its performance goals, BOLC should
a. adopt measurable standards for inspector performance and include them in their
position descriptions;
b. monitor the number of hours worked and inspections completed by each inspector;
c. perform annual employee evaluations for inspectors; and
d. consider performing a formal staffing analysis, and periodically evaluate inspector
workloads, making staffing decisions as appropriate.
Agency Response
Analysis Factually Accurate
Page 16 of 19

--- Page 80 ---
Board of License Commissioners
for Prince George’s County
Agency Response Form
Please explain any
concerns with factual
accuracy.
Recommendation 15a Agree Estimated Completion Date: July 2019
Please provide details of Measurable standards for the inspection staff are being developed.
corrective action or
explain disagreement.
Recommendation 15b Agree Estimated Completion Date: April 2019
Please provide details of The inspector staff’s hours and inspections will be monitor by the
corrective action or Deputy Chief Liquor Inspectors.
explain disagreement.
Recommendation 15c Agree Estimated Completion Date: February
2019
Please provide details of Annual Performance appraisals were completed for the inspection
corrective action or staff.
explain disagreement.
Recommendation 15d Agree Estimated Completion Date: March 2019
Please provide details of Management will periodically evaluate inspector’s workload by
corrective action or analyzing the number of inspections completed in comparison to the
explain disagreement. number of inspections issued. This assessment will be done
periodically to ensure staffing levels are commensurate with Agency
Goals and Objectives.
Finding 16
User access to critical BOLC data files was not adequately monitored and restricted to BOLC
employees whose job duties required such access, and user transaction reports were not
available to review for propriety.
Recommendation 16
We recommend that BOLC, in conjunction with the County, establish adequate access
controls over its critical data files. Specifically, they should
a. establish a formal documented process, subject to supervisory review, for assigning and
restricting user access commensurate with each employee’s duties, monitoring user
access, and removing access for terminated employees;
Page 17 of 19

--- Page 81 ---
Board of License Commissioners
for Prince George’s County
Agency Response Form
b. make system changes that enable the saving of a user’s transaction history and the
generation of a report for independent documented review; and
c. establish logon and password controls over critical databases and individual workstation
files.
Agency Response
Analysis Factually Accurate
Please explain any
concerns with factual
accuracy.
Recommendation 16a Agree Estimated Completion Date: July 2019
Please provide details of The licensing data base is currently restricted to the administrative
corrective action or staff for edits and updates. An active log in profile is required to
explain disagreement. make edits. A formal process will be developed to remove employees
no longer with the agency.
Recommendation 16b Agree Estimated Completion Date: July 2019
Please provide details of Currently the data is stored in a database. Changes are tracked by
corrective action or who makes changes or updates to the database. There are only four
explain disagreement. users that can edit and update. The only way to see the record is for
approved users to login with registered access.
Recommendation 16c Agree Estimated Completion Date: July 2019
Please provide details of The current data base system has a login and password control to
corrective action or restrict and control users with a daily backup.
explain disagreement.
Finding 17
BOLC had not established procedures to monitor employee compliance with statutory
independence restrictions concerning secondary employment, business investments, and
political activities.
Recommendation 17
We recommend that BOLC establish procedures to monitor employee compliance with
statutory independence restrictions. Specifically, the Board should consider
a. requiring employees to sign an annual affidavit attesting to their knowledge of and
compliance with key statutory provisions, including disclosure of all political and fund
raising activities;
b. provide specific guidance to its staff on potential independence restrictions; and
Page 18 of 19

--- Page 82 ---
Board of License Commissioners
for Prince George’s County
Agency Response Form
c. advise the full-time employee to revise their SEC disclosure noting their holding of public
office.
Agency Response
Analysis Factually Accurate
Please explain any
concerns with factual
accuracy.
Recommendation 17a Agree Estimated Completion Date: July 2019
Please provide details of An affidavit will be developed for employees to disclose all political
corrective action or and fundraising activities annually.
explain disagreement.
Recommendation 17b Agree Estimated Completion Date: July 2019
Please provide details of A policy will be developed to address potential independence
corrective action or restrictions.
explain disagreement.
Recommendation 17c Agree Estimated Completion Date: July 2019
Please provide details of The employee has notified the SEC of holding the public office. A
corrective action or written policy for all employees will be developed.
explain disagreement.
Page 19 of 19

--- Page 83 ---
A T
UDIT EAM
Raymond G. Burton, Jr., CPA, CFE
Audit Manager
Brian S. Han, CPA
Senior Auditor
Elliot Ortiz, CFE
Matusala Y. Abishe
Staff Auditors