Title: Review of the Actions Taken by the Maryland Department of Health - Office of the Secretary to Resolve Repeat Audit Findings in Response to the April 2018 Joint Chairmen's Report
Date: 04/01/2019
Type: Special Reports and Letters
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5ca4fee8a1ce580ef44e4052
Extracted: 2025-06-18T22:27:27.220003
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY
VictoriaL. Gruber April 1, 2019 GregoryA.Hook, CPA
Executive Director LegislativeAuditor
Senator Nancy J. King, Chair
Senate Budget and Taxation Committee
Miller Senate Office Building, 3 West Wing
11 Bladen Street
Annapolis, Maryland 21401
Delegate Maggie McIntosh, Chair
House Appropriations Committee
House Office Building, Room 121
6 Bladen Street
Annapolis, Maryland 21401
Dear Senator King and Delegate McIntosh:
The Office of Legislative Audits (OLA) has reviewed the actions taken by the Maryland
Department of Health Office of the Secretary (MDH O/S) to resolve the repeat findings in our
August 30, 2017 audit report. This review was conducted in accordance with the requirement
specified in the April 2018 Joint Chairmen ‘s Report (JCR), Page 74. The ICR required that, prior
to the release of$100,000 ofits administrative appropriation for fiscal year 2019, MDH 0/S must
take corrective action withrespectto all repeat audit findings on orbeforeNovember 1, 2018. The
ICR language further provided that OLA submit a report to the budget committees listing each
repeat audit finding along with a determination that each finding was corrected. The OLA report
is required to be submitted to allow 45 days for the budget committees to review and release the
funds priorto the end ofthe fiscal year.
The August 30, 2017 audit report of MDH 0/S contained six repeat audit findings
(findings 6, 7, 10, 11, 14, and 17) that were addressed by seven recommendations. In that report,
we concluded that MDH O/S’ accountabilityand compliance ratingwas unsatisfactory. As aresult
of that unsatisfactory rating, we subsequently performed a follow-up review, in which we
evaluated the status of 9 ofthe findings (including 4 repeat findings) from the August 30, 2017
audit report. In our resultant special review report, dated October 16, 2018, we concluded that
MDH 0/S had corrected 4 findings (including repeat findings 6 and 7) and had made progress,
but had not resolved 5 other findings (including repeat findings 10 and 11).
MDH 0/S provided a report to OLA, dated November 13, 2018, detailing the corrective
actions that it had taken with respect to repeat audit Findings 10, 11, 14 and 17 (Exhibit 1). The
MDH 0/S status report indicated that Findings 6 and 7 had beenpreviously deemed to be corrected
and added that corrective actions had been completed to address finding 10 while corrective
actions were ongoing for Findings 11, 14, and 17. MDH 0/S’ status report also addressed certain
recommendations that were not applicable to repeat findings; and consequently we did not assess
the corrective actions taken for these recommendations.
301 West Preston Street Room 1202 Baltimore, Maryland 21201
410-946-5900 Toll Free in Maryland 877-486-9964
Fraud Hotline 877-FRAUD-il www.ola.state.md.us
.

--- Page 2 ---
Senator Nancy J. King, Chair -2- April 1, 2019
Delegate Maggie McIntosh, Chair
We reviewed the MDH 0/S status report and related documentation, performed limited
tests and analyses ofthe information, and held discussion with MDH 0/S personnel as necessary
to assess the implementation status ofthe related recommendations. As findings 6 and 7 were
determined to be resolved during our aforementioned follow-up review, our current review was
limited to determining the status of repeat Findings 10, 11, 14 and 17. Our review did not
constitute an audit conducted in accordance with generally accepted government auditing
standards. Based on our review, we determined that MDH 0/S had resolved Findings 10, 14, and
17, but had not taken sufficient actions to correct Finding 11 (Exhibit 2). Our assessment ofthe
one repeat finding that had not been resolved is included in Exhibit 3.
Afier discussing our review results, MDH 0/S generally agreed with the accuracy ofthe
information presented. We wish to acknowledge the cooperation extended to us by MDH 0/S
during this review and its willingness to address the audit issues and implement appropriate
corrective actions.
We trust our response satisfactorily addresses the JCR requirement. Please contact me if
you need additional information.
Sincerely,
Gregory A. Hook, CPA
Legislative Auditor
cc: Senator Craig I. Zucker, Co-Chair, Joint Audit Committee
Delegate Shelly L. Hettleman, Co-Chair, Joint Audit Committee
Joint Audit Committee Members and Staff
Senator Thomas V. Mike Miller, Jr., President ofthe Senate
Delegate Michael E. Busch, Speaker ofthe House ofDelegates
Governor Lawrence J. Hogan, Jr.
Comptroller Peter V.R. Franchot
TreasurerNancy K. Kopp
Attorney General Brian E. Frosh
Honorable David R. Brinkley, Secretary Department ofBudget and Management
Honorable Robert R. Neall, Secretary Maryland Department ofHealth
Dennis R. Scbrader, ChiefOperating Officer, Maryland Department ofHealth
frederick D. Doggett, Inspector General, Maryland Department ofHealth
Sha S. Brown, Assistant Inspector General, Maryland Department ofHealth
Joan Peacock, Manager, Audit Compliance Unit, Department ofBudget and Management
Victoria L. Gruber, Executive Director, Department ofLegislative Services
Simon G. Powell, Policy Analyst, Department ofLegislative Services

--- Page 3 ---
Exhibit 1 to April 1, 2019 Letter to Joint Chairmen
$W
MARYLAND
1,7 Department of Health
Lorn’JIsigaa (inwrnt’r fluidK.ft’,tht’4m1,1.:. (knenrur Ruben ft.YuaN,Seraic,n
November13,2018
Mr.ThomasJ. Barnickel Ill, CPA
LegislativeAuditor
Officeof LegislativeAudits
301 W. Preston Street
Baltimore, MD 21201
DearMr. Barnlckel,
The Maryland DepartmentofHealth (MDH) OfficeoftheSecretary(OS) hastaken
correctiveactionon allthefindingsfromtheAugust 30, 2017audItreportissued bythe
Officeof LegishtiveAudits(OLA).The JointChairmen’sReport(JCR) contained language
requiringMON/OStotakecorrectiveaction on thesix repeatauditfindingsfrom this
report,with respecttothese repeatfindings, OLkhasdeemedfindings6and 7 as
corrected in theirfollow-up auditreport. Pleaseseethe attached reportwhich documents
MDH/05 correctiveactions on the remainingrepeatfindings (finding 10,11,14, and 17).
Ifyouhave anyquestionsor requireadditionalinformation, please donothesitate
tocontact me at410-767-4639or Frederick 0. Doggett, Inspector General, at 410-767-
0S85.
Sincerely,
Robert R,Neali
Secretary
Enclosure
cc: Dennis R.Schrader,ChiefOperatingOfficer,MDH
Frederick0. Doggett, InspectorGeneral, MDH
20) I1 PttvurnSony &:bir,rrw SN)2120! bc,,Ith,nrank,rni,jrn lidtFwi’: !—877-Jtl?-34(4 77’ .WKJ_735.22SH
.

--- Page 4 ---
Exhibit 1 to April 1, 2019 Letter to Joint Chairmen
Maryland Department ofHealth
Office of the Secretary
(August 2017 Audit Report)
-
Corrective Aclions laken to address OLA Findings and Recommendations
November 13, 2018
Finding6
Federal Funds Supcrvisoyoversight offederalfund reimbursementwas nat always
-
effective.
Finding6 Final Status: Thestatus ofMDH’s corrective actionswere reviewed by OLA
auditors during theirfoiiowup review(September2018) and this findinghas been deemed
corrected.
Finding7
ornee ofthe Inspector General—(016)had notauditedcertain privateproviders for
morethan fiveyearsand did notalways conductprivate providerauditsin a
comprehensive manner.
Finding7 Final Status:Thestatus ofMDH’s correctiveactions were reviewed by 0L4
auditors during theirfollow-up review (September2018)and thisfinding has been deemed
corrected.
Finding 10
InformationSystems Seeuribrand Control Network access to criticalMDII Internal
—
network devices was notproperly restricted, Intrusion detection preventionsystem
coveragewasnot complete oradequate, and certainwireless connectionswerenot
Finding 10 Final Status: The stains ofMDLI’s correctiveactionswere reviewed by OLA
auditors during theirfollow-up review (September2018) and the auditors identified 2 of
the$ recommendations as beingresolved (recommendations A and E.Additionally, OLA
auditorscompleted areview ofthestatusofMDIIcorrective actions forrecommendationC
and determined that the corrective actionswere still inprogress. Regardingthe remaining
recommendations(recommendations B andU), the 016 completed a follow-up review
(September2018) and determined thecorrectiveactionswerestill in progress.MDII
anticipates fullimplemeatation and resolution ofnilthe recommendations by December31,

--- Page 5 ---
Exhibit 1 to April 1, 2019 Letter to Joint Chairmen
201$.The below listed corrective actions will be provided to the auditorsand assist MDH’s
effort to avoid a repeatfinding.
MDH’s Corrective Actions (sinceAugust2t)17audit report)
MDH has configured its firewalls topropertyprotectall critical networkdevices, implemented
use ofthe strongestpossibleencryptionmethodavailableto protectdataintransitoverMDH
wiretessconnections, and completedreviewsofits firewallsto ensurethat onlynecessaryrules
remain activeandunnecessaryrules aredeleted/disabled, MDH has confirmed that alltraffic
(bothinbound/outbound) iscurrently beingmonitored atHeadquarters and SpringfieldHospital
Center. Additionally, MDI-I receivednew IPS hardware that is currentlybeing setupto configure
the upgraded IDPS at Headquartersand implementedamonthly informationsecurity
groupmeetingto reviewlowrisk malicious traffic forpossible investigation.
Finding 11
Malware protection forMDII computerswas notsufficientto providetheOfficeof
InformationTechnology(OIT)with adequate assurance thatthese computerswere
properlyprotected.
Finding 11 FinalStatus: Thestatus ofMDH’s corrective actionswere reviewed by OLA
auditors during theirfollow-up review(September2018) andOLAdetermined thatthe
corrective actionswerestilt inprogress. MDH has assigned an actingInformation Security
Officertasked with overseeing implementation ofMUll’s correctiveactions. The below
listed correctiveactions will beprovided to theauditors and assistMDH’s effortto avoid a
repeat finding.
MDH’s CorrectiveActions (since August2017 auditreport)
The acting InformationSecurity Officer(ISO) isnowtaskedto oversee and document thatOIT
maintained computersarerunningcurrentmalware protection software and implementing
automated procedures forverification signatures. This includesreconciliations to verifywhich
OITcomputershavecurrentclients andsignatures. MDH currently conductsreviews that
identifycomputers whosepatchesare outdated. Procedures willbeestablished to monitor non-
011 managed workstationsdocumentingactivity in these environments. MDH plansto work
withnon-OlT sitesto reportworkstation patchmonitoringand controt. Non-OlTreporting is
scheduled forthe endofNovember2018.
OIT managed computersvulnerablesoftwareproducts arebeing periodicallypatchedwith
exceptions. Workstations with certain appLicationsandenvironments areexemptbecause
conflicts arise with the latestversions. MDHhasbuilt specializedpatch packages fornon-exempt
computersthatare currentlybeingdelivered bi-monthly. MDI-! hasplanned to requestthatnon
OlTmanaged administrationsexecute“vulnerableapplication” patching by theend ofNovember
2018. MDH witimonitorthereportingprocess andensure non-exemptOlTand non-OIT
workstationsarerunning current versions ofalt applications. Additionally, the ISO ismonitoring
and reporting on administrativerightsaccesswithin MDH. MDI-l isactively documenting users
whohave administrativerightsto theirmachines.
2

--- Page 6 ---
Exhibit 1 to April 1, 2019 Letter to Joint Chairmen
Finding 14
Accounts Receivable MDII did notadequately pursue collection ofcertain Division of
—
Cost Accountingand Reimbursementsdelinquentaccounts receivable.
Finding 14 Final Status: ThestatusofMDH’s correctiveactionswere reviewed by 016’s
auditors during their follow-up review (September 2018) and the 016 determined that the
correctiveactions were still in progress. Effective October2016, MDII has implemented a
new process which monthly reports are sent to tield office supervisors who review and
ensure that theaccounts are adequately being followed-upon to preventaccount
delinquency. The below listed corrective actionswill be provided to theauditors and assist
MDWs effort to avoid a repeat finding.
MDHts Corrective Actions (since Aunust 2017 audit report)
MDII is ensuringaccountsreceivableare adequately pursued tbrcollection by mailingbilling
statementson a monthlybases andrequiringfield office supervisor reviewofthe “aging report”.
The reportconsistsofaccountsover 120 days past duethat had not been transferredto CCUus
required. hiUII‘snewprocess mtquires financial agents to code all accountsaccurately on this
report as“[‘CU rererml”or “Non-CCU referraL ansLLring accountsare appmprialely identified.
Field Office Supervisorsarc requiredto complete an atleslation confirming receipt. review, and
disposition nfaccouittsappearinonthe aging reportby initialing anddating the report.
Finding 17
MDH physical inventory procedures did not comply with certain DOS requirements!.
Finding 17 Final Status The statusofMDII’s corrective actionswere reviewed by 010’s
auditorsdtidng their follow-up review (September201K) and the 016 determined that the
corrective actions werestill in progress. In October2Ol8the 016 completed a review of
MI)Il InventoryManagement.The OLA findings and recommendations in combination
with the016’sindependent review and recommendatIons, provided MDH with significant
informationto create a plan for correctiveactions.The below listed corrective actions will
be providedto OLA’s auditors and assist MUll’s effort toavoid a repeat finding.
3

--- Page 7 ---
Exhibit 1 to April 1, 2019 Letter to Joint Chairmen
MDII’s Cnrrective Acthms (shice Autusi 2017 audit report)
In response to the audit recommendations, MDII completed acomprehensive physical inventory
and adopted new procedures for monitoring invcntoty controls and investigating missing/stolen
items. AfterMDII umtscomplete theirphysical inventory, MON Central Services Division will
reviewajudgmental sample ofthedisclosed inventory items, and appropriately liwestigate trny
item that cannot be located. MON will complete a missing/stolen report lbrany items that cannot
he located and submit the missing/stolen report to DGS within 10 days. To address the
missing/stolen report backlog, MDFI has collected all unsubmitted reports and forwarded then to
DOS.
Regarding process improvements, MDII has supplied its units with Radio-frequency
klenhfication (RFID) scanners to efficiemly conduct physical inventories, report, and identify
missing items ecpeditiously. MDIIhas organizedtraining forall Property Officers tobe
completed annually includinginformation on inventory control. policy, and best practIces.
Additionally, MDII Pmpcrty Officers nrcbeing provided esce] spreadsheets ofall inventoried
itemsalong with a separate spreadsheet identifyingany missing items. MON Property Officers
are investigating the cause for the missing/stolen item and reportingany missing/stolen item to
DOS as appropriate.

--- Page 8 ---
Exhibit 2 to April 1, 2019 Letter to Joint Chairmen
Status of Repeat Findings in OLA’s August 30, 2017 Audit Report on the
Maryland Department ofHealth Office of the Secretary
—
Status Based on
Prior Recommendations Pertaining to Repeat Findings
OLA Review
Federal Funds
6. We recommend that MDH
Resolved
a. ensure that federal fund reimbursement requests are
thoroughly reviewed, along with supporting documentation.
Office ofthe Inspector General
7. We recommend that MCPA Resolved
a. OIG completes its grant audits on a timely basis.
Information System Security and Control
10. We recommend that MCPA
Reso1yed
a. configure its firewalls to properly protect all critical
network devices.
11. We recommend that MDH OIl ensure
a. that all MDH computers are running current versions ofthe
malware protection software and that malware signatures
provided by the malware protection software vendor are
installed on these computers immediately upon issuance,
document these efforts, and retain the documentation for future
Not Resolved
reference.
c. that administrative rights on all MDH workstations and
servers are restricted to only systemlnetwork administrators or
non-IT personnel authorized in writing to have such rights,
with documentation supporting these authorizations retained
for future reference.
Accounts Receivable
14. We recommend that MDH ensure delinquent accounts
Reso1yed
receivable are adequately pursued for collection and
transferred to CCU as required.
Equipment
17. We recommend that MDH comply with the requirements ofthe
Department ofGeneral Services’ Inventoiy Control Manual. Resolved
Specifically, we recommend that MDH
c. conduct annual physical inventories ofsensitive equipment.

--- Page 9 ---
Exhibit 3 to April 1, 2019 Letter to Joint Chairmen
Detailed Comments for Findings for Which
Office of Legislative Audits Status is Deemed to be “Not Resolved”
Prior Report Recommendation 11
We recommend that the Office ofInformation Technology (OTT) ensure
a. that all MDH computers are running current versions ofthe maiware protection software
and that maiware signatures provided by the maiware protection software vendor are
installed on these computers immediately upon issuance, document these efforts and
retain the documentation for future reference.
b. that administrative rights on all MDH workstations and servers are restricted to only
system/network administrators or non—IT personnel authorized in writing to have such
rights, with documentation supporting these authorizations retained for future reference
(repeat).
Status Not Resolved
—
We determined that as ofMarch 18, 2019, the OIT maintained computers were not running the
most current version ofmalware protection. Furthermore, as ofFebruary 2019, we were
informed that only 30 to 40 percent ofthe non-OIT supported MDH units have submitted
administrative rights reporting documentation needed to properly monitor local administrative
rights within these MDH units.