Title: Maryland Department of Transportation - Office of Transportation Technology Services
Date: 04/01/2019
Type: Fiscal Compliance
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5ca4d822a1ce580ef44d6807
Extracted: 2025-06-19T06:13:24.667455
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Audit Report
Maryland Department of Transportation
Office of Transportation Technology Services
February 2024
Public Notice
In compliance with the requirements of the State Government Article Section
2-1224(i), of the Annotated Code of Maryland, the Office of Legislative Audits
has redacted cybersecurity findings and related auditee responses
from this public report.
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Senator Clarence K. Lam, M.D. (Senate Chair) Delegate Jared Solomon (House Chair)
Senator Joanne C. Benson Delegate Steven J. Arentz
Senator Paul D. Corderman Delegate Andrea Fletcher Harrison
Senator Katie Fry Hester Delegate Steven C. Johnson
Senator Shelly L. Hettleman Delegate Mary A. Lehman
Senator Cheryl C. Kagan Delegate David Moon
Senator Cory V. McCray Delegate Julie Palakovich Carr
Senator Justin D. Ready Delegate Stephanie M. Smith
Senator Bryan W. Simonaire Delegate M. Courtney Watson
Senator Craig J. Zucker One Vacancy
To Obtain Further Information
Office of Legislative Audits
The Warehouse at Camden Yards
351 West Camden Street, Suite 400
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Phone: 410-946-5900
Maryland Relay: 711
TTY: 410-946-5401 ꞏ 301-970-5401
E-mail: webmaster@ola.state.md.us
Website: www.ola.state.md.us
To Report Fraud
The Office of Legislative Audits operates a Fraud Hotline to report fraud, waste, or abuse involving State
of Maryland government resources. Reports of fraud, waste, or abuse may be communicated anonymously
by a toll-free call to 1-877-FRAUD-11, by mail to the Fraud Hotline, c/o Office of Legislative Audits, or
through the Office’s website.
Nondiscrimination Statement
The Department of Legislative Services does not discriminate on the basis of age, ancestry, color, creed,
marital status, national origin, race, religion, gender, gender identity, sexual orientation, or disability in the
admission or access to its programs, services, or activities. The Department’s Information Officer has been
designated to coordinate compliance with the nondiscrimination requirements contained in Section 35.107
of the United States Department of Justice Regulations. Requests for assistance should be directed to the
Information Officer at 410-946-5400 or 410-970-5400.

--- Page 3 ---
February 27, 2024
Senator Clarence K. Lam, M.D., Senate Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Delegate Jared Solomon, House Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Members of Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Annapolis, Maryland
Ladies and Gentlemen:
We have audited the Maryland Department of Transportation (MDOT) – Office
of Transportation Technology Services (OTTS). OTTS provides computing and
network resources to MDOT headquarters and its five modals and operates as a
computer services provider for these units. Our audit included an internal control
review of the OTTS data center and the network administered by OTTS that
supports MDOT and its modals.
Systems that operated on OTTS computing platforms at the time of our review
included MDOT’s Financial Management Information System, MDOT’s payroll
system, and several Motor Vehicle Administration applications.
Our audit disclosed certain cybersecurity-related findings. However, in
accordance with the State Government Article, Section 2-1224(i) of the
Annotated Code of Maryland, we have redacted the findings from this audit
report. Specifically, State law requires the Office of Legislative Audits to redact
cybersecurity findings in a manner consistent with auditing best practices before
the report is made available to the public. The term “cybersecurity” is defined in
the State Finance and Procurement Article, Section 3.5-301(b), and using our
professional judgment we have determined that the redacted findings falls under
the referenced definition. The specifics of the cybersecurity findings were
previously communicated to those parties responsible for acting on our
recommendations.
Our audit also included a review to determine the status of the two findings
contained in our preceding audit report. However, since these are cybersecurity-
related findings, the current status of these findings has been redacted.

--- Page 4 ---
MDOT’s response to this audit, on behalf of OTTS, is included as an appendix to
this report; however, consistent with the requirements of State law, we have
redacted all elements of MDOT’s response since they are related to the
cybersecurity findings. We reviewed the response and noted general agreement to
our findings and related recommendations. Subsequent to the response receipt,
but prior to the issuance of the final report, we contacted MDOT management and
obtained verbal clarification from MDOT that satisfactorily resolved one
outstanding issue. Consequently, we have concluded that the written responses
and verbal clarification together indicate that MDOT’s corrective actions
identified are sufficient to address all audit issues.
We wish to acknowledge the cooperation extended to us during the audit by
OTTS. We also wish to acknowledge MDOT’s and OTTS’ willingness to address
the audit issues and implement appropriate corrective actions.
Respectfully submitted,
Gregory A. Hook, CPA
Legislative Auditor
2

--- Page 5 ---
Table of Contents
Background Information 4
Agency Responsibilities 4
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report 4
Findings and Recommendations 5
Information Technology
Finding 1 – Redacted cybersecurity-related finding 5
Finding 2 – Redacted cybersecurity-related finding 5
Finding 3 – Redacted cybersecurity-related finding 5
Finding 4 – Redacted cybersecurity-related finding 5
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology 6
Agency Response Appendix
3

--- Page 6 ---
Background Information
Agency Responsibilities
The Maryland Department of Transportation (MDOT) – Office of Transportation
Technology Services (OTTS) provides computing and network resources, such as
internet access and remote access, to MDOT headquarters and its modals and
operates as a computer service bureau for these units.
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report
Our audit included a review to determine the current status of the two findings
contained in our preceding audit report dated April 1, 2019. However, since these
are cybersecurity-related findings, the current status of these findings has been
redacted.
4

--- Page 7 ---
Findings and Recommendations
Information Technology
We determined that the Information Technology section, including Findings 1
through 4 related to “cybersecurity,” as defined by the State Finance and
Procurement Article, Section 3.5-301(b) of the Annotated Code of Maryland, and
therefore are subject to redaction from the publicly available audit report in
accordance with the State Government Article 2-1224(i). Consequently, the
specifics of the following findings, including the analysis, related
recommendations, along with MDOT’s responses, have been redacted from this
report copy.
Finding 1
Redacted cybersecurity-related finding.
Finding 2
Redacted cybersecurity-related finding.
Finding 3
Redacted cybersecurity-related finding.
Finding 4
Redacted cybersecurity-related finding.
5

--- Page 8 ---
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We have audited the Maryland Department of Transportation (MDOT) – Office
of Transportation Technology Services (OTTS). Fieldwork associated with our
audit of OTTS was conducted during the period from September 2021 to August
2022. The audit was conducted in accordance with generally accepted
government auditing standards. Those standards require that we plan and perform
the audit to obtain sufficient, appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis
for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives. We believe that
the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and
conclusions based on our audit objectives.
As prescribed by the State Government Article, Section 2-1221 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, the objectives of this audit were to examine OTTS’ internal
control over the MDOT data center and network and to evaluate its compliance
with applicable State laws, rules, and regulations for the computer systems that
support MDOT and its five modals. Specifically, given OTTS’ widespread
responsibility for the MDOT network, our audit included an evaluation of the
security control environment for all portions of the MDOT network controlled by
OTTS. A description of the specific information systems and related control
functions addressed by the audit have been redacted from this report as required
by State Government Article Section 2-1224(i) described below.
In planning and conducting our audit, we focused on the major areas of operations
based on assessments of significance and risk. As noted, the areas addressed by
the audit have been redacted from this report. We also determined the status of
the findings contained in our preceding audit report.
Our audit did not include OTTS’ fiscal operations which are audited separately as
part of our audit of the MDOT – The Secretary’s Office. The most recent report
on MDOT – The Secretary’s Office was issued on November 6, 2023.
To accomplish our audit objectives, our audit procedures included inquiries of
appropriate personnel, inspections of documents and records, certain tests to
evaluate the effectiveness of controls, and to the extent practicable, observations
of OTTS’ operations. We also performed other auditing procedures that we
considered necessary to achieve our audit objectives. The reliability of data used
in this report for background or informational purposes was not assessed.
OTTS’ management is responsible for establishing and maintaining effective
internal control. Internal control is a process designed to provide reasonable
assurance that objectives pertaining to the reliability of financial records;
6

--- Page 9 ---
effectiveness and efficiency of operations, including safeguarding of assets
(including information systems resources); and compliance with applicable laws,
rules, and regulations are achieved. As provided in Government Auditing
Standards, there are five components of internal control: control environment,
risk assessment, control activities, information and communication, and
monitoring. Each of the five components, when significant to the audit
objectives, and as applicable to OTTS, were considered by us during the course of
this audit.
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate.
Our reports are designed to assist the Maryland General Assembly in exercising
its legislative oversight function and to provide constructive recommendations for
improving State operations. As a result, our reports generally do not address
activities we reviewed that are functioning properly.
This report includes findings relating to conditions that we consider to be
significant deficiencies in the design or operation of internal control that could
adversely affect OTTS’ ability to operate information systems resources
effectively and efficiently, and/or comply with applicable laws, rules, and
regulations. Our report also includes findings regarding significant instances of
noncompliance with applicable laws, rules, or regulations. Other less significant
findings were communicated to OTTS that did not warrant inclusion in this
report.
State Government Article Section 2-1224(i) requires that we redact in a manner
consistent with auditing best practices any cybersecurity findings before a report
is made available to the public. This results in the issuance of two different
versions of an audit report that contains cybersecurity findings – a redacted
version for the public and an unredacted version for government officials
responsible for acting on our audit recommendations.
The State Finance and Procurement Article, Section 3.5-301(b), states that
cybersecurity is defined as “processes or capabilities wherein systems,
communications, and information are protected and defended against damage,
unauthorized use or modification, and exploitation.” Based on that definition, and
in our professional judgement, we concluded that all findings in this report fall
under that definition. Consequently, for the publicly available audit report all
specifics as to the nature of cybersecurity findings and required corrective actions
7

--- Page 10 ---
have been redacted. We have determined that such aforementioned practices, and
government auditing standards, support the redaction of this information from the
public audit report. The specifics of these cybersecurity findings have been
communicated to OTTS and those parties responsible for acting on our
recommendations in an unredacted audit report.
The response from MDOT, on behalf of OTTS, to our findings and
recommendations is included as an appendix to this report. Depending on the
version of the audit report, responses to any cybersecurity findings may be
redacted in accordance with State law. As prescribed in the State Government
Article, Section 2-1224 of the Annotated Code of Maryland, we will advise
MDOT regarding the results of our review of its response.
8

--- Page 11 ---
APPENDIX

--- Page 12 ---
Maryland Department of Transportation
Office of Transportation Technology Services
Agency Response Form
Information Technology
The Office of Legislative Audits (OLA) has determined that the Information Technology section,
including Findings 1 through 4 related to “cybersecurity,” as defined by the State Finance and
Procurement Article, Section 3.5-301(b) of the Annotated Code of Maryland, and therefore are
subject to redaction from the publicly available audit report in accordance with the State
Government Article 2-1224(i). Although the specifics of the following findings, including the
analysis, related recommendations, along with MDOT’s responses, have been redacted from this
report copy, MDOT’s responses indicated agreement with the findings and related
recommendations.
Finding 1
Redacted cybersecurity-related finding.
Agency Response has been redacted by OLA.
Finding 2
Redacted cybersecurity-related finding.
Agency Response has been redacted by OLA.
Finding 3
Redacted cybersecurity-related finding.
Agency Response has been redacted by OLA.
Finding 4
Redacted cybersecurity-related finding.
Agency Response has been redacted by OLA.
Page 1 of 1

--- Page 13 ---
A T
UDIT EAM
R. Brendan Coffey, CPA, CISA
Edwin L. Paul, CPA, CISA
Information Systems Audit Managers
Edward O. Kendall, CISA
Matthew D. Walbert, CISA
Information Systems Senior Auditors
Vickey K. Micah
Malcolm J. Woodard
Information Systems Staff Auditors