Title: Review of the Actions Taken by the Uninsured Employers' Fund to Resolve Repeat Audit Findings in Response to the April 2018 Joint Chairmen's Report
Date: 04/01/2019
Type: Special Reports and Letters
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5ca4fee8a1ce580ef44e4054
Extracted: 2025-06-19T06:12:55.358639
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY
VictoriaI. Gruber April 1, 2019 GregoA.Hook,CPA
Executive Director Legislative Auditor
SenatorNancy J. King, Chair
Senate Budget and Taxation Committee
Miller Senate Office Building, 3 West Wing
11 Bladen Street
Annapolis, Maryland 21401
Delegate Maggie McIntosh, Chair
House Appropriations Committee
House Office Building, Room 121
6 Bladen Street
Annapolis, Maryland 21401
Dear Senator King and Delegate McIntosh:
The Office of Legislative Audits (OLA) has reviewed the actions taken by the Uninsured
Employers’ fund (UEf) to resolve the seven repeat findings in our January 3, 2018 audit report.
This review was conducted in accordance with a requirement specified in the April 201$ Joint
Chairmen‘s Report (JCR), page 9. The JCR required that, prior to the release of $100,000 ofits
administrative appropriation for fiscal year 2019, UEF must take corrective action with respect to
all repeat audit findings on or before November 1, 201$. The JCR language further provided that
OLA submit a report to the budget committees listing each repeat audit finding along with a
determination that each finding was corrected. The OLA report is required to be submitted to
allow 45 days for the budget committees to review and release the funds prior to the end ofthe
fiscal year.
The January 3, 2018 audit report ofUEF contained seven repeat audit findings (Findings
1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 7, and 8) that were addressed by 15 recommendations. In that report, we concluded
that UEF’s accountability and compliance rating was unsatisfactory. As a result, we subsequently
performed a follow-up review, in which we evaluated the status of 5 ofthe findings (including 4
repeat findings) from the January 3, 2018 audit report. In our follow-up review report, dated
November 2, 201$, we concluded that UEF had not fully resolved any of the 4 repeat findings
subject to review.
In response to the April 2018 JCR requirement, UEF provided a report to OLA, dated
January 10, 2019, detailing the corrective actions that it had taken with respect to the repeat audit
findings (Exhibit 1). UEf’s status report did not specifically address all of the repeat
recommendations and we concludedthat the responses generally lacked sufficient detail regarding
the corrective actions taken by UEF. Consequently, we held discussions with UEF management,
during which UEF clarified the implementation status of each recommendation and
301 West Preston Street• Room 1202 Baltimore, Maryland 21201
410-946-5900 Toll free in Maryland 877-486-9964
.
Fraud Hotline 877-FRAUD-li www.ola.state.md.us
.

--- Page 2 ---
Senator Nancy J. King, Chair
Delegate Maggie McIntosh, Chair -2- April 1, 2019
provided additional details regarding the corrective actions that UEF had completed and that
remained ongoing. Based on these discussions, UEF represented that corrective actions had been
completed to address five of the repeat findings (findings 1, 3, 5, 7, and 8) and that corrective
actions were ongoing for Findings 2 and 4. UEf’s status report also addressed certain
recommendations that were not applicable to repeat findings; consequently, we did not assess the
corrective actions taken for these recommendations.
In addition to the aforementioned discussion with UEF personnel to clarify our
understanding of the corrective actions undertaken, we also considered the results of our prior
follow-up review, reviewed the January 10, 2019 UEF status report and related documentation,
and performed limited tests and analyses ofinformation to assess the implementation status ofthe
related recommendations. Our review did not constitute an audit conducted in accordance with
generally accepted government auditing standards. Based on our review, we determinedthat UEF
had taken sufficient actions to fully correct finding 4 and had resolved at least halfofthe repeat
recommendations related to Findings 3, 5, and 7 (Exhibit 2). Our assessment ofthe findings not
deemed to be resolved is included in Exhibit 3. We offered to meet with UEF to discuss our
review results; however, UEF declined citing pressing workload issues. Nevertheless, we believe
that our assessments are appropriate and reflective ofthe corrective actions taken by UEF.
We trust our response satisfactorily addresses the JCR requirement. Please contact me if
you need additional information.
Sincerely,
Gregory A. Hook, CPA
Legislative Auditor
cc: Senator Craig J. Zucker, Co-Chair, Joint Audit Committee
Delegate Shelly Hettleman, Co-Chair, Joint Audit Committee
Joint Audit Committee Members and Staff
Senator Thomas V. Mike Miller, Jr., President ofthe Senate
Delegate Michael E. Busch, Speaker ofthe House ofDelegates
Governor Lawrence J. Hogan, Jr.
Comptroller Peter V.R. franchot
TreasurerNancy K. Kopp
Attorney General Brian E. Frosh
Honorable David R. Brinkley, Secretary, Department ofBudget and Management
Michael W. Bums, Executive Director, Uninsured Employers’ fund
Martin E. Lewis, Chairman ofthe Board, Uninsured Employers’ fund
Joan Peacock, Manager, Audit Compliance Unit, Department ofBudget and Management
Victoria L. Gruber, Executive Director, Department ofLegislative Service
Laura M. Vykol, Senior Policy Analyst, Department ofLegislative

--- Page 3 ---
Exhibit 1 to April 1, 2019 Letter to Joint Chairmen
LAWRENCEJ,HOGAN,JR. STATE OF MARYLAND MARTINE.LEWIS
GOVERNOR CHAIR
..
,,AL
‘
MICHAELW.BURNS i‘. DONCELL4S. WILSON
ExeuizveDzrector AMYL THOMPSON
michaet.burnsl@maryland.gm’ MEMBERS
afla
STATEOPMARYLAND
UNINSUREDEMPLOYERS’ FUND
300EastJoppaRoad, Suite402
Towson,MD 21286
PHONE-(410)321-4136
FAX-(410)321-3975
January 10, 2019
GregoryA. Hook, CPA
Acting Legislative Auditor
StateofMaryland
OfficeofLegislative Audits
StateOfficeBuilding, Room 1202
301 WestPreston Street
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
DearMr. Hook:
Please accept this letter as the Maryland Uninsured Employer’s Fund (UEF) latest status
report for the fiscal compliance audit for the period beginning November 14, 2013 and ending
November27, 2016 foryourreview and consideration.
As you are aware, we continue the ongoing process ofresponding to the findings and
Recommendations contained in the audit as well as the follow-Up Review report from
Novemberof201$.
For purposes of this latest report please note that the UEF adopts and incorporates by
reference each ofthe prior reports submitted to the Office of Legislative Audits (OLA) by the
UEf during this process. This response will add relevant current information to those prior
submissions.
TheUEFupdates asto theAuditfindings are as follows:
1) Finding I The UEF did not conduct independent reviews of accounts receivable
-
transactions:
The UEF continues to implement this finding. The UEF is in the process ofhiring a
new staffperson currently designated as a fiscal Accounts Technician 11 part of
— —

--- Page 4 ---
Exhibit 1 to April 1, 2019 Letter to Joint Chairmen
whose projected workdutieswillbe toworkon this issue. Thisnew staffposition will
workwith otherstaffto continue to developproceduresregardingthis finding.
2) Finding 2 The UEF did not adequately monitor and pursue collection ofdelinquent
-
accounts. As ofJanuary 5, 2017, there were 3,980 delinquent accounts totaling $5.2
million that should have been referred to the Department of Budget and
Management’s (DBM) Central CollectionUnit (CCU).
The UEF continues to focus in on debt collection, continuing to emphasize a
procedure for collection from the onset ofdebts. This process is designed to prevent
thepastpractice ofallowingdebtsto go uncollectedforyears.
The UEF is engaged in areview ofthe entire agency collection process, including a
review of several contractual positions, in order to continue to make the collection
process more cogent, effective and successful. The hiring ofa competent Third-Party
Clams Administrator in September of 2017 has resulted in a significant increase in
datawhich has an addedbenefitofassisting withcollections.
TheUEFhasmade proposals to theCCUregardingjurisdictionoverand collectionof
debts and continues to work with the CCU to utiLize the new CCU data system to
enableboth entities to collect debtsmoreefficiently.
3) Finding 3 The UFF did not adequately review indemnity and medical claim
-
payments forpropriety.
The UEF reviews payments randomly and is continuing to refme that process. In
addition, the UEF has obtained the reclassification of a position to a Program
Manager W which will serve as the agency’s Claims Administrator/Manager whose
job responsibilitieswill include involvementwith this reviewprocess. Thisposition is
currentlybeing advertisedand will behiredinthe comingmonths.
4) Finding 4 The UEF violated State Procurement regulations to obtain claims
-
processing and related services from 11 vendors, did not have written agreements,
and didnotadequatelymonitorthevendor’s services andverifytheirbillings.
The UFF signed an Emergency Contract with the Corvel Corporation for workers’
compensation Third Party Claims Administration services effective September 1,
2017. Based on available information this would appearto have been the first written
contract for such services ever entered into by the UEF in its history. Because ofthe
lack of relevant accurate empirical data, the implementation of the Emergency
Contract has required modifications in order to respond to various needs and
requirements discovered during the implementation of the Contract. The UEF is
working with DBM staffon a series ofcontract modifications as a result which will
bepresented to the Board ofPublic Works (BPW) forapproval.

--- Page 5 ---
Exhibit 1 to April 1, 2019 Letter to Joint Chairmen
Additionally, the UEf, again working with DBM staff, has prepared and issued a
Request for Proposals (RFP) for Third Party Claims Administration (TPA) Services.
This RFP, issued on October4, 2018, is the first such RFP for suchTPA services ever
issued by the agency. Unsurprisingly, the RFP process has required several
amendments but continues to move forward, with award and submission to the BPW
forapproval anticipated to takeplace earlythis year.
Finally, the UEF is developing a process to insure all contracts entered into comply
withthe requirementsofState law.
5) Finding 5 The UEF did not have adequate procedures and controls to ensure that all
—
collectionswere deposited.
In addition to already established procedures, the UEF is currently working with the
Maryland Treasurer’soffice (Treasurer) to establishaprocedureforremote deposit of
all receipts. Because of the recent RFP for banking services engaged in by the
Treasurer, the actual establishment ofthis procedure will require additional time as
the Treasurer works to impLement the requirements of banking changes for state
agencies. It is anticipated thatthe Fiscal Accounts Technician II staffposition will be
involved in insuringadequateagencyresponse to this findingaswell.
6) Finding 6 SensitivePersonally Identifiable Information maintained by the UEF was
—
storedwithoutadequate safeguards.
The UEF, working with its contractor and DolT, believes this finding has been
addressed.
7) Finding 7 Security event monitoring, access controls, and user access monitoring
—
were not sufficient.
The UhF, working with its contractor and DolT, believes that it has addressed this
finding. The Uhf continues to work with the named parties to insure compliance on
an ongoingbasis.
8) Finding 8 TheUEF didnothavean information systems disasterrecoveryplan.
—
The UEF has drafled a disaster recovery plan with the assistance of its technical
contractor, D P Solutions. This plan includes backup ofall relevant UEF systems by
outside agencies either DolT or DP Solutions as relevant. The UhF has also
—
arranged with D P Solutions to utilize their facility and equipment in the event that
events requiresuch actionsbetakento continuethe agency’s functions.
As you are aware, most of these audit findings are repeat findings which exist in the
current audit because of the failure ofprior UEF leadership to recognize, address and resolve
them. Dealing with, and addressing, these audit findings has not been, unfortunately, the only
issue facing the current UEF leadership sincetheirinvolvementbegan here. The condition ofthe

--- Page 6 ---
Exhibit 1 to April 1, 2019 Letter to Joint Chairmen
UEF at that time made this process a challenge for all involved and the staff at the UEF
appreciates the cooperation, professionalism and understanding exhibited by the OLA and its
staffduring this audit process and the follow-up review in light ofthe facts and circumstances
present.
The UEF remains available to meet with you, or with your staff, at any time ifyou wish
to discuss anyofthese items inmore detail.
The UEF appreciates working with the Office of Legislative Audits to deal with the
fmdings oftheOLA auditandto address theRecommendations contained in therelevantauditas
partofourongoingprogram to fix, and improve,the agency’s function andperformance.
Thank you.
Respectfully submitted,
Michael W Burns
The Honorable Michael W. Bums, Esquire
Director

--- Page 7 ---
Exhibit 2 to April 1, 2019 Letter to Joint Chairmen
Status of Repeat Findings in OLA’s January 3,2018 Audit Report on the
Uninsured Employers’ Fund (UEF)
Status Based on
Prior Recommendations Pertaining to Repeat Findings
OLA Review
Accounts Receivable
1. We recommend that UEF establish a process to ensure the Not Resolved
propriety oftransactions recorded in its accounts receivable
records. Specifically, we recommend that UEF perform
independent reviews to ensure that all WCC awards and
properly authorized adjustments are accurately entered into its
accounts receivable records.
2. We recommendthat UEF
a. investigate and take the necessary corrective actions to Not Resolved
resolve the noted deficiencies (generate dunning notices
and produce accurate accounts receivable aging reports) to
ensure that the accounting system provides sufficient
information to monitor and pursue collection activities.
b. refer delinquent accounts to CCU for collection as Not Resolved
required.
c. establish aprocess to identify and refer delinquent
employers to applicable State licensing authorities for Not Resolved
license or permit suspension.
Claims Processing
3. We recommend that UEF Resolved
a. conduct independent supervisory reviews ofindemnity
payments to ensure the payments are valid and accurate.
b. establish a documented procedure to verify, at least on a
test basis, that medical claim payments were properbased Not Resolved
on supporting documentation.
4. We recommend that UEF
a. comply with the procurement and contract provisions of Resolved
the State procurement regulations by soliciting competitive
bids and executing written contracts for the claims
processing and related services that include all relevant
contract provisions.
Cash Receipts
5. We recommend that UEF ensure that
a. The initial record ofcollections is forwarded directly to an Resolved
independent employee to perform the deposit verification
function.
d. The cash receipts and accounts receivable duties are Not Resolved
adequately separated.

--- Page 8 ---
Exhibit 2 to April 1, 2019 Letter to Joint Chairmen
Status Based on
Prior Recommendations Pertaining to Repeat Findiws
OLA Review
Information Systems Security and Control
7. We recommend that UEF
a. enable security auditing for files on the dedicated server Resolved
which hosts UEF’s critical applications.
b. Generate and review, on a weekly basis, reports ofcritical
security events, document these reviews, and retain the Resolved
documentation for future reference.
c. limit modification access to critical files and programs on
the dedicated server to only those employees who require Resolved
such access for theirjob duties.
d. periodically generate system security reports and use these
reports to ensure users cannot perform incompatible Not Resolved
functions and are assigned only those capabilities needed to
perform theirjob duties.
e. prohibit the sharing ofuserids. Resolved
8. We recommend that UEF develop and implement a
comprehensive disaster recovery plan, in accordance with the Not Resolved
Information Technology (IT) Disaster Recovery Guidelines.

--- Page 9 ---
Exhibit 3 to April 1, 2019 Letter to Joint Chairmen
OLA’s Assessments Regarding Repeat Findings and Recommendations That
Were Not Resolved
Prior Report Recommendation Finding 1
—
We recommend that UEF establish a process to ensure the propriety of transactions
recorded in its accounts receivable records. Specifically, we recommend that UEF perform
independent reviews to ensure that all WCC awards and properly authorized adjustments
are accurately entered into its accounts receivable records (repeat).
Status: Not Resolved
UEF had not established a sufficient process to ensure the propriety oftransactions recorded in
its accounts receivable records. UEF management advised us that they transitioned the majority
ofthe accounts receivable process to its claims processing vendor and that it had established a
process to review certain transactions recorded in its accounts receivable records. However, the
employees performing the reviews were not independent since they could process adjustments to
the accounts receivable records and the reviews were only done on a test basis rather than for all
adjustments, as recommended.
Prior Report Recommendation Finding 2
—
We recommend that UEF
a. investigate and take the necessary corrective actions to resolve the noted deficiencies
(generate dunning notices and produce accurate accounts receivable aging reports) to
ensure that the accounting system provides sufficient information to monitor and
pursue collection activities (repeat),
b. refer delinquent accounts to CCU for collection as required (repeat), and
c. establish a process to identify and refer delinquent employers to applicable State
licensing authorities for license or permit suspension (repeat).
Status: Not Resolved
UEF had not resolved the three recommendations related to the collection ofdelinquent
accounts. Specifically, although UEF advised us that it had held preliminary discussions with its
IT support vendor about correcting the system deficiencies noted in the report, as ofthe time of
our review, the issues had not been addressed. UEF also advised us that it had not referred
delinquent accounts to the State’s Central Collection Unit (CCU) since the issuance ofour
January 201$ audit report. In this regard, UEF management advised us that they made various
proposals to CCU to obtain a waiver from the standard referral requirements, but these proposals
had not been accepted by CCU. furthermore, although UEF provided us with an example ofa
license suspension for one delinquent employer, they did not document the efforts to identify
delinquent employers with a business license, and could not provide us with a comprehensive
listing ofemployers that had been referred to State authorities for license suspensions.

--- Page 10 ---
Exhibit 3 to April 1, 2019 Letter to Joint Chairmen
Prior Report Recommendation Finding 3
—
We recommend that UEF
b. establish a documented procedure to verify, at least on a test basis, that medical claim
payments were proper based on supporting documentation (repeat).
Status: Not Resolved
UEF had not sufficiently documented its verification ofmedical claim payments. Specifically,
although UEF documented the claims it selected for review, there was no documentation ofthe
basis for selecting the claims for review or what supporting documentation was used in the
verification process.
Prior Report Recommendation Finding 5
—
We recommend that UEF
d. ensure that the cash receipts and accounts receivable duties are adequately separated
(repeat).
Status: Not Resolved
UEF had not adequately separated the cash receipts and accounts receivable duties. Specifically,
our review ofUEF’s automated accounts receivable system security reports disclosed that four
UEF employees with cash handling responsibilities also had the capabilities to create, adjust, or
delete accounts receivable records.
Prior Report Recommendation Finding 7
—
We recommend that UEF
d. periodically generate system security reports and use these reports to ensure users
cannot perform incompatible functions and are assigned only those capabilities needed
to perform their job duties (repeat).
Status: Not Resolved
UEF had not periodically generated and reviewed system security reports to ensure that user
capabilities were properly assigned and restricted based on the employees’ job duties. As a
result, UEF had not identified the improper accounts receivable access granted to certain
employees (see status ofPrior Report Recommendation finding 5d)
Prior Report Recommendation Finding 8
—
We recommend that UEF develop and implement a comprehensive disaster recovery plan,
in accordance with the Information Technology (IT) DisasterRecovery Guidelines (repeat).

--- Page 11 ---
Exhibit 3 to April 1, 2019 Letter to Joint Chairmen
Status: Not Resolved
Although UEF took steps to develop a disaster recovery plan (DRP), it was not in accordance
with the IT Guidelines and consequently not comprehensive. Specifically, the DRP did not
contain sufficient details describing specific steps, information, and other materials deemed
necessary for a complete DRP.