Title: Maryland Department of Transportation - The Secretary's Office
Date: 04/18/2019
Type: Fiscal Compliance
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5cbf2ec0a1ce5802a01745b3
Extracted: 2025-06-19T06:13:51.001108
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Audit Report
Maryland Department of Transportation
The Secretary’s Office
November 2023
Public Notice
In compliance with the requirements of the State Government Article Section
2-1224(i), of the Annotated Code of Maryland, the Office of Legislative Audits
has redacted cybersecurity findings and related auditee responses
from this public report.
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Senator Clarence K. Lam, M.D. (Senate Chair) Delegate Jared Solomon (House Chair)
Senator Joanne C. Benson Delegate Steven J. Arentz
Senator Paul D. Corderman Delegate Nicholas P. Charles II
Senator Katie Fry Hester Delegate Andrea Fletcher Harrison
Senator Shelly L. Hettleman Delegate Steven C. Johnson
Senator Cheryl C. Kagan Delegate Mary A. Lehman
Senator Cory V. McCray Delegate David Moon
Senator Justin D. Ready Delegate Julie Palakovich Carr
Senator Bryan W. Simonaire Delegate Stephanie M. Smith
Senator Craig J. Zucker Delegate M. Courtney Watson
To Obtain Further Information
Office of Legislative Audits
The Warehouse at Camden Yards
351 West Camden Street, Suite 400
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Phone: 410-946-5900
Maryland Relay: 711
TTY: 410-946-5401 · 301-970-5401
E-mail: webmaster@ola.state.md.us
Website: www.ola.state.md.us
To Report Fraud
The Office of Legislative Audits operates a Fraud Hotline to report fraud, waste, or abuse involving State
of Maryland government resources. Reports of fraud, waste, or abuse may be communicated anonymously
by a toll-free call to 1-877-FRAUD-11, by mail to the Fraud Hotline, c/o Office of Legislative Audits, or
through the Office’s website.
Nondiscrimination Statement
The Department of Legislative Services does not discriminate on the basis of age, ancestry, color, creed,
marital status, national origin, race, religion, gender, gender identity, sexual orientation, or disability in the
admission or access to its programs, services, or activities. The Department’s Information Officer has been
designated to coordinate compliance with the nondiscrimination requirements contained in Section 35.107
of the United States Department of Justice Regulations. Requests for assistance should be directed to the
Information Officer at 410-946-5400 or 410-970-5400.

--- Page 3 ---
November 6, 2023
Senator Clarence K. Lam, M.D., Senate Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Delegate Jared Solomon, House Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Members of Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Annapolis, Maryland
Ladies and Gentlemen:
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of The Secretary’s Office, including
the Debt Service Requirements Program, of the Maryland Department of
Transportation (MDOT), for the period beginning May 7, 2018 and ending
September 15, 2022. MDOT provides overall direction and support to five
modals and administers the bond issuance and debt service activities associated
with the Department’s transportation bonds. MDOT also provides operating and
capital grants for transit services in the Washington, D.C. metropolitan area as
well as grants to other governmental agencies for transportation-related purposes.
Our audit disclosed that MDOT did not always publish contract awards on
eMaryland Marketplace Advantage (eMMA) within 30 days as required by State
law. Specifically, our test of 13 contract awards totaling $87.7 million, disclosed
that MDOT had not posted 2 awards totaling $25.2 million to eMMA and MDOT
posted 3 awards totaling $14.6 million late (56, 106, and 189 days after the award
dates).
In addition, we believe that MDOT should establish a formal documented process
to ensure appropriate corrective actions were implemented to address findings
from our Office’s fiscal compliance audit reports of MDOT units. Our most
recent audit reports of the five modals and MDOT - Office of Transportation
Technology Services identified 25 findings. Since MDOT provides overall
direction and guidance to these units, we believe a formal documented process to

--- Page 4 ---
ensure that the units implemented appropriate corrective actions to address these
findings would help strengthen controls over these operations.
Furthermore, our audit disclosed a cybersecurity-related finding. However, in
accordance with the State Government Article, Section 2-1224(i) of the
Annotated Code of Maryland, we have redacted the finding from this audit report.
Specifically, State law requires the Office of Legislative Audits to redact
cybersecurity findings in a manner consistent with auditing best practices before
the report is made available to the public. The term “cybersecurity” is defined in
the State Finance and Procurement Article, Section 3.5-301(b), and using our
professional judgment we have determined that the redacted finding falls under
the referenced definition. The specifics of the cybersecurity finding were
previously communicated to those parties responsible for acting on our
recommendations.
Our audit also included a review to determine the status of the two findings
contained in our preceding audit report. We determined that MDOT satisfactorily
addressed these findings. Additionally, we determined the status of the finding
contained in our July 26, 2019 audit of MDOT Financial Management
Information System Centralized Operations and the status of 8 of the 12 findings
in contained in our August 3, 2018 performance audit report of Department of
Information Technology and Selected State Agencies Telecommunication
Resource Sharing Agreements. We determined that MDOT satisfactorily
addressed these findings.
MDOT’s response to this audit is included as an appendix to this report. We
reviewed the response and noted general agreement to our findings and related
recommendations. Subsequent to the response receipt, but prior to the issuance of
the final report, we contacted MDOT staff and obtained verbal clarification that
satisfactorily resolved all outstanding questions and issues. Consequently, we
have concluded that the written responses and verbal clarification together
indicate that the MDOT corrective actions identified are sufficient to address all
audit issues. In addition, consistent with State law, we have redacted the elements
of MDOT’s response related to the cybersecurity audit finding.
2

--- Page 5 ---
We wish to acknowledge the cooperation extended to us during the audit by
MDOT. We also wish to acknowledge MDOT’s willingness to address the audit
issues and implement appropriate corrective actions.
Respectfully submitted,
Gregory A. Hook, CPA
Legislative Auditor
3

--- Page 6 ---
4

--- Page 7 ---
Table of Contents
Background Information 6
Agency Responsibilities 6
Audits of Maryland Department of Transportation’s (MDOT) Financial 7
Statements
Washington Metropolitan Area Transit Authority Grants 8
Resource Sharing Agreements 10
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Reports 10
Findings and Recommendations 11
Procurement
Finding 1 – MDOT did not always publish contract awards on 11
eMaryland Marketplace Advantage as required by State procurement
laws and regulations.
Executive Oversight
Finding 2 (Policy Issue) – MDOT should consider establishing a formal 12
documented process to ensure appropriate corrective actions were
implemented to address findings from Office of Legislative Audits
fiscal compliance audit reports of MDOT units.
Information Systems Security and Control
Finding 3 – Redacted cybersecurity-related finding 13
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology 14
Exhibit 1 – Listing of Most Recent Office of Legislative Audits Fiscal 18
Compliance Audits of MDOT as of September 30, 2023
Agency Response Appendix
5

--- Page 8 ---
Background Information
Agency Responsibilities
The Maryland Department of Transportation – The Secretary’s Office (MDOT)
provides overall direction and guidance to the Department including its five
modals1 (Maryland Aviation Administration, State Highway Administration,
Motor Vehicle Administration, Maryland Port Administration, and Maryland
Transit Administration). MDOT is also responsible for the operation of the
Office of Transportation Technology Services (OTTS), which provides
computing resources to the various units of the Department and operates as a
computer service bureau for these units. The computer service operations of
OTTS are addressed in a separate audit and, as such were not included in the
scope of this audit. Furthermore, the operations of the five modals are addressed
in separate audits.
MDOT administers the bond issuance and debt service activities associated with
Maryland’s consolidated transportation bonds and receives an appropriation for
all debt service requirements. In addition, MDOT provides operating and capital
grants to the Washington Metropolitan Area Transit Authority for transit services
in the Washington, D.C. metropolitan area, as well as grants to other
governmental agencies (such as local transportation planning agencies) for
transportation-related purposes.
Finally, MDOT maintains a separate Financial Management Information System
(FMIS), which interfaces certain financial information to the Statewide FMIS2 for
recordation, payment processing, and reporting. This audit included a review of
MDOT FMIS operations and internal control (for example, database and security
controls) that were previously addressed in a separate audit.
1 The other component of Maryland’s transportation system is the Maryland Transportation
Authority (MDTA). Although Maryland’s Secretary of Transportation serves as MDTA’s chair,
MDTA is not overseen by MDOT.
2 A separate version of FMIS (known as Statewide FMIS) is maintained by the State’s Department
of Information Technology and the Comptroller of Maryland’s General Accounting Division for
the use of most Executive Branch agencies and is outside the scope of this audit.
6

--- Page 9 ---
According to the State’s records, during fiscal year 2022, MDOT’s expenditures
totaled approximately $918 million, of which $769.5 million related to operating
and capital grants for transportation-related purposes (see Figure 1). In addition,
debt service payments totaled approximately $452.3 million.
Figure 1
MDOT Positions, Expenditures, and Funding Sources
Full-Time Equivalent Positions as of June 30, 2022
Positions Percent
Filled 287 88.0%
Vacant 39 12.0%
Total 326
Fiscal Year 2022 Expenditures
Expenditures Percent
Salaries, Wages, and Fringe Benefits $ 38,396,627 4.2%
Technical and Special Fees 6,210,185 0.7%
Operating Expenses 873,393,160 95.1%
Total $917,999,972
Fiscal Year 2022 Funding Sources
Funding Percent
General Fund $ 8,700,000 1.0%
Special Fund 859,507,507 93.6%
Federal Fund 49,792,465 5.4%
Total $917,999,972
Fiscal Year 2022 Debt Service Payments / Funding Source
Payments and Funding Percent
Special Fund $452,267,873 100.00%
Source: State financial and personnel records
Audits of MDOT’s Financial Statements
An independent accounting firm was engaged to audit the State of Maryland’s
financial statements for the fiscal years ended June 30, 2019, 2020, 2021, and
2022. In conjunction with these audits, the firm was engaged to prepare separate
audit reports on MDOT’s financial statements. In the related audit reports, the
firm stated that MDOT’s financial statements presented fairly, in all material
respects, the respective financial position of the governmental activities, the major
7

--- Page 10 ---
fund, and the aggregate remaining fund information of MDOT, and respective
changes in financial position, for the years then ended, in accordance with
accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America.
Washington Metropolitan Area Transit Authority Grants
The Washington Metropolitan Area Transit Authority (WMATA) provides transit
services (Metrobus, Metrorail, and MetroAccess paratransit) in Montgomery and
Prince George’s Counties, the District of Columbia, and several cities and
counties in northern Virginia. MDOT enters into annual operating and capital
grant agreements with the Washington Suburban Transit Commission, which is
the financial conduit for funding mass transportation projects in Montgomery and
Prince George’s counties.
According to the State’s records, MDOT’s fiscal year 2022 operating and capital
grant expenditures paid to WMATA totaled approximately $738.7 million
($399.5 million for operating and $339.2 million for capital), an increase of 48.7
percent in total State funding compared to fiscal year 2018 (see Figure 2).
Figure 2
WMATA Operating and Capital Grants Amounts
Fiscal Year 2018 to 2022
(dollar amounts in millions)
$800 $770.1 $764.1 $738.7
$600 $542.4 $304.2 $338.9 $339.2
$496.7
$153.8
$134.2
$400
$465.9
$200 $362.5 $388.6 $425.2 $399.5
$0
2018 2019 2020 2021 2022
Operating Capital
Source: State financial records
8

--- Page 11 ---
These grants, along with similar funding from certain jurisdictions within the
Commonwealth of Virginia and the District of Columbia, fund WMATA’s
operating deficits (amounts not covered by fares and other revenue) and its capital
improvement program expenditures (including bus and rail vehicle replacement,
capital improvements, debt service, and infrastructure repair). The allocation of
operating and capital costs to the three entities is calculated based on factors such
as miles of service in each jurisdiction and ridership data3. Under the terms of
these grants, MDOT can audit operating and capital subsidy payment calculations
within three years of the end of the agreement.
According to MDOT, during its audit of WMATA’s fiscal year 2016 operating
and capital subsidies, there was a lack of cooperation from WMATA and it was
unable to obtain support for the subsidy calculations. A similar lack of
cooperation was encountered by MDOT’s independent accounting firm contracted
to review the subsidy calculations for fiscal years 2018 and 2019. The
independent accounting firm’s audit report for fiscal year 2018 included a scope
limitation due to the lack of supporting documentation and the fiscal year 2019
audit was still not completed as of December 2022.
As a result, MDOT withheld a total of $78.5 million in payments to WMATA
during the period April 2018 through September 2019 and reduced payments to
WMATA totaling $1.3 million for its audit findings related to fiscal year 2016.
Based on the fiscal year 2018 audit findings, MDOT reduced payments to
WMATA an additional $2.2 million. Despite the ongoing lack of cooperation
with the independent accounting firm, MDOT released the withheld funds
because WMATA subsequently provided certain requested information.
In accordance with a suggestion from certain members of the Maryland General
Assembly, MDOT reached out to the other funding entities to enhance efficiency
in the audit process by establishing a regional approach to the subsidy audits.
However, MDOT management advised us that the parties were unable to reach
agreement on the scope and process for regional audits, and accordingly, MDOT
intends to continue to conduct (or contract for) annual subsidy audits for its
operating and capital funding to WMATA.
3 Annual operating subsidy grant amounts (to cover operating deficits) are based initially on
WMATA’s budgeted operating costs for the year and adjustments are made in a subsequent fiscal
year based on the actual operating deficit according to WMATA’s independent audited financial
statements. Annual capital grants are based on WMATA’s budgeted annual capital projects
improvement plan, after considering federal funding, and on each jurisdiction’s proportionate
share of bond debt payments.
9

--- Page 12 ---
Resource Sharing Agreements
On August 3, 2018, we issued a performance audit report of Department of
Information Technology and Selected State Agencies Telecommunication
Resource Sharing Agreements which contained several additional findings related
to MDOT. The audit report included a number of findings related to selected
agencies, but emphasized the need for the Department of Information Technology
to exercise greater oversight of the resource sharing agreements (RSAs) entered
into by State agencies in general. The performance audit included the following
select findings related to MDOT operations:
 MDOT did not maintain comprehensive records of RSAs, inventories of
State-owned telecommunication towers and fiber optic cables for potential
resource sharing, and inventories of private company equipment installed on
towers.
 MDOT did not treat certain agreements as resource sharing resulting in lost
opportunities to maximize compensation.
 MDOT did not verify that all monetary compensation was received.
 MDOT did not always include adequate provisions to protect State interests.
 MDOT executed and renewed resource sharing agreements without proper
approvals.
MDOT agreed with the findings and recommendations in the August 2018 report.
During our current audit, we reviewed MDOT’s actions in response to this report
and noted that they generally complied with the recommendations.
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Reports
Our audit included a review to determine the status of the two findings contained
in our preceding audit report of MDOT dated April 18, 2019, and the finding in
our July 26, 2019 audit of MDOT Financial Management Information System
Centralized Operations. We determined that MDOT satisfactorily addressed
these findings.
As previously mentioned in this report, we also determined the status of 8 of the
12 findings in contained in our August 3, 2018 performance audit report of
Department of Information Technology and Selected State Agencies
Telecommunication Resource Sharing Agreements. We determined that MDOT
satisfactorily addressed these findings.
10

--- Page 13 ---
Findings and Recommendations
Procurement
Finding 1
Maryland Department of Transportation (MDOT) did not always publish
contract awards on eMaryland Marketplace Advantage (eMMA) as required
by State procurement laws and regulations.
Analysis
MDOT did not always publish contract awards on eMMA as required.
Specifically, our test of 13 contract awards for various transportation planning
services during the period from September 2019 through June 2022 totaling $87.7
million, disclosed that as of December 2022 MDOT had not posted 2 awards
totaling $25.2 million made in April 2021 and June 2022. After bringing this to
MDOT’s attention these awards were posted on eMMA in December 2022 (176
and 615 days after the respective awards). For 3 other awards tested totaling
$14.6 million, we found they were posted to eMMA 56, 106, and 189 days after
the respective award dates.
eMMA is an internet-based, interactive procurement system managed by the
Department of General Services. State procurement laws and regulations require
awards for contracts greater than $50,000 to be published on eMMA not more than
30 days after the execution and approval of the contract. Publishing awards on
eMMA provides transparency over State procurements, including information
about winning bidders and the amount of the related awards.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that MDOT comply with State procurement laws and
regulations by publishing contract awards on eMMA in a timely manner.
11

--- Page 14 ---
Executive Oversight
Finding 2 (Policy Issue)
MDOT should consider establishing a formal documented process to ensure
appropriate corrective actions were implemented to address findings from
Office of Legislative Audits (OLA) fiscal compliance audit reports of MDOT
units.
Analysis
MDOT should consider establishing a formal documented process to ensure each
MDOT unit implemented appropriate corrective actions to address findings from
OLA’s separate fiscal compliance audit reports of each unit. In accordance with
State law, OLA conducts an audit of MDOT - The Secretary’s Office, the five
modals, and the Office of Transportation Technology Services (OTTS). As
detailed in Exhibit 1, our most recent audit reports of the five modals and OTTS
identified 25 findings.
MDOT advised us that it performs follow-up procedures on OTTS findings since
it is part of MDOT - The Secretary’s Office, but it does not perform follow-up
procedures on findings for the modals since it delegates this responsibility to the
modals. However, staff of MDOT – The Secretary’s Office is involved in the
OLA audit of each unit through attendance at formal meetings and working with
the modals to develop written responses to the audit findings. MDOT has also
performed limited internal audit work of modal activity in the past. Since MDOT
provides overall direction and guidance to the modals, we believe a formal
documented process to ensure that the modals implemented appropriate corrective
actions to address these findings would help strengthen controls over the modals’
operations.
Recommendation 2
We recommend that MDOT establish a formal documented process to ensure
appropriate correction actions were taken to address OLA report findings.
12

--- Page 15 ---
Information Systems Security and Control
We determined that Finding 3 related to “cybersecurity,” as defined by the State
Finance and Procurement Article, Section 3.5-301(b) of the Annotated Code of
Maryland, and therefore is subject to redaction from the publicly available audit
report in accordance with the State Government Article 2-1224(i). Consequently,
the specifics of the following finding, including the analysis, related
recommendations, along with MDOT’s response, have been redacted from this
report copy.
Finding 3
Redacted cybersecurity-related finding.
13

--- Page 16 ---
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the Maryland Department of
Transportation – The Secretary’s Office (MDOT), including the Debt Service
Requirements Program, for the period beginning May 7, 2018 and ending
September 15, 2022. The audit was conducted in accordance with generally
accepted government auditing standards. Those standards require that we plan
and perform the audit to obtain sufficient, appropriate evidence to provide a
reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives.
We believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings
and conclusions based on our audit objectives.
As prescribed by the State Government Article, Section 2-1221 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, the objectives of this audit were to examine MDOT’s financial
transactions, records, and internal control, and to evaluate its compliance with
applicable State laws, rules, and regulations.
In planning and conducting our audit, we focused on the major financial-related
areas of operations based on assessments of significance and risk. The areas
addressed by the audit included certain programs associated with transportation
activities (such as the consolidated transportation program), grants, contract
procurements and invoice processing, payroll processing, resource sharing
agreements, and information systems security and control, including the MDOT
Financial Management Information System (FMIS) operations and control. Our
audit also included certain payroll support services (such as processing of
personnel transactions and maintenance of employee leave records) provided by
MDOT to other units of the Department of Transportation. We also determined
the status of the findings contained in our preceding audit reports of MDOT and
MDOT FMIS, as well as 8 of the 12 findings contained in our performance audit
report on telecommunication resource sharing agreements, dated August 3, 2018.
Our audit did not include the computer operations of MDOT’s Office of
Transportation Technology Services that are addressed in a separate audit. Our
audit also did not include an evaluation of internal controls over compliance with
federal laws and regulations for federal financial assistance programs and an
assessment of MDOT’s compliance with those laws and regulations because the
State of Maryland engages an independent accounting firm to annually audit such
programs administered by State agencies, including MDOT.
An independent accounting firm was engaged to audit the State of Maryland’s
financial statements for the fiscal years ended June 30, 2019, 2020, 2021, and
2022. In conjunction with these audits, the firm was engaged to prepare separate
14

--- Page 17 ---
audit reports on MDOT’s financial statements. In the related audit reports, the
firm stated that MDOT’s financial statements presented fairly, in all material
respects, the respective financial position of the governmental activities, the major
fund, and the aggregate remaining fund information of MDOT, and respective
changes in financial position, for the years then ended, in accordance with
accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America. We
have relied on the work of the independent accounting firm to provide audit
coverage pertaining to bond issuance and debt service payments. Our audit
procedures in this area were generally limited, therefore, to obtaining a sufficient
basis for that reliance.
Our assessment of internal controls was based on agency procedures and controls
in place at the time of our fieldwork. Our tests of transactions and other auditing
procedures were generally focused on the transactions occurring during our audit
period of May 7, 2018 to September 15, 2022, but may include transactions
before or after this period as we considered necessary to achieve our audit
objectives.
To accomplish our audit objectives, our audit procedures included inquiries of
appropriate personnel, inspections of documents and records, tests of transactions,
and to the extent practicable, observations of MDOT’s operations. Generally,
transactions were selected for testing based on auditor judgment, which primarily
considers risk, the timing or dollar amount of the transaction, or the significance
of the transaction to the area of operation reviewed. As a matter of course, we do
not normally use sampling in our tests, so unless otherwise specifically indicated,
neither statistical nor non-statistical audit sampling was used to select the
transactions tested. Therefore, unless sampling is specifically indicated in a
finding, the results from any tests conducted or disclosed by us cannot be used to
project those results to the entire population from which the test items were
selected.
We also performed various data extracts of pertinent information from the State’s
Financial Management Information System and MDOT’s Financial Management
Information System (such as revenue and expenditure data) and the State’s
Central Payroll Bureau (payroll data). The extracts are performed as part of
ongoing internal processes established by the Office of Legislative Audits and
were subject to various tests to determine data reliability. We determined that the
data extracted from these sources were sufficiently reliable for the purposes the
data were used during this audit. We also extracted data from MDOT’s payroll
systems for the purpose of testing payroll transactions. We performed various
tests of the relevant data and determined that the data were sufficiently reliable for
the purposes the data were used during the audit. Finally, we performed other
15

--- Page 18 ---
auditing procedures that we considered necessary to achieve our audit objectives.
The reliability of data used in this report for background or informational
purposes was not assessed.
MDOT’s management is responsible for establishing and maintaining effective
internal control. Internal control is a process designed to provide reasonable
assurance that objectives pertaining to the reliability of financial records;
effectiveness and efficiency of operations, including safeguarding of assets; and
compliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations are achieved. As
provided in Government Auditing Standards, there are five components of
internal control: control environment, risk assessment, control activities,
information and communication, and monitoring. Each of the five components,
when significant to the audit objectives, and as applicable to MDOT, were
considered by us during the course of this audit.
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate.
Our reports are designed to assist the Maryland General Assembly in exercising
its legislative oversight function and to provide constructive recommendations for
improving State operations. As a result, our reports generally do not address
activities we reviewed that are functioning properly.
This report includes a finding relating to conditions that we consider to be
significant deficiencies in the design or operation of internal control that could
adversely affect MDOT’s ability to maintain reliable financial records, operate
effectively and efficiently, and/or comply with applicable laws, rules, and
regulations. Our report also includes findings regarding significant instances of
noncompliance with applicable laws, rules, or regulations. In addition, this report
includes a finding, which is identified as a “Policy Issue.” This finding represents
a significant operational or financial-related issue for which formal criteria may
not necessarily exist and for which management has significant discretion in
addressing, but the recommendation represents prudent and/or practical actions,
which we believe should be implemented by the agency to improve outcomes.
Other less significant findings were communicated to MDOT that did not warrant
inclusion in this report.
State Government Article 2-1224(i) requires that we redact in a manner consistent
with auditing best practices any cybersecurity findings before a report is made
available to the public. This results in the issuance of two different versions of an
16

--- Page 19 ---
audit report that contains cybersecurity findings – a redacted version for the
public and an unredacted version for government officials responsible for acting
on our audit recommendations.
The State Finance and Procurement Article, Section 3.5-301(b), states that
cybersecurity is defined as “processes or capabilities wherein systems,
communications, and information are protected and defended against damage,
unauthorized use or modification, and exploitation.” Based on that definition, and
in our professional judgment, we concluded that certain findings in this report fall
under that definition. Consequently, for the publicly available audit report all
specifics as to the nature of cybersecurity findings and required corrective actions
have been redacted. We have determined that such aforementioned practices, and
government auditing standards, support the redaction of this information from the
public audit report. The specifics of these cybersecurity findings have been
communicated to MDOT and those parties responsible for acting on our
recommendations in an unredacted audit report.
MDOT’s response to our findings and recommendations is included as an
appendix to this report. Depending on the version of the audit report, responses to
any cybersecurity findings may be redacted in accordance with State law. As
prescribed in the State Government Article, Section 2-1224 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, we will advise MDOT regarding the results of our review of
its response.
17

--- Page 20 ---
Exhibit 1
Listing of Most Recent Office of Legislative Audits
Fiscal Compliance Audits of Maryland Department of Transportation
As of September 2023
Number of
Most Recent Total
Name of Audit Repeat
Report Date Findings
Findings
1 State Highway Administration 03/29/22 4 2
2 Maryland Port Administration 03/24/22 1 0
3 Maryland Transit Administration 03/11//22 5 1
4 Motor Vehicle Administration 09/23/20 9 1
5 Maryland Aviation Administration 12/12/19 4 0
6 Office of Transportation Technology Services 04/01/19 2 0
Total 25 4
18

--- Page 21 ---
APPENDIX

--- Page 22 ---
Maryland Department of Transportation
The Secretary’s Office
Agency Response Form
Procurement
Finding 1
Maryland Department of Transportation (MDOT) did not always publish contract awards
on eMaryland Marketplace Advantage (eMMA) as required by State procurement laws and
regulations.
We recommend that MDOT comply with State procurement laws and regulations by
publishing contract awards on eMMA in a timely manner.
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide N/A
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 1 Agree Estimated Completion Date: 04/05/2023
Please provide details of MDOT maintains standard procedures to ensure that contract awards are
corrective action or posted on eMMA; however, the procedures were not always followed in
explain disagreement. a timely manner. On April 5, 2023, MDOT deployed an enhancement to
the MDOT FMIS Enhanced Procurement Information Control System
(EPICS, formerly MDOT FMIS AdPICS), that adds two new fields
called “eMMA Contract ID” and “eMMA Post Date” to the Additional
Elements screens for Blanket Purchase Orders, Purchase Orders and
Direct Purchase Orders. These two fields are mandatory if the contract
amount on the document is $50,000.01 or greater. This prevents
purchase orders from being posted or approved until the fields are
completed with data from the appropriate contract award posting on
eMMA. This system enhancement helps ensure that required postings
are made in a timely manner.
Page 1 of 3

--- Page 23 ---
Maryland Department of Transportation
The Secretary’s Office
Agency Response Form
Executive Oversight
Finding 2 (Policy Issue)
MDOT should consider establishing a formal documented process to ensure appropriate
corrective actions were implemented to address findings from Office of Legislative Audits
(OLA) fiscal compliance audit reports of MDOT units.
We recommend that MDOT establish a formal documented process to ensure appropriate
correction actions were taken to address OLA report findings.
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide N/A
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 2 Agree Estimated Completion Date: 10/27/2023
Please provide details of MDOT’s modal administrations have a process in place for each modal
corrective action or Audit Office to review OLA fundings and monitor and re-test corrective
explain disagreement. actions. To provide additional oversight of this process, in October 2023,
MDOT established a Standard Operating Procedure for the Office of
Audits at the Secretary’s Office to follow-up and monitor
implementation of corrective action plans by modal administrations.
Page 2 of 3

--- Page 24 ---
Maryland Department of Transportation
The Secretary’s Office
Agency Response Form
Information Systems Security and Control
The Office of Legislative Audits (OLA) has determined that Finding 3 related to “cybersecurity,”
as defined by the State Finance and Procurement Article, Section 3.5-301(b) of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, and therefore is subject to redaction from the publicly available audit report
in accordance with the State Government Article 2-1224(i). Although the specifics of the
finding, including the analysis, related recommendations, along with MDOT’s response, have
been redacted from this report copy, MDOT’s responses indicated agreement with the finding
and related recommendations.
Finding 3
Redacted cybersecurity-related finding.
Agency Response has been redacted by OLA.
Page 3 of 3

--- Page 25 ---
A T
UDIT EAM
Mark S. Hagenbuch, CPA
Audit Manager
Edwin L. Paul, CPA, CISA
Information Systems Audit Manager
Lauren E. Franchak, CPA
Walter L. Horan, IV
Senior Auditors
Eric Alexander, CPA, CISA
Information Systems Senior Auditor
Ashley D. Farlow, CFE
Ali A. Dayya
Kareem R. Jackson
Dianne P. Ramirez
Staff Auditors
Vickey K. Micah
Information Systems Staff Auditor