Title: Maryland Longitudinal Data System Center
Date: 05/14/2019
Type: Fiscal Compliance
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5ce2addaa1ce580c8cf96069
Extracted: 2025-06-19T06:14:31.836065
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Audit Report
Maryland Longitudinal Data System Center
October 2023
Public Notice
In compliance with the requirements of the State Government Article Section
2-1224(i), of the Annotated Code of Maryland, the Office of Legislative
Audits has redacted cybersecurity findings and related auditee responses
from this public report.
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Senator Clarence K. Lam, M.D. (Senate Chair) Delegate Jared Solomon (House Chair)
Senator Joanne C. Benson Delegate Steven J. Arentz
Senator Paul D. Corderman Delegate Nicholas P. Charles II
Senator Katie Fry Hester Delegate Andrea Fletcher Harrison
Senator Shelly L. Hettleman Delegate Steven C. Johnson
Senator Cheryl C. Kagan Delegate Mary A. Lehman
Senator Cory V. McCray Delegate David Moon
Senator Justin D. Ready Delegate Julie Palakovich Carr
Senator Bryan W. Simonaire Delegate Stephanie M. Smith
Senator Craig J. Zucker Delegate M. Courtney Watson
To Obtain Further Information
Office of Legislative Audits
The Warehouse at Camden Yards
351 West Camden Street, Suite 400
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Phone: 410-946-5900
Maryland Relay: 711
TTY: 410-946-5401 ꞏ 301-970-5401
E-mail: webmaster@ola.state.md.us
Website: www.ola.state.md.us
To Report Fraud
The Office of Legislative Audits operates a Fraud Hotline to report fraud, waste, or abuse involving State
of Maryland government resources. Reports of fraud, waste, or abuse may be communicated anonymously
by a toll-free call to 1-877-FRAUD-11, by mail to the Fraud Hotline, c/o Office of Legislative Audits, or
through the Office’s website.
Nondiscrimination Statement
The Department of Legislative Services does not discriminate on the basis of age, ancestry, color, creed,
marital status, national origin, race, religion, gender, gender identity, sexual orientation, or disability in the
admission or access to its programs, services, or activities. The Department’s Information Officer has been
designated to coordinate compliance with the nondiscrimination requirements contained in Section 35.107
of the United States Department of Justice Regulations. Requests for assistance should be directed to the
Information Officer at 410-946-5400 or 410-970-5400.

--- Page 3 ---
October 16, 2023
Senator Clarence K. Lam, M.D., Senate Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Delegate Jared Solomon, House Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Members of Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Annapolis, Maryland
Ladies and Gentlemen:
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the Maryland Longitudinal Data
System Center for the period beginning December 3, 2018 and ending October
31, 2022. The Center is responsible for overseeing and maintaining the Maryland
Longitudinal Data System, a statewide data system that contains individual-level
student and workforce data from all levels of education and the State’s workforce.
The Center is tasked with managing and analyzing these data to determine how
students are performing and the extent to which students are prepared for higher
education and the workforce.
Our audit disclosed a cybersecurity-related finding. However, in accordance with
the State Government Article, Section 2-1224(i) of the Annotated Code of
Maryland, we have redacted the finding from this audit report. Specifically, State
law requires the Office of Legislative Audits to redact cybersecurity findings in a
manner consistent with auditing best practices before the report is made available
to the public. The term “cybersecurity” is defined in the State Finance and
Procurement Article, Section 3.5-301(b), and using our professional judgment we
have determined that the redacted finding falls under the referenced definition.
The specifics of the cybersecurity finding were previously communicated to those
parties responsible for acting on our recommendations.
The Center’s redacted response to this cybersecurity finding is included as an
appendix to this report; however, in accordance with State law, we have reviewed

--- Page 4 ---
the original response to our finding and related recommendations, and have
concluded that the corrective actions identified are sufficient to address all audit
issues.
We wish to acknowledge the cooperation extended to us during the audit by the
Center and its willingness to address the audit issues and implement appropriate
corrective actions.
Respectfully submitted,
Gregory A. Hook, CPA
Legislative Auditor
2

--- Page 5 ---
Background Information
Agency Responsibilities
The Maryland Longitudinal Data System Center is as an independent unit of State
government under the direction of a 15-member governing board. The Center is
responsible for overseeing and maintaining the Maryland Longitudinal Data
System, a statewide data system that contains individual-level student and
workforce data from all levels of education and the State’s workforce. The Center
is tasked with managing and analyzing these data to help determine how students
are performing and the extent to which students are prepared for higher education
and the workforce. The Center conducts research to improve the State’s
education system and to guide decision-making by State and local governments,
educational agencies, institutions, teachers, and other educational professionals.
The Center obtains and analyzes data through collaboration with the following 10
State entities:
1. Maryland State Department of Education
2. Maryland Higher Education Commission
3. Maryland Department of Labor
4. Department of Juvenile Services
5. Department of Human Services
6. Maryland Department of Health - Health Occupation Boards and
Commissions
7. Morgan State University – School of Education and Urban Studies
8. University of Maryland, Baltimore - School of Social Work
9. University of Maryland, College Park - College of Education
10. University of Maryland, Baltimore County – School of Public Policy.
As of November 2022, the Center had collected data for school years 2008
through 2021 and was continuing to collect data for subsequent periods.
According to the State’s records, during fiscal year 2022, the Center’s
expenditures totaled approximately $2.5 million (See Figure 1 on following page).
3

--- Page 6 ---
Figure 1
Maryland Longitudinal Data System Center
Positions, Expenditures, and Funding Sources
Full-Time Equivalent Positions as of June 30, 2022
Positions Percent
Filled 13 100.0%
Vacant 0 0.0%
Total 13
Fiscal Year 2022 Expenditures
Expenditures Percent
Salaries, Wages, and Fringe Benefits $1,775,695 69.8%
Technical and Special Fees 0 0.0%
Operating Expenses 768,785 30.2%
Total $2,544,480
Fiscal Year 2022 Funding Sources
Funding Percent
General Fund $2,544,480 100.0%
Total $2,544,480
Source: State financial and personnel records
Findings and Recommendations
Information Systems and Security Control
We determined that Finding 1 related to “cybersecurity”, as defined by the State
Finance and Procurement Article, Section 3.5-301(b) of the Annotated Code of
Maryland, and therefore is subject to redaction from the publicly available audit
report in accordance with the State Government Article 2-1224(i). Consequently,
the specifics of the following finding, including the analysis, related
recommendation(s), along with the Center’s responses, have been redacted from
this report copy.
Finding 1
Redacted cybersecurity-related finding.
4

--- Page 7 ---
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the Maryland Longitudinal Data
System Center for the period beginning December 3, 2018 and ending October
31, 2022. The audit was conducted in accordance with generally accepted
government auditing standards. Those standards require that we plan and perform
the audit to obtain sufficient, appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis
for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives. We believe that
the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and
conclusions based on our audit objectives.
As prescribed by the State Government Article, Section 2-1221 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, the objectives of this audit were to examine the Center’s
financial transactions, records, and internal control, and to evaluate its compliance
with applicable State laws, rules, and regulations.
In planning and conducting our audit, we focused on the major financial-related
areas of operations based on assessments of significance and risk. The areas
addressed by the audit included interagency agreements with institutions of higher
education and related disbursements, and information technology systems.
Our audit did not include certain support services provided to the Center by the
Maryland State Department of Education (MSDE). These support services (such
as payroll processing, purchasing, maintenance of accounting records, and related
fiscal functions) are included within the scope of our audit of MSDE.
Our assessment of internal controls was based on agency procedures and controls
in place at the time of our fieldwork. Our tests of transactions and other auditing
procedures were generally focused on the transactions occurring during our audit
period of December 3, 2018 to October 31, 2022, but may include transactions
before or after this period as we considered necessary to achieve our audit
objectives.
To accomplish our audit objectives, our audit procedures included inquiries of
appropriate personnel, inspections of documents and records, tests of transactions,
and to the extent practicable, observations of the Center’s operations. Generally,
transactions were selected for testing based on auditor judgment, which primarily
considers risk, the timing or dollar amount of the transaction, or the significance
of the transaction to the area of operation reviewed. As a matter of course, we do
not normally use sampling in our tests, so unless otherwise specifically indicated,
neither statistical nor non-statistical audit sampling was used to select the
transactions tested. Therefore, unless sampling is specifically indicated in a
finding, the results from any tests conducted or disclosed by us cannot be used to
5

--- Page 8 ---
project those results to the entire population from which the test items were
selected.
We also performed various data extracts of pertinent information from the State’s
Financial Management Information System (such as revenue and expenditure
data). The extracts are performed as part of ongoing internal processes
established by the Office of Legislative Audits and were subject to various tests to
determine data reliability. We determined that the data extracted from these
sources were sufficiently reliable for the purposes the data were used during this
audit. Finally, we performed other auditing procedures that we considered
necessary to achieve our audit objectives. The reliability of data used in this
report for background or informational purposes was not assessed.
The Center’s management is responsible for establishing and maintaining
effective internal control. Internal control is a process designed to provide
reasonable assurance that objectives pertaining to the reliability of financial
records; effectiveness and efficiency of operations, including safeguarding of
assets; and compliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations are achieved.
As provided in Government Auditing Standards, there are five components of
internal control: control environment, risk assessment, control activities,
information and communication, and monitoring. Each of the five components,
when significant to the audit objectives, and as applicable to the Center, were
considered by us during the course of this audit.
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate.
Our reports are designed to assist the Maryland General Assembly in exercising
its legislative oversight function and to provide constructive recommendations for
improving State operations. As a result, our reports generally do not address
activities we reviewed that are functioning properly.
This report includes a finding relating to conditions that we consider to be
significant deficiencies in the design or operation of internal control that could
adversely affect the Center’s ability to maintain reliable financial records, operate
effectively and efficiently, and/or comply with applicable laws, rules, and
regulations. This finding is also considered a significant instance of
noncompliance with applicable laws, rules, or regulations.
6

--- Page 9 ---
State Government Article Section 2-1224(i) requires that we redact in a manner
consistent with auditing best practices any cybersecurity findings before a report
is made available to the public. This results in the issuance of two different
versions of an audit report that contains cybersecurity findings – a redacted
version for the public and an unredacted version for government officials
responsible for acting on our audit recommendations.
The State Finance and Procurement Article, Section 3.5-301(b), states that
cybersecurity is defined as “processes or capabilities wherein systems,
communications, and information are protected and defended against damage,
unauthorized use or modification, and exploitation”. Based on that definition, and
in our professional judgment, we concluded that the finding in this report falls
under that definition. Consequently, for the publicly available audit report all
specifics as to the nature of the cybersecurity finding and required corrective
actions have been redacted. We have determined that such aforementioned
practices, and government auditing standards, support the redaction of this
information from the public audit report. The specifics of the cybersecurity
finding has been communicated to the Center and those parties responsible for
acting on our recommendation in an unredacted audit report.
The response from the Center to our finding and recommendation is included as
an appendix to this report. Depending on the version of the audit report,
responses to any cybersecurity findings may be redacted in accordance with State
law. As prescribed in State Government Article, Section 2-1224 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, we will advise the Center regarding the results of our review
of its response.
7

--- Page 10 ---
APPENDIX
October 13, 2023
Gregory Hook, Legislative Auditor
Office of Legislative Audits
351 West Camden Street, Suite 400
Baltimore, MD 21201
Dear Mr. Hook,
Enclosed are the Maryland Longitudinal Data System Center’s responses to the Legislative
Auditor’s current audit of the MLDSC for the period beginning December 3, 2018 and ending
October 31, 2022.
An electronic version was forwarded by email. If you have any questions or need additional
information please feel contact me1 or Ms. Tejal Cherry, MLDS Center Chief Information
Officer.2
Sincerely,
Ross Goldstein
Executive Director
1 ross.goldstein@maryland.gov
2 Tejal.cherry@maryland.gov

--- Page 11 ---
Maryland Longitudinal Data System Center
Agency Response Form
Information Systems and Security Control
The Office of Legislative Audits (OLA) has determined that Finding 1 related to “cybersecurity”,
as defined by the State Finance and Procurement Article, Section 3.5-301(b) of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, and therefore is subject to redaction from the publicly available audit report
in accordance with the State Government Article 2-1224(i). Although the specifics of the
finding, including the analysis, related recommendations, along with the Center’s responses,
have been redacted from this report copy, the Center’s responses indicated agreement with the
finding and related recommendations.
Finding 1
Redacted cybersecurity-related finding.
Agency Response has been redacted by OLA.
Page 1 of 1

--- Page 12 ---
A T
UDIT EAM
Bekana Edossa, CPA, CFE
Audit Manager
Edwin L. Paul, CPA, CISA
Information Systems Audit Manager
W. Thomas Sides
Mindy R. Garrett
Senior Auditors
Charles O. Price
Information Systems Senior Auditor
Christopher C. Pitre
Information Systems Staff Auditor