Title: Washington County Public Schools
Date: 05/14/2019
Type: Local School Systems
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5ce2ac45a1ce580c8cf92af7
Extracted: 2025-06-19T06:14:00.481448
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Financial Management Practices Audit Report
Washington County Public Schools
February 2025
Public Notice
In compliance with the requirements of the State Government Article Section
2-1224(i), of the Annotated Code of Maryland, the Office of Legislative Audits
has redacted cybersecurity findings and related auditee responses
from this public report.
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Senator Shelly L. Hettleman (Senate Chair) Delegate Jared Solomon (House Chair)
Senator Joanne C. Benson Delegate Steven J. Arentz
Senator Benjamin T. Brooks, Sr. Delegate Andrea Fletcher Harrison
Senator Paul D. Corderman Delegate Steven C. Johnson
Senator Katie Fry Hester Delegate Mary A. Lehman
Senator Cheryl C. Kagan Delegate David H. Moon
Senator Clarence K. Lam, M.D. Delegate Julie Palakovich Carr
Senator Cory V. McCray Delegate Emily K. Shetty
Senator Justin D. Ready Delegate Stephanie M. Smith
Senator Bryan W. Simonaire Delegate M. Courtney Watson
To Obtain Further Information
Office of Legislative Audits
The Warehouse at Camden Yards
351 West Camden Street, Suite 400
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Phone: 410-946-5900
Maryland Relay: 711
TTY: 410-946-5401 ꞏ 301-970-5401
E-mail: webmaster@ola.state.md.us
Website: www.ola.state.md.us
To Report Fraud
The Office of Legislative Audits operates a Fraud Hotline to report fraud, waste, or abuse involving State
of Maryland government resources. Reports of fraud, waste, or abuse may be communicated anonymously
by a toll-free call to 1-877-FRAUD-11, by mail to the Fraud Hotline, c/o Office of Legislative Audits, or
through the Office’s website.
Nondiscrimination Statement
The Department of Legislative Services does not discriminate on the basis of age, ancestry, color, creed,
marital status, national origin, race, religion, gender, gender identity, sexual orientation, or disability in the
admission or access to its programs, services, or activities. The Department’s Information Officer has been
designated to coordinate compliance with the nondiscrimination requirements contained in Section 35.107
of the United States Department of Justice Regulations. Requests for assistance should be directed to the
Information Officer at 410-946-5400 or 410-970-5400.

--- Page 3 ---
February 13, 2025
Senator Shelly L. Hettleman, Senate Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Delegate Jared Solomon, House Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Members of Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Annapolis, Maryland
Ladies and Gentlemen:
We conducted an audit of the financial management practices of the Washington
County Public Schools (WCPS) in accordance with the requirements of the State
Government Article, Section 2-1220(e) of the Annotated Code of Maryland. The
objectives of this audit were to evaluate whether WCPS’ procedures and controls
were effective in accounting for and safeguarding its assets and whether its
policies provided for the efficient use of financial resources.
Our audit disclosed that certain requirements of WCPS’ procurement policies
were not being consistently used when obtaining goods and services under
intergovernmental cooperative purchasing agreements and the policies were not
sufficiently comprehensive. In addition, during the period from July 1, 2022 to
February 20, 2024, WCPS did not publish 78 contract awards, each valued over
$50,000 and in aggregate totaling $57.3 million, on eMaryland Marketplace
Advantage as required by State law. Furthermore, WCPS did not competitively
procure a $3.6 million nursing services contract that has been awarded annually to
the same vendor since 2013.
Additionally, our audit disclosed cybersecurity-related findings. However, in
accordance with the State Government Article, Section 2-1224(i) of the
Annotated Code of Maryland, we have redacted the findings from this audit
report. Specifically, State law requires the Office of Legislative Audits to redact
cybersecurity findings in a manner consistent with auditing best practices before
the report is made available to the public. The term “cybersecurity” is defined in
the State Finance and Procurement Article, Section 3.5-301(b), and using our

--- Page 4 ---
professional judgment we have determined that the redacted findings fall under
the referenced definition. The specifics of the cybersecurity findings were
previously communicated to those parties responsible for acting on our
recommendations.
Our audit also disclosed that WCPS needs to improve internal controls and
accountability in several areas, including payroll processing, and health care
services. For example, WCPS did not have adequate internal controls over the
processing of certain critical payroll transactions, such as payroll adjustments.
Additionally, WCPS did not audit or adequately monitor the performance of its
third-party administrators that provide health care claims processing services.
Finally, based on our current audit assessment of significance and risk to our audit
objectives, our audit included a review to determine the status of 10 of the 13
findings contained in our preceding audit report. For the non-cybersecurity-
related findings we determined that WCPS satisfactorily addressed 4 of those 5
findings. The remaining finding is repeated in this report.
WCPS’ response to this audit is included as an appendix to this report. Consistent
with State law, we have redacted the elements of WCPS’ response related to the
cybersecurity audit findings. We reviewed the response to our findings and
related recommendations, and have concluded that the corrective actions
identified are sufficient to address all audit issues.
We wish to acknowledge the cooperation extended to us during the course of this
audit by WCPS. We also wish to acknowledge WCPS’ willingness to address the
audit issues and implement appropriate corrective actions.
Respectfully submitted,
Brian S. Tanen
Brian S. Tanen, CPA, CFE
Legislative Auditor
2

--- Page 5 ---
Table of Contents
Background Information 5
Statistical Overview 5
Oversight 8
External Audits 10
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report 11
Findings and Recommendations 13
Revenue and Billing Cycle 13
Federal Funds 14
Procurement and Disbursement Cycle
Finding 1 – Certain requirements of State law and recognized best 16
practices were not incorporated into Washington County Public
Schools’ (WCPS) procurement policies and were not consistently
used when participating in intergovernmental cooperative purchasing
agreements.
Finding 2 – WCPS published contract awards on its website instead of 18
on eMaryland Marketplace Advantage as required by State
procurement law.
Finding 3 – WCPS did not competitively procure a $3.6 million nursing 18
services contract that has been awarded annually to the same vendor
since 2013, and did not obtain available supporting documentation to
ensure that related billings were proper.
Human Resources and Payroll
 Finding 4 – WCPS did not independently review payroll adjustments 19
for propriety.
Equipment Control and Accountability 20
 Denotes item repeated in full or part from preceding audit report
3

--- Page 6 ---
Information Technology
Finding 5 – Redacted cybersecurity-related finding 21
Finding 6 – Redacted cybersecurity-related finding 21
Finding 7 – Redacted cybersecurity-related finding 21
Facilities Construction, Renovation, and Maintenance 21
Transportation Services 22
Food Services 23
School Board Oversight 24
Management of Other Risks
* Finding 8 – WCPS did not adequately monitor the performance of its 26
third-party administrator that provided medical healthcare and
pharmacy claims processing services.
Finding 9 – WCPS did not have memorandums of agreement with its 27
affiliated foundations to address each entity’s roles and responsibilities.
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology 30
Agency Response Appendix
 Denotes item repeated in full or part from preceding audit report
4

--- Page 7 ---
Background Information
Statistical Overview
Enrollment
According to student enrollment records compiled by the Maryland State
Department of Education (MSDE), Washington County Public Schools (WCPS)
ranks 11th in student enrollment among the 24 public school systems in Maryland.
Fiscal year 2023 full-time student enrollment was 22,297 students. WCPS had 46
schools, consisting of 25 elementary, 7 middle schools, 1 combined middle/high
school, 8 high schools, and 5 other types of schools (three alternative, one special
education, and an outdoors center).
Funding
WCPS revenues consist primarily of funds received from the State, Washington
County, and the federal government. According to the WCPS’ audited financial
statements, revenues from all sources totaled approximately $416.4 million in
fiscal year 2023, including $238 million from the State. According to MSDE’s
records, the State funding included Blueprint for Maryland’s Future grants
totaling $211.2 million, State-share for employee pension payments totaling $15.5
million, and other State funding sources, such as capital projects totaling $11.3
million. See Figure 1 on the following page for WCPS’ enrollment and funding
by source for the six-year period from fiscal year 2018 through fiscal year 2023.
See Figure 2 (on page 7) for revenue sources per enrolled student in fiscal year
2023 according to its audited financial statements.
5

--- Page 8 ---
Figure 1
WCPS Enrollment and Funding by Source
Fiscal Years 2018 through 2023
(dollar amounts in millions)
22,993
22,681
22,595
22,297
22,171
21,939
$228 $220 $223 $238
$207
$194
$98 $100 $112 $104 $108 $112
$64 $67
$52
$29 $33 $28
2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023
Enrollment State Local Federal and Other
State funding for fiscal year 2023 included:
 $211.2 million for Blueprint Grants
 $15.5 million for the State-share of employee pension costs
 $5.7 million for Capital Projects
 $5.6 million for Other State funding
Source: WCPS’ Fiscal Year 2023 Audited Financial Statements and MSDE Data
6

--- Page 9 ---
Figure 2
WCPS’ Revenue Sources Per Enrolled Student
Fiscal Year 2023
Other
Federal $428
$2,562 2%
14%
Local
$5,011
27%
State
$10,675
57%
Source: WCPS’ Fiscal Year 2023 Audited Financial Statements and MSDE Data
Blueprint for Maryland’s Future (Blueprint)
Blueprint is a State-funded grant program based on recommendations of the
Maryland Commission on Innovation and Excellence in Education.1 Chapter 771,
Laws of Maryland, 2019, effective June 1, 2019, established principles of the
Blueprint that are intended to transform Maryland's early childhood, primary, and
secondary education systems to the levels of the highest-performing systems.
Blueprint specifies how funding is calculated to support programs and initiatives
from prekindergarten through college and career.
Blueprint allocates funding to schools based on a weighted-student formula. The
funding formula provides resources to local education agencies based on the
number of students enrolled at each school (known as Foundation Aid) and the
characteristics of those students (such as, Special Education, Concentration of
1 The Maryland Commission on Innovation and Excellence in Education was established by
Chapters 701 and 702, Laws of Maryland 2016, effective June 1, 2016 to review the adequacy of
funding for education.
7

--- Page 10 ---
Poverty, and Compensatory Education Aid). Blueprint also provides additional
funding for specific programs that schools offer (such as Prekindergarten Aid).
Expenditures
According to WCPS’ audited financial statements, fiscal year 2023 expenditures
were approximately $420.2 million. The largest expenditure category was
salaries and wages, including benefits, which accounted for approximately 71
percent of total expenditures during fiscal year 2023. According to MSDE
records, during the 2022-2023 school year, WCPS had 3,200 full-time equivalent
positions, which consisted of 2,222 instructional and 978 non-instructional
positions. Instruction accounted for 60 percent of WCPS’ expenditures on a
categorical basis (see Figure 3).
Figure 3
WCPS Expenditures by Category and Selected Statistical Data
Fiscal Year 2023
(amounts in millions)
$253.3
Instruction
60%
$60.7
Facilities & Capital Projects
15%
Enrollment
$42.4
Administration & Support 10% 22,297
$36 Employees
Special Education
9%
3,200
$14.1
Food Service
3% Cost Per Pupil
$18,845
$13.7
Transportation
3%
Source: WCPS’ Fiscal Year 2023 Audited Financial Statements and MSDE Data
Oversight
WCPS is governed by a local school board, consisting of seven elected voting
members and one non-voting student member. MSDE exercises considerable
oversight of WCPS through the establishment and monitoring of various financial
and academic policies and regulations, in accordance with certain provisions of
8

--- Page 11 ---
the Annotated Code of Maryland. MSDE also works with WCPS to comply with
the requirements and mandates of federal law. The Washington County
government also exercises authority over WCPS primarily through the review and
approval of WCPS’ annual operating and capital budgets.
Accountability and Implementation Board (AIB)
The AIB was established by State law as an independent unit of State government
in February 2021 and is responsible for holding State and local governments,
including local education agencies, accountable for implementing the Blueprint
State-funded grant program and for evaluating the outcomes. Specifically, the
AIB reviews the use of school-level expenditures and monitors school system
compliance with Blueprint requirements. The AIB consists of a seven-member
Board appointed by the Governor, with advice and consent of the Senate. The
Board Chair is designated by the Governor, the Senate President, and the Speaker
of the House.
Office of the Inspector General for Education (OIGE)
The OIGE was established by State law as an independent unit of State
government effective June 2019. The OIGE is responsible for examining and
investigating complaints or information regarding the management and affairs of
local boards of education, local school systems, public schools, nonpublic schools
that receive State funds, the Maryland State Department of Education, and the
Interagency Commission on School Construction. Specifically, the law provides
that the OIGE may receive and investigate information and complaints concerning
potential fraud, waste, and abuse of public funds and property; civil rights
violations involving students or employees; whether policies and procedures
governing the prevention and reporting of child abuse and neglect comply with
applicable federal and State laws; and compliance with other applicable federal
and State laws.
The OIGE initiates examinations and investigations based on its assessment of
complaints and information it receives from various sources, including State and
outside agencies and through its fraud, waste, and abuse hotline. The OIGE also
conducts an annual review of local school systems to ensure policies and
procedures governing the prevention and reporting of child abuse and neglect
comply with applicable federal and State laws. During the period covered by our
review, the OIGE did not issue any reports related to WCPS reviews and
investigations.
9

--- Page 12 ---
External Audits
As required by State law, WCPS engages a certified public accounting firm to
independently audit its annual financial statements. The firm performs
procedures to verify the amounts and disclosures in the financial statements. The
firm also evaluates the appropriateness of accounting policies used and the
reasonableness of significant accounting estimates made by management. In the
related audit reports, the firm stated that the financial statements presented fairly,
in all material respects, the financial position of WCPS as of June 30, 2018, 2019,
2020, 2021, 2022, and 2023, and the respective changes in its financial position
and, where applicable, its cash flows for the years then ended in accordance with
accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America.
Additionally, in accordance with Government Auditing Standards, as part of the
audited financial statements, the accounting firm also issued separate reports on
WCPS’ control over financial reporting and its tests of WCPS’ compliance with
certain provisions of laws, regulations, contracts, grant agreements, and other
matters. These reports are an integral part of the annual independently audited
financial statements. The accounting firm also conducts the Single Audit of
WCPS’ federal grant programs. The Single Audit is intended to provide
assurance to the federal government that adequate internal controls are in place,
and the entity is generally in compliance with program requirements.
We reviewed the aforementioned financial statement audits and Single Audit
reports for fiscal years 2018 through 2023 and examined the related work papers
for the fiscal year 2023 audit, which were the latest available during our audit
fieldwork. Our review did not note any deficiencies that warranted inclusion in
this report. In addition, certain work of the independent certified public
accounting firm, which we determined was reliable, covered areas included in the
scope of our audit. As a result, we did not conduct any audit work related to the
following areas:
 State and local government revenues received via electronic funds transfer
 Accounts receivable
 Federal grant activity
10

--- Page 13 ---
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report
Based on our current assessment of significance and risk relative to our audit
objectives, our audit included a review to determine the status of 10 of the 13
findings contained in our preceding audit report dated May 14, 2019. As
disclosed in Figure 4, for the non-cybersecurity-related findings, we determined
that WCPS satisfactorily addressed 4 of these 5 findings. The remaining finding
is repeated in this report.
Figure 4
Status of Preceding Findings
Preceding Implementation
Finding Description
Finding Status
Adequate accountability and control had not been established over
cash receipts, as checks were not always restrictively endorsed,
Finding 1 Not repeated
collections were not recorded immediately upon receipt, and there
was no independent verification that collections were deposited.
WCPS paid a vendor to perform data backup services for its student
information system without a properly executed contract for more
Finding 2 Not repeated
than two years. Consequently, WCPS’ interests were not adequately
protected when a disaster event occurred at its datacenter.
WCPS did not ensure that employee access to its human resources and
payroll system was appropriate. Additionally, critical human
Finding 3 Status Redacted2
resources and payroll transactions were not independently
reviewed for propriety.
WCPS had not established comprehensive equipment policies and Not repeated
Finding 4
adequate recordkeeping practices and controls over equipment. (Not followed up on)
Sensitive personally identifiable information maintained by WCPS
Finding 5 Status Redacted2
was stored without adequate safeguards.
Security activity monitoring, password controls, and database
Finding 6 software maintenance for the WCPS student information system were Status Redacted2
not sufficient.
WCPS did not have a complete information technology disaster
recovery plan for recovering computer operations, and had not
Finding 7 Status Redacted2
properly monitored a vendor responsible for certain IT backup
operations immediately before an actual disaster event occurred.
2 Specific information on the current status of this cybersecurity-related finding has been redacted
from the publicly available report in accordance with State Government Article, Section 2-
1224(i) of the Annotated Code of Maryland.
11

--- Page 14 ---
Figure 4
Status of Preceding Findings
Preceding Implementation
Finding Description
Finding Status
Intrusion detection prevention system coverage for the WCPS
network had substantial gaps, and malware protection controls were
Finding 8 Status Redacted 3
not sufficient to provide WCPS with adequate assurance that its
computers were properly protected.
Not repeated
Finding 9 WCPS’ energy use and conservation policy was not comprehensive.
(Not followed up on)
WCPS had not established comprehensive bus routing procedures and
Not repeated
Finding 10 did not periodically perform a system-wide analysis of routes and
(Not followed up on)
related bus capacities to maximize efficiency.
Certain elements used to calculate WCPS’ payments to bus
Not repeated
Finding 11 contractors did not consider market conditions, actual costs, or were
not properly documented.
Payments to bus contractors were not adequately verified for
Finding 12 Not repeated
accuracy.
WCPS did not verify that stop-loss insurance was correctly applied by
Repeated
Finding 13 the third-party administrator, and plan administrative fees and stop-
(Current Finding 8)
loss premiums were properly charged.
3 Specific information on the current status of this cybersecurity-related finding has been redacted
from the publicly available report in accordance with State Government Article, Section 2-
1224(i) of the Annotated Code of Maryland.
12

--- Page 15 ---
Findings and Recommendations
Revenue and Billing Cycle
Background
Washington County Public Schools (WCPS) revenues consist primarily of funds
received from the State, Washington County, and the federal government.
According to the WCPS audited financial statements, revenues from all sources
totaled approximately $416.4 million in fiscal year 2023, including $238 million
from the State.
External Audits
There were similarities between the work of the independent certified public
accounting firm (CPA) that audited WCPS’ financial statements and the
objectives for our audit for certain revenue activities. As a result, we relied on
this work to provide audit coverage for State and local government revenues
received via electronic funds transfer and accounts receivable, for which the
auditor’s procedural reviews (related to the fiscal year 2023 audit) and testing
disclosed no material weaknesses or significant deficiencies.
School Activity Funds
Schools collect funds for other purposes such as student activities, clubs, and
school publications. Because they are not considered school revenue, these
school activity funds are accounted for separately by each school and reported in
summary in the audited financial statements. During fiscal year 2023, school
activity collections totaled approximately $3.3 million and the June 30, 2023 fund
balance was $2.8 million. Based on our assessment of the relative significance of
this activity, we did not review the procedures and controls over these funds.
Conclusion
Based on our current assessment of significance and risk relative to our audit
objectives, we relied on the work of the CPA to provide audit coverage in this
area, including procedures and controls related to the accounting for and
safeguarding of collections with respect to revenue and billing.
13

--- Page 16 ---
Federal Funds
Background
WCPS receives funds pertaining to federal government programs that are
generally restricted for use for a specific program (such as the School Lunch
Program or Special Education). According to WCPS’ Single Audit, fiscal year
2023 (latest available at the time of our audit) federal expenditures totaled
approximately $54.3 million, not including federally funded fee-for-service
programs such as Medicaid reimbursement for special education services.
According to the audited financial statements, federal fund revenues (excluding
Medicaid) increased, from $22.3 million in fiscal year 2020 to $54.3 million in
fiscal year 2023 (144 percent), due to COVID-19 pandemic grant funding.
According to WCPS’ records, as of June 30, 2023, it was awarded federal
COVID-19 pandemic grant funds totaling $97.5 million to be distributed over
federal fiscal years 2020 to 2024 under the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and
Economic Security Act, Coronavirus Response and Relief Supplemental
Appropriations Act, and the American Rescue Plan.
As of June 30, 2023, WCPS expenditures related to these COVID-19 grants
totaled $70.1 million from March 2020 to June 2023, and were primarily
comprised of staffing, laptops, summer enhancement programs, personal
protection equipment, sanitary supplies, and positions associated with learning
loss. WCPS can request extensions up until December 2025 from the federal
grant programs for distributing these funds if the funds are not used by the end of
fiscal year 2024. We were advised by WCPS that it plans to request an extension
to expend the remaining funds.
Single Audit Reports
There were similarities in the work performed by the independent CPA that
conducted the Single Audit of WCPS’ federal grants and the objectives of our
audit in this area. In addition to expressing an opinion on WCPS compliance with
the terms of several grant programs, the auditor also considered the existing
internal control structure’s impact on compliance and audited the required
Schedule of Expenditures of Federal Awards (which includes claimed and
reported grant expenditures) for fiscal years 2018 through 2023. Our review of
the Single Audits did not identify any issues that warranted inclusion in this
report.
Medicaid Funds for Eligible Services
WCPS has established a procedure to identify children eligible for Medicaid-
subsidized services and the services rendered. Medicaid is an entitlement
14

--- Page 17 ---
program for which certain service costs can be reimbursed to WCPS. Medicaid
activity is not covered by the Single Audit of federal grants.
The Maryland State Department of Education’s Interagency Medicaid Monitoring
Team issued a report in July 2023 of the results of its review of 65 student case
files for 100 criteria. The report did not specifically address the propriety of
Medicaid billing, but overall concluded that WCPS was generally compliant with
most criteria. For example, WCPS was 100 percent compliant with 79 criteria
and between 91 and 99 percent compliant with 17 criteria.
According to WCPS records, fiscal year 2023 State and federal reimbursements
for Medicaid-subsidized services totaled approximately $2.6 million, which was
consistent with the previous fiscal year. Based on our current assessment of
significance and risk relative to our audit objectives, our audit did not include a
review of Medicaid-subsidized services.
Conclusion
We relied on the work of the independent CPA that conducted the Single Audits
for the work in this area, including policies, procedures, and controls with respect
to federal grants and expenditures.
Procurement and Disbursement Cycle
Background
According to the audited financial statements and WCPS’ records, disbursements
(excluding payroll) totaled $123.8 million during fiscal year 2023. WCPS uses a
financial management system for purchases and disbursements. Requisitions are
created in the system by department staff and are subject to supervisory and
purchasing department approvals. Purchase orders are prepared in the system by
the purchasing department based on approved requisitions. The purchasing
department also generally handles the solicitation, bid evaluation, and
establishment of contracts.
Invoices are submitted by vendors directly to the accounts payable department for
entry into the financial management system. Generally, the system matches
invoices to appropriate purchasing documents and the verification of receipt
entered by the receiving school or department. Payments are processed by the
accounts payable department through the financial management system which
either prints vendor checks or processes an electronic payment, and then posts the
payment to the financial records.
15

--- Page 18 ---
WCPS written procurement policy requires that procurements equal to or
exceeding $25,000 be competitively bid in accordance with Section 5-112 of the
Education Article of the Annotated Code of Maryland. Procurements of contracts
and agreements valued at $50,000 or more, are to be approved by the Washington
County Board of Education.
Finding 1
Certain requirements of State law and recognized best practices were not
incorporated into WCPS procurement policies and were not consistently
used when participating in intergovernmental cooperative purchasing
agreements (ICPAs).
Analysis
Certain requirements of State law and recognized best practices were not
incorporated into WCPS procurement policies and were not consistently used
when participating in ICPAs. State law, which legal counsel to the Maryland
General Assembly advised us is applicable to local education agencies, allows the
use of ICPAs only after the using entity has met the statutory requirement of
determining (or assessing) in writing that the use of such arrangements will
provide cost benefits, promote administrative efficiencies, or promote
intergovernmental cooperation.4
According to its records, WCPS used the ICPA procurement method for 82
procurements with awards totaling approximately $94.2 million during fiscal
years 2018 through 2023. Our review of WCPS procurement policies disclosed
that the above statutory requirement as well as the following critical best practices
were not included:
 Analyze all costs of conducting competitive solicitations;
 Research, compare, and evaluate available ICPAs;
 Verify ICPA has a clause allowing utilization by other parties;
 Verify the ICPA solicitation was competitively bid and publicly
advertised;
4 Section 13-110 of the State Finance and Procurement Article of the Annotated Code of
Maryland, in part, defines an ICPA as a contract that is entered into by at least one governmental
entity in a certain manner, that is available for use by the governmental entity entering the
contract and at least one additional governmental entity, and that is intended to promote
efficiency and savings that can result from intergovernmental cooperative purchasing. The
aforementioned law applies to all ICPAs regardless of the services, goods, or commodities
purchased. In addition, Section 5- 112(a)(3) of the Education Article, of the Code provides that
local education agencies do not need to conduct competitive procurements for goods and
commodities if they use a contract awarded by public agencies or intergovernmental purchasing
organizations and the originating procuring agency followed public bidding procedures.
16

--- Page 19 ---
 Verify terms, scope of services, specifications, and price meet our needs;
 Execute an addendum of participation with lead agency and remove or
incorporate necessary local terms and conditions; and
 Obtain a copy of ICPA and related price lists for invoice verification.
In addition, we tested WCPS’ participation in 5 ICPAs (selected based on
significance), awarded during fiscal years 2020 through 2022, totaling
approximately $8.3 million. Our review disclosed that WCPS did not include
some of the aforementioned best practices in the ICPAs tested. For example,
WCPS did not analyze the costs of conducting competitive solicitations for any of
the contracts tested and did not adhere to 4 of the remaining best practices for 3 of
the ICPAs tested. We further noted that WCPS had not prepared the statutorily
required written assessments for any of the contracts tested to justify the use of
the ICPA.
We did find that other best practices were performed despite not being included in
WCPS’ policies. For example, WCPS verified the ICPA had a clause allowing
utilization by other parties and WCPS verified the ICPA solicitation was
competitively bid and publicly advertised for all 5 ICPAs tested. Incorporating
ICPA best practices into WCPS procurement policies could help ensure they are
consistently used.
The Institute for Public Procurement, formerly known as the National Institute of
Government Purchasing, as well as other public and educational organizations
have published ICPA best practices. These practices include comprehensive
multi-step checklists that require, among other things (as per the list above), that
prospective ICPA users verify that the contract allows other entities to participate.
In addition, the practices also require that ICPA users ensure that the contract was
awarded through a competitive procurement process, that addendums be executed
documenting their participation, and that all local required terms and conditions
are incorporated.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that WCPS incorporate the aforementioned statutory
requirements and other identified and acknowledged best practices into its
procurement policies and ensure that the performance of the requirements
and best practices are documented when evaluating and participating in
ICPAs.
17

--- Page 20 ---
Finding 2
WCPS published contract awards on its website instead of on eMaryland
Marketplace Advantage (eMMA) as required by State procurement law.
Analysis
WCPS did not publish contract awards on eMMA as required by State
procurement law. According to State law, the solicitation and award of contracts
of $50,000 or more procured by public schools after July 1, 2022, are required to
be published on eMMA.5 Publishing awards on eMMA provides transparency
over State procurements, including information about winning bidders and the
amount of the related awards.
Our review disclosed that since July 1, 2022, WCPS published awards on its
website consistent with its own policy, and not on eMMA as required by the
aforementioned law. According to WCPS records, during the period from July 1,
2022 to February 20, 2024, the WCPS’ Board of Education approved 78 contract
awards each valued at or over $50,000 and in aggregate totaling $57.3 million.
Recommendation 2
We recommend that WCPS comply with State procurement law by
publishing contract awards on eMMA as required, including those noted
above.
Finding 3
WCPS did not competitively procure a $3.6 million nursing services contract
that has been awarded annually to the same vendor since 2013, and did not
obtain available supporting documentation to ensure that related billings
were proper.
Analysis
WCPS did not competitively procure a $3.6 million nursing services contract and
did not obtain available supporting documentation to ensure that related billings
were proper. Our review of 5 contracts totaling $8.7 million6 disclosed that in
August 2022, WCPS awarded a one-year $3.6 million nursing contract to the
incumbent vendor without soliciting competitive bids. Similar contract awards
have been made by WCPS to the same vendor since 2013. We were advised by
WCPS that in 2013, WCPS competitively solicited bids for the nursing contract,
but the only responsive bidder was the current vendor.
5 eMMA is an Internet-based, interactive procurement system managed by the State of Maryland’s
Department of General Services.
6 Test selection was based on material payments made to vendors in fiscal year 2023.
18

--- Page 21 ---
WCPS also did not obtain available supporting documentation to validate the
propriety of vendor billings. Specifically, our review of 2 invoices (selected
based on materiality) from October 2022 and April 2023 totaling approximately
$454,000 and $390,000, respectively, disclosed that WCPS did not obtain
available detailed staff timesheets or use staff assignment reports to validate the
propriety of vendor billings. Our comparison of hours charged on summary
vendor billing reports to detailed timesheets for 5 employees (which WCPS
obtained at our request) did not identify any differences between the hours billed
and the hours worked for the 5 employees.
Recommendation 3
We recommend that WCPS
a. ensure that contracts are competitively procured and awarded, to allow
for the best possible contract prices; and
b. use available supporting documentation from the vendor (such as,
timesheets and staff assignment reports) to validate the propriety of
vendor billings.
Human Resources and Payroll
Background
Payroll expense represents the largest single cost component in the WCPS budget.
According to WCPS records, fiscal year 2023 salary, wage, and benefit costs
totaled approximately $296.4 million, representing 71 percent of the total
expenditures. According to Maryland State Department of Education reports,
during the 2022–2023 school year WCPS had 3,200 full-time positions, which
consisted of 2,222 instructional and 978 non-instructional positions.
WCPS uses an automated system to maintain human resources information,
record employee time, track employee leave usage, and process and record
payroll transactions. The system generates payroll checks and direct deposit
advices. Payroll processing involves both automated processes (such as
compiling leave and running edit reports) and manual processes (such as data
entry of new employee information).
Finding 4
WCPS did not independently review payroll adjustments for propriety.
Analysis
WCPS did not independently review payroll adjustments for propriety.
Specifically, two employees were responsible for calculating and entering payroll
19

--- Page 22 ---
adjustments (such as overtime, summer school, vacation and leave payouts),
which totaled approximately $1.2 million in fiscal year 2023, without independent
supervisory review or approval. Our test of 10 material leave payout adjustments
valued at approximately $673,000 processed during the period from July 2020 to
January 2023 did not disclose any inappropriate or erroneous transactions.
A similar condition regarding the lack of an independent review of payroll
transactions was commented on in our two preceding audit reports dating back to
June 2013. In response to our preceding report, WCPS agreed to conduct a
documented supervisory review of critical or unusual payroll transactions noted
on its system generated action history report. However, WCPS did not take the
corrective actions as agreed.
Recommendation 4
We recommend that WCPS perform a documented independent supervisory
review of payroll adjustments to ensure that they are appropriate and
properly supported (repeat).
Equipment Control and Accountability
Background
According to WCPS’ audited financial statements, the undepreciated value of its
capital equipment inventory (furniture, fixtures, and equipment) totaled $54
million as of June 30, 2023. WCPS maintains centralized automated records for
all equipment with a cost of $5,000 or more that are capitalized for financial
statement purposes. In addition, WCPS’ Information Technology Department
maintains an inventory database of laptops issued to schools, students, and
employees. WCPS has written equipment policies and performs inventories at
each school annually.
Conclusion
Based on our current assessment of significance and risk relative to our audit
objectives, our audit did not include a review of policies, procedures, and controls
with respect to the equipment area of operations.
Information Technology
We determined that the Information Technology section, including Findings 5
through 7 related to “cybersecurity,” as defined by the State Finance and
Procurement Article, Section 3.5-301(b) of the Annotated Code of Maryland, and
20

--- Page 23 ---
therefore are subject to redaction from the publicly available audit report in
accordance with the State Government Article 2-1224(i). Consequently, the
specifics of the following findings, including the analysis, related
recommendations, along with WCPS’ responses, have been redacted from this
report copy.
Finding 5
Redacted cybersecurity-related finding.
Finding 6
Redacted cybersecurity-related finding.
Finding 7
Redacted cybersecurity-related finding.
Facilities Construction, Renovation, and Maintenance
Background
WCPS employs a staff of 236 employees to maintain its 46 schools and a number
of other facilities (such as administrative and support offices). According to its
fiscal year 2023 Capital Improvement Program, necessary construction, major
renovations, and systemic improvements to WCPS’ facilities over the next five
years are estimated to cost $106.9 million.
WCPS Capital Projects Were Competitively Solicited and Approved by the
Board and Related Expenditures Were Properly Supported
Our review of three high dollar construction-related and one architectural
procurement awarded during fiscal years 2019 to 2022 totaling $34.5 million,
disclosed that the contracts were competitively procured and approved by the
Board. In addition, our test of eight invoices totaling $6.1 million for these
contracts disclosed that the invoices were properly reviewed and approved, and
the amounts invoiced were in accordance with the related contract terms.
Processes are in Place to Promote Ongoing Facility Maintenance and to
Minimize Energy Costs
WCPS has processes in place to promote ongoing facility maintenance and
minimize energy costs. For example, WCPS provides scheduled maintenance of
its buildings and equipment with the goal of preventing emergency repairs. In
addition, WCPS participates in a consortium with other area entities to purchase
21

--- Page 24 ---
energy at the best possible terms for members of the consortium. WCPS also uses
a vendor energy management program to monitor and control heating and air
conditioning usage and a utility bill management program to monitor related
costs. WCPS has written policies that include best practices that encourage both
students and employees to be aware of and limit their energy use and conducts
internal on-site reviews of building energy efficiency. Further, WCPS makes
limited use of solar and wind energy sources.
Conclusion
Our audit did not disclose any significant deficiencies in the design or operation
of WCPS’ internal controls over the facilities construction, renovation, and
maintenance financial-related areas of operations reviewed. Our audit also did
not disclose any significant instances of noncompliance with applicable laws,
rules, or regulations.
Transportation Services
Background
According to statistics compiled by the Maryland State Department of Education
(MSDE), WCPS has approximately 20,048 students eligible to receive student
transportation services. These students were transported using 132 system-owned
buses and 38 contractor-owned buses. WCPS reported that 3.2 million route
miles were traveled to transport students for the 2022-2023 school year.
During school year 2022-2023, WCPS had contracts with 17 bus contractors for
student transportation. The contracts are for either one-year or six-year terms and
continue annually throughout the service life of the contractor’s buses, subject to
the Board’s right to terminate the contract for various reasons (such as available
funding, cause, contractor insolvency, and termination of routes to reduce or
consolidate routes). According to WCPS’ financial records, fiscal year 2023
transportation costs totaled $14 million, of which $2.7 million (19.3 percent) were
payments to the 17 bus contractors. When schools were closed, from March 17,
2020 to September 1, 2020 due to the COVID-19 pandemic, WCPS continued to
pay the bus contractors at its agreed-upon rates (except for fuel). The cost
components for contractor bus payments for fiscal year 2023 are summarized in
Figure 5 on the following page.
22

--- Page 25 ---
Figure 5
Cost Components for Bus Contractor Payments
Fiscal Year 2023
(dollar amounts in millions)
Cost Component Amount
Maintenance Fee and Fuel Costs $1.1 43%
Reimbursements for Drivers Hourly Rates 1.0 35%
Per-vehicle Allotment (PVA) – reimbursement for the cost of
0.4 14%
purchasing a bus
Other Costs – (such as administrative fee and spare buses) 0.2 8%
Total $2.7
Source: WCPS Records
Conclusion
Our audit did not disclose any significant deficiencies in the design or operation
of WCPS’ internal controls over the transportation services financial-related areas
of operations reviewed. Our audit also did not disclose any significant instances
of noncompliance with applicable laws, rules, or regulations.
Food Services
Background
According to WCPS’ audited financial statements, food services operating
expenditures totaled $14.1 million in fiscal year 2023 and were funded with
federal funds totaling $11.9 million and food sales totaling $2.2 million. The
federal funds are received from the United States Department of Agriculture
(USDA) based on an established rate per meal served. WCPS is allowed to retain
federal funds it receives in excess of its annual food service operating costs to be
used to offset certain future food service operating costs. According to WCPS’
audited financial statements, the balance in WCPS’ Food Services Fund totaled
$2.5 million as of June 30, 2023. According to MSDE records, in fiscal year
2023, WCPS had 146 food services positions for its 46 schools, consisting of 144
cafeteria positions and 2 administrative positions.
Similar to other Maryland local education agencies, WCPS continued to serve
meals from certain schools during the COVID-19 pandemic health crisis by
providing free meals for parents and students to pick up. The number of meals
served increased by approximately 22 percent from 2.8 million in fiscal year 2020
to 3.5 million in fiscal year 2023. WCPS advised us that the increase was the
23

--- Page 26 ---
result of students returning to in-person classes after the COVID-19 pandemic,
and because meals were provided to all students at no cost during the 2021-2022
school year. WCPS food service expenditures increased by 31 percent (food costs
and equipment) during the same period, from $11.6 million to $15.2 million.
WCPS indicated that no employees were laid off due to the COVID-19 pandemic.
Conclusion
Based on our current assessment of significance and risk relative to our audit
objectives, our audit did not include a review of policies, procedures, and controls
related to the Food Services financial area of operations.
School Board Oversight
Background
The Washington County Board of Education (the Board) is composed of seven
elected members and one non-voting student representative. The Board
contracted with a certified public accounting firm to conduct independent audits
of the WCPS financial statements and federal programs. To assist in its oversight
of various areas of WCPS operation and governance, the Board established
several committees, such as a Citizen Advisory Committee and an Ethics Panel.
WCPS Adopted an Ethics Policy that Met the Requirements of State Law
The Board has adopted a detailed ethics policy that conforms to State Law and
was approved by the State Ethics Commission. The policy is applicable to both
Board members and WCPS employees and includes provisions for conflicts of
interest and financial disclosures by Board members and certain employees.
Specifically, annual financial disclosure statements are required to be filed by
Board members, candidates for the Board, appointed officials (such as the
Superintendent), and members of administrative/supervisory units (such as school
principals) by April 30th of each year.
In accordance with the policy, WCPS established an Ethics Panel consisting of
five members appointed by the Board to interpret ethics policies and provide
advice on policy implementation. The Panel also reviews and rules on any
reported complaints of ethics violations. Our review of the records for Board
members and WCPS employees required to submit financial disclosure forms for
calendar year 2022 disclosed that all forms were submitted as required.
Conclusion
Our audit did not disclose any reportable conditions related to school board
oversight.
24

--- Page 27 ---
Figure 6
Management of Other Risks
WCPS 2023 Healthcare Financing
Healthcare Background (amounts in millions)
Revenues
WCPS is self-insured and contracts
Employer Contributions $45.1
with three third-party administrator
Employee/Retiree Contributions 12.2
firms (TPAs) for health care claims
Rebates 7.3
processing services for employee
Other Revenue 0.3
and retiree medical, prescription,
Total Revenue $64.9
dental, and vision costs. WCPS also
contracts with a consultant to help
Expenditures
manage the health plans. The
Claims Payments $59.2
consultant performs data analysis of
Administrative Fees 1.1
health services utilization and costs,
Stop-Loss Insurance Premiums 1.1
provides recommendations on
Other Expenses 0.2
potential rate changes, and evaluates
Total Expenditures $61.6
the merits of health plan proposals.
In addition, WCPS contracts with an
Source: WCPS Records
insurer for stop-loss insurance,
which indemnifies WCPS against
health claim amounts that exceed $500,000 per participant per plan year.
The health benefit plans for WCPS employees and retirees are financed through
governmental funds, with a fiduciary fund (referred to as the Retiree Health Plan
Trust) established as an investment reserve for future retiree health benefit costs.7
The plans provide coverage under contracts with several insurance companies.
According to WCPS records, the healthcare revenues and expenditures for fiscal
year 2023 totaled $64.9 million and $61.6 million respectively (see Figure 6).
WCPS employs a verification process in its enrollment procedures whereby
employees must submit documentation (such as, birth certificates) for dependents
they want added to their health plan. As of December 15, 2023, WCPS provided
health insurance benefits to approximately 8,814 enrolled employees, dependents,
and retirees.
7 These funds are invested with the Maryland Association of Boards of Education, Retiree Health
Plan Trust, and totaled $113.4 million as of June 30, 2023.
25

--- Page 28 ---
Finding 8
WCPS did not adequately monitor the performance of its third-party
administrator that provided medical healthcare and pharmacy claims
processing services.
Analysis
WCPS did not adequately monitor the performance of its TPA that provided
medical healthcare and pharmacy claims processing services. According to
WCPS records, payments to the TPA totaled approximately $1.1 million in fiscal
year 2023.
 WCPS did not obtain and review claim data to support the amounts billed by
the medical TPA for healthcare claims. Rather, WCPS approved the amounts
billed based on a review of a summary schedule of the total claims paid for
each health plan with no review of supporting documentation. WCPS also did
not routinely audit the healthcare claims paid by the TPA to ensure the billed
services were provided to participants, were covered by the health plans, and
that amounts paid were proper. The last claims audit performed by WCPS
was for claims paid during fiscal year 2018. According to that audit,
recoveries totaling $19,477 were identified and claim payment accuracy was
94.84 percent, which was below industry standards of 97 to 98 percent.
WCPS’ TPA contracts allowed for periodic independent third-party audits of
the accuracy and validity of claim reimbursements paid by WCPS.
 WCPS did not perform a documented verification that individual claims
exceeding the $500,000 stop-loss limit were reimbursed by the TPA. We
were advised by WCPS that it received and reviewed a report from the TPA of
claims that exceeded the stop-loss threshold, but there was no documentation
of this review. In addition, as noted above, WCPS did not receive a report of
detailed claims data paid by the TPA to ensure no claims over the stop-loss
threshold had been paid. In fiscal year 2023, WCPS paid approximately
$992,000 in stop-loss premiums and received $93,000 in stop-loss coverage.
A similar condition regarding the lack of a documented review of detailed
claims data to ensure no claims over the stop-loss threshold had been paid was
commented upon in our preceding audit report. WCPS’ response to our
preceding report indicated that corrective actions would be implemented to
address our recommendations. However, WCPS did not take the corrective
actions as indicated.
 WCPS did not audit the TPA to ensure that it received all the prescription
drug rebates the TPA received from drug manufacturers and did not document
26

--- Page 29 ---
the receipt of the rebates. Drug rebates are determined based on volume and
type of drug dispensed per agreements with drug manufacturers. According to
WCPS records, pharmacy rebates totaled $7.3 million during fiscal year 2023.
 WCPS did not verify the accuracy of the TPA’s self-reported compliance with
performance measures. For example, the TPA contract included 26
performance measures relating to medical and pharmacy services. Although
the contract allowed for the assessment of penalties up to $223,334 annually if
the TPA did not meet the performance measures, WCPS had not determined
whether any penalties should be assessed during the audit period.
Recommendation 8
We recommend that WCPS
a. establish procedures to verify the propriety of TPA claim billings
including the review of supporting documentation;
b. conduct claims audits to assess the accuracy and validity of claims;
c. obtain and use detailed claim payment data to ensure that claims paid
above the stop-loss limit are reimbursed by the TPA (repeat);
d. conduct pharmacy TPA audits to assess that all drug rebates due were
received; and
e. establish a process to independently verify, on an annual basis, the TPA’s
compliance with reported performance measures and assess penalties
when performance goals are not met.
Finding 9
WCPS did not have memorandums of agreement (MOA) with its affiliated
foundations to address each entity’s roles and responsibilities.
Analysis
WCPS did not have memorandums of agreement (MOA) with its affiliated
foundations, the Barbara Ingram School for the Arts Foundation (BISFAF) and
the Washington County Public Schools Education Foundation (WCPSEF), to
address each entity’s roles and responsibilities. The affiliated foundations are tax
exempt charitable organizations under Section 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue
Service (IRS) code that were created in 2007 and 2008, respectively.
According to filings with the IRS and the respective foundations’ websites, the
BISFAF’s purpose is to advance exceptional arts education by providing
resources and funding, and the WCPSEF’s purpose is to enhance education for all
students by securing resources to support innovative teaching and learning. Given
the affiliated foundations’ public purposes and their relationship to WCPS, it
27

--- Page 30 ---
would be appropriate for WCPS to enter into formal MOAs that specify the roles
and responsibilities of each entity, which could include the following:
 The foundations’ solicitation, collection, and administration of funds,
including an investment policy. These would address controls over collected
funds including proper collateralization of funds, the use of interest-bearing
accounts, and procedures for the accounting and reporting of fund balances.
The policies should also address the need for a long-term plan to maximize
the use of unrestricted funds.
 The foundations’ conflict of interest policy for board members and foundation
employees. Although both foundations had conflict of interest policies, they
did not have comprehensive ethics policies as provided for under the State
Ethics law, which addresses standards of conduct, ethics training, and
completing annual financial disclosures by board members and officers. Such
policies would provide additional assurance regarding the integrity of the
foundations’ boards and their processes and should include a requirement to
advise WCPS of conflict of interest issues.
 The foundations’ procurement policies for purchases of goods and services
donated to WCPS.
 The foundations’ submission of an annual audit report to WCPS’ Board of
Education.
 WCPS’ sharing of priorities, projects and resource requirements; including the
sharing of any data to assist the foundations’ efforts.
 WCPS’ providing of any in-kind support functions and the use of its facilities
to the foundations.
According to BISFAF’s fiscal year 2023 audited financial statements, revenues
and expenditures totaled $274,000 and $242,000, respectively and assets totaled
$2.1 million as of June 30, 2023. According to WCPSEF’s unaudited financial
statements for fiscal year 2023, reported revenues and expenditures totaled
$111,000 and $128,000, respectively and assets totaled $69,000 as of June 30,
2023.
Recommendation 9
We recommend that WCPS enter into MOAs with its affiliated foundations
detailing the roles and responsibilities for each entity in the above-mentioned
28

--- Page 31 ---
critical areas such as conflicts of interest, collection and safeguarding funds,
and procurement policies.
29

--- Page 32 ---
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We have conducted a performance audit of the Washington County Public
Schools (WCPS). We conducted this audit under the authority of the State
Government Article, Section 2-1220(e) of the Annotated Code of Maryland,
which generally requires that every 6 years we audit each of the 24 local school
systems to evaluate the effectiveness and efficiency of financial management
practices. This performance audit was performed in accordance with generally
accepted government auditing standards. Those standards require that we plan
and perform the audit to obtain sufficient, appropriate evidence to provide a
reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives.
We believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings
and conclusions based on our audit objectives.
We had two broad audit objectives:
1. Evaluate whether the WCPS procedures and controls were effective in
accounting for and safeguarding its assets.
2. Evaluate whether the WCPS policies provided for the efficient use of
financial resources.
In planning and conducting our audit of WCPS, we focused on 11 major
financial-related areas of operations as approved on December 6, 2016 by the
Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee of the Maryland General Assembly in
accordance with the enabling legislation. The 11 major financial-related areas
included revenue and billing, federal funds, procurement and disbursements,
human resources and payroll, equipment control, information technology security
and control, facilities, transportation, food service, school board oversight, and the
management of other risks (such as health care).
The scope of the work performed in each of these areas was based on our
assessments of significance and risk. Therefore, our follow-up on the status of
findings included in our preceding audit report on WCPS dated May 14, 2019,
was limited to those findings that were applicable to the current audit scope for
each of the 11 areas.
The audit objectives excluded reviewing and assessing student achievement,
curriculum, teacher performance, and other academic-related areas and functions.
Also, we did not evaluate the WCPS Comprehensive Education Master Plan or
related updates, and we did not review the activities, financial or other, of any
30

--- Page 33 ---
parent teacher association, group, or funds not under the local board of
education’s direct control or management.
To accomplish our objectives, we reviewed applicable State laws and regulations
pertaining to public elementary and secondary education, as well as policies and
procedures issued and established by WCPS. We also interviewed personnel at
WCPS and the Maryland State Department of Education (MSDE), and staff at
other local school systems in Maryland (as appropriate). Our audit procedures
included inspections of documents and records, and to the extent practicable,
observations of WCPS operations. We also tested transactions and performed
other auditing procedures that we considered necessary to achieve our objectives,
generally for the period from July 1, 2021 to June 30, 2023.
Generally, transactions were selected for testing based on auditor judgment,
which primarily considers risk, the timing or dollar amount of the transaction, or
the significance of the transaction to the area of operation reviewed. As a matter
of course, we do not normally use sampling in our tests, so unless otherwise
specifically indicated, neither statistical nor non-statistical audit sampling was
used to select the transactions tested. Therefore, unless sampling is specifically
indicated in a finding, the results from any tests conducted or disclosed by us
cannot be used to project those results to the entire population from which the test
items were selected. For certain areas within the scope of the audit, we relied on
the work performed by the independent accounting firm that annually audits
WCPS’ financial statements and conducts the federal Single Audit.
We used certain statistical data—including financial and operational—compiled
by MSDE from various informational reports submitted by the Maryland local
school systems. This information was used in this audit report for background or
informational purposes, and was deemed reasonable.
We also extracted data from the WCPS automated financial management system
for the purpose of testing expenditure and payroll transactions. We performed
various audit procedures on the relevant data and determined the data were
sufficiently reliable for the purposes the data were used during the audit.
WCPS’ management is responsible for establishing and maintaining effective
internal control. Internal control is a process designed to provide reasonable
assurance that objectives pertaining to the reliability of financial records;
effectiveness and efficiency of operations including safeguarding of assets; and
compliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations are achieved. As
provided in Government Auditing Standards, there are five components of
internal control: control environment, risk assessment, control activities,
31

--- Page 34 ---
information and communication, and monitoring. Each of the five components,
when significant to the audit objectives, and as applicable to WCPS, were
considered by us during the course of this audit.
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate. In addition
to the conditions included in this report, other findings were communicated to
WCPS that were not deemed significant and, consequently, did not warrant
inclusion in this report.
State Government Article Section 2-1224(i) requires that we redact in a manner
consistent with auditing best practices any cybersecurity findings before a report
is made available to the public. This results in the issuance of two different
versions of an audit report that contains cybersecurity findings – a redacted
version for the public and an unredacted version for government officials
responsible for acting on our audit recommendations.
The State Finance and Procurement Article, Section 3.5-301(b), states that
cybersecurity is defined as “processes or capabilities wherein systems,
communications, and information are protected and defended against damage,
unauthorized use or modification, and exploitation.” Based on that definition, and
in our professional judgment, we concluded that certain findings in this report fall
under that definition. Consequently, for the publicly available audit report all
specifics as to the nature of cybersecurity findings and required corrective actions
have been redacted. We have determined that such aforementioned practices, and
government auditing standards, support the redaction of this information from the
public audit report. The specifics of these cybersecurity findings have been
communicated to WCPS and those parties responsible for acting on our
recommendations in an unredacted audit report.
We conducted our fieldwork from November 2023 to April 2024. WCPS’
response to our findings and recommendations is included as an appendix to this
report. Depending on the version of the audit report, responses to any
cybersecurity findings may be redacted in accordance with State law. As
prescribed in the State Government Article, Section 2-1224 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, we will advise WCPS regarding the results of our review of its
response.
32

--- Page 35 ---
APPENDIX

--- Page 36 ---
Washington County Public Schools
Agency Response Form
Procurement and Disbursement Cycle
Finding 1
Certain requirements of State law and recognized best practices were not
incorporated into WCPS procurement policies and were not consistently
used when participating in intergovernmental cooperative purchasing
agreements (ICPAs).
We recommend that WCPS incorporate the aforementioned statutory
requirements and other identified and acknowledged best practices into its
procurement policies and ensure that the performance of the requirements
and best practices are documented when evaluating and participating in
ICPAs.
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 1 Agree Estimated Completion Date: March 2025
Please provide details of WCPS will include the statutory requirement and other identified best
corrective action or practices. We will create a worksheet to reflect these requirements and
explain disagreement. best practices to ensure we are following them with each ICPA. The
worksheet will be added to any supporting documents submitted to the
purchasing department through the requisition process.
Page 1 of 8

--- Page 37 ---
Washington County Public Schools
Agency Response Form
Finding 2
WCPS published contract awards on its website instead of on eMaryland
Marketplace Advantage (eMMA) as required by State procurement law.
We recommend that WCPS comply with State procurement law by
publishing contract awards on eMMA as required, including those noted
above.
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 2 Agree Estimated Completion Date: January 2025
Please provide details of WCPS will publish the name of the awarded vendor on eMMA as
corrective action or required by law. WCPS will seek training from DGS to determine the
explain disagreement. proper method and whether our staff has the appropriate rights to meet
this recommendation.
Page 2 of 8

--- Page 38 ---
Washington County Public Schools
Agency Response Form
Finding 3
WCPS did not competitively procure a $3.6 million nursing services contract
that has been awarded annually to the same vendor since 2013, and did not
obtain available supporting documentation to ensure that related billings
were proper.
We recommend that WCPS
a. ensure that contracts are competitively procured and awarded, to allow
for the best possible contract prices; and
b. use available supporting documentation from the vendor (such as,
timesheets and staff assignment reports) to validate the propriety of
vendor billings.
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 3a Agree Estimated Completion Date: June 2025
Please provide details of WCPS is developing an RFP for these services and will put out the RFP
corrective action or during the current fiscal year and award the RFP in time for the start of
explain disagreement. the next school year (August 2025).
Recommendation 3b Agree Estimated Completion Date: July 2025
Please provide details of WCPS plans to change the procurement type from a reimbursable
corrective action or contract to a lump sum contract paid in equal payments over the course
explain disagreement. of the year. Any allowances under the contract will be required to be
substantiated with appropriate documentation as noted in the finding.
Page 3 of 8

--- Page 39 ---
Washington County Public Schools
Agency Response Form
Human Resources and Payroll
Finding 4
WCPS did not independently review payroll adjustments for propriety.
We recommend that WCPS perform a documented independent supervisory
review of payroll adjustments to ensure that they are appropriate and
properly supported (repeat).
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 4 Agree Estimated Completion Date: March 2025
Please provide details of WCPS will create custom reports to review leave adjustments monthly.
corrective action or The payroll supervisor will also randomly audit various leave
explain disagreement. adjustments on a bi-weekly basis. Overtime, summer school, and other
additional pay items are already reviewed for duplicates via in-house
reports and approved by the employee’s supervisor prior to submission
to the payroll department. Payouts over a threshold will be reviewed and
approved by the payroll supervisor.
Page 4 of 8

--- Page 40 ---
Washington County Public Schools
Agency Response Form
Information Technology
OLA has determined that the Information Technology section, including Findings
5 through 7 related to “cybersecurity”, as defined by the State Finance and
Procurement Article, Section 3.5-301(b) of the Annotated Code of Maryland, and
therefore are subject to redaction from the publicly available audit report in
accordance with State Government Article 2-1224(i). Although the specifics of
the findings, including the analysis, related recommendations, along with WCPS’
responses, have been redacted from this report copy, WCPS’ responses indicated
agreement with the findings and related recommendations.
Finding 5
Redacted cybersecurity-related finding.
Agency Response has been redacted by OLA.
Finding 6
Redacted cybersecurity-related finding.
Agency Response has been redacted by OLA.
Finding 7
Redacted cybersecurity-related finding.
Agency Response has been redacted by OLA.
Page 5 of 8

--- Page 41 ---
Washington County Public Schools
Agency Response Form
Management of Other Risks
Finding 8
WCPS did not adequately monitor the performance of its third-party
administrator that provided medical healthcare and pharmacy claims
processing services.
We recommend that WCPS
a. establish procedures to verify the propriety of TPA claim billings
including the review of supporting documentation;
b. conduct claims audits to assess the accuracy and validity of claims;
c. obtain and use detailed claim payment data to ensure that claims paid
above the stop-loss limit are reimbursed by the TPA (repeat);
d. conduct pharmacy TPA audits to assess that all drug rebates due were
received; and
e. establish a process to independently verify, on an annual basis, the TPA’s
compliance with reported performance measures and assess penalties
when performance goals are not met.
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 8a Agree Estimated Completion Date: July 2025
Please provide details of WCPS began receiving the SOC reports in the fall of 2024. WCPS will
corrective action or document its review and recommendations provided by WCPS to the
explain disagreement. TPA.
Recommendation 8b Agree Estimated Completion Date: December
2025
Please provide details of A standard claims audit is expected to be completed in 2025
corrective action or
explain disagreement.
Recommendation 8c Agree Estimated Completion Date: March 2025
Page 6 of 8

--- Page 42 ---
Washington County Public Schools
Agency Response Form
Please provide details of WCPS has been utilizing its benefits consultant to examine the claim
corrective action or payment data to guarantee the accuracy of the reimbursement for
explain disagreement. individuals who exceed the stop loss threshold. If there is a difference
between the expected reimbursement and the actual reimbursement,
individual reports are requested and reviewed by the consultant. Moving
forward, WCPS will conduct and document an internal review after
receiving verified reimbursement reports from the consultant noting the
accuracy of claims reimbursements.
Recommendation 8d Agree Estimated Completion Date: March 2025
Please provide details of
corrective action or WCPS utilizes its benefits consultant to verify the accuracy of rebates. If
explain disagreement. there is a difference between the expected and actual rebate, individual
reports are requested and reviewed by the consultant. WCPS will
conduct and document an internal review after receiving verified rebates
from the consultant. WCPS will evaluate adding an annual rebate audit
under our benefit services administration contract to obtain a more
thorough annual review of prescription rebates.
Recommendation 8e Agree Estimated Completion Date: September
2025
Please provide details of
corrective action or WCPS its benefits consultant to review performance guarantees for
explain disagreement. accuracy of the calculations that are self-reported by the TPA. WCPS
will conduct and document an internal review after receiving verified
performance guarantees from the consultant. Additionally, WCPS will
work with its benefits consultant to also request additional supporting
documentation to verify the accuracy of the self-reported performance of
the TPA.
Page 7 of 8

--- Page 43 ---
Washington County Public Schools
Agency Response Form
Finding 9
WCPS did not have memorandums of agreement (MOA) with its affiliated
foundations to address each entity’s roles and responsibilities.
We recommend that WCPS enter into MOAs with its affiliated foundations
detailing the roles and responsibilities for each entity in the above-mentioned
critical areas such as conflicts of interest, collection and safeguarding funds,
and procurement policies.
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 9 Agree Estimated Completion Date: June 2025
Please provide details of Memorandums of Agreement will be drafted and executed by the
corrective action or respective parties as recommended.
explain disagreement.
Page 8 of 8

--- Page 44 ---
A T
UDIT EAM
Bekana Edossa, CPA, CFE
Audit Manager
R. Brendan Coffey, CPA, CISA
Edwin L. Paul, CPA, CISA
Information Systems Audit Managers
Menachem Katz, CPA
Senior Auditor
Michael K. Bliss, CISA
Matthew D. Walbert, CISA
Information Systems Senior Auditors
Mia W. Foelster
Matthew P. Henry
Daniel G. Johnson, CFE
Staff Auditors
Joshua A. Nicodemus, CISA
Christopher C. Pitre
Neha S. Tirkey
Information Systems Staff Auditors