Title: University System of Maryland - University of Maryland Center for Environmental Science
Date: 06/14/2019
Type: Fiscal Compliance
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5d07e157a1ce5802f8bf8ca8
Extracted: 2025-06-19T06:14:50.842830
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Audit Report
University System of Maryland
University of Maryland Center for Environmental
Science
January 2024
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Senator Clarence K. Lam, M.D. (Senate Chair) Delegate Jared Solomon (House Chair)
Senator Joanne C. Benson Delegate Steven J. Arentz
Senator Paul D. Corderman Delegate Andrea Fletcher Harrison
Senator Katie Fry Hester Delegate Steven C. Johnson
Senator Shelly L. Hettleman Delegate Mary A. Lehman
Senator Cheryl C. Kagan Delegate David Moon
Senator Cory V. McCray Delegate Julie Palakovich Carr
Senator Justin D. Ready Delegate Stephanie M. Smith
Senator Bryan W. Simonaire Delegate M. Courtney Watson
Senator Craig J. Zucker One Vacancy
To Obtain Further Information
Office of Legislative Audits
The Warehouse at Camden Yards
351 West Camden Street, Suite 400
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Phone: 410-946-5900
Maryland Relay: 711
TTY: 410-946-5401 ꞏ 301-970-5401
E-mail: webmaster@ola.state.md.us
Website: www.ola.state.md.us
To Report Fraud
The Office of Legislative Audits operates a Fraud Hotline to report fraud, waste, or abuse involving State
of Maryland government resources. Reports of fraud, waste, or abuse may be communicated anonymously
by a toll-free call to 1-877-FRAUD-11, by mail to the Fraud Hotline, c/o Office of Legislative Audits, or
through the Office’s website.
Nondiscrimination Statement
The Department of Legislative Services does not discriminate on the basis of age, ancestry, color, creed,
marital status, national origin, race, religion, gender, gender identity, sexual orientation, or disability in the
admission or access to its programs, services, or activities. The Department’s Information Officer has been
designated to coordinate compliance with the nondiscrimination requirements contained in Section 35.107
of the United States Department of Justice Regulations. Requests for assistance should be directed to the
Information Officer at 410-946-5400 or 410-970-5400.

--- Page 3 ---
January 31, 2024
Senator Clarence K. Lam, M.D., Senate Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Delegate Jared Solomon, House Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Members of Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Annapolis, Maryland
Ladies and Gentlemen:
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the University System of
Maryland (USM) – University of Maryland Center for Environmental Science
(UMCES) for the period beginning December 17, 2018 and ending May 31, 2023.
UMCES engages in environmental research, public service, and educational
activities at four regional laboratories. UMCES also includes the Sea Grant
College, which coordinates the research efforts of USM that are associated with
the United States Department of Commerce’s National Oceanic and Atmospheric
Administration.
Our audit did not disclose any findings that warrant mention in this report.
We wish to acknowledge UMCES’ efforts to satisfactorily address the finding
contained in our preceding audit report. We also wish to acknowledge the
cooperation extended to us during the audit by UMCES.
Respectfully submitted,
Gregory A. Hook, CPA
Legislative Auditor

--- Page 4 ---
2

--- Page 5 ---
Background Information
Agency Responsibilities
The University of Maryland Center for Environmental Science (UMCES) engages
in environmental research, public service, and educational activities at four
regional laboratories: Appalachian Laboratory in Frostburg, Chesapeake
Biological Laboratory in Solomons, Horn Point Laboratory in Cambridge, and the
Institute for Marine and Environmental Technology in Baltimore. UMCES also
includes the Sea Grant College, which coordinates the research efforts of the
University System of Maryland that are associated with the Sea Grant Program
within the United States Department of Commerce’s National Oceanic and
Atmospheric Administration. UMCES’ administrative office is located in
Cambridge, Maryland.
UMCES’ budget is funded by unrestricted revenues, such as State appropriations,
and restricted revenues, such as federal grants. According to the State’s
accounting records, fiscal year 2022 revenues totaled approximately $46.6
million, which included a State general fund appropriation of approximately $20.8
million. UMCES expenditures for fiscal year 2022 totaled approximately $46.6
million (See Figure 1 on the following page).
3

--- Page 6 ---
Figure 1
UMCES Positions, Expenditures, and Funding Sources
Full-Time Equivalent Positions as of June 30, 2022
Positions Percent
Filled 257.4 93.0%
Vacant 19.5 7.0%
Total 276.9
Fiscal Year 2022 Expenditures
Expenditures Percent
Salaries, Wages, and Fringe Benefits $32,917,869 70.6%
Technical and Special Fees 230,122 0.5%
Operating Expenses 13,496,619 28.9%
Total $46,644,610
Fiscal Year 2022 Funding Sources
Funding Percent
Unrestricted
General Fund $20,774,048 44.5%
Other University Revenues1 8,682,180 18.6%
$29,456,228 63.1%
Restricted
Federal Grants and Contracts $10,660,883 22.9%
State and Local Grants and Contracts 3,433,498 7.4%
Other Gifts, Grants and Contracts 3,094,001 6.6%
$17,188,382 36.9%
Total $46,644,610
Source: State financial records and UMCES personnel records
1 Includes revenues from Sale and Services of Educational Services ($3M), from other unrestricted
gifts, grants, and contracts ($3.5M), and from the Higher Education Investment Fund ($2.1M).
4

--- Page 7 ---
Status of Finding From Preceding Audit Report
Our audit included a review to determine the status of the finding contained in our
preceding audit report dated June 14, 2019. We determined that UMCES
satisfactorily addressed this finding.
Findings and Recommendations
Our audit did not disclose any significant deficiencies in the design or operation
of University of Maryland Center for Environmental Science’s (UMCES) internal
control. Our audit also did not disclose any significant instances of
noncompliance with applicable laws, rules, or regulations. Findings that did not
warrant inclusion in this report were separately communicated to University
System of Maryland (USM) and UMCES.
A draft copy of this report was provided to USM and UMCES. Since there are no
recommendations in this report, a written response was not necessary.
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the University System of
Maryland (USM) – University of Maryland Center for Environmental Science
(UMCES) for the period beginning December 17, 2018 and ending May 31, 2023.
The audit was conducted in accordance with generally accepted government
auditing standards. Those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to
obtain sufficient, appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our
findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives. We believe that the
evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions
based on our audit objectives.
As prescribed by the State Government Article, Section 2-1221 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, the objectives of this audit were to examine UMCES’
financial transactions, records, and internal control, and to evaluate its compliance
with applicable State laws, rules, and regulations.
In planning and conducting our audit, we focused on the major financial-related
areas of operations based on assessments of significance and risk. The areas
addressed by the audit included cash receipts, disbursements, payroll, grants and
contracts, corporate purchasing cards, and revolving accounts for research
5

--- Page 8 ---
activities. We also determined the status of the finding contained in our preceding
audit report.
Our audit did not include certain support services provided to UMCES by the
USM Office, such as endowment accounting, and by the University of Maryland,
College Park (UMCP), such as procurements, the processing of vendor payment
transmittals, and payroll. These support services are included within the scope of
our audits of the USM Office and UMCP, respectively. In addition, our audit did
not include an evaluation of internal controls over compliance with federal laws
and regulations for federal assistance programs and an assessment of UMCES’
compliance with those laws and regulations because the State of Maryland
engages an independent accounting firm to annually audit such programs
administered by State agencies, including the components of the USM.
Our assessment of internal controls was based on agency procedures and controls
in place at the time of our fieldwork. Our tests of transactions and other auditing
procedures were generally focused on the transactions occurring during our audit
period of December 17, 2018 to May 31, 2023, but may include transactions
before or after this period as we considered necessary to achieve our audit
objectives.
To accomplish our audit objectives, our audit procedures included inquiries of
appropriate personnel, inspections of documents and records, tests of transactions,
and to the extent practicable, observations of UMCES’ operations. Generally,
transactions were selected for testing based on auditor judgment, which primarily
considers risk, the timing or dollar amount of the transaction, or the significance
of the transaction to the area of operation reviewed. As a matter of course, we do
not normally use sampling in our tests, so unless otherwise specifically indicated,
neither statistical nor non-statistical audit sampling was used to select the
transactions tested. Therefore, unless sampling is specifically indicated in a
finding, the results from any tests conducted or disclosed by us cannot be used to
project those results to the entire population from which the test items were
selected.
We also performed various data extracts of pertinent information from the State’s
Financial Management Information System (such as revenue and expenditure
data) and the State’s Central Payroll Bureau (payroll data), as well as from the
contractor administering the State’s Corporate Purchasing Card Program (credit
card activity). The extracts are performed as part of ongoing internal processes
established by the Office of Legislative Audits and were subject to various tests to
determine data reliability. We determined that the data extracted from these
6

--- Page 9 ---
sources were sufficiently reliable for the purposes the data were used during this
audit.
We also extracted data from UMCES’ grants management system and financial
management system for the purpose of testing grants and contracts. We
performed various tests of the relevant data and determined that the data were
sufficiently reliable for the purposes the data were used during the audit. Finally,
we performed other auditing procedures that we considered necessary to achieve
our audit objectives. The reliability of data used in this report for background or
informational purposes was not assessed.
UMCES’ management is responsible for establishing and maintaining effective
internal control. Internal control is a process designed to provide reasonable
assurance that objectives pertaining to the reliability of financial records;
effectiveness and efficiency of operations, including safeguarding of assets; and
compliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations are achieved. As
provided in Government Auditing Standards, there are five components of
internal control: control environment, risk assessment, control activities,
information and communication, and monitoring. Each of the five components,
when significant to the audit objectives, and as applicable to UMCES, were
considered by us during the course of this audit.
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate.
Our reports are designed to assist the Maryland General Assembly in exercising
its legislative oversight function and to provide constructive recommendations for
improving State operations. As a result, our reports generally do not address
activities we reviewed that are functioning properly.
7

--- Page 10 ---
A T
UDIT EAM
Robert A. Wells, Jr., CPA
Audit Manager
Edward J. Welsh, CFE
Senior Auditor
Garrett A. White
Staff Auditor