Title: Maryland Department of Health - Western Maryland Hospital Center
Date: 06/20/2019
Type: Fiscal Compliance
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5d121465a1ce58048471d968
Extracted: 2025-06-19T06:15:01.745612
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Audit Report
Maryland Department of Health
Western Maryland Hospital Center
June 2019
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
Joint Audit Committee
Senator Craig J. Zucker (Senate Chair) Delegate Shelly L. Hettleman (House Chair)
Senator Adelaide C. Eckardt Delegate Steven J. Arentz
Senator George C. Edwards Delegate Andrew P. Cassilly
Senator Guy J. Guzzone Delegate Mark S. Chang
Senator Katie Fry Hester Delegate Keith E. Haynes
Senator Cheryl C. Kagan Delegate Michael A. Jackson
Senator Benjamin F. Kramer Delegate David Moon
Senator Cory V. McCray Delegate April R. Rose
Senator Douglas J.J. Peters Delegate Geraldine Valentino-Smith
Senator Justin D. Ready Delegate Karen Lewis Young
To Obtain Further Information
Office of Legislative Audits
301 West Preston Street, Room 1202
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Phone: 410-946-5900 ꞏ 301-970-5900 ꞏ 1-877-486-9964 (Toll Free in Maryland)
Maryland Relay: 711
TTY: 410-946-5401 ꞏ 301-970-5401
E-mail: OLAWebmaster@ola.state.md.us
Website: www.ola.state.md.us
To Report Fraud
The Office of Legislative Audits operates a Fraud Hotline to report fraud, waste, or abuse involving State
of Maryland government resources. Reports of fraud, waste, or abuse may be communicated anonymously
by a toll-free call to 1-877-FRAUD-11, by mail to the Fraud Hotline, c/o Office of Legislative Audits, or
through the Office’s website.
Nondiscrimination Statement
The Department of Legislative Services does not discriminate on the basis of age, ancestry, color, creed,
marital status, national origin, race, religion, gender, gender identity, sexual orientation, or disability in the
admission or access to its programs, services, or activities. The Department’s Information Officer has been
designated to coordinate compliance with the nondiscrimination requirements contained in Section 35.107
of the United States Department of Justice Regulations. Requests for assistance should be directed to the
Information Officer at 410-946-5400 or 410-970-5400.

--- Page 5 ---
Background Information
Agency Responsibilities
The Western Maryland Hospital Center (WMHC), which is located in
Hagerstown, provides chronic care and treatment to patients requiring a hospital-
level rehabilitation program, long-term nursing home care, and inpatient renal
dialysis services. WMHC is accredited by The Joint Commission, which
evaluates and monitors health care organizations nationwide to promote safe,
high-quality care, treatment, and services. During fiscal year 2018, WMHC had a
licensed capacity of 123 inpatients and an average daily population of 49
inpatients. According to the State’s records, WMHC’s expenditures totaled
approximately $24.1 million during fiscal year 2018.
Update on WMHC Executive Management
In our preceding audit report, we commented that, in May 2014, a review of
WMHC’s nursing home facilities and operations conducted by the Maryland
Department of Health’s (MDH) Office of Health Care Quality (OHCQ), on behalf
of the federal Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS), identified
serious deficiencies resulting in substantial noncompliance with Medicaid and
Medicare requirements. WMHC paid associated fines totaling $375,100 and was
denied Medicaid and Medicare reimbursement for new nursing home admissions
from August 7, 2014 until September 22, 2014, when CMS and OHCQ
determined the deficiencies to be satisfactorily corrected.
We also noted in our preceding audit report that MDH concluded that WMHC’s
executive management was unable to effectively implement the changes
necessary to address the deficiencies and, therefore, hired a contractor to provide
professional personnel to replace three WMHC executive management positions
and implement the necessary corrective actions. WMHC made payments to the
contractor totaling $3.3 million for services provided during the period from June
2014 through June 2018. The contract for these services ended June 30, 2018,
and the three management positions have been filled by State employees.
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report
Our audit included a review to determine the status of the two findings contained
in our preceding audit report dated October 16, 2015. We determined that
WMHC satisfactorily addressed both of these findings.
3

--- Page 6 ---
Findings and Recommendations
Purchases and Disbursements
Finding 1
The Western Maryland Hospital Center (WMHC) did not procure fresh
produce and certain medical and dietary supplies in accordance with State
procurement regulations and Maryland Department of Health (MDH)
policies.
Analysis
WMHC did not procure fresh produce and certain medical and dietary supplies in
accordance with State procurement regulations and MDH policies.
 During the period from April 2015 through December 2018, WMHC made
repeated purchases of fresh produce from one vendor, totaling $755,427,
without any public solicitation, competitive bids, written contracts, and
control agency approval as required by State regulations. Consequently, there
is a lack of assurance that WMHC obtained these items at the best price. State
procurement regulations generally require a formal written competitive
procurement and publication of the solicitation on eMaryland Marketplace for
procurements exceeding $15,000, and control agency approval, such as by the
Board of Public Works, for larger procurements. WMHC management
advised us the purchases were made under a statewide contract procured by
the Department of General Services (DGS). However, the DGS contract had
expired in 2010, and there was no statewide contract with the vendor during
our audit period.
 WMHC did not obtain DGS and MDH approval for the purchases of medical
and dietary supplies from two vendors through Intergovernmental Cooperative
Purchasing Agreements (ICPA) as required by State regulations and MDH
policies. WMHC also did not prepare a determination that using an ICPA was
in the best interest of the State. During our audit period, WMHC purchases
from the two vendors through the ICPAs totaled $491,836 and $395,640 for
medical and dietary supplies, respectively. State regulations only authorize
primary procurement units, such as DGS, to participate in an ICPA. In
addition, once procured by DGS, MDH written policy requires its facilities to
obtain MDH approval to use an ICPA and to prepare a determination that
purchases from an ICPA are in the best interest of the State. Our test of one
purchase from each of these vendors, totaling $2,250 and $2,538, respectively,
4

--- Page 7 ---
disclosed that the prices paid appeared reasonable based on an Internet search
of current market pricing for the items purchased.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that WMHC
a. comply with State procurement regulations by publicly soliciting
competitive bids, executing written contracts, and obtaining control
agency approval for procurements, where applicable; and
b. refrain from purchasing goods through ICPAs that have not been
procured or approved in accordance with State regulations and MDH
policies, including those noted above.
Finding 2
Supervisory reviews of corporate purchasing card (CPC) activity did not
always ensure that the billed services were received, and did not make use of
available Level-3 data to help ensure the propriety of the purchases, as
required.
Analysis
Supervisory reviews of CPC activity did not always ensure that the billed services
were received, and did not make use of available Level-3 data to help ensure the
propriety of the purchases, as required. During the period from July 1, 2015
through November 23, 2018, WMHC processed 7,109 CPC transactions totaling
$4.8 million, which were primarily made by two cardholders.
 Supervisory reviews of monthly CPC activity logs did not always ensure the
related services were received. We tested 25 CPC payments totaling $71,211
on the aforementioned two cardholders’ monthly activity logs, which had
been approved by supervisory personnel. Our test disclosed that, while the
receipt of commodities purchased was documented, for 4 of the 6 payments
for services tested totaling $7,899, there was no indication that the billed
services had been received. During our audit fieldwork, we were able to sight
evidence that the four services were received.
 Supervisory reviews of monthly CPC activity log did not use available Level-
3 data to ensure the propriety of the purchases as required. During the period
from July 1, 2015 through November 23, 2018, we determined that Level-3
data were available for 3,429 of WMHC’s CPC transactions totaling $2.4
million. WMHC management advised us that they reviewed the Level-3 data
independent of the monthly reviews of the activity logs, but there was no
documentation of the reviews.
5

--- Page 8 ---
The Comptroller of Maryland’s Corporate Purchasing Card Program Policy and
Procedures Manual requires agencies to ensure that cardholders verify all
purchases and sign receipts. The Manual further requires agencies to verify
Level-3 data to CPC transaction logs and document monthly reviews of Level-3
data as part of transaction monitoring. Level-3 data, which are provided by
certain merchants, consist of detailed descriptions of items purchased and provide
supervisory personnel with additional information to help detect questionable
purchases.
Recommendation 2
We recommend that WMHC comply with the Corporate Purchasing Card
Program Policy and Procedures Manual. Specifically, we recommend that
WMHC ensure that supervisors conducting reviews of monthly activity logs
a. verify that all services paid for were received, and
b. use available Level-3 data as required.
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the Western Maryland Hospital
Center (WMHC) of the Maryland Department of Health (MDH) for the period
beginning March 30, 2015 and ending January 1, 2019. The audit was conducted
in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards. Those
standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient,
appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and
conclusions based on our audit objectives. We believe that the evidence obtained
provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit
objectives.
As prescribed by the State Government Article, Section 2-1221 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, the objectives of this audit were to examine WMHC’s
financial transactions, records, and internal control, and to evaluate its compliance
with applicable State laws, rules, and regulations.
In planning and conducting our audit, we focused on the major financial-related
areas of operations based on assessments of significance and risk. The areas
addressed by the audit included procurements, disbursements, corporate
purchasing cards, and payroll. We also determined the status of the findings
included in our preceding audit report.
Our audit did not include billing and collection support services provided to
WMHC by Deer’s Head Hospital Center for renal dialysis and other support
6

--- Page 9 ---
services (such as certain payroll and purchasing functions, maintenance of
accounting records, and related fiscal functions) provided by MDH’s Office of the
Secretary and Other Units. These support services are included in the scope of
our audits of the Deer’s Head Hospital Center and MDH’s Office of the Secretary
and Other Units.
To accomplish our audit objectives, our audit procedures included inquiries of
appropriate personnel, inspections of documents and records, observations of
WMHC’s operations, and tests of transactions. Generally, transactions were
selected for testing based on auditor judgment, which primarily considers risk.
Unless otherwise specifically indicated, neither statistical nor non-statistical audit
sampling was used to select the transactions tested. Therefore, the results of the
tests cannot be used to project those results to the entire population from which
the test items were selected.
We also performed various data extracts of pertinent information from the State’s
Financial Management Information System (such as revenue and expenditure
data) and the State’s Central Payroll Bureau (payroll data), as well as from the
contractor administering the State’s Corporate Purchasing Card Program (credit
card activity). The extracts are performed as part of ongoing internal processes
established by the Office of Legislative Audits and were subject to various tests to
determine data reliability. We determined that the data extracted from these
sources were sufficiently reliable for the purposes the data were used during this
audit. Finally, we performed other auditing procedures that we considered
necessary to achieve our audit objectives. The reliability of data used in this
report for background or informational purposes was not assessed.
WMHC’s management is responsible for establishing and maintaining effective
internal control. Internal control is a process designed to provide reasonable
assurance that objectives pertaining to the reliability of financial records;
effectiveness and efficiency of operations, including safeguarding of assets; and
compliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations are achieved.
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate.
Our reports are designed to assist the Maryland General Assembly in exercising
its legislative oversight function and to provide constructive recommendations for
improving State operations. As a result, our reports generally do not address
activities we reviewed that are functioning properly.
7

--- Page 10 ---
This report includes a finding relating to conditions that we consider to be
significant deficiencies in the design or operation of internal control that could
adversely affect WMHC’s ability to maintain reliable financial records, operate
effectively and efficiently, and/or comply with applicable laws, rules, and
regulations. Our report also includes findings regarding significant instances of
noncompliance with applicable laws, rules, or regulations. Other less significant
findings were communicated to WMHC that did not warrant inclusion in this
report.
The response from MDH, on behalf of WMHC, to our findings and
recommendations is included as an appendix to this report. As prescribed in the
State Government Article, Section 2-1224 of the Annotated Code of Maryland,
we will advise MDH regarding the results of our review of its response.
8

--- Page 12 ---
Maryland Department of Health
Western Maryland Hospital Center
Agency Response Form
Purchases and Disbursements
Finding 1
The Western Maryland Hospital Center (WMHC) did not procure fresh produce and
certain medical and dietary supplies in accordance with State procurement regulations and
Maryland Department of Health (MDH) policies.
We recommend that WMHC
a. comply with State procurement regulations by publicly soliciting competitive bids,
executing written contracts, and obtaining control agency approval for procurements,
where applicable; and
b. refrain from purchasing goods through ICPAs that have not been procured or
approved in accordance with State regulations and MDH policies, including those noted
above.
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 1a Agree Estimated Completion Date: 08/01/2019
Please provide details of WMHC concurs with the recommendation. WMHC is obtaining
corrective action or competitive pricing for fresh produce on a monthly basis from
explain disagreement. vendors. WMHC has compiled a listing of medical supplies that
would require a competitively bid contract. The MD Department of
General Services (DGS) is currently in the process of soliciting and
awarding a statewide contract for medical supplies. We are
awaiting the award of that contract as many of the supplies that we
purchase will be included in this statewide contract. In the
meantime, WMHC is comparing prices for medical supplies from
vendors.
Recommendation 1b Agree Estimated Completion Date: 05/01/2019
Please provide details of WMHC concurs with the recommendation. WMHC will refrain from
corrective action or purchasing goods through ICPAs that have not been procured or
explain disagreement. approved in accordance with State regulations and MDH policies.
WMHC will utilize the approved policies and regulations to procure
goods and services.
Page 1 of 2

--- Page 13 ---
Maryland Department of Health
Western Maryland Hospital Center
Agency Response Form
Finding 2
Supervisory reviews of corporate purchasing card (CPC) activity did not always ensure
that the billed services were received and did not make use of available Level-3 data to help
ensure the propriety of the purchases, as required.
We recommend that WMHC comply with the Corporate Purchasing Card Program Policy
and Procedures Manual. Specifically, we recommend that WMHC ensure that supervisors
conducting reviews of monthly activity logs
a. verify that all services paid for were received, and
b. use available Level-3 data as required.
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 2a Agree Estimated Completion Date: 05/01/2019
Please provide details of WMHC concurs with the recommendation. All invoices will be
corrective action or signed by the individual who has confirmed receipt of the services.
explain disagreement.
Recommendation 2b Agree Estimated Completion Date: 07/01/2019
Please provide details of WMHC concurs with the recommendation. Level 3 data is distributed to
corrective action or credit card holders and their supervisor/manager. The Level 3 data will
explain disagreement. be attached to the Credit Card Activity Log form. Signatures on the
Credit Card Activity Log form denote that the Level 3 data has been
reviewed in coordination with the credit card reconciliation. Credit card
holders, supervisors/managers, and fiscal staff will be re-educated on
Level 3 review.
Page 2 of 2

--- Page 14 ---
A T
UDIT EAM
Edward A. Rubenstein, CPA
Audit Manager
Nathan H. Suffin, CPA
Senior Auditor
Ian T. Pontius
Staff Auditor