Title: Department of Disabilities
Date: 06/26/2019
Type: Fiscal Compliance
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5d1b52cea1ce580d50e2b39a
Extracted: 2025-06-19T06:15:40.207913
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Audit Report
Department of Disabilities
December 2022
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Senator Clarence K. Lam, M.D. (Senate Chair) Delegate Mark S. Chang (House Chair)
Senator Malcolm L. Augustine Delegate Steven J. Arentz
Senator Adelaide C. Eckardt Delegate Nicholas P. Charles II
Senator George C. Edwards Delegate Andrea Fletcher Harrison
Senator Katie Fry Hester Delegate Trent M. Kittleman
Senator Cheryl C. Kagan Delegate Carol L. Krimm
Senator Benjamin F. Kramer Delegate David Moon
Senator Cory V. McCray Delegate Julie Palakovich Carr
Senator Justin D. Ready Delegate Elizabeth G. Proctor
Senator Craig J. Zucker Delegate Geraldine Valentino-Smith
To Obtain Further Information
Office of Legislative Audits
The Warehouse at Camden Yards
351 West Camden Street, Suite 400
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Phone: 410-946-5900
Maryland Relay: 711
TTY: 410-946-5401 · 301-970-5401
E-mail: OLAWebmaster@ola.state.md.us
Website: www.ola.state.md.us
To Report Fraud
The Office of Legislative Audits operates a Fraud Hotline to report fraud, waste, or abuse involving State
of Maryland government resources. Reports of fraud, waste, or abuse may be communicated anonymously
by a toll-free call to 1-877-FRAUD-11, by mail to the Fraud Hotline, c/o Office of Legislative Audits, or
through the Office’s website.
Nondiscrimination Statement
The Department of Legislative Services does not discriminate on the basis of age, ancestry, color, creed,
marital status, national origin, race, religion, gender, gender identity, sexual orientation, or disability in the
admission or access to its programs, services, or activities. The Department’s Information Officer has been
designated to coordinate compliance with the nondiscrimination requirements contained in Section 35.107
of the United States Department of Justice Regulations. Requests for assistance should be directed to the
Information Officer at 410-946-5400 or 410-970-5400.

--- Page 3 ---
December 13, 2022
Senator Clarence K. Lam, M.D., Senate Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Delegate Mark S. Chang, House Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Members of Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Annapolis, Maryland
Ladies and Gentlemen:
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the Department of Disabilities
(DOD) for the period beginning June 21, 2018 and ending August 15, 2022.
DOD is responsible for evaluating programs and services for citizens with
disabilities, and coordinating and supporting public and private agencies serving
persons with disabilities.
Our audit did not disclose any findings.
We wish to acknowledge DOD’s efforts to satisfactorily address the finding
contained in our preceding audit report. We also wish to acknowledge the
cooperation extended to us during the audit by DOD.
Respectfully submitted,
Gregory A. Hook, CPA
Legislative Auditor

--- Page 4 ---
2

--- Page 5 ---
Background Information
Agency Responsibilities
The Department of Disabilities (DOD) is responsible for evaluating programs and
services for citizens with disabilities, and coordinating and supporting public and
private agencies serving persons with disabilities. According to the State’s
records, DOD’s expenditures were approximately $11.5 million during fiscal year
2022, which included approximately $2.2 million for grants and subsidies.
Law Change
Effective July 1, 2020, Chapter 586, Laws of Maryland 2020, transferred the
administration and management of the Telecommunications Access of Maryland
and the Telecommunications Devices and Distribution of Accessible Information
for Disabled Individuals programs from the Department of Information
Technology to DOD. These programs are supported by the Maryland Universal
Service Trust Fund (USTF) and provide telecommunications relay service for
Marylanders who are deaf, hard of hearing, or speech disabled so they can
communicate with others through TTY (teletypewriter) using a standard phone.
During fiscal year 2022, USTF revenue totaled approximately $2.8 million and
program expenditures totaled $5.4 million; and the USTF fund balance was $10.9
million as of June 30, 2022. The procedures and controls over USTF and these
programs starting July 1, 2020 were subject to review during our current DOD
audit.
Status of Finding From Preceding Audit Report
Our audit included a review to determine the status of the finding contained in our
preceding audit report dated June 26, 2019. We determined that DOD
satisfactorily addressed this finding.
Findings and Recommendations
Our audit did not disclose any deficiencies in the design or operation of DOD’s
internal control. Our audit also did not disclose any instances of noncompliance
with applicable laws, rules, or regulations.
A draft copy of this report was provided to DOD. Since there are no
recommendations in this report, a written response was not necessary.
3

--- Page 6 ---
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the Department of Disabilities
(DOD) for the period beginning June 21, 2018 and ending August 15, 2022. The
audit was conducted in accordance with generally accepted government auditing
standards. Those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain
sufficient, appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and
conclusions based on our audit objectives. We believe that the evidence obtained
provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit
objectives.
As prescribed by the State Government Article, Section 2-1221 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, the objectives of this audit were to examine DOD’s financial
transactions, records, and internal control, and to evaluate its compliance with
applicable State laws, rules, and regulations.
In planning and conducting our audit, we focused on the major financial-related
areas of operations based on assessments of significance and risk. The areas
addressed by the audit included procurements and disbursements, equipment,
federal fund recoveries, the Telecommunication Access of Maryland Program,
and the Telecommunications Devices and Distribution of Accessible Information
for Disabled Individuals programs. We also determined the status of the finding
contained in our preceding audit report.
Our audit did not include certain support services provided to DOD by the
Executive Department – Governor. These support services (such as processing of
invoices and payroll, and maintenance of certain accounting records and related
fiscal functions) are included within the scope of our audits of the Executive
Department – Governor. In addition, our audit did not include an evaluation of
internal controls over compliance with federal laws and regulations for federal
financial assistance programs and an assessment of DOD’s compliance with those
laws and regulations because the State of Maryland engages an independent
accounting firm to annually audit such programs administered by State agencies,
including DOD.
Our assessment of internal controls was based on agency procedures and controls
in place at the time of our fieldwork. Our tests of transactions and other auditing
procedures were generally focused on the transactions occurring during our audit
period of June 21, 2018 to August 15, 2022, but may include transactions before
or after this period as we considered necessary to achieve our audit objectives.
4

--- Page 7 ---
To accomplish our audit objectives, our audit procedures included inquiries of
appropriate personnel, inspections of documents and records, tests of transactions,
and to the extent practicable, observations of DOD’s operations. Generally,
transactions were selected for testing based on auditor judgment, which primarily
considers risk, the timing or dollar amount of the transaction, or the significance
of the transaction to the area of operation reviewed. As a matter of course, we do
not normally use sampling in our tests, so unless otherwise specifically indicated,
neither statistical nor non-statistical audit sampling was used to select the
transactions tested. Therefore, unless sampling is specifically indicated in a
finding, the results from any tests conducted or disclosed by us cannot be used to
project those results to the entire population from which the test items were
selected. We also performed other auditing procedures that we considered
necessary to achieve our audit objectives. The reliability of data used in this
report for background or informational purposes was not assessed.
DOD’s management is responsible for establishing and maintaining effective
internal control. Internal control is a process designed to provide reasonable
assurance that objectives pertaining to the reliability of financial records;
effectiveness and efficiency of operations, including safeguarding of assets; and
compliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations are achieved. As
provided in Government Auditing Standards, there are five components of
internal control: control environment, risk assessment, control activities,
information and communication, and monitoring. Each of the five components,
when significant to the audit objectives, and as applicable to DOD, were
considered by us during the course of this audit.
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate.
Our reports are designed to assist the Maryland General Assembly in exercising
its legislative oversight function and to provide constructive recommendations for
improving State operations. As a result, our reports generally do not address
activities we reviewed that are functioning properly.
5

--- Page 8 ---
A T
UDIT EAM
Bekana Edossa, CPA, CFE
Audit Manager
Anthony V. Calcagno
Senior Auditor
Kareem R. Jackson
Staff Auditor