Title: Maryland Department of Transportation - Maryland Port Administration - Allegations Related to Possible Violations of State Laws, Regulations, and Policies Involving an MPA Employee
Date: 06/26/2019
Type: Fraud, Waste, and Abuse
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5d1b5354a1ce580d50e2c58e
Extracted: 2025-06-19T06:15:31.396959
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Special Review
Maryland Department of Transportation
Maryland Port Administration
Allegations Related to Possible Violations of State Laws, Regulations, and
Policies Involving an MPA Employee
June 2019
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
Joint Audit Committee
Senator Craig J. Zucker (Senate Chair) Delegate Shelly L. Hettleman (House Chair)
Senator Adelaide C. Eckardt Delegate Steven J. Arentz
Senator George C. Edwards Delegate Andrew P. Cassilly
Senator Guy J. Guzzone Delegate Mark S. Chang
Senator Katie Fry Hester Delegate Keith E. Haynes
Senator Cheryl C. Kagan Delegate Michael A. Jackson
Senator Benjamin F. Kramer Delegate David Moon
Senator Cory V. McCray Delegate April R. Rose
Senator Douglas J.J. Peters Delegate Geraldine Valentino-Smith
Senator Justin D. Ready Delegate Karen Lewis Young
To Obtain Further Information
Office of Legislative Audits
301 West Preston Street, Room 1202
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Phone: 410-946-5900 ꞏ 301-970-5900 ꞏ 1-877-486-9964 (Toll Free in Maryland)
Maryland Relay: 711
TTY: 410-946-5401 ꞏ 301-970-5401
E-mail: OLAWebmaster@ola.state.md.us
Website: www.ola.state.md.us
To Report Fraud
The Office of Legislative Audits operates a Fraud Hotline to report fraud, waste, or abuse involving State
of Maryland government resources. Reports of fraud, waste, or abuse may be communicated anonymously
by a toll-free call to 1-877-FRAUD-11, by mail to the Fraud Hotline, c/o Office of Legislative Audits, or
through the Office’s website.
Nondiscrimination Statement
The Department of Legislative Services does not discriminate on the basis of age, ancestry, color, creed,
marital status, national origin, race, religion, gender, gender identity, sexual orientation, or disability in the
admission or access to its programs, services, or activities. The Department’s Information Officer has been
designated to coordinate compliance with the nondiscrimination requirements contained in Section 35.107
of the United States Department of Justice Regulations. Requests for assistance should be directed to the
Information Officer at 410-946-5400 or 410-970-5400.

--- Page 5 ---
Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We conducted a review of an allegation received through our fraud, waste, and
abuse hotline regarding the Maryland Department of Transportation (MDOT) –
Maryland Port Administration (MPA). The allegation related to possible
violations of State laws, regulations, and policies involving an MPA employee
directing a property management contractor to use specific vendors as
subcontractors, as well as questionable corporate purchasing card (CPC) activity
involving this same employee. The purpose of our review was to determine
whether the allegation we received was valid and the extent to which the related
activities violated State laws, regulations, and policies. This review was
performed in accordance with State Government Article, Section 2-1220 of the
Annotated Code of Maryland.
The scope of our review included a multi-million dollar property management
contract awarded to the contractor identified in the allegation, which covered a
period of more than 10 years, ending in June 2019. The property management
contract provided for the contractor to manage building operations, maintenance,
and construction-related services at one of MPA’s facilities. Since the allegation
related to the use of subcontractors for construction-related services, we limited
our review to the construction-related projects completed by the contractor. We
also reviewed CPC activity involving this MPA employee and selected employees
in other MPA departments.
Our review consisted of tests, analyses, observations, and discussions with MPA
personnel and others, as we deemed necessary, to achieve our objectives.
The results of our review of the allegation did not identify any issues that
warranted a referral to the Office of the Attorney General – Criminal Division, but
we did find that MPA used its property management contract to procure services
in a manner that was not consistent with State procurement regulations. The
results of our review of the allegation are identified in Finding 1. Our review also
identified issues with the administration of the property management contract and
monitoring of the related payments, which are identified in Findings 1 and 2,
certain of which involved the MPA employee. Another less significant finding
was communicated to MPA that did not warrant inclusion in this report.
Our review did not constitute an audit conducted in accordance with generally
accepted government auditing standards. Our review was conducted during the
period from November 2018 through March 2019.
3

--- Page 6 ---
The response from MDOT, on behalf of MPA, to our findings and
recommendations is included as an appendix to this report. As prescribed in State
Government Article, Section 2-1224 of the Annotated Code of Maryland, we will
advise MDOT regarding the results of our review of its response.
Background Information
Agency Responsibilities
The Maryland Port Administration (MPA), a transportation business unit of the
Maryland Department of Transportation, operates State-owned port facilities and
promotes the economic well-being of Maryland’s ports. MPA is responsible for
managing the State’s investment in port facilities; developing trade by promoting
maritime business; and coordinating the delivery of services, such as dredging and
navigational aids, to the maritime community. MPA also owns and operates a
number of facilities including Baltimore’s World Trade Center building.
According to State records, during fiscal year 2018, MPA’s operating and capital
expenditures totaled approximately $140.1 million.
Overview
The hotline allegation pertained to an MPA employee directing a property
management contractor to use specific vendors as subcontractors, as well as
questionable corporate purchasing card (CPC) activity involving this same
employee. The contract identified in the allegation was for management of
building operations, maintenance, and construction-related services at one of
MPA’s facilities and had a total value exceeding $40 million. According to
MPA’s records, as of January 2019, payments to the contractor totaled $36.4
million since the contract’s inception.
The property management contract was competitively procured more than 10
years ago by MPA’s Office of Procurement based on the specifications and
deliverables established by the relevant MPA department. The MPA employee
referenced in the allegation started working for MPA several years after the
contract had been procured, replacing the prior contract administrator. As
contract administrator, this employee was responsible for assigning building
renovation and improvement projects to the contractor, monitoring the overall
work, and approving related invoices.
The contractor generally used subcontractors to complete construction projects,
such as tenant renovations and other building improvements, at the request of
4

--- Page 7 ---
MPA. The property management contract provided that the contractor was
responsible for soliciting bids and awarding the work to subcontractors, directing
and monitoring the work completed by subcontractors, and paying the
subcontractors’ invoices. The subcontractors’ charges were to be incorporated
into the contractor’s invoices submitted to MPA, along with a fixed overhead fee.
We reviewed 13 construction-related projects performed under the property
management contract, with related expenditures totaling approximately $2.1
million as of December 2018, including 7 projects for which the vendors
referenced in the allegation were subcontractors. We also reviewed CPC
transactions totaling $54,500, involving the MPA employee referenced in the
allegation and employees in other MPA departments, and we did not identify any
reportable conditions.
Based on our review, we substantiated certain aspects of the allegation.
Specifically, MPA used its property management contract to procure services in a
manner that was not consistent with State procurement regulations. Our review
also identified poor contract administration procedures and controls that require
corrective action by MPA.
Findings and Recommendations
Contract Procurement
Finding 1
MPA did not ensure certain construction-related services were competitively
procured in accordance with the terms of the property management
contract. In addition, the MPA contract administrator made direct contact
with and obtained proposals from certain vendors and referred them to the
contractor to use as subcontractors.
Analysis
MPA did not ensure certain construction-related services were competitively
procured in accordance with the terms of the property management contract. In
addition, the MPA contract administrator made direct contact with and obtained
proposals from certain vendors and referred them to the contractor to use as
subcontractors.
 MPA did not ensure the property management contractor competitively
procured its subcontracted work as required. The property management
5

--- Page 8 ---
contract generally required the contractor to competitively procure any
subcontracted projects valued at more than $2,500, and to submit all related
bid documentation to MPA for approval. Our test of 13 projects, for which
expenditures totaled approximately $2.1 million during the period from May
2015 through December 2018, disclosed that MPA could not provide
documentation that subcontracted work, totaling $830,000, was competitively
procured for 12 of the projects.
Although the MPA contract administrator informed us that the contractor
generally submitted bid documentation for review and approval, the contract
administrator could not provide us with bid documentation for these projects.
We contacted the contractor to obtain support for these 12 projects. For 6 of
the projects tested with related payments totaling $391,000, the contractor
advised us that no bids were obtained for the subcontracted work totaling
$373,000. For the remaining projects, the contractor could not provide the
requested documentation to support that all of the subcontracted work had
been competitively procured.
 MPA used its property management contract to procure services in a manner
that was not consistent with State procurement regulations. Our review of
MPA records disclosed that the MPA contract administrator made direct
contact with and obtained proposals from vendors and then submitted them to
the contractor to use as subcontractors. One of these subcontractors was an
out-of-state painting company that was paid $46,500 by the contractor as of
January 2019. When we discussed this with the MPA contract administrator,
we were advised that three vendors, including the painting company, were
brought in to work as subcontractors because of the administrator’s familiarity
with their work through a previous working relationship in the private sector.
Our test of the 13 projects disclosed that these 3 vendors with which the MPA
contract administrator had a previous working relationship were used as
subcontractors on 7 of the projects. These 7 projects were among the
aforementioned 12 projects for which neither MPA nor the contractor could
provide documentation that the work was competitively procured. Based on
our review of the contractor’s records, during the period from September 2016
through December 2018, the contractor made 20 payments totaling $154,000
to these 3 vendors.
 The current and prior MPA contract administrators initiated projects with the
contractor without any formal independent review and approval. This is
significant because both the current and prior MPA contract administrator also
6

--- Page 9 ---
approved the related contractor invoices for all the projects tested, which
resulted in a lack of segregation of duties.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that MPA
a. ensure the contractor competitively procures subcontractor services in
accordance with the contract,
b. discontinue the practice of directing contractors to use specific vendors as
subcontractors, and
c. ensure that duties are properly segregated by establishing procedures for
a formal independent review and approval of projects with the
contractor.
Contract Monitoring
Finding 2
MPA did not always approve project cost estimates prior to the start of work
and did not approve certain change orders. In addition, MPA did not have
required support for certain contractor invoices tested.
Analysis
MPA did not always approve project cost estimates prior to the start of work on
the projects. In addition, MPA did not always approve project change orders and
did not have subcontractor invoices to support certain related contractor invoices.
Our test of 13 projects with expenditures totaling approximately $2.1 million
during the period from May 2015 through December 2018 disclosed the following
conditions:
 MPA did not always obtain and approve project cost estimates prior to the
start of work on the projects. When responding to MPA requests for services,
the property management contract required the contractor to submit project
cost estimates, for MPA’s approval, that established fixed prices for
completing projects, including the overhead charges in accordance with the
contract. Our test disclosed that, for 8 projects with expenditures totaling
approximately $1.9 million, MPA did not approve the project cost estimates
until up to 374 days after the subcontractors had already billed the contractor
for work performed costing $219,000. Allowing subcontractors to start work
prior to approval of the related cost estimates precluded effective project
oversight, especially since the contractor’s overhead payments were a
percentage of the related subcontractor charges.
7

--- Page 10 ---
 MPA did not always formally approve changes to the scope of a project and
the associated cost. We were advised by the contract administrator that
changes to the scope of a project should be supported by approved change
orders documenting the necessity of the additional work. However, our test
disclosed that MPA could not provide documentation that it had approved
additional work and the related costs beyond the original estimates, totaling
$209,000, that were associated with seven projects originally valued at $1.3
million. As a result, there was no assurance that the additional work and
related costs were reasonable.
For example, a previous contract administrator approved an estimate totaling
$25,000 for carpet replacement to be performed by a subcontractor. MPA
ultimately paid the contractor an additional $100,000 for construction,
moving, mold remediation, and electrical work performed by four other
subcontractors, but did not formally approve these scope changes.
 MPA did not always obtain required support for subcontractor work to
substantiate the propriety of the amounts invoiced by the contractor. The
property management contract required the contractor to provide
subcontractor invoices along with its own invoices when submitting to MPA
for payment. However, for three of the projects tested totaling $339,000,
MPA did not have documentation on file to support seven subcontractor
billings included on related contractor invoices totaling $74,600. Despite the
lack of support for the subcontractor billings, all of the invoices had been
approved by the contract administrator. We subsequently obtained the support
for these charges directly from the contractor.
Recommendation 2
We recommend that MPA
a. ensure cost estimates and project change orders are reviewed and
approved prior to commencement of the related services; and
b. obtain and review support for subcontractor costs invoiced, including
those noted above.
8

--- Page 12 ---
Maryland Port Administration
Special Review
Agency Response Form
Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
Agency Response
Scope, Objectives, Factually Accurate
and Methodology
Please explain any
concerns with factual N/A
accuracy.
Background Information
Agency Response
Background Factually Accurate
Information
Please explain any N/A
concerns with factual
accuracy.
Findings and Recommendations
Finding 1
MPA did not ensure certain construction-related services were competitively procured in
accordance with the terms of the property management contract. In addition, the MPA
contract administrator directly contacted and obtained proposals from certain vendors and
referred them to the contractor to use as subcontractors.
We recommend that MPA
a. ensure the contractor competitively procures subcontractor services in accordance
with the contract,
b. comply with State procurement regulations and discontinue the practice of directing
contractors to use specific vendors as subcontractors, and
c. establish procedures for a formal independent review and approval of projects with
the contractor.
Page 1 of 3

--- Page 13 ---
Maryland Port Administration
Special Review
Agency Response Form
Agency Response
Background / Factually Accurate
Analysis
Please explain any N/A
concerns with factual
accuracy.
Recommendation a Agree Estimated Completion Date: June 28, 2019
Please provide details of In accordance with the Property Management Contract, the MDOT MPA
corrective action or will ensure that the required bid documentation for construction-related
explain disagreement. services are competitively procured, properly approved and retained on
file for audit verification.
Additionally, emergencies and other exceptions (in accordance with the
contract language) will require supervisory review and approval.
Recommendation b Agree Estimated Completion Date: June 28, 2019
Please provide details of In accordance with the Property Management Contract, the MDOT MPA
corrective action or will discontinue the practice of advising the contractor in the use of
explain disagreement. specific vendors as sub-contractors. The instance referenced in the
Audit Report was a result of using a vendor based on a history of the
work-related expertise to benefit the quality of work for the World Trade
Center.
Emergencies and other extraordinary exceptions in accordance with the
contract language will require supervisory review and approval.
Recommendation c Agree Estimated Completion Date: June 28, 2019
Please provide details of The MDOT MPA will establish written procedures to require and ensure
corrective action or that a formal independent review and approval of projects is conducted
explain disagreement. by the Engineering Division and the Director of Commercial
Management.
Page 2 of 3

--- Page 14 ---
Maryland Port Administration
Special Review
Agency Response Form
Finding 2
MPA did not always approve project cost estimates prior to the start of work and did not
approve certain change orders. In addition, MPA did not have required support for
certain contractor invoices tested.
We recommend that MPA
a. ensure cost estimates and project change orders are reviewed and approved prior to
commencement of the related services;
b. obtain and review support for subcontractor costs invoiced, including those noted
above.
Agency Response
Background / Factually Accurate
Analysis
Please explain any N/A
concerns with factual
accuracy.
Recommendation a Agree Estimated Completion Date: June 28, 2019
Please provide details of The MDOT MPA will establish procedures to ensure cost estimates and
corrective action or project change orders are reviewed and approved by the Engineering
explain disagreement. Division and the contract administrator supervisor prior to the
commencement of related services. These procedures will include pre-
determined thresholds for further review and approval of cost estimates
and change orders by the Engineering Division and the Director of
Commercial Management prior to the commencement of related
services.
Recommendation b Agree Estimated Completion Date: June 28, 2019
Please provide details of The MDOT MPA will establish procedures to ensure all supporting
corrective action or subcontractor costs invoiced is attached to the contractor invoice for
explain disagreement. review and approval by the contract administrator.
Additionally, subsequent review and approval by the Finance Division is
required before the invoice is paid.
Page 3 of 3