Title: Maryland Department of Health - Developmental Disabilities Administration
Date: 07/08/2019
Type: Fiscal Compliance
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5d24f879a1ce580e286a1bdf
Extracted: 2025-06-19T06:16:01.482736
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Audit Report
Maryland Department of Health
Developmental Disabilities Administration
October 2022
Public Notice
In compliance with the requirements of the State Government Article Section
2-1224(i), of the Annotated Code of Maryland, the Office of Legislative
Audits has redacted a cybersecurity finding and related auditee response
from this public report.
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Senator Clarence K. Lam, M.D. (Senate Chair) Delegate Mark S. Chang (House Chair)
Senator Malcolm L. Augustine Delegate Steven J. Arentz
Senator Adelaide C. Eckardt Delegate Nicholas P. Charles II
Senator George C. Edwards Delegate Andrea Fletcher Harrison
Senator Katie Fry Hester Delegate Trent M. Kittleman
Senator Cheryl C. Kagan Delegate Carol L. Krimm
Senator Benjamin F. Kramer Delegate David Moon
Senator Cory V. McCray Delegate Julie Palakovich Carr
Senator Justin D. Ready Delegate Elizabeth G. Proctor
Senator Craig J. Zucker Delegate Geraldine Valentino-Smith
To Obtain Further Information
Office of Legislative Audits
The Warehouse at Camden Yards
351 West Camden Street, Suite 400
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Phone: 410-946-5900
Maryland Relay: 711
TTY: 410-946-5401 · 301-970-5401
E-mail: OLAWebmaster@ola.state.md.us
Website: www.ola.state.md.us
To Report Fraud
The Office of Legislative Audits operates a Fraud Hotline to report fraud, waste, or abuse involving State
of Maryland government resources. Reports of fraud, waste, or abuse may be communicated anonymously
by a toll-free call to 1-877-FRAUD-11, by mail to the Fraud Hotline, c/o Office of Legislative Audits, or
through the Office’s website.
Nondiscrimination Statement
The Department of Legislative Services does not discriminate on the basis of age, ancestry, color, creed,
marital status, national origin, race, religion, gender, gender identity, sexual orientation, or disability in the
admission or access to its programs, services, or activities. The Department’s Information Officer has been
designated to coordinate compliance with the nondiscrimination requirements contained in Section 35.107
of the United States Department of Justice Regulations. Requests for assistance should be directed to the
Information Officer at 410-946-5400 or 410-970-5400.

--- Page 3 ---
October 26, 2022
Senator Clarence K. Lam, M.D., Senate Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Delegate Mark S. Chang, House Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Members of Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Annapolis, Maryland
Ladies and Gentlemen:
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the Maryland Department of
Health (MDH) – Developmental Disabilities Administration (DDA) for the period
beginning May 1, 2018 and ending May 31, 2021. DDA plans, develops policies
and regulations, and funds a statewide system of services for individuals with
developmental disabilities (referred to as consumers) and their families.
Our audit disclosed that DDA lacked adequate procedures to ensure that
consumers received their services and that the related provider payments were
proper. Specifically, DDA did not ensure that its coordination of community
services (CCS) agencies completed annual service plans and quarterly monitoring
visits for all consumers, and we found that a significant number of consumers did
not receive all required plans and visits. For example, at least one monitoring
visit was not completed for 95 percent of DDA consumers during fiscal years
2020 and 2021. In addition, DDA did not have an adequate process to ensure that
amounts billed by its CCS agencies properly reflected the consumer services
(such as monitoring visits) provided, and did not take action when questionable
CCS agency billings were identified.
DDA also did not conduct audits of service providers to ensure payments were
consistent with actual services delivered and in accordance with consumers’
approved service plans. Our test of provider billings for services rendered to 12
consumers during January 2021 disclosed a lack of available documentation to

--- Page 4 ---
support billings for 5 consumers. In addition, DDA did not verify the propriety of
payments totaling $6.1 million made for services provided to consumers in
isolation because they had tested positive for COVID-19. Furthermore, DDA did
not have a comprehensive process to verify adjustments to provider payments
processed in Provider Consumer Information System II.
DDA continued to obtain fiscal management services from two vendors that were
improperly procured in 2006. DDA also did not monitor the services provided by
the two vendors to ensure that consumers received the required services, that
provider payments were proper, and that related federal reimbursements were
obtained. For example, our testing disclosed that DDA failed to recover
approximately $8.8 million in federal fund reimbursements related to services it
paid to the two providers. Finally, DDA did not forward funds totaling $1.3
million pertaining to unclaimed refunds of improper contribution to care
collections to the Comptroller of Maryland, as required.
Furthermore, we found certain risks in DDA’s information systems. However, in
accordance with the State Government Article, Section 2-1224(i) of the
Annotated Code of Maryland, we have redacted that finding from this audit
report. Specifically, State law requires the Office of Legislative Audits to redact
cybersecurity-related findings in a manner consistent with auditing best practices
before the report is made available to the public. The term “cybersecurity” is
defined in the State Finance and Procurement Article, Section 3A-301(b), and
using our professional judgment we have determined that the redacted finding
falls under the referenced definition. The specifics of the cybersecurity finding
were previously communicated to DDA as well as those parties responsible for
acting on our recommendations.
Based on our current audit assessment of significance and risk to our audit
objectives, our audit also included a review to determine the status of seven non-
cybersecurity-related findings contained in our preceding audit report. We
determined that DDA satisfactorily addressed four of these findings. The
remaining three findings are repeated in this report. In addition, our audit
included a review to determine the status of one of the two findings contained in
our Monitoring of Coordination of Community Services Agencies performance
audit report (dated January 2, 2019). We determined that DDA did not
satisfactorily address this finding; therefore, it is repeated in this report.
In our preceding audit report, dated July 8, 2019, we reported that DDA’s
accountability and compliance level was unsatisfactory in accordance with the
rating system that we established in conformity with State law. Based on the
results of our current audit, we have concluded that DDA’s accountability and
2

--- Page 5 ---
compliance level remains unsatisfactory. The significance of our audit findings,
rather than the number of findings, is the primary factor contributing to the
current unsatisfactory rating.
MDH’s response to this audit, on behalf of DDA, is included as an appendix to
this report. We reviewed the response to our findings and related
recommendations, and have concluded that the corrective actions identified are
sufficient to address all audit issues.
We wish to acknowledge the cooperation extended to us during the audit by
DDA. We also wish to acknowledge MDH’s and DDA’s willingness to address
the audit issues and implement appropriate corrective actions.
Respectfully submitted,
Gregory A. Hook, CPA
Legislative Auditor
3

--- Page 6 ---
4

--- Page 7 ---
Table of Contents
Background Information 7
Agency Responsibilities 7
Organizational and Audit Approach Changes 7
Developmentally Disabled Services Delivery Process 8
Ransomware Security Incident 9
Federal Liability 10
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Reports 10
Findings and Recommendations 13
Consumer Services
* Finding 1 – The Developmental Disabilities Administration (DDA) did 14
not ensure that Coordination of Community Services (CCS) agencies
properly completed annual consumer service plans and conducted
quarterly face-to-face monitoring visits.
* Finding 2 – DDA did not have an adequate process to ensure the amounts 17
invoiced by CCS agencies properly reflected consumer services
provided and did not take appropriate action when a significant number
of improper or unsupported payments were identified.
Provider Payments
* Finding 3 – DDA did not conduct required audits of providers to ensure 18
payments were for services actually delivered and included in the
consumers’ approved plans.
Finding 4 – DDA did not verify the propriety of $6.1 million in enhanced 19
payments for consumers who were isolated due to COVID-19.
Finding 5 – DDA did not use available output reports to verify the 20
propriety of critical adjustments that were processed in Provider
Consumer Information System II.
∗ Denotes item repeated in full or part from preceding audit report
5

--- Page 8 ---
Fiscal Management Services
* Finding 6 – Fiscal management services contracts procured in 2006 were 21
not comprehensive, properly approved, and adequately monitored. As
a result, DDA did not recover unspent funds totaling $3.2 million and
obtain federal reimbursements totaling $8.8 million.
Contribution to Care
Finding 7 – DDA did not forward approximately $1.3 million in 24
unclaimed refunds to the Comptroller of Maryland, as required.
Information Systems Security and Control
Finding 8 – Redacted cybersecurity-related finding. 25
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology 26
Agency Response Appendix
∗ Denotes item repeated in full or part from preceding audit report
6

--- Page 9 ---
Background Information
Agency Responsibilities
The Developmental Disabilities Administration (DDA) is an agency within the
Maryland Department of Health (MDH). DDA’s mission is to provide leadership
to assure the full participation of individuals with developmental disabilities
(consumers) and their families in all aspects of community life, and to promote
their access to quality support and services necessary to foster personal growth,
independence, and productivity.
DDA plans, develops policies and regulations, and funds a Statewide system of
services for consumers and their families. DDA coordinates its work with other
government, voluntary and private health, education, and welfare agencies. DDA
funds services to consumers through a combination of private licensed Medicaid
providers, not-for-profit licensed
Medicaid providers, local health
departments, and fiscal management
services vendors (entities that assist
consumers in a self-directed support
services delivery system). Consumer
services include an array of options
such as residential living arrangements
and support, and employment assistance. During fiscal year 2021, DDA
expenditures totaled approximately $1.48 billion (see Figure 1), of which $1.42
billion related to provider payments for services on behalf of consumers.
DDA consists of a headquarters unit, four regional offices that administer
community-based services, and two intellectual disabilities residential centers –
the Holly Center and the Potomac Center. We conduct a separate audit of the two
intellectual disabilities residential centers. The scope of this audit included the
DDA headquarters unit and the four regional offices.
Organizational and Audit Approach Changes
Effective July 1, 2021, the MDH transferred oversight of the Secure Evaluation
and Therapeutic Treatment (SETT) Program of the Court Involved Service
Delivery System from DDA to the MDH Office of the Secretary – Operations
Administration budgetary unit. Although certain SETT functions (non-payroll
related services) were previously included within the scope of the DDA audit, to
promote audit efficiency, such SETT activity for the period beginning May 1,
2018 and ending June 30, 2021 was included our audit of the Intellectual
7

--- Page 10 ---
Disabilities Residential Centers, under the oversight of the MDH Healthcare
System.
Developmentally Disabled Services Delivery Process
Consumer Eligibility and Provider Services
Generally, DDA’s delivery of consumer services can be described as a three-step
process; see Figure 2. To obtain DDA services, a consumer submits an
application to a DDA regional office. Eligible consumers select one of the
Coordination of
Community
Services (CCS) Figure 2
DDA Consumer Service Delivery Process
agencies under
contract with
1. Application/Eligibility
DDA. The CCS
•Individuals with disabilities (consumers) submit an application to
agency works with
DDA. A Coordinator of Community Services (CCS) agency
the consumer to reviews the consumer's medical profile and assigns the consumer a
develop an annual category based on priority; the consumer is then generally placed
on a waiting list.
plan that describes
•Once funding has been identified, the consumer applies for
the specific Medicaid eligibility under DDA's waiver programs.
services the
consumer is to 2. Consumer Plan and Budgets
receive from DDA
•Consumers work with a CCS agency to develop and implement an
providers. Due to annual plan.
•A vendor under contract with DDA reviews each consumer's
funding
medical profile and provides the consumer with a score for each
limitations,
required service based on an established DDA methodology. The
consumers are level-of-need score is entered into DDA's automated system to
calculate the amount of funding to be allocated to the consumer.
generally placed
on a waiting list
3. Service Delivery
until funding
•The majority of consumers are directed by DDA to providers
becomes available
operating under the Fee Payments System; the providers are paid
for their services.
based on rates established in State regulations.
•Consumers may also elect to select their own providers for certain
DDA services. These consumers are assigned a fiscal management
DDA provides
vendor which manages the payments to the providers.
services in
accordance with
three Medicaid
waiver programs, which allow DDA to receive federal funding to cover a portion
of the service costs and allows services to be delivered in a non-institutional
setting to people with different needs or different income levels.
8

--- Page 11 ---
The majority of consumers receive services under DDA’s traditional services
model (the Fee Payments System), in which consumers receive services from
providers licensed by the MDH Office of Health Care Quality. DDA also offers a
self-directed service model, which allows consumers to select their own providers
for certain services. Consumers who elect self-direction are assigned a fiscal
management services vendor which manages the payments to providers.
Transition to New Provider Payment Model
DDA is in the process of transitioning from a prospective payment model to a fee-
for-service payment model. Under the prospective payment model providers are
paid in advance based on estimates of the services to be provided and the
associated rates established in State regulations. At year-end, providers submit
records of actual services provided which are reconciled by MDH’s Division of
Cost Accounting and Reimbursements to the estimated payments, and future
payments are adjusted for any differences. Under the Fee-For-Service (FFS)
model providers are reimbursed for actual services provided to consumers based
on rates established in State regulations.
The transition to the FFS model included the replacement of DDA’s legacy
Provider Consumer Information System II (PCIS2) with MDH’s integrated care
management tracking system, the Long Term Services and Supports System
(LTSS), and establishing new provider payment rates based on the actual costs of
providing the services. DDA transitioned CCS activities and billings from PCIS2
to LTSS in August 2018, and began transitioning service providers to LTSS in
December 2019. The service provider transition was still in process as of March
2022. According to DDA records, provider payments for fiscal year 2021 totaled
$1.43 billion, of which $1.15 billion was paid prospectively and $281.2 million
was FFS.
Ransomware Security Incident
In December 2021, MDH experienced a broad security incident which resulted
from a ransomware attack.1 This incident affected the entire MDH computer
network and disrupted Information Technology (IT) operations for all MDH
servers and end user computers, resulting in substantial impact on all MDH
business operations including DDA. MDH notified the Department of
Information Technology’s (DoIT) Office of Security Management, which
initiated incident response measures. The aforementioned incident and related
1 As defined by the Federal Department of Homeland Security Cybersecurity and Infrastructure
Security Agency, ransomware is an ever-evolving form of malware designed to encrypt files on a
device, rendering any files and the systems that rely on them unusable. Malicious actors then
demand ransom in exchange for decryption.
9

--- Page 12 ---
controls will be subject to review as part of our next audit of the MDH Office of
the Secretary and Other Units.
The incident did not significantly impact our DDA audit and we were generally
able to obtain information needed to satisfy our audit objectives and related
conclusions. However, certain records related to finding 4 in this report were not
available at the time of our review due to the incident (see additional comments in
the finding).
Federal Liability
DDA has a federal liability of approximately $34.2 million for which State
general funds may be needed. In June 2018, the federal Centers for Medicare and
Medicaid Services (CMS) notified MDH that it was disallowing claims made
between July 1, 2010 and June 30, 2013 totaling $34.2 million related to add-on
services for certain consumers that DDA approved without considering the
consumers’ level of need. The Maryland Office of Attorney General, on behalf of
MDH and DDA, appealed CMS’ decision to the Department of Health and
Human Services (DHHS) Departmental Appeals Board; however, as of January
2022, DHHS had not responded to this appeal.
CMS will assess interest accrued on any amounts it determines were properly
disallowed beginning on the date of initial disallowance (June 2018).
Consequently, the total federal liability may exceed $34.2 million. During the
fiscal year 2021 closeout process, MDH reported the potential liability to the
Comptroller of Maryland – General Accounting Division, but had not identified
funding sources for the liability.
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Reports
Based on our current assessment of significance and risk relative to our audit
objectives, our audit included a review to determine the status of 10 of the 11
findings contained in our preceding audit report dated July 8, 2019. As disclosed
in Figure 3 on page 12, for the non-cybersecurity-related findings we determined
that DDA satisfactorily addressed 4 of these 7 findings. The remaining 3 findings
are repeated in this report.
Our audit also included a review to determine the status of one of the two findings
that were contained in our January 2, 2019 performance audit report on DDA’s
monitoring of Coordination of Community Services agencies. We determined
that DDA did not address this finding; therefore, it is repeated in this report.
10

--- Page 13 ---
In our preceding audit report, we reported that DDA’s accountability and
compliance level was unsatisfactory, in accordance with the rating system we
established in conformity with State law. Based on the results of our current
audit, we have concluded that DDA’s accountability and compliance level
remains unsatisfactory. The significance of our audit findings, rather than the
number of findings, is the primary factor contributing to the current unsatisfactory
rating.
11

--- Page 14 ---
Figure 3
Status of Preceding Findings
Preceding Implementation
Finding Description
Finding Status
Developmental Disabilities Administration
DDA did not ensure level-of-need scores used to determine consumers’ service
budgets were assigned in accordance with DDA’s established criteria and were
Finding 1 Not repeated
properly recorded in its PCIS2 system. Our testing disclosed that certain scores
could not be supported.
DDA did not identify recurring overpayments made over several years totaling at
least $1.7 million that were later self-reported by a provider. In addition, DDA did
Finding 2 Not repeated
not subsequently determine the full extent of the overpayments to this provider
and whether similar overpayments were made to other providers.
DDA did not conduct audits of providers to ensure payments were consistent with
Repeated
Finding 3 actual services delivered and in accordance with the consumers’ approved
(Current Finding 3)
individual plans.
Fiscal management services contracts were not comprehensive and properly
approved, and DDA did not monitor the related vendors to ensure the required
Repeated
Finding 4 services were provided and the propriety of payments. In addition, all related
(Current Finding 6)
federal reimbursements were not obtained, including federal funds totaling $4.9
million.
DDA did not adequately justify a $2.7 million sole source contract awarded to an
incumbent vendor to continue assisting in the financial restructuring of DDA
Finding 5 Not repeated
operations, and could not support a significant increase in the contract rates for
one vendor employee.
DDA did not have an adequate process to ensure that amounts invoiced by
Repeated
Finding 6 Coordination of Community Services (CCS) agencies properly reflected consumer
(Current Finding 2)
services provided.
DDA had not taken sufficient action to identify and return improper contribution
Finding 7 Not repeated
to care collections identified during our preceding audit.
DDA did not recover certain federal funds timely, resulting in lost interest income Not repeated
Finding 8 of approximately $126,000. These delays were due, in part, to untimely Medicaid (Not followed up
eligibility redeterminations. on)
DDA did not verify the accuracy and completeness of critical adjustments that
Finding 9 were processed in PCIS2, resulting in errors such as overpayments going Status Redacted2
undetected, and did not adequately restrict user access in the system.
The PCIS2 database and its supporting server were running on outdated software
Finding 10 Status Redacted2
versions.
PCIS2 database and application backups were not stored offsite, and DDA did not
Finding 11 have a complete information technology disaster recovery plan for recovering Status Redacted2
computer operations.
DDA – Monitoring of Coordination of Community Services Agencies
DDA’s guidance to, and training of, CCS agencies on consumer monitoring
Not repeated
responsibilities did not contain clear instruction about the level of detail required
Finding 1 (Not followed up
to complete the monitoring forms and did not address specific documentation the
on)
CCS agencies should obtain when conducting the reviews.
DDA did not adequately monitor its CCS agencies’ efforts to determine whether
Repeated
Finding 2 the CCS agencies were ensuring that consumers received the required services
(Current Finding 1)
from service providers.
2 Specific information on the current status of this cybersecurity-related finding has been redacted
from this publicly available audit report in accordance with State Government Article,
Section 2-1224(i) of the Annotated Code of Maryland.
12

--- Page 15 ---
Findings and Recommendations
Consumer Services
Background
The Developmental Disabilities Administration (DDA) uses Coordination of
Community Services (CCS) agencies (consisting of 7 private companies and 12
local health departments (LHDs)) to oversee its programs, and ensure that
consumers receive high quality services.
Figure 4
According to State records, DDA paid
Summary of Consumers Served by CCS
CCS agencies approximately $70.3
Agencies in Fiscal Year 2021
million during fiscal year 2021,
Fiscal Year
including $64.4 million paid to 7 private Count and
2021
CCS Agency Percentage of
companies that served 90 percent of Payments to
Consumers
DDA consumers (see Figure 4). CCS Agency
Private Company 1 12,820 51% $45,103,541
The CCS agencies are primarily Private Company 2 3,494 14% 6,015,493
responsible for developing and updating Private Company 3 2,437 10% 4,667,372
Private Company 4 1,576 6% 4,592,405
consumers’ annual service plans,
Private Company 5 1,816 7% 3,845,174
monitoring consumers, and assisting
Private Company 6 182 <1% 119,352
consumers with the initial Medicaid
Private Company 7 96 <1% 30,615
waiver application and annual eligibility
12 Local Health
reassessments. 2,571 10% 5,931,128
Departments
Totals 24,9923 $70,305,080
Consumer Service Plans
Source: DDA Records
CCS agencies work with consumers to
develop the service plan. State regulations
require the plan to be updated at least annually. The plan identifies the services
and support each consumer requires to meet their needs and goals. For example,
the plan specifies the consumer's feeding, medication, hygiene, and toileting
needs. The plan also serves as the basis for determining the amount of DDA
funding consumers receive.
Consumer Monitoring
State regulations require the CCS agencies to conduct face-to-face monitoring
visits with each consumer at least once per quarter. The primary purpose of the
monitoring visits is to assess whether the consumers are receiving their services
3 The population of 24,992 consumers consisted of the following: 17,955 consumers that were
receiving CCS for community-based services, 6,993 consumers that were on the waiting list
during the year, and 44 consumers that were receiving transition coordination services to
transition from a facility to the community.
13

--- Page 16 ---
and making progress towards the goals identified in their annual plans. The CCS
agencies make additional contacts with consumers as necessary.
CCS agencies document these activities in the Long Term Services and Supports
System (LTSS). CCS agencies are paid for each 15-minute unit of service
provided to consumers and the number of comprehensive assessments
(evaluations performed during the initial application process to determine the
individual’s eligibility) completed based on rates established in State regulations.
During fiscal year 2021 the established CCS billing rates ranged from $20.72 to
$22.69 per unit (depending on the location of the consumer’s residence), and $450
for each comprehensive assessment.
Medicaid Eligibility
CCS agencies assist consumers with the Medicaid waiver application (completing
the forms and gathering required supporting documents) and, once enrolled in
Medicaid, monitor and follow up with these consumers and assist with annual
Medicaid eligibility reassessments (getting financial information from consumers
to enable the reassessments).
Finding 1
DDA did not ensure that CCS agencies properly completed annual consumer
service plans and conducted quarterly face-to-face monitoring visits.
Analysis
DDA did not ensure that CCS agencies properly completed annual consumer
service plans and conducted quarterly face-to-face monitoring visits. Similar
conditions regarding DDA monitoring of the CCS agencies have been commented
upon in our four prior audit reports dating back to November 2009. Our current
review disclosed that DDA still did not have a process to verify that the CCS
agencies provided these critical services to all consumers. As a result, we noted
that consumer service plans and quarterly monitoring visits frequently were not
completed, and the monitoring visits that were completed were not always
adequately documented.
Although the LTSS4 automatically notified the CCS agencies when plans and
monitoring visits were due for each consumer, the CCS agencies did not complete
annual service plans and conduct quarterly monitoring visits as required.
Specifically, our analysis of DDA records for fiscal years 2020 and 2021
disclosed that approximately 18,800 consumers required annual service plans and
4 As previously noted, CCS activities (including consumer plans and related monitoring) were
transitioned from PCIS2 to LTSS in August 2018.
14

--- Page 17 ---
15,500 consumers required quarterly monitoring visits from the CCS agencies5,
yet many consumers had not received the required services.
• The CCS agencies did not update the annual service plans for 1,635
consumers in fiscal year 2020 and 2021, including 1,069 consumers who were
actively receiving home and community based services during this period.
According to DDA records, the fiscal year 2021 service budgets for these
1,069 consumers totaled approximately $45.5 million. DDA could not readily
explain why these plans were not completed or document actions taken to
address the failure to complete these plans with the applicable CCS agencies.
• The CCS agencies did not document that the required monitoring had been
conducted. Specifically, we noted that 95 percent (14,737) of consumers were
missing at least one required monitoring form, including 53 percent (8,240)
for whom 4 or more forms were not completed (see Figure 5 on the following
page). Our January 2019 performance audit report noted similar high levels
of non-compliance in this area.6 In total, 47 percent (58,492) of the 123,896
forms required for fiscal years 2020 and 2021 were not recorded.
• The CCS agencies did not sufficiently document the quarterly monitoring
forms that were recorded. We tested the most recently completed quarterly
monitoring forms (generally during the period from January 2020 to June
2021) for 20 judgmentally selected consumers with fiscal year 2020 service
budgets totaling $1.2 million. While the monitoring forms indicated that all
20 consumers received their services, the forms for 5 consumers lacked
detailed comments to support the CCS agencies’ conclusions. Specifically,
these 5 forms contained only generic statements such as “the consumer
continued to make progress towards these goals” and did not reference the
documentation (for example, service provider records) used by the CCS
agencies in making these determinations. DDA management concurred with
our conclusion that these 5 monitoring forms were not sufficiently detailed.
5 DDA consumers are generally placed on a waiting list until funding is available for their
services. Quarterly monitoring visits are only required for consumers who actively receive home
and community based services from providers.
6 Specifically, our January 2019 report noted that at least one form was missing for 97 percent of
consumers, including 57 percent who were missing 4 or more forms during calendar years 2016
and 2017.
15

--- Page 18 ---
Figure 5
Quarterly Monitoring Forms Recordation for 15,487 Consumers
During Fiscal Years 2020 and 2021
Source: DDA’s Records from LTSS
In our opinion, these conditions occurred primarily because DDA had not
established effective oversight of the CCS agencies. However, we also noted that
DDA lacked an effective mechanism to address instances of noncompliance
because the CCS agency contracts did not provide for liquidated damages,
penalties, or other actions. Furthermore, in our opinion, under the current
payment structure established in State regulations, the CCS agencies were not
incentivized to provide all of the required services. Specifically, amounts billed
to DDA were based on time charges (in 15 minute intervals), and not contingent
on completing specific activities (such as, consumer plans and monitoring visits).
DDA management advised us that they were considering alternative payment
structures, but had not yet pursued the necessary changes to regulations.
16

--- Page 19 ---
Recommendation 1
We recommend that DDA establish a process to ensure that CCS agencies
provide all critical services to consumers in accordance with State
regulations. Specifically, DDA should ensure that the CCS agencies complete
a. consumers’ annual service plans timely,
b. all quarterly monitoring forms as required for each consumer (repeat),
and
c. quarterly monitoring forms which contain detailed comments regarding
consumers’ progress on achieving personal goals and outcomes (repeat).
Finding 2
DDA did not have an adequate process to ensure the amounts invoiced by
CCS agencies properly reflected consumer services provided and did not
take appropriate action when a significant number of improper or
unsupported payments were identified.
Analysis
DDA did not have an adequate process to ensure that amounts invoiced by CCS
agencies were proper and did not take appropriate action when a significant
number of improper or unsupported payments were identified. A similar
condition was noted in our preceding audit report. In response to our prior report,
in August 2019 DDA implemented a review process that was intended to ensure
that the amounts billed by the CCS agencies were supported by activity notes
recorded in LTSS. However, the review was only conducted for two months in
our current audit period (August 2019 and January 2021) and it was not
sufficiently comprehensive. We found that the review did not assess the
reasonableness of the amounts billed by the CCS agencies versus the delivery (or
lack of delivery) of all the required services (such as annual plans and quarterly
monitoring visits). As noted in Finding 1, the CCS agencies collectively did not
complete these services for a significant number of DDA consumers.
In addition, DDA did not take sufficient action when a significant number of
improper or unsupported payments were identified. For example, in January
2021, the CCS agencies collectively submitted approximately 43,500 claims
totaling $3.2 million to DDA for services provided. DDA reviewed 295 of these
claims (totaling $22,041) and determined that 25 percent (73 claims) were either
for non-billable activities (such as, certain administrative tasks) or lacked
adequate supporting documentation. Since DDA did not use statistical sampling
to select claims for review, it could not project the results of its review to the
entire population of claims paid. DDA also did not expand its review to
17

--- Page 20 ---
determine the extent that additional non-billable activities were invoiced by the
CCS agencies or seek reimbursement totaling $6,718 related to these 73 claims.
Recommendation 2
We recommend that DDA
a. establish a comprehensive review process to ensure that CCS agency
billings are proper (repeat);
b. consider the use of statistical sampling for selecting claims to review or
expand its review when questionable billings are identified; and
c. pursue recovery of any improper or unsupported payments, including
those noted above.
Provider Payments
Finding 3
DDA did not conduct required audits of providers to ensure payments were
for services actually delivered and included in the consumers’ approved
plans.
Analysis
DDA did not conduct required audits of providers (non-CCS providers) to ensure
payments were for services that were actually delivered and included in the
consumers’ approved plans. The audits are required by DDA’s Home and
Community Based Services Waivers from the federal Centers for Medicare and
Medicaid Services (CMS) and provide a mechanism to identify overpayments and
instances in which the services provided to consumers differed from the service
plans. According to DDA records, payments to providers for community-based
services totaled approximately $1.43 billion during fiscal year 2021.
We requested documentation (such as case notes and attendance sheets) from
DDA providers to support billings totaling approximately $49,100 for services
provided in January 2021 for 12 judgmentally selected consumers with material
fiscal year 2021 service budgets. The providers could not furnish documentation
to support billings for 5 consumers totaling $13,300. For example, one provider
that billed DDA $10,200 could only furnish documentation of the services
provided for 6 of the 31 days billed, resulting in unsupported payments totaling
$8,200. In addition, we could not readily determine whether the services received
by these 12 consumers were in accordance with their annual service plans.
A similar condition regarding the failure to perform these audits was commented
upon in our preceding two audit reports dating back to November 2016. In
18

--- Page 21 ---
January 2020 DDA awarded a contract to a vendor to perform utilization audits,
but terminated the contract in August 2020 before the vendor had conducted the
audits. In June 2022, subsequent to the completion of our audit fieldwork, DDA
awarded a new $22.6 million contract for these services.
Recommendation 3
We recommend that DDA
a. conduct audits of providers to ensure payments to providers were
consistent with actual services delivered and in accordance with the
consumers’ approved plans (repeat); and
b. take appropriate corrective action to recover related unsupported
payments identified, including the aforementioned $13,300.
Finding 4
DDA did not verify the propriety of $6.1 million in enhanced payments for
consumers who were isolated due to COVID-19.
Analysis
DDA did not verify the propriety of enhanced payments made for consumers who
were isolated because they had tested positive for COVID-19. At the onset of the
pandemic, CMS approved modifications to DDA’s Home and Community Based
Services Waivers, which included a 50 percent increase to the rates DDA paid for
certain services provided to these consumers. According to its records, between
March 2020 and October 2021, DDA paid approximately $6.1 million for services
provided to 2,202 consumers in COVID-19 isolation.
Providers recorded isolation services they performed in Provider Consumer
Information System II (PCIS2), which automatically applied the increased rates
when calculating the provider payments. Our review disclosed that DDA did not
require providers to submit evidence of a consumer’s positive COVID-19 test
result to support the increased rates, nor did DDA independently verify the
positive status of these consumers using the State of Maryland’s COVID-19 test
results database, to which it would have had access. We requested the test results
from this database for the aforementioned 2,202 consumers, but as of March
2022, the Maryland Department of Health (MDH) could not provide these results
due to the December 2021 ransomware security incident previously mentioned in
this report.
19

--- Page 22 ---
Recommendation 4
We recommend that DDA take appropriate steps to verify the propriety of
COVID-19 isolation payments and pursue recovery of payments made for
consumers without evidence of a positive COVID-19 test.
Finding 5
DDA did not use available output reports to verify the propriety of critical
adjustments that were processed in PCIS2.
Analysis
DDA did not use available output reports to verify the propriety of critical
adjustments manually processed by DDA for various reasons, such as to adjust
provider payments. In response to our prior audit report DDA established an
independent review of certain adjustments. However, DDA did not use available
system output reports of all adjustments recorded in PCIS27 to select adjustments
for review. Rather, DDA selected adjustments for review from its adjustment
tracking database, which assigned a ticket number to adjustment requests received
from DDA service providers. As a result, adjustments without a corresponding
ticket number were not subject to review.
According to PCIS2, there were 4,389 adjustments totaling approximately $105.4
million processed during fiscal years 2019 through 2021. Our analysis disclosed
that 1,385 of these adjustments (which resulted in either increasing or decreasing
the related provider payments by $46.1 million) were not included in the tracking
database and, consequently, were not subject to selection for independent review.
Our test of 12 adjustments totaling $7.2 million that we judgmentally selected
from the aforementioned 1,385 adjustments did not identify any erroneous or
improper transactions.
Recommendation 5
We recommend that DDA use available output reports to ensure that all
critical adjustments in PCIS2 are subject to selection for independent review.
7 As previously noted, during the audit period DDA began transitioning providers from PCIS2 to
LTSS; however, as of March 2022 the transition was not complete.
20

--- Page 23 ---
Fiscal Management Services
Background
While DDA directs most consumers to appropriate service providers, consumers
may also elect to select their own providers for certain DDA services. DDA used
two fiscal management services (FMS) vendors to administer the fiscal activities
of consumers who elected to self-direct their delivery of care. These FMS
vendors were responsible for all fiscal operations, including monitoring consumer
budgets, paying for provider services, and recovering any applicable federal
funds. On a quarterly basis, DDA advanced funds to FMS vendors to cover
administrative fees and provider payments on behalf of these self-directed
consumers. According to DDA records, there has been a significant increase in
self-directed services over the past several years and during fiscal year 2021,
DDA paid the FMS vendors approximately $79.4 million (including FMS
administrative fees) to provide services to 1,143 self-directed consumers (see
Figure 6).
Figure 6
Summary of Self-Directed Consumers for Fiscal Years 2017 - 2021
Source: DDA records
Finding 6
FMS services contracts procured in 2006 were not comprehensive, properly
approved, and adequately monitored. As a result, DDA did not recover
unspent funds totaling $3.2 million and obtain federal reimbursements
totaling $8.8 million.
Analysis
During the period covered by this audit, DDA continued to obtain FMS services
from two vendors under contracts procured in 2006 that were not comprehensive
21

--- Page 24 ---
and for which required approvals were not obtained. In addition, DDA did not
adequately monitor the vendors to ensure the required services were provided,
that provider payments were proper, and that federal reimbursements were
obtained. As a result, we noted a number of discrepancies, including DDA failing
to recover unspent funds totaling $3.2 million and obtain federal reimbursements
totaling $8.8 million.
FMS Vendor Contracts Were Not Comprehensive and Properly Approved
During the audit period, DDA continued to use FMS vendor contracts procured in
2006 that were not approved by the Department of Budget and Management and
the Board of Public Works as required. In addition, these 2006 contracts did not
include critical provisions such as the fees to be charged and the period to be
covered by the agreements, resulting in a lack of assurance that these services are
being provided at the most advantageous prices.8
DDA Did Not Monitor the Vendors nor Ensure Related Payments Were Proper
DDA did not monitor the vendors to ensure that consumers received appropriate
FMS services and that the related payments (administrative fees and consumer
services) were proper, and it did not pursue recovery of certain unspent funds.
• DDA did not perform annual site visits nor obtain independent financial audits
of the two FMS vendors as required by the Community Pathways Waivers
received from CMS. The annual site visits and audits ensure consumers
receive all required services (including self-directed services) and that related
service budgets and payments are proper. Consequently, DDA did not have
an effective mechanism to ensure self-directed consumers received all
required FMS services and that payments processed on their behalf were
proper.
• DDA did not recover $3.2 million in unspent funds advanced to one FMS
vendor in fiscal year 2020. DDA required the FMS vendors to submit annual
accountings that compared their actual costs (administrative fees and
consumer services) to the amounts previously advanced by DDA, and to
return any unspent funds. Our review of the annual accountings submitted by
the two vendors disclosed that one FMS vendor reported that $3.2 million in
advanced funds related to fiscal year 2020 had not been spent and were to be
returned to DDA. As of March 31, 2022, DDA had not attempted to recover
8 After a recent procurement solicitation for these services, in June 2022 DDA awarded contracts
to three vendors to provide these services to self-directed consumers. Finding 6 relates to issues
found with the prior two contracts in place during our audit period. The three new contracts will
be subject to review during our next audit of DDA.
22

--- Page 25 ---
the funds by billing the vendor, entering into a payment plan, or withholding
future payments.
• DDA did not ensure that administrative fees paid to the FMS vendors were
proper. According to the FMS vendors’ records, administrative fees totaled
$2.3 million during fiscal years 2019 and 2020. As noted above, the 2006
contracts did not specify the amount of administrative fees DDA was to pay,
which were included in the funds DDA advanced to the FMS vendors. DDA
could not provide a breakdown between the cost of consumer services and
administrative fees advanced to the vendors. In addition, although the
vendors reported the total administrative fees for each consumer when they
submitted their annual accountings, DDA did not verify that these amounts
were accurate and reasonable in relation to the services provided.
• DDA did not verify that the service provider payments reported by the
vendors were accurate based on supporting documentation and did not ensure
payments for consumer services were consistent with established DDA rates.
Our test of 30 billings totaling $122,000 for 15 self-directed consumers did
not disclose any unsupported or excessive payments.
Federal Funds Were Not Recovered for All Vendor Provider Payments
DDA did not ensure the FMS vendors recorded all provider payments into the
MDH Maryland Medicaid Information System II (MMIS II) so that federal
reimbursement could be obtained for the cost of the services (federal Medicaid
reimbursement is based on MMIS II information). Specifically, DDA did not
compare the claims entered into MMIS II by the FMS vendors with the provider
expenditures separately reported to DDA by the vendors to ensure all claims had
been recorded.
Our comparison of DDA’s fiscal year 2019 and 2020 self-directed services
expenditures with the related provider payments recorded in MMIS II identified
$8.8 million in related federal fund reimbursement requests that had not been
made as of March 31, 2022 because the provider payments had not been recorded
in MMIS II. As a result, State general funds were used to finance federal fund
expenditures. DDA advised that these payments may have been for services that
were not eligible for federal reimbursement. However, DDA could not provide
any documentation to support this assertion as of August 31, 2022. Since claims
must be submitted within two years of the service, a portion of these claims may
no longer be eligible for federal reimbursement.
Similar conditions were commented upon in our preceding audit report. In its
response to our prior audit report, MDH on behalf of DDA concurred with our
23

--- Page 26 ---
prior findings and indicated the recommendations had already or would be
implemented by the end of calendar 2019.
Recommendation 6
We recommend that DDA
a. ensure contracts are executed that include all relevant contract provisions
(including the contract term and authorized administrative fees) (repeat);
b. monitor vendor activity and compliance to ensure that all key
requirements and terms are complied with, including site visits and
audits, and timely return of unspent funds, and that FMS vendor
payments are proper and supported (repeat);
c. ensure FMS vendors record all provider payments into MMIS II timely
(repeat); and
d. take appropriate corrective action to recover unspent funds and obtain
available federal reimbursement for any outstanding claims (including
the aforementioned $8.8 million), and consider recovering any lost
investment income resulting from untimely vendor actions (repeat).
Contribution to Care
Finding 7
DDA did not forward approximately $1.3 million in unclaimed refunds to the
Comptroller of Maryland, as required.
Analysis
DDA did not forward approximately $1.3 million in unclaimed refunds of
improper contribution to care (CTC) collections to the Comptroller of Maryland,
as required by State law. CTC is the monthly amount that certain consumers in
residential care are required to pay providers, based on the consumer’s ability to
pay. In fiscal year 2014, DDA discovered that it had been incorrectly directing
service providers to collect CTC from certain consumers. DDA ultimately
determined that approximately $4.1 million needed to be refunded to consumers
for improper CTC collections between January 2013 and June 2014.9
DDA began notifying affected consumers in December 2018, and as of March
2022, had refunded approximately $2.8 million of these funds. DDA advised that
9 The issue of improper CTC collections was originally disclosed in our November 2016 DDA
audit report. As noted in that report, DDA management advised that these improper collections
had been occurring for many years and estimated that improper CTC collections could total $4.2
million annually. However, DDA declined to investigate the extent of these collections that
occurred prior to calendar year 2013.
24

--- Page 27 ---
the remaining $1.3 million had not been refunded because the consumers had not
responded to DDA’s request to verify the amounts they were owed.
State law provides that unclaimed property, such as unclaimed refunds, shall be
reported and remitted by the property holder to the Comptroller of Maryland. In
general, property is assumed to be abandoned when there is no owner contact with
the holder regarding the property for three years. We were advised by
Comptroller of Maryland - Compliance Division officials that DDA’s
determination that the CTC was improperly collected from consumers was
sufficient for DDA to designate the funds as unclaimed property. However, as of
March 2022, DDA did not forward these funds to the Comptroller of Maryland as
required.
Recommendation 7
We recommend that DDA forward funds totaling approximately $1.3 million
pertaining to unclaimed refunds of improper CTC collections to the
Comptroller of Maryland, as required.
Information Systems Security and Control
We determined that Finding 8 related to “cybersecurity”, as defined by the State
Finance and Procurement Article, Section 3A-301(b) of the Annotated Code of
Maryland, and therefore is subject to redaction from the publicly available audit
report in accordance with the State Government Article 2-1224(i). Consequently,
the specifics of the following finding, including the analysis, related
recommendation(s), along with MDH’s responses, have been redacted from this
report copy.
Finding 8
Redacted cybersecurity-related finding.
25

--- Page 28 ---
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the Developmental Disabilities
Administration (DDA) of the Maryland Department of Health (MDH) for the
period beginning May 1, 2018 and ending May 31, 2021. The audit was
conducted in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards.
Those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient,
appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and
conclusions based on our audit objectives. We believe that the evidence obtained
provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit
objectives.
As prescribed by the State Government Article, Section 2-1221 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, the objectives of this audit were to examine DDA’s financial
transactions, records, and internal control, and to evaluate its compliance with
applicable State laws, rules, and regulations.
In planning and conducting our audit, we focused on the major financial-related
areas of operations based on assessments of significance and risk. The areas
addressed by the audit included federal funds, provider fee payment systems,
contract procurement and monitoring, and disbursements for consumer services.
The scope of the work performed in each of these areas was based on our
assessments of significance and risk. We also determined the status of 10 of the
11 findings contained in our preceding audit report and 1 of the 2 findings
contained in our performance audit of DDA’s monitoring of its coordination of
community services agencies, dated January 2, 2019.
Our audit did not include certain support services provided to DDA by MDH.
These support services (such as payroll, maintenance of accounting records, and
related fiscal functions) are generally included within the scope of our audit of the
MDH Office of the Secretary and Other Units. In addition, our audit did not
include an evaluation of internal controls over compliance with federal laws and
regulations for federal financial assistance programs and an assessment of DDA’s
compliance with those laws and regulations because the State of Maryland
engages an independent accounting firm to annually audit such programs
administered by State agencies, including DDA.
Our assessment of internal controls was based on agency procedures and controls
in place at the time of our fieldwork. Our tests of transactions and other auditing
procedures were generally focused on the transactions occurring during our audit
period of May 1, 2018 and ending May 31, 2021, but may include transactions
26

--- Page 29 ---
before or after this period as we considered necessary to achieve our audit
objectives.
To accomplish our audit objectives, our audit procedures included inquiries of
appropriate personnel, inspections of documents and records, tests of transactions,
and to the extent practicable, observations of DDA’s operations. Generally,
transactions were selected for testing based on auditor judgment, which primarily
considers risk, the timing or dollar amount of the transaction, or the significance
of the transaction to the area of operation reviewed. As a matter of course, we do
not normally use sampling in our tests, so unless otherwise specifically indicated,
neither statistical nor non-statistical audit sampling was used to select the
transactions tested. Therefore, unless sampling is specifically indicated in a
finding, the results from any tests conducted or disclosed by us cannot be used to
project those results to the entire population from which the test items were
selected.
We also performed various data extracts of pertinent information from the State’s
Financial Management Information System (such as revenue and expenditure
data). The extracts are performed as part of ongoing internal processes
established by the Office of Legislative Audits and were subject to various tests to
determine data reliability. We also extracted data from MDH’s Long Term
Services and Supports System (LTSS) and from DDA’s Provider Consumer
Information System II (PCIS2) for the purpose of selecting test items and
assessing user access. We performed various tests of the relevant data and
determined that the data were sufficiently reliable for the purposes the data were
used during the audit. Finally, we performed other auditing procedures that we
considered necessary to achieve our audit objectives. The reliability of data used
in this report for background or informational purposes was not assessed.
DDA’s management is responsible for establishing and maintaining effective
internal control. Internal control is a process designed to provide reasonable
assurance that objectives pertaining to the reliability of financial records;
effectiveness and efficiency of operations, including safeguarding of assets; and
compliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations are achieved. As
provided in Government Auditing Standards, there are five components of
internal control: control environment, risk assessment, control activities,
information and communication, and monitoring. Each of the five components,
when significant to the audit objectives, and as applicable to DDA, were
considered by us during the course of this audit.
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
27

--- Page 30 ---
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate.
Our reports are designed to assist the Maryland General Assembly in exercising
its legislative oversight function and to provide constructive recommendations for
improving State operations. As a result, our reports generally do not address
activities we reviewed that are functioning properly.
This report includes findings related to conditions that we consider to be
significant deficiencies in the design or operation of internal control that could
adversely affect DDA’s ability to maintain reliable financial records, operate
effectively and efficiently, and/or comply with applicable laws, rules, and
regulations. Our report also includes findings regarding significant instances of
noncompliance with applicable laws, rules, or regulations. Other less significant
findings were communicated to DDA that did not warrant inclusion in this report.
As a result of our audit, we determined that DDA’s accountability and compliance
level was unsatisfactory. The significance of our audit findings, rather than the
number of findings, is the primary factor contributing to the current unsatisfactory
rating. Our rating conclusion has been made solely pursuant to State law and
rating guidelines approved by the Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee. The
rating process is not a practice prescribed by professional auditing standards.
State Government Article Section 2-1224(i) requires that we redact in a manner
consistent with auditing best practices any cybersecurity findings before a report
is made available to the public. This results in the issuance of two different
versions of an audit report that contains cybersecurity findings – a redacted
version for the public and an unredacted version for government officials
responsible for acting on our audit recommendations.
The State Finance and Procurement Article, Section 3A-301(b), states that
cybersecurity is defined as “processes or capabilities wherein systems,
communications, and information are protected and defended against damage,
unauthorized use or modification, and exploitation”. Based on that definition, and
in our professional judgment, we concluded that certain findings in this report fall
under that definition. Consequently, for the publicly available audit report all
specifics as to the nature of cybersecurity findings and required corrective actions
have been redacted. We have determined that such aforementioned practices, and
government auditing standards, support the redaction of this information from the
public audit report. The specifics of these cybersecurity findings have been
communicated to DDA and those parties responsible for acting on our
recommendations in an unredacted audit report.
28

--- Page 31 ---
MDH’s response to our findings and recommendations, on behalf of DDA, is
included as an appendix to this report. Depending on the version of the audit
report, responses to any cybersecurity findings may be redacted in accordance
with State law. As prescribed in the State Government Article, Section 2-1224 of
the Annotated Code of Maryland, we will advise MDH regarding the results of
our review of its response.
29

--- Page 32 ---
APPENDIX
October 21, 2022
Mr. Gregory A. Hook, CPA
Legislative Auditor
Office of Legislative Audits
The Warehouse at Camden Yards
351 West Camden Street, Suite 400
Baltimore, MD 21201
Dear Mr. Hook:
Enclosed, please find the Maryland Department of Health’s response to the draft audit report on
the Maryland Department of Health – Developmental Disabilities Administration for the period
May 1, 2018 through May 31, 2021.
If you have any questions, please contact Frederick D. Doggett at 410-767-0885 or email at
frederick.doggett@maryland.gov.
Sincerely,
Dennis R. Schrader
Secretary
Enclosure
cc: Frederick D. Doggett, Director, Ofc. of Internal Controls, Audit Compliance & Security,
Bernard Simons, Deputy Secretary, Developmental Disabilities Administrations
Robert White, Deputy Director, Developmental Disabilities Administration

--- Page 33 ---
Maryland Department of Health
Developmental Disabilities Administration
Agency Response Form
Consumer Services
Finding 1
DDA did not ensure that CCS agencies properly completed annual consumer service plans
and conducted quarterly face-to-face monitoring visits.
We recommend that DDA establish a process to ensure that CCS agencies provide all
critical services to consumers in accordance with State regulations. Specifically, DDA
should ensure that the CCS agencies complete
a. consumers’ annual service plans timely,
b. all quarterly monitoring forms as required for each consumer (repeat), and
c. quarterly monitoring forms which contain detailed comments regarding consumers’
progress on achieving personal goals and outcomes (repeat).
Agency Response
Analysis Factually Accurate
Please provide
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 1a Agree Estimated Completion Date: 7/1/2023
Please provide details of The Maryland Department of Health’s Developmental Disabilities
corrective action or Administration (DDA) fully agrees with the suggestions in
explain disagreement. Recommendation 1.
As discussed in our regular work sessions with the Office of Legislative
Audits on this topic and throughout this audit, we thank OLA staff for
their insightful analysis and helpful recommendations in ensuring that
Coordination of Community Services (CCS) agencies complete
consumers’ annual service plans timely, that quarterly monitoring forms
are completed with detailed comments. We continue to have ongoing
conversations about improving DDA’s oversight of CCS agencies,
including CCS agency contracts.
As noted in our response to the Behavioral Health Administration and
Medical Care Programs Administration Administrative Service
Organization for Behavioral Health Services Audit Report, MDH will
confer and coordinate with the Department of General Services (DGS)
and its Office of State Procurement on developing and implementing a
Page 1 of 12

--- Page 34 ---
Maryland Department of Health
Developmental Disabilities Administration
Agency Response Form
contract administration/management process as well as any attendant
interim departmental policies by December 31, 2022. We will continue to
work to improve service level agreements requirements and other contract
management mechanisms in forthcoming requests for procurement that
are in process. In addition, we will research contract administration and
management national best practices to include in these policies and
procedures. We will solicit and consult with the Office of Legislative
Auditors and the Office of State Procurement for assistance in this
process.
Our principal solution to addressing the findings and Recommendation 1
has been outlined through our solicitation, procurement, and now
implementation of a Quality Improvement Organization Services vendor
(QIO). This vendor was approved by the Board of Public Works at its June
8, 2022 meeting (DGS Agenda Item 41-S, page 220). The request for
proposal provides for certain critical services that we believe align with
the OLA Recommendation 1, and will result in the satisfactory resolution
of some issues identified in this report, including:
1. Provision of strategies that enhance the quality of life and help ensure
the health and well being for individuals with intellectual and
developmental disabilities;
2. Development of audit standards for the DDA’s services including
review of cases and analysis of patterns of services related to assessed
need and quality review;
3. Ongoing utilization reviews to safeguard against unnecessary
utilization of care and services and to assure efficiency, economy and
quality of care; and
4. Administration of the DDA’s National Core Indicators Surveys. These
services will provide quality assurance to the DDA and will ensure DDA
is compliant with previous related previous audit findings.
The QIO vendor began its implementation work on July 1, 2022, and will
continue through June 2023. DDA would be pleased to update OLA at its
convenience on the status of this vendor’s progress. Please see the below
chart for a high-level overview of the QIO vendor’s activities.
Page 2 of 12

--- Page 35 ---
Maryland Department of Health
Developmental Disabilities Administration
Agency Response Form
In addition to the QIO vendor’s work, we will continue to review and
improve our current regulations, policies, and procedures regarding
corrective measures when consumers’ annual service plans are not
completed timely. We will work to create an enhanced person-centered
plan (PCP) report template that tracks the timeliness of these plans by the
CCSs, and other oversight measures on a weekly and monthly basis.
Recommendation 1b Agree Estimated Completion Date: 6/30/2023
Please provide details of MDH agrees, and notes its above response to Recommendation 1a. As
corrective action or mentioned above, as DDA develops mechanisms and processes for
explain disagreement. enforcement and compliance of quarterly monitoring forms with CCS,
we will provide off-cycle and regular quarterly progress updates to OLA
on this issue. We believe that there are a number of corrective action
solutions in development that may satisfactorily address
Recommendation 1b. CCSs are administrative services under the
Medicaid State Plan, as such, we anticipate developing and
implementing service level agreements for accountability.
Recommendation 1c Agree Estimated Completion Date: 3/31/2023
Please provide details of Please see the responses to Recommendation 1a and 1b, above. In
corrective action or addition, the Coordination of Community Services Billing
explain disagreement. Documentation Verification Quality Review Guidance provides specific
examples of how the coordinator must provide detailed comments
regarding consumers’ progress on achieving their chosen outcomes for
the services identified in their Person-Centered Plans. In addition, we
will take further steps as appropriate to continue implementation of
Recommendation 1c.
QIO Vendor Flowchart (Finding 1a response)
Page 3 of 12

--- Page 36 ---
Maryland Department of Health
Developmental Disabilities Administration
Agency Response Form
Finding 2
DDA did not have an adequate process to ensure the amounts invoiced by CCS agencies
properly reflected consumer services provided and did not take appropriate action when a
significant number of improper or unsupported payments were identified.
We recommend that DDA
a. establish a comprehensive review process to ensure that CCS agency billings are proper
(repeat);
b. consider the use of statistical sampling for selecting claims to review or expand its
review when questionable billings are identified; and
c. pursue recovery of any improper or unsupported payments, including those noted
above.
Agency Response
Analysis Factually Accurate
Please provide Yes, please see the discussion of the QIO in Recommendations 1a and
additional comments as 1b, above.
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 2a Agree Estimated Completion Date: 3/31/2023
Please provide details of Please see the discussion of the QIO and service level agreements in
corrective action or Recommendation 1a and 1b, above. The QIO will conduct Financial
explain disagreement. Accountability Reviews (Section 2.3.3.1 - Page 12 of RFP, and Section
2.2.5.2 on page 5 of the RFP) as part of the contract scope. Based on the
current work plan, the QIO will complete the development of the tools
that will be used to conduct comprehensive reviews on a quarterly basis
in November 2022. Upon approval of the tools, the QIO will begin
piloting their review process for Targeted Case Management in late
November 2022, followed by the review of all TCM agencies in
February 2023. The DDA and the QIO will work with the MDH Office
of Internal Controls, Audit Compliance & Security (IAC/S) to validate
the process upon completion of the February 2023 review.
Recommendation 2b Agree Estimated Completion Date: 3/31/2023
Please provide details of MDH will consider the use of statistical sampling for selecting claims
corrective action or for review or to expand its review when questionable billings are
explain disagreement. identified.
The scope of the QIO contract requires that the sample size is consistent
with the U.S. Department of Health and Humans Services Office of
Page 4 of 12

--- Page 37 ---
Maryland Department of Health
Developmental Disabilities Administration
Agency Response Form
Inspector General’s toolkit for State Medicaid Fraud Control Units
recommendations requiring a confidence level of 90 - 95 percent. The
QIO contract requires a confidence level of 95 percent. The sample size
will be validated using an online tool to ensure that the confidence level
has been satisfied. Moreover, the random sample will be stratified by
waiver, region, and service type. The DDA’s QIO will provide findings
to the DDA for remediation and/or a plan of correction on a bi-annual
basis. If questionable patterns emerge, the sample size will be expanded
for additional review.
Recommendation 2c Agree Estimated Completion Date: 3/31/2023
Please provide details of The DDA with the assistance of the QIO will set up guidance for CCS
corrective action or on how to pursue recoupment of any improper or unsupported billing. In
explain disagreement. addition, the DDA will pursue recoupment of funds related to improper
billings identified by the OLA auditors upon validation.
Page 5 of 12

--- Page 38 ---
Maryland Department of Health
Developmental Disabilities Administration
Agency Response Form
Provider Payments
Finding 3
DDA did not conduct required audits of providers to ensure payments were for services
actually delivered and included in the consumers’ approved plans.
We recommend that DDA
a. conduct audits of providers to ensure payments to providers were consistent with actual
services delivered and in accordance with the consumers’ approved plans (repeat); and
b. take appropriate corrective action to recover related unsupported payments identified,
including the aforementioned $13,300.
Agency Response
Analysis Factually Accurate
Please provide Please see additional comments for Findings 1 and 2 above.
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 3a Agree Estimated Completion Date: 1/31/2023
Please provide details of The DDA agrees to comply with the recommendation to conduct audits
corrective action or of providers to ensure payments to providers were consistent with actual
explain disagreement. services provided and in accordance with the consumers’ approved
plans. As of July 1, 2022, the DDA has contracted with a Quality
Improvement Organization (QIO). The QIO will conduct Financial
Accountability Reviews (Section 2.3.3.1 - Page 12 of RFP, and Section
2.2.5.2 on page 5 of the RFP) as part of the contract scope. Based on the
current work plan, the QIO will conduct reviews on pilot providers of
DDA services in November of 2022, followed by reviews of all
providers in January 2023. The DDA and the QIO will work with the
IAC/S to validate the process upon completion of the January 2023
review
Recommendation 3b Agree Estimated Completion Date: 12/31/2022
Please provide details of The DDA agrees to comply with the recommendation to take appropriate
corrective action or corrective action to recover related overpayments identified, including
explain disagreement. the aforementioned $13,300. The DDA will pursue recoupment of funds
related to overpayments identified by the OLA auditors upon validation.
Page 6 of 12

--- Page 39 ---
Maryland Department of Health
Developmental Disabilities Administration
Agency Response Form
Finding 4
DDA did not verify the propriety of $6.1 million in enhanced payments for consumers who
were isolated due to COVID-19.
We recommend that DDA take appropriate steps to verify the propriety of COVID-19
isolation payments and pursue recovery of payments made for consumers without evidence
of a positive COVID-19 test.
Agency Response
Analysis Factually Accurate
Please provide
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 4 Agree Estimated Completion Date: 3/31/2023
Please provide details of The DDA has taken the first steps to conduct a review of the $6.1
corrective action or million in enhanced payments to see where documentation has been
explain disagreement. submitted/provided. If documentation is not available, we will conduct a
statistical sample.
Page 7 of 12

--- Page 40 ---
Maryland Department of Health
Developmental Disabilities Administration
Agency Response Form
Finding 5
DDA did not use available output reports to verify the propriety of critical adjustments
that were processed in PCIS2.
We recommend that DDA use available output reports to ensure that all critical
adjustments in PCIS2 are subject to selection for independent review.
Agency Response
Analysis Factually Accurate
Please provide
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 5 Agree Estimated Completion Date: 3/31/2023
Please provide details of The DDA has revised procedures to now require that all adjustments are
corrective action or validated by a second party using the ticket system. The DDA will
explain disagreement. validate the process and every adjustment will be subject to review.
Random audits will continue to be done quarterly, and corrective action
taken as appropriate for observed findings. The DDA will share the
results of the next quarterly review with IAC/S in order to test the new
process.
Page 8 of 12

--- Page 41 ---
Maryland Department of Health
Developmental Disabilities Administration
Agency Response Form
Fiscal Management Services
Finding 6
FMS services contracts procured in 2006 were not comprehensive, properly approved, and
adequately monitored. As a result, DDA did not recover unspent funds totaling $3.2
million and obtain federal reimbursements totaling $8.8 million.
We recommend that DDA
a. ensure contracts are executed that include all relevant contract provisions (including
the contract term and authorized administrative fees) (repeat);
b. monitor vendor activity and compliance to ensure that all key requirements and terms
are complied with, including site visits and audits, and timely return of unspent funds,
and that FMS vendor payments are proper and supported (repeat);
c. ensure FMS vendors record all provider payments into MMIS II timely (repeat); and
d. take appropriate corrective action to recover unspent funds and obtain available
federal reimbursement for any outstanding claims (including the aforementioned $8.8
million), and consider recovering any lost investment income resulting from untimely
vendor actions (repeat).
Agency Response
Analysis Factually Accurate
Please provide
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 6a Agree Estimated Completion Date: 7/1/2022
Please provide details of MDH agrees with Recommendation 6 and has been working on
corrective action or resolving the issues in Recommendation 6 over the past 18 months. We
explain disagreement. have provided regular updates to OLA and we thank them for their
support and advice throughout this process.
3 vendors were approved by the Board of Public Works at its June 8,
2022 meeting with an effective date of July 1, 2022 (DGS Agenda Items
43-S and 44-S-MOD). Information about the Financial Management and
Counseling Service (FMCS) transition to the new approved vendors can
be found on our website, and in our Guidance document. All participants
currently self-directing their DDA services will need to choose an FMCS
agency in an open enrollment period from August through November 15,
Page 9 of 12

--- Page 42 ---
Maryland Department of Health
Developmental Disabilities Administration
Agency Response Form
2022. We anticipate that all current participants will completely be
migrated by January 1, 2023 from the previous vendors.
As of October 21, 2022, 1632 out of 1892 participants self-directing
their services have selected a provider of choice.
Recommendation 6b Agree Estimated Completion Date: 7/1/2022
Please provide details of DDA will monitor vendor activity and compliance to ensure that all key
corrective action or requirements and terms are complied with, including site visits and
explain disagreement. audits, and timely submission of annual accountings and return of
unspent funds, and that FMS vendor payments are proper and supported.
The DDA hired a FMCS Program Manager whose job it is to ensure that
all contract requirements are being met, including site visits and audits
as required. Furthermore, the QIO will audit payments for waiver
services as part of their financial accountability reviews, and the FMCS
agencies will be required to have audits of their financial statements
performed by an independent CPA firm as outlined in the scope of work
for the New FMCS contract (OPASS 21-19022)
Recommendation 6c Agree Estimated Completion Date: 1/31/2023
Please provide details of Under the scope of the new contracts, FMCS agencies will be required to
corrective action or bill fee-for-service, meaning that claims will be submitted directly to
explain disagreement. MMIS for payment. Prospective payments will no longer be used and
eliminating the need for reconciliation and delaying the submission of
federal claims
Recommendation 6d Agree Estimated Completion Date: 3/31/2023
Please provide details of DDA’s Deputy Director for Finance will take appropriate corrective
corrective action or action to obtain available federal reimbursement for any outstanding
explain disagreement. claims, any annual accountings not received, and identified
overpayments, and consider recovering any lost investment income
resulting from untimely vendor actions. The Deputy Director is currently
investigating the aforementioned $8.8 million and will obtain federal
reimbursement for any number of qualified claims.
Page 10 of 12

--- Page 43 ---
Maryland Department of Health
Developmental Disabilities Administration
Agency Response Form
Contribution to Care
Finding 7
DDA did not forward approximately $1.3 million in unclaimed refunds to the Comptroller
of Maryland, as required.
We recommend that DDA forward funds totaling approximately $1.3 million pertaining to
unclaimed refunds of improper CTC collections to the Comptroller of Maryland, as
required.
Agency Response
Analysis Factually Accurate
Please provide
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 7 Agree Estimated Completion Date: 1/31/2023
Please provide details of DDA’s Deputy Director for Finance will verify unclaimed CTC refunds
corrective action or and forward the necessary information to the unclaimed property
explain disagreement. division of the Comptroller's office as required.
Page 11 of 12

--- Page 44 ---
Maryland Department of Health
Developmental Disabilities Administration
Agency Response Form
Information Systems Security and Control
The Office of Legislative Audits (OLA) has determined that finding 8 related to “cybersecurity”,
as defined by the State Finance and Procurement Article, Section 3A-301(b) of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, and therefore is subject to redaction from the publicly available audit report
in accordance with State Government Article 2-1224(i). Although the specifics of the finding
including the analysis, related recommendation(s), along with MDH’s responses, have been
redacted from this report copy, MDH’s response indicated agreement with the finding and
related recommendation(s).
Finding 8
Redacted cybersecurity-related finding.
Agency Response has been redacted by OLA.
Page 12 of 12

--- Page 45 ---
A T
UDIT EAM
Edward A. Rubenstein, CPA
Audit Manager
Edwin L. Paul, CPA, CISA
Information Systems Audit Manager
Abdullah I. Adam, CFE
Senior Auditor
Peter W. Chong
Information Systems Senior Auditor
Jordan T. Duke, CFE
Matthew P. Henry
Nga T. Nguyen Simmons
Staff Auditors