Title: Maryland Department of Health - Behavioral Health Administration


NOTE: Effective July 1, 2014, the Mental Hygiene Administration and the Alcohol and Drug Abuse Administration were merged to create the Behavioral Health Administration within the Maryland Department of Health (MDH). Effective January 1, 2015, MDH implemented a new integrated Public Behavioral Health System. Certain functions previously performed by MHA are now performed by the Medical Care Programs Administration (MCPA). Specifically, MCPA now monitors and accounts for activities of the Administrative Service Organization (ASO) responsible for the authorization of behavioral health services, data collection, claims submission, and the payment of claims. Activities of the ASO since January 1, 2015 were excluded from this audit and are included in our audits of MCPA.
Date: 07/09/2019
Type: Fiscal Compliance
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5d26226fa1ce580f383a0e60
Extracted: 2025-06-19T06:16:11.152944
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Audit Report
Maryland Department of Health
Behavioral Health Administration
July 2019
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Senator Craig J. Zucker (Senate Chair) Delegate Shelly L. Hettleman (House Chair)
Senator Adelaide C. Eckardt Delegate Steven J. Arentz
Senator George C. Edwards Delegate Andrew P. Cassilly
Senator Guy J. Guzzone Delegate Mark S. Chang
Senator Katie Fry Hester Delegate Keith E. Haynes
Senator Cheryl C. Kagan Delegate Michael A. Jackson
Senator Benjamin F. Kramer Delegate David Moon
Senator Cory V. McCray Delegate April R. Rose
Senator Douglas J.J. Peters Delegate Geraldine Valentino-Smith
Senator Justin D. Ready Delegate Karen Lewis Young
To Obtain Further Information
Office of Legislative Audits
301 West Preston Street, Room 1202
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Phone: 410-946-5900 ꞏ 301-970-5900 ꞏ 1-877-486-9964 (Toll Free in Maryland)
Maryland Relay: 711
TTY: 410-946-5401 ꞏ 301-970-5401
E-mail: OLAWebmaster@ola.state.md.us
Website: www.ola.state.md.us
To Report Fraud
The Office of Legislative Audits operates a Fraud Hotline to report fraud, waste, or abuse involving State
of Maryland government resources. Reports of fraud, waste, or abuse may be communicated anonymously
by a toll-free call to 1-877-FRAUD-11, by mail to the Fraud Hotline, c/o Office of Legislative Audits, or
through the Office’s website.
Nondiscrimination Statement
The Department of Legislative Services does not discriminate on the basis of age, ancestry, color, creed,
marital status, national origin, race, religion, gender, gender identity, sexual orientation, or disability in the
admission or access to its programs, services, or activities. The Department’s Information Officer has been
designated to coordinate compliance with the nondiscrimination requirements contained in Section 35.107
of the United States Department of Justice Regulations. Requests for assistance should be directed to the
Information Officer at 410-946-5400 or 410-970-5400.

--- Page 4 ---
BHA also did not monitor the vendor responsible for providing care management
services to children with intensive needs to ensure the required services were
provided, and did not ensure that payments to the vendor were proper. For
example, BHA did not monitor the vendor to ensure that it had weekly phone
contact with each child, even though the Governor’s Office of Children, which
previously monitored the contract, had noted similar deficiencies. Additionally,
BHA paid the vendor $2,875,000, the full contract value, without obtaining
adequate support for the payments.
In addition, BHA did not ensure that an external third party properly safeguarded
sensitive client data, including protected health information and personally
identifiable information, collected from pharmacies and healthcare practitioners
under its Prescription Drug Monitoring Program. Specifically, BHA did not
require the contractor who compiled these data to have comprehensive
independent security reviews to ensure that the data were safeguarded.
Finally, the audit report includes two informational comments regarding reports
issued by the MDH Office of the Inspector General (OIG) on certain BHA-related
activities. The first report addressed certain interagency agreements entered into
by BHA, and the second addressed BHA’s administration of certain opioid grant
funds. Both reports contained matters that the OIG referred to the Office of the
Attorney General – Criminal Division. These referrals do not mean that a
criminal act has actually occurred or that criminal charges will be filed.
During our audit, we determined the status of one of the five findings contained in
our preceding audit report of MHA dated September 18, 2014. We determined
that BHA satisfactorily addressed this finding. The remaining four findings from
that report related to the activities of the Administrative Service Organization and
were reviewed during our recent audit of MDH – Medical Care Programs
Administration and commented upon in the related audit report dated August 18,
2017. The preceding audit report of ADAA dated October 7, 2014 did not contain
any findings.
MDH’s response to this audit, on behalf of BHA, is included as an appendix to
this report. We reviewed the response and noted general agreement to our
findings and related recommendations, and we will advise the Joint Audit and
Evaluation Committee of any outstanding issues that we cannot resolve with
MDH.
2

--- Page 6 ---
Table of Contents
Background Information 5
Agency Creation and Responsibilities 5
Questionable Interagency Agreements 5
Questionable Opioid Operational Command Center Grant Activity 7
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report 7
Findings and Recommendations 8
Mental Health and Substance Use Disorder Grants
Finding 1 – The Behavioral Health Administration (BHA) did not 9
adequately monitor grantees to verify actual performance as required
by the grant agreements. In addition, BHA’s monitoring of the
grantees did not ensure that the required mental health and substance
use disorder services were provided to clients.
Problem Gambling Program
Finding 2 – BHA did not adequately monitor a State university 10
administering a problem gambling program on behalf of BHA to
ensure the required public awareness services were provided.
Care Management Services
Finding 3 – BHA did not monitor the State vendor responsible for 12
providing care management services to children with intensive needs
and did not ensure payments to the vendor were proper.
Prescription Drug Monitoring Program
Finding 4 – BHA did not ensure that an external third party properly 13
safeguarded sensitive client data including protected health
information and personally identifiable information.
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology 15
Agency Response Appendix
4

--- Page 7 ---
Background Information
Agency Creation and Responsibilities
Chapter 460, Laws of Maryland 2014, effective July 1, 2014, merged the Mental
Hygiene Administration (MHA) and the Alcohol and Drug Abuse Administration
(ADAA) to create the Behavioral Health Administration (BHA) within the
Maryland Department of Health (MDH). In addition, effective January 1, 2015,
MDH implemented a new integrated Public Behavioral Health System.
As a result, certain functions previously performed by MHA are now performed
by MDH – Medical Care Programs Administration (MCPA). Specifically, MCPA
now monitors and accounts for activities of the Administrative Service
Organization (ASO) that is responsible for the authorization of behavioral health
services, data collection, claims submission, and the payment of claims.
Accordingly, activities of the ASO since January 1, 2015 were excluded from this
audit and are included in our audits of MCPA.
BHA operates the Public Behavioral Health System to provide mental health and
substance-related disorder services to the citizens of Maryland. BHA is
responsible for developing, regulating, promoting, and monitoring treatment and
rehabilitation services for individuals with mental health and substance-related
disorders (including drug, alcohol, and gambling addictions). BHA also provides
grants, education, training, data collection, and research related to these disorders.
These services are delivered through private community-based providers (profit
and non-profit), local health department clinics, and State operated facilities.
According to the State’s records, BHA’s expenditures, which were primarily for
mental health and substance-related disorder programs and services, totaled
approximately $359 million during fiscal year 2017 (mainly funded by State and
federal funds).
Questionable Interagency Agreements
During our audit fieldwork, MDH’s Office of Inspector General (OIG) received
allegations of questionable activity on interagency agreements between BHA and
two Core Service Agencies (CSAs). CSAs are designated county or multi-county
authorities, such as a local health department or private contractor, responsible for
planning, managing, and monitoring certain publicly funded mental health
services. The OIG conducted a review of the allegations and issued a report with
its findings on June 29, 2018. We obtained and reviewed a copy of the report.
The report disclosed that BHA may have circumvented State personnel and
procurement regulations by directing the CSAs to hire specific individuals and to
5

--- Page 8 ---
obtain certain information technology services from a firm, without any
competitive procurement.
Specifically, the report disclosed that BHA directed the CSAs to hire as many as
13 individuals as independent consultants at a cost of approximately $2.6 million
in fiscal year 2018. These individuals were former BHA employees (some of
whom were retired from State service) or had been previously associated with
BHA through other contractual or regulatory relationships. BHA chose the
individuals to be hired by the CSAs and specified their compensation. No
recognized procurement procedures were followed. In addition, the individuals
performed work directly for BHA with no oversight or involvement by CSA
management. As such, the role of the CSAs was limited to paying these
individuals and recovering the related costs from BHA. BHA also directed both
CSAs to procure an information technology and consulting contract from a
designated firm without any competitive procurement process. The CSAs
awarded this firm $1.5 million in contracts in fiscal 2018 to provide services
directly to BHA.
We also reviewed BHA’s formal response to the OIG’s report and noted that
BHA disagreed with the OIG’s findings and conclusions and asserted that the
CSAs had the authority to procure services in accordance with their respective
policies and procedures. BHA also disagreed that the hiring of former employees
or individuals with a relationship with BHA posed a conflict as nothing precluded
these individuals from applying to work at the CSAs. Furthermore, the BHA
response indicated that it found no issue with these individuals providing services
to BHA, because the CSAs function under the Secretary of Health’s authority.
Finally, BHA disagreed with the characterization of the agreements with the
CSAs as being interagency in nature, but contended they were grant agreements.
However, the BHA response did not appear to address the key elements of the
OIG findings, which were that BHA directed the CSAs to hire these specific
individuals (and also established their compensation), who then provided services
to BHA and not the CSAs, and that there was no evidence of a competitive
procurement process.
Because of the questionable nature of this activity, the OIG referred these matters
to the Office of the Attorney General – Criminal Division. A referral to the
Division does not mean that a criminal act has actually occurred or that criminal
charges will be filed.
BHA subsequently advised us that it will take certain actions to address a number
of the findings in the OIG report and implement a related corrective action plan.
Furthermore, BHA agreed there was the appearance of impropriety.
6

--- Page 9 ---
Questionable Opioid Operational Command Center Grant
Activity
A Governor’s Executive Order, effective January 24, 2017 established the Opioid
Operational Command Center (OOCC) within the Inter-Agency Heroin and
Opioid Coordinating Council. The purpose of OOCC is to bring opioid response
partners together to identify challenges, establish system-wide priorities, and
capitalize on opportunities for collaboration. MDH was appropriated $500,000,
$10.5 million, and $16.2 million during fiscal years 2017, 2018, and 2019,
respectively, for the OOCC. The funds were to be used for grants for crisis
response services, expansion of alternatives to incarceration, enforcement
activities to dismantle drug trafficking organizations, and education and outreach
efforts. MDH directed the funds to BHA to administer the grants via the CSAs.
During our current audit, certain concerns with the use of OOCC grant funds were
brought to the attention of MDH’s OIG. The OIG initiated an investigation into
these concerns which identified certain questionable activity that has been
referred to the Office of Attorney General – Criminal Division. A referral to the
Division does not mean that a criminal act has actually occurred or that criminal
charges will be filed. As a result of these concerns and the nature of certain
activity, we will be conducting an audit of the OOCC and issuing a separate
report on the results of our review.
Status of Findings from Preceding Audit Report
Our audit included a review to determine the status of one of the five findings
contained in our preceding audit report of MHA dated September 18, 2014. We
determined that BHA satisfactorily addressed this finding. The remaining four
findings from that report related to the activities of the Administrative Service
Organization and were reviewed during our most recent audit of MCPA, the
status of which was included in our audit report dated August 18, 2017. The
preceding audit report of ADAA dated October 7, 2014 did not contain any
findings.
7

--- Page 10 ---
Findings and Recommendations
Mental Health and Substance Use Disorder Grants
Background
On an annual basis, the Behavioral Health Administration (BHA) funds Core
Service Agencies (CSAs) to provide mental health services and Local Addiction
Authorities (LAAs) to provide substance use disorder (SUD) services in each
jurisdiction across the State. CSAs are designated county or multi-county
authorities, such as local health departments or private contractors, responsible for
planning, managing, and monitoring certain publicly funded mental health
services. Similarly, LAAs are designated county or multicounty authorities that
are responsible for planning, managing, and monitoring publicly funded SUD
services. Certain jurisdictions have consolidated the functions of the CSAs and
LAAs into Local Behavioral Health Authorities (LBHAs).
The CSAs, LAAs, and LBHAs submit annual grant funding proposals to BHA
which include performance measures such as the estimated number of clients to
be served. BHA uses these estimated performance measures to determine the
grant amount awarded to each entity. According to BHA’s records, during fiscal
year 2017, BHA awarded approximately $96.3 million in mental health grants to
26 entities and $109.3 million in SUD grants to 27 entities.
The BHA grant agreements with the CSAs, LAAs, and LBHAs, as well as BHA
policy, permit the subcontracting of certain services to vendors. BHA policy
further requires that these entities ensure that any subcontracted services meet all
of the conditions of the original grant agreements and that the vendors are
monitored (such as via site visits) to ensure they are satisfactorily performing the
required services. Consequently, BHA conducts annual reviews of the CSAs,
LAAs, and LBHAs, which are designed to ensure compliance with the terms of
the grant agreements and related performance measures. In addition, the CSAs,
LAAs, and LBHAs are to conduct annual reviews of their subcontractor vendors
to ensure compliance with the terms of their contracts.
8

--- Page 11 ---
Finding 1
BHA did not adequately monitor the CSAs, LAAs, and LBHAs to verify
actual performance as required by the grant agreements. In addition, BHA’s
monitoring of the grantees did not ensure that the required mental health
and SUD services were provided to clients.
Analysis
BHA did not verify performance measures reported by CSAs, LAAs, and LBHAs,
and did not recover or adjust grant funds when grantees failed to meet established
performance measures. In addition, BHA did not adequately monitor the grantees
and the grantees’ monitoring of their subcontractor vendors, to ensure the required
services were provided to clients.
 Although grantees were required to submit annual reports of actual
performance (such as the number of clients served), BHA could not document
that it reviewed these reports or verified the accuracy of the information
reported. In addition, BHA did not recover or adjust funds when these entities
reported that they did not meet the performance measures established in the
annual grant agreements. For example, BHA did not attempt to recover funds
from one LBHA that was awarded $3.4 million in fiscal year 2017 grants, but
only served 7,663 of the estimated 12,046 clients (or 64 percent) included in
its grant funding proposal. Based on our calculations, BHA could have
potentially recovered $1.2 million of the funds paid to this LBHA. BHA also
did not consider this information when approving the $3.5 million fiscal year
2018 grant to this LBHA which included a similar number of clients to be
served. According to MDH’s Local Health Department Funding System
Manual, a grantee’s failure to comply with approved performance measures
may result in a reduction in funding.
 BHA did not adequately monitor SUD and mental health grantees, and their
subcontractor vendors, to ensure that the services specified in their clients’
individual treatment plans were provided.
For SUD grants, BHA conducted annual site visits of the programs being
operated directly by an LAA and LBHA, and the LAAs or LBHAs conducted
site visits of programs operated by their vendors. However, the
documentation of these various site visits did not include any information
about whether services were provided to clients in accordance with the related
treatment plans. Rather, the documentation generally addressed
grantee/vendor compliance with certain State and federal requirements (such
as, compliance with drug-free workplace requirements). As a result, there was
a lack of assurance that clients obtained all the required services. In this
9

--- Page 12 ---
regard, our test of 20 clients who received services from 5 vendors under one
LBHA during fiscal year 2017 disclosed that, for 3 clients, the LBHA had no
documentation to support that required services under the related grant (such
as group therapy), valued at $12,200, were received.
For mental health grants, BHA did not ensure that CSAs and LBHAs
conducted the required monitoring of subcontractors to ensure client services
were being provided by those vendors. In this regard, our test of the
monitoring conducted by one CSA and one LBHA of 10 vendors awarded
contracts totaling approximately $4.5 million during fiscal year 2017,
disclosed there was no documentation of any site visits by these two entities to
3 vendors awarded contracts totaling $986,113. These 3 vendors were to
provide a variety of services including conferences and training, and client
support visits. A site visit for one of these vendors was subsequently
conducted after our review.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that BHA
a. verify the annual performance reported by grantees and recover or
adjust funds when they fail to meet established performance measures,
including those noted above; and
b. ensure that all site visits of grantees and subcontractor vendors are
performed and documented, including ensuring that the grantees and
vendors provided the required SUD and mental health services to clients.
Problem Gambling Program
Finding 2
BHA did not adequately monitor a State university administering a problem
gambling program on behalf of BHA to ensure the required public
awareness services were provided.
Analysis
BHA did not adequately monitor the State university administering a problem
gambling program on behalf of BHA to ensure the required public awareness
services were provided. During our audit, we noted that BHA was monitoring the
training and treatment programs provided; however, BHA did not adequately
monitor the university’s public awareness efforts.
Since July 2012, a State university has administered a center on behalf of BHA
which, until July 2015, was primarily focused on researching and developing
10

--- Page 13 ---
programs for problem gambling. BHA entered into a three-year memorandum of
understanding (MOU) totaling approximately $6.5 million with the university,
effective July 2015, to expand and enhance the center by implementing enhanced
problem gambling initiatives. These initiatives included public awareness,
training, and treatment programs.
 BHA did not ensure that the center was effectively administering its website,
which was one of its primary sources of public outreach and provided access
to the center’s problem gambling programs. For example, neither BHA nor
the center obtained a copy of the website renewal policy and, therefore,
neither was aware that the website was due for renewal in May 2018, which
allowed the website domain to lapse. In this regard on May 17, 2018, we
accessed the center’s website and noted that it was populated with information
promoting travel and casinos in Las Vegas, Nevada, rather than with
information about problem gambling programs and resources. BHA was
unaware that the website was not functioning until we brought this to its
attention. BHA personnel then contacted the center, which took corrective
action to restore the website to its proper form. We subsequently determined
that the website was not functioning for a total of 10 days.
According to the center’s annual report, the website had approximately
160,000 visits during fiscal year 2017, and callers into the center’s helpline
reported that the website was one of the main sources of information about
problem gambling and resources for getting help and finding treatment.
 BHA reimbursed the center for the cost of a statewide media campaign
(including television and radio commercials) as reflected on invoices but did
not obtain and review documentation to ensure the media campaigns actually
occurred. In December 2017, BHA paid the center $868,480 for a public
awareness campaign, which was to include advertising spots on radio,
television, and social media during the period between June 2017 and June
2018. However, neither BHA nor the center could provide us with
documentation to identify the actual advertising efforts undertaken or how the
funds were spent on advertising (for example, actual commercials placed on
specific media outlets).
Recommendation 2
We recommend that BHA monitor the State university administering the
problem gambling program to ensure
a. the website is properly administered in accordance with the MOU, and
b. all media services invoiced were provided.
11

--- Page 14 ---
Care Management Services
Finding 3
BHA did not monitor the State vendor responsible for providing care
management services to children with intensive needs and did not ensure
payments to the vendor were proper.
Analysis
BHA had not established a process to monitor the State vendor responsible for
providing care management services to children with intensive needs and did not
ensure payments to the vendor were proper. The vendor was to provide
coordination of care services to children Statewide using a network of providers,
and to provide assessments and community support services. The contract was
procured in 2014 by the Governor’s Office for Children (GOC), which
administered the contract until September 30, 2015. On October 1, 2015, GOC
entered into an agreement with BHA, for BHA to assume responsibility for
administering the remaining nine months of the contract ending June 30 2016.
BHA was responsible for monitoring and paying the vendor, for which GOC
would reimburse BHA up to $2,875,000, which included $300,000 for BHA’s
contract administration costs.
 BHA did not adequately monitor the vendor to ensure that required services
were being provided. For example, BHA did not ensure the vendor had the
required weekly phone contact with each child which was used to monitor the
effectiveness of the services provided and to obtain feedback on the care. In
its September 2015 monitoring report, GOC noted that the vendor lacked
documentation of the required phone contact for 18 of the 22 records tested;
however, BHA did not perform similar monitoring or follow up on GOC’s
findings. In addition, an independent third-party report for July 2015 noted
that only 143 children (68 percent) had a Child and Adolescent Needs and
Strengths assessment completed by the vendor within 30 days of their
enrollment as required. We found that BHA did not conduct any vendor site
visits or otherwise follow up on this finding after assuming administrative
responsibility for the contract.
 During its period as contract administrator, BHA paid the vendor without
obtaining adequate documentation to support the amounts billed. BHA paid
the vendor $2,875,000, consisting of $2,022,000 for care coordination and
$853,000 for discretionary payments. Regarding the care coordination, the
vendor was to be paid monthly based on an approved rate per child served.
However, invoices totaling $1,147,000 did not include any details to enable
BHA to verify the amounts invoiced, such as how many children were served,
12

--- Page 15 ---
the duration of those services, and the names of those served. While the
remaining care coordination billings included how many children were served
and the duration of those services, the billings did not include the names of
those served. In regard to the discretionary payments, BHA did not obtain
any documentation to support how the funds were spent. Rather, the invoice
included a single charge for this payment with no explanation or details of the
services provided.
Finally, BHA paid the vendor $300,000 more than was stipulated in its GOC
agreement. The agreement between GOC and BHA included $2,575,000 for
vendor payments and $300,000 to compensate BHA for its contract
administration costs. However, BHA did not recover any administrative
charges from GOC but, rather, paid the entire $2,875,000 to the vendor. As
previously noted, these payments included $853,000 in unidentified
discretionary payments.
Recommendation 3
We recommend that BHA
a. for the aforementioned contract, obtain sufficient documentation to
support amounts invoiced, including those noted above, and recover any
improper or unsupported payments;
b. for any future contracts, establish procedures to adequately monitor
vendors to ensure services and deliverables are provided in accordance
with the contract, including periodic site visits and obtaining and
reviewing required reports, as applicable; and
c. comply with the terms of any future agreements.
Prescription Drug Monitoring Program
Finding 4
BHA did not ensure that an external third party properly safeguarded
sensitive client data including protected health information (PHI) and
personally identifiable information (PII).
Analysis
BHA did not ensure that an external third party properly safeguarded sensitive
client data including PHI and PII. BHA collects data from pharmacies and
healthcare practitioners under the Prescription Drug Monitoring Program (PDMP)
including client names, dates of birth, and certain information related to
prescribed controlled dangerous substances (CDS) dispensed to patients in
Maryland. Access to PDMP data is available to health practitioners, pharmacists,
13

--- Page 16 ---
and others with respect to their patients to promote the safe and effective use of
these prescription drugs.
BHA has a memorandum of understanding (MOU) with the National Association
of Boards of Pharmacy (NABP) to share PDMP data with other states to help
reduce the non-medical use and abuse of CDS. The NABP further contracted
with a third party to compile these data to facilitate the exchange of information
between the states. Our review disclosed that BHA’s MOU with NABP did not
require this third-party contractor to obtain independent security reviews to ensure
these sensitive data are properly safeguarded.
The American Institute of Certified Public Accountants has issued guidance
concerning examinations of service organizations. Based on this guidance,
customers, such as BHA, may obtain from service organizations an independent
auditor’s report referred to as a System and Organization Controls (SOC) for
Service Organizations report. There are several types of SOC reports, with
varying scopes and levels of review and auditor testing. One type of report,
referred to as a SOC 2 Type 2 report, includes the results of the auditor’s review
of controls placed in operation and tests of operating effectiveness for the period
under review and could include an evaluation of system security, availability of
data, processing integrity, confidentiality of data, and privacy of data.
In response to our inquiries, BHA was informed that the third-party contractor
had obtained a Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA)
Security Rule Compliance Assessment dated December 13, 2017, as well as a
SOC 2 Type 2 report. BHA subsequently obtained the HIPPA report which stated
that the design and effectiveness of the control environment appropriately
maintains the confidentiality, integrity, and availability of PHI data. However, as
of August 30, 2018, BHA had not obtained the SOC 2 Type 2 report, which is a
more comprehensive review. Consequently, there was a lack of assurance that
there were adequate controls to secure sensitive client data.
Recommendation 4
We recommend that BHA obtain and review the annual SOC 2 Type 2 report
of the third-party contractor to ensure that the related independent review
adequately addresses critical security concerns and that the contractor
implements all critical report recommendations.
14

--- Page 17 ---
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the Behavioral Health
Administration (BHA), a unit of the Maryland Department of Health (MDH), for
the period beginning July 1, 2014 and ending November 12, 2017. Chapter 460,
Laws of Maryland 2014, effective July 1, 2014, created BHA by merging the
former Mental Hygiene Administration (MHA) and the former Alcohol and Drug
Abuse Administration (ADAA). Our audit included the activities of MHA from
October 8, 2013 through June 30, 2014 covering the period since its preceding
audit. The preceding audit of ADAA covered its activities through June 30, 2014.
The audit was conducted in accordance with generally accepted government
auditing standards. Those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to
obtain sufficient, appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our
findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives. We believe that the
evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions
based on our audit objectives.
As prescribed by the State Government Article, Section 2-1221 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, the objectives of this audit were to examine BHA’s financial
transactions, records, and internal control, and to evaluate its compliance with
applicable State laws, rules, and regulations.
In planning and conducting our audit, we focused on the major financial-related
areas of operations based on assessments of significance and risk. The areas
addressed by the audit included cash receipts, contracts, grants, and the
Prescription Drug Monitoring Program. We also determined the status of one
finding contained in our preceding audit report of MHA; the remaining findings
contained in the MHA report were reviewed during our audit of the Medical Care
Programs Administration dated August 18, 2017. The preceding audit report of
ADAA did not contain any findings.
Our audit did not include certain support services provided to BHA by MDH.
These support services (such as payroll, purchasing, maintenance of accounting
records, and related fiscal functions) are included within the scope of our audit of
MDH’s Office of the Secretary and Other Units.
To accomplish our objectives, our audit procedures included inquiries of
appropriate personnel, inspections of documents and records, observations of
BHA’s operations, and tests of transactions. Generally, transactions were selected
for testing based on auditor judgment, which primarily considers risk. Unless
otherwise specifically indicated, neither statistical nor non-statistical audit
15

--- Page 18 ---
sampling was used to select the transactions tested. Therefore, the results of the
tests cannot be used to project those results to the entire population from which
the test items were selected.
We also performed various data extracts of pertinent information from the State’s
Financial Management Information System (such as expenditure data). The
extracts are performed as part of ongoing internal processes established by the
Office of Legislative Audits and were subject to various tests to determine data
reliability. We determined that the data extracted from this source were
sufficiently reliable for the purposes the data were used during this audit. Finally,
we performed other auditing procedures that we considered necessary to achieve
our objectives. The reliability of data used in this report for background or
informational purposes was not assessed.
BHA’s management is responsible for establishing and maintaining effective
internal control. Internal control is a process designed to provide reasonable
assurance that objectives pertaining to the reliability of financial records;
effectiveness and efficiency of operations including safeguarding of assets; and
compliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations are achieved.
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate.
Our reports are designed to assist the Maryland General Assembly in exercising
its legislative oversight function and to provide constructive recommendations for
improving State operations. As a result, our reports generally do not address
activities we reviewed that are functioning properly.
This report includes findings relating to conditions that we consider to be
significant deficiencies in the design or operation of internal control that could
adversely affect BHA’s ability to maintain reliable financial records, operate
effectively and efficiently, and/or comply with applicable laws, rules, and
regulations. Our report also includes findings regarding significant instances of
noncompliance with applicable laws, rules, or regulations. Other less significant
findings were communicated to BHA that did not warrant inclusion in this report.
The response from MDH, on behalf of BHA, to our findings and
recommendations is included as an appendix to this report. As prescribed in the
State Government Article, Section 2-1224 of the Annotated Code of Maryland,
we will advise MDH regarding the results of our review of its response.
16

--- Page 20 ---
Maryland Department of Health
Behavioral Health Administration
Agency Response Form
Mental Health and Substance Use Disorder Grants
Finding 1
BHA did not adequately monitor the CSAs, LAAs, and LBHAs to verify actual
performance as required by the grant agreements. In addition, BHA’s monitoring of the
grantees did not ensure that the required mental health and SUD services were provided to
clients.
We recommend that BHA
a. verify the annual performance reported by grantees and recover or adjust funds when
they fail to meet established performance measures, including those noted above; and
b. ensure that all site visits of grantees and subcontractor vendors are performed and
documented, including ensuring that the grantees and vendors provided the required
SUD and mental health services to clients.
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 1a Agree Estimated Completion Date: 7/1/2020
Please provide details of BHA Leadership will ensure that personnel can conduct effective
corrective action or oversight by introducing and training relevant staff, supervisors, and
explain disagreement. managers on policies and procedures.
Recommendation 1b Agree Estimated Completion Date: 7/1/2020
Please provide details of BHA Leadership will ensure that personnel have the appropriate
corrective action or training, processes, authority, and resources to conduct effective
explain disagreement. oversight through site visits.
Page 1 of 4

--- Page 21 ---
Maryland Department of Health
Behavioral Health Administration
Agency Response Form
Problem Gambling Program
Finding 2
BHA did not adequately monitor a State university administering a problem gambling
program on behalf of BHA to ensure the required public awareness services were provided.
We recommend that BHA monitor the State university administering the problem
gambling program to ensure
a. the website is properly administered in accordance with the MOU, and
b. all media services invoiced were provided.
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 2a Agree Estimated Completion Date: 8/30/2019
Please provide details of BHA will improve monitoring and oversight of contract deliverables by
corrective action or clearing up the reporting structure and role of Department employees in
explain disagreement. the oversight process.
Recommendation 2b Agree Estimated Completion Date: 8/30/2019
Please provide details of BHA staff will ensure that media services invoices are provided and
corrective action or reviewed appropriately through supervision and training.
explain disagreement.
Page 2 of 4

--- Page 22 ---
Maryland Department of Health
Behavioral Health Administration
Agency Response Form
Care Management Services
Finding 3
BHA did not monitor the State vendor responsible for providing care management services
to children with intensive needs and did not ensure payments to the vendor were proper.
We recommend that BHA
a. for the aforementioned contract, obtain sufficient documentation to support amounts
invoiced, including those noted above, and recover any improper or unsupported
payments;
b. for any future contracts, establish procedures to adequately monitor vendors to ensure
services and deliverables are provided in accordance with the contract, including
periodic site visits and obtaining and reviewing required reports, as applicable; and
c. comply with the terms of any future agreements.
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide BHA respectfully notes, in reference to the administration costs
additional comments as associated with the contract, that the language of one contract involved
deemed necessary. did not reflect the intent of the parties, and that further changes would
have caused loss of services for the target population.
Recommendation 3a Agree Estimated Completion Date: 1/1/2020
Please provide details of BHA Staff will obtain and review the documentation regarding the
corrective action or invoices and recover payments as appropriate.
explain disagreement.
Recommendation 3b Agree Estimated Completion Date: 1/1/2020
Please provide details of BHA Leadership is currently updating process and procedures to ensure
corrective action or that staff maintain adequate controls and monitoring of any agreements
explain disagreement. with vendors and the required deliverables.
Recommendation 3c Agree Estimated Completion Date: 1/1/2020
Please provide details of BHA Leadership and staff will ensure that adequate oversight and
corrective action or review of deliverables is reinforced through regular training and
explain disagreement. supervisor review.
Page 3 of 4

--- Page 23 ---
Maryland Department of Health
Behavioral Health Administration
Agency Response Form
Prescription Drug Monitoring Program
Finding 4
BHA did not ensure that an external third party properly safeguarded sensitive client data
including protected health information (PHI) and personally identifiable information (PII).
We recommend that BHA obtain and review the annual SOC 2 Type 2 report of the third-
party contractor to ensure that the related independent review adequately addresses critical
security concerns and that the contractor implements all critical report recommendations.
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 4 Agree Estimated Completion Date: 10/1/2019
Please provide details of MDH will annually obtain and review SOC 2 Type 2 reports for the third
corrective action or party-contractor. For any weaknesses noted in the report, MDH will
explain disagreement. ensure that the necessary corrective action is taken.
Page 4 of 4

--- Page 24 ---
A
UDIT
T
EAM
Joshua S. Adler, CPA, CFE
Audit Manager
James M. Fowler
Senior Auditor
Sporthi J. Carnelio
Samuel Hur, CPA
Staff Auditors