Title: Allegany County Public Schools
Date: 07/12/2019
Type: Local School Systems
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5d2df86da1ce5813b4b507b5
Extracted: 2025-06-19T06:16:30.252195
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Financial Management Practices Audit Report
Allegany County Public Schools
July 2019
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Senator Craig J. Zucker (Senate Chair) Delegate Shelly L. Hettleman (House Chair)
Senator Adelaide C. Eckardt Delegate Steven J. Arentz
Senator George C. Edwards Delegate Andrew P. Cassilly
Senator Guy J. Guzzone Delegate Mark S. Chang
Senator Katie Fry Hester Delegate Keith E. Haynes
Senator Cheryl C. Kagan Delegate Michael A. Jackson
Senator Benjamin F. Kramer Delegate David Moon
Senator Cory V. McCray Delegate April R. Rose
Senator Douglas J.J. Peters Delegate Geraldine Valentino-Smith
Senator Justin D. Ready Delegate Karen Lewis Young
To Obtain Further Information
Office of Legislative Audits
301 West Preston Street, Room 1202
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Phone: 410-946-5900 · 301-970-5900 · 1-877-486-9964 (Toll Free in Maryland)
Maryland Relay: 711
TTY: 410-946-5401 · 301-970-5401
E-mail: OLAWebmaster@ola.state.md.us
Website: www.ola.state.md.us
To Report Fraud
The Office of Legislative Audits operates a Fraud Hotline to report fraud, waste, or abuse involving
State of Maryland government resources. Reports of fraud, waste, or abuse may be communicated
anonymously by a toll-free call to 1-877-FRAUD-11, by mail to the Fraud Hotline, c/o Office of
Legislative Audits, or through the Office’s website.
Nondiscrimination Statement
The Department of Legislative Services does not discriminate on the basis of age, ancestry, color,
creed, marital status, national origin, race, religion, gender, gender identity, sexual orientation, or
disability in the admission or access to its programs, services, or activities. The Department’s
Information Officer has been designated to coordinate compliance with the nondiscrimination
requirements contained in Section 35.107 of the United States Department of Justice Regulations.
Requests for assistance should be directed to the Information Officer at 410-946-5400 or 410-970-
5400.

--- Page 4 ---
independent documented supervisory review of critical personnel and payroll
transactions processed was not performed. Furthermore, equipment record
keeping practices and controls were not comprehensive. For example,
equipment policies did not include requirements for investigating physical
inventory discrepancies, or separating the duties of equipment custody,
performing physical inventories, and recordkeeping.
We also found that significant risks existed within the ACPS computer systems
and network. For example, ACPS lacked assurance that adequate information
technology security and operational controls existed over its financial and
student information systems, which were hosted, operated, and maintained
by service providers. In addition, certain publicly accessible servers were
improperly located within the internal network, and intrusion detection
prevention system coverage was not adequate or complete. Furthermore,
certain computer workstations had not been updated with the latest releases
for software products that were known to have significant security-related
software vulnerabilities or were lacking malware protection.
We also determined that ACPS could not ensure its methodology for
determining payments to its bus contractors resulted in the best value. For
example, we estimated that payments to bus contractors for the purchase
price and investment return of private buses could have been up to $857,000
more than necessarily prudent based on recommended rates of return by past
studies by the State and a consultant for another Maryland school system. In
addition, the basis for certain payments to bus contractors for bus
maintenance and operation costs were not documented nor supported by
industry standards. Finally, a system-wide route analysis was not periodically
performed and we found through testing that ridership on certain routes was
lower than bus capacities.
Finally, based on our current audit assessment of significance and risk to our
audit objectives, our audit included a review to determine the status of 18 of
the 19 findings contained in our preceding audit report. We determined that
ACPS satisfactorily addressed 12 of these findings. The remaining 6 findings
are repeated in this report.
ACPS’ response to this audit is included as an appendix to this report. We
reviewed the response and noted general agreement to our findings and
related recommendations, and we will advise the Joint Audit and Evaluation
Committee of any outstanding issues that we cannot resolve with ACPS. In
accordance with our policy, we have redacted the names of any private
companies or products mentioned by ACPS in this document.
2

--- Page 6 ---
Table of Contents
Background Information 6
Statistical Overview 6
Oversight 7
External Audits 7
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report 7
Findings and Recommendations 9
Revenue and Billing Cycle 9
Federal Funds 10
Procurement and Disbursement Cycle
 Finding 1 – Allegany County Public Schools (ACPS) did not adequately 11
restrict users’ capabilities in its automated procurement and
accounts payable system and certain transactions were not subject
to independent review or supported by required documents.
Finding 2 – ACPS did not assess the benefits of using an 13
intergovernmental cooperative purchasing agreement (ICPA), nor
did it ensure that the ICPA contract was awarded through a
competitive procurement process as required by State law.
 Finding 3 – Contracts were not always properly procured in accordance 14
with established procurement policy or applicable State law.
Finding 4 – ACPS did not execute a contract modification with its 16
automated student information system vendor for cloud hosting
and data back-up services, which resulted in a lack of contract
provisions to protect its interests.
Human Resources and Payroll
 Finding 5 – ACPS did not ensure employee access to human 17
resources and payroll systems was appropriate and adequately
controlled.
 Denotes item repeated in full or part from preceding audit report
4

--- Page 7 ---
Equipment Control and Accountability
 Finding 6 – ACPS had not established comprehensive equipment 19
policies, adequate record keeping practices, and controls
over equipment.
Information Technology
Finding 7 – ACPS lacked assurance that adequate information 21
technology security and operational controls existed over its
financial and student information systems, which were hosted,
operated, and maintained by service providers.
 Finding 8 – Certain publicly accessible servers were improperly 22
located within the internal network, intrusion detection prevention
system coverage was not adequate or complete, and ACPS network
resources were not secured against improper access from students
using either ACPS owned or their personal devices.
Finding 9 – Certain ACPS computer workstations were running 24
outdated software or lacking malware protection software.
Facilities Construction, Renovation, and Maintenance 25
Transportation Services
 Finding 10 – ACPS had not implemented certain practices to promote 26
more efficient use of bus operations.
Finding 11 – Certain elements used to determine payments to bus 27
contractors did not reflect market conditions, actual costs, or
were not properly documented.
Food Services 29
School Board Operations 30
Management of Other Risks 30
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology 32
Agency Response Appendix
* Denotes item repeated in full or part from preceding audit report
5

--- Page 8 ---
Background Information
Statistical Overview
According to student enrollment records compiled by the Maryland State
Department of Education (MSDE), Allegany County Public Schools (ACPS)
ranks 16th in student enrollment among the 24 public school systems in
Maryland. Fiscal year 2018 full-time student enrollment was 8,702 students.
ACPS has 21 schools, consisting of 13 elementary, 4 middle schools, 3 high
schools, and 1 career and technical school.
According to ACPS’ fiscal year 2017 audited financial statements, revenues
and expenditures were approximately $158 million and $148 million,
respectively. The largest expenditure category was salaries and wages,
including benefits, which accounted for 69 percent of total expenditures
during fiscal year 2017. See the chart below for ACPS’ expenditures by
category in fiscal year 2017 according to its audited financial statements.
According to MSDE records, during the 2016-2017 school year, ACPS had
1,188 full-time equivalent positions, which consisted of 845 instructional and
343 non-instructional employees.
__________________________________________________________________
ACPS Expenditures by Category and Selected Statistical Data
Fiscal Year 2017
(amounts in thousands)
__________________________________________________________________
Source: ACPS’ Fiscal Year 2017 Audited Financial Statements and MSDE Data
6

--- Page 9 ---
Oversight
ACPS is governed by a local school board, consisting of five elected voting
members and a non-voting student member. The State and the Allegany
County government provide the vast majority of ACPS funding. In addition,
MSDE exercises considerable oversight through the establishment and
monitoring of various financial and academic policies and regulations, in
accordance with certain provisions of the Annotated Code of Maryland. MSDE
also works with ACPS to comply with the requirements and mandates of
federal law. The Allegany County government exercises authority over ACPS
primarily through the review and approval of ACPS’ annual operating and
capital budgets.
External Audits
ACPS engages a certified public accounting firm to independently audit its
annual financial statements. Additionally, the auditor conducts what is
referred to as a Single Audit of ACPS’ federal grant programs (as required by
federal regulations). We reviewed the resulting financial statement audit and
Single Audit reports for fiscal years 2015 through 2017, and examined the
related work papers for fiscal year 2017, which were the latest available at
the time we performed our audit fieldwork.
There were similarities between the work of the independent certified public
accounting firm that audited ACPS’ financial statements and conducted the
Single Audit, and the risks and scope of our audit in certain areas. As a result,
we reduced the scope of our audit work related to State and local government
revenues received via wire transfer, accounts receivable, and federal grant
activity.
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report
Based on our current audit assessment of significance and risk to our audit
objectives, our audit included a review to determine the status of 18 of the 19
findings contained in our preceding audit report dated January 29, 2013. We
determined that ACPS satisfactorily addressed 12 of those findings. The
remaining 6 findings are repeated in this report as noted in the following
table.
7

--- Page 10 ---
Status of Preceding Findings
Preceding Implementation
Finding Description
Finding Status
ACPS had not processed reimbursement claims for
Medicaid-subsidized services timely and was at risk Not repeated
Finding 1
that eligible claims may not be processed by
established deadlines.
Duties for purchasing and payment processing were
Repeated
Finding 2 not properly separated and certain transactions were
(Current Finding 1)
not subject to independent review.
ACPS has not established comprehensive written
Finding 3 Not repeated
procurement policies and procedures.
ACPS did not competitively bid certain service Repeated
Finding 4
contracts. (Current Finding 3)
ACPS did not ensure the propriety of payments for
Finding 5 Not repeated
employee and retiree health care costs.
ACPS did not adequately monitor payments made for
Finding 6 Not repeated
special education services.
User access to the automated system was not properly
Repeated
Finding 7 restricted and documentation of independent reviews
(Current Finding 5)
of certain payroll transactions was lacking.
ACPS did not always obtain independent approval Repeated
Finding 8
before updating records for missing equipment. (Current Finding 6)
Security events for a critical server and database were
Finding 9 Not repeated
not properly monitored.
Application, network, and server account and
Finding 10 password controls were not sufficient to properly Not repeated
protect critical resources.
ACPS’s disaster recovery plan and program change
Finding 11 Not repeated
controls were not adequate.
Repeated
Finding 12 The ACPS network was not adequately secured.
(Current finding 8)
ACPS’ energy management program was not
Finding 13 Not repeated
sufficiently comprehensive.
ACPS does not maintain documentation of all
Finding 14 Not repeated
preventive maintenance work performed.
Certain bus contractor payment rates were either not
Finding 15 Not repeated
verified or not supported.
ACPS did not use automated routing capabilities to Repeated
Finding 16
develop more efficient routes. (Current Finding 10)
ACPS has experienced persistent deficits in its food
Finding 17 service operations, although certain actions have been Not repeated
taken to reduce the deficits.
Proper internal controls were not established over food Not repeated
Finding 18
services inventory. (Not followed up on)
The disclosure form could be improved to identify
Finding 19 Not repeated
potential conflicts of interest.
8

--- Page 11 ---
Findings and Recommendations
Revenue and Billing Cycle
Background
Allegany County Public Schools (ACPS) revenues consist primarily of funds
received from the State, Allegany County, and the federal government.
According to the ACPS audited financial statements, revenues from all
sources totaled $158.3 million during fiscal year 2017; including $113.2
million from the State. See the Chart below for ACPS’ revenue sources per
enrolled student in fiscal year 2017, according to its audited financial
statements.
_________________________________________________________________
ACPS’ Revenue Sources Per Enrolled Student
Fiscal Year 2017
_________________________________________________________________
Source: ACPS’ Fiscal Year 2017 Audited Financial Statements
In addition, schools collect funds for other purposes, such as for student
activities, clubs, and school publications. Because they are not considered
school revenue, these school activity funds are accounted for separately by
each school and reported in summary in the audited financial statements.
Although this revenue is raised through student-related activities, ACPS has a
9

--- Page 12 ---
fiduciary duty to safeguard these funds. For fiscal year 2017, school activity
fund collections totaled $2.9 million and the June 30, 2017 balance was $2.1
million.
External Audits
There were similarities between the work of the independent certified public
accounting firm that audited the ACPS financial statements and the objectives
of our audit for certain revenue activities. As a result, we reduced the scope
of our audit work related to State and local government revenues received via
wire transfer and accounts receivable, for which the auditor’s procedural
review and testing disclosed no material weaknesses or significant
deficiencies.
Reviews of School Activity Funds
The independent certified public accounting firm contracted by ACPS to
perform its annual financial audit also conducts limited reviews of the school
activity funds. These reviews consist primarily of tests of school activity fund
bank reconciliations, and receipt and disbursement transactions at selected
schools performed on a rotating basis. Our review of the firm’s findings for
fiscal year 2017 did not identify any improprieties and internal control
weaknesses identified were not prevalent.
Federal Funds
Background
ACPS receives funds pertaining to federal government programs that are
generally restricted for use for a specific program (such as the School Lunch
Program or Special Education). According to the audited Schedule of
Expenditures of Federal Awards, fiscal year 2017 expenditures totaled $9.9
million, not including federally funded fee-for-service programs such as
Medicaid reimbursement for special education services.
Single Audit Reports Disclosed No Material Weaknesses Regarding Federal
Grant Management
Due to work performed by the independent certified public accounting firm
that conducted the Single Audits of ACPS’ federal grants for fiscal years 2015
to 2017 and the objectives of our audit in this area, we reduced the scope of
our audit work related to federal grants. Besides expressing an opinion on
ACPS’ compliance with the terms of several grant programs, the auditor also
considered the existing internal control structure's impact on compliance and
audited the required Schedules of Expenditures of Federal Awards (which
includes claimed and reported grant expenditures) for fiscal years 2015 to
10

--- Page 13 ---
2017. The related reports stated that ACPS complied, in all material respects,
with the requirements applicable to its major federal programs. With respect
to internal controls over compliance with, and the operation of, major federal
programs, the firm identified significant deficiencies that were not considered
to be material weaknesses for fiscal year 2017. ACPS generally agreed to
take corrective actions to correct these deficiencies such as developing and
adopting policies and procedures for cash management and procurements
using federal grant funds.
Procurement and Disbursement Cycle
Background
According to ACPS records, non-payroll related disbursements totaled $45.5
million during fiscal year 2017. Purchase orders for goods and services are
manually prepared by the requesting department, under the signature of the
department head or principal, and sent directly to the vendor. ACPS’ written
procurement policies require that procurements over $25,000 be
competitively bid in accordance with Section 5-112 of the Education Article of
the Annotated Code of Maryland. Contracts and agreements over $25,000
are to be approved by the Superintendent or designee and the Board
approves all contracts over $1 million.
ACPS procedures require the manual comparison of invoices submitted by
vendors to the finance office to the related purchase order prior to payment.
In addition, the receipt of goods and services is to be confirmed by the
requesting department before payment processing. Payments are processed
by the finance office through an automated system that prints vendor checks
and posts the payments to the financial records.
Finding 1
ACPS did not adequately restrict users’ capabilities in its automated
procurement and accounts payable system and certain transactions were not
subjected to independent review or supported by required documents.
Analysis
ACPS did not adequately restrict users’ capabilities in its automated
procurement and accounts payable system and certain transactions were not
subjected to independent review or supported by required documents.
 Ten employees were assigned system capabilities that allowed them to
perform incompatible functions. These ten employees from three different
11

--- Page 14 ---
offices or departments could perform a number of critical accounts
payable system functions including adding a vendor, entering invoices,
and processing payments. Nine of these employees could also change a
vendor’s address and two of these employees were responsible for
printing checks that included authorized facsimile signatures.
Furthermore, ACPS did not periodically assess the appropriateness of
employee access for unnecessary or incompatible capabilities. Finally,
available transaction history reports identifying specific transactions
unilaterally processed by the above individuals were not generated for
review.
 ACPS had not established adequate controls over certain purchasing
functions to ensure that independent approvals were obtained and that all
required documents were completed. Specifically, purchase orders were
not required to be approved by individuals other than the preparer (in this
case, department heads and school principals). Consequently, there was
no process established to require an independent approval of the
propriety of purchase orders (such as, justification for the purchase). In
addition, required receiving reports were not always prepared prior to
processing invoices for payment.
Our test of 20 paid invoices totaling $316,000 disclosed that for 6 of the
20 invoices totaling $61,000, purchase orders had not been prepared,
and for the 14 purchase orders that were prepared, there was no
documentation of independent approval. In addition, for 4 of the 20
invoices totaling $45,000, ACPS was unable to provide documentation
(such as a receiving report) that the goods or services were received.
We noted that ACPS’ automated procurement and accounts payable
system did have certain features to aid in providing necessary controls,
including on-line approvals of purchase orders and recordation of receiving
reports, but these were not used.
 Changes to vendor information in the automated system were not
adequately verified. Specifically, only verbal approval from the Chief
Financial Officer was obtained by finance office staff prior to adding new
vendors to the system, and ACPS did not periodically generate a report of
new vendors added to ensure that all recorded vendor changes are
proper.
 Although ACPS had a process in place to review all checks for propriety
prior to issuance, the employees responsible for this review also had
system access capabilities that allow them to approve invoices for
12

--- Page 15 ---
payment, and notify information technology personnel to print signed
checks. Accordingly, this review was not an effective control process due
to the lack of reviewer independence.
Due to the above conditions, unauthorized purchases and disbursements
could be processed without detection. Our review did not disclose any
inappropriate transactions that were processed by employees that had
unnecessary or incompatible access. Similar conditions were commented
upon in our preceding audit report.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that ACPS strengthen its controls over procurements and
disbursements (repeat). Specifically, we recommend that ACPS
a. restrict user’s capabilities to those needed to perform their job duties, and
separate employee duties to eliminate incompatible procurement and
disbursement processing functions (repeat);
b. perform a periodic documented independent review of procurement and
disbursement system access;
c. ensure that an independent supervisory employee reviews and approves
purchase orders (repeat);
d. ensure that all required documents (for example, receiving reports) are
obtained prior to the completion of payment processing;
e. consider the use of the document approval and tracking features of the
automated procurement and accounts payable system;
f. ensure that changes to the vendor information recorded in the automated
system are verified to appropriate source documentation by an
independent employee (repeat); and
g. ensure that an independent employee conducts a documented
comparison of transactions and checks processed to the related
supporting documentation (repeat).
Finding 2
ACPS did not assess the benefits of using an intergovernmental cooperative
purchasing agreement (ICPA), nor did it ensure that the ICPA contract was
awarded through a competitive procurement process, as required by State
law.
Analysis
ACPS had not assessed the benefits of using one ICPA, nor did it ensure that
the ICPA contract was awarded through a competitive procurement process,
as required by State law. In addition, ACPS had not verified with the agency
that awarded the original contract that the ICPA was based on a competitive
13

--- Page 16 ---
procurement process. For the current contract period, which covered fiscal
years 2014 to 2018, ACPS’ payments to the ICPA vendor totaled $3.8 million.
Upon our inquiry, ACPS advised us that it had participated in this ICPA since
1998, but for the current contract period had not documented the benefits of
using the ICPA.
State law, which legal counsel to the Maryland General Assembly advised us
is applicable to local education agencies, allows the use of cooperative
purchasing arrangements or ICPAs only after the using entity has determined
in writing that the use of such arrangements will provide cost benefits,
promote administrative efficiencies, or promote intergovernmental
cooperation1. Another State law stipulates that contract bidding requirements
do not apply to a county board of education’s participation in contracts
awarded by other public agencies or intergovernmental purchasing
organizations if the lead agency for the contract follows public bidding
procedures.
Recommendation 2
We recommend that ACPS comply with State law by
a. ensuring that a written determination is prepared of the benefits of using
ICPAs and,
b. obtaining documentation that the ICPA contract was competitively
procured by the originating agency.
Finding 3
Contracts were not always properly procured in accordance with established
procurement policy or applicable State law.
Analysis
The procurement and awarding of contracts tested were not always in
accordance with ACPS’ formal procurement policy or State law. Our test of
1 Section 13-110 of the State Finance and Procurement Article, of the Annotated Code of
Maryland in part, defines an intergovernmental cooperative purchasing agreement (ICPA).
As defined, an ICPA is a contract that is entered into by at least one governmental entity in
a certain manner, that is available for use by the governmental entity entering the contract
and at least one additional governmental entity, and that is intended to promote efficiency
and savings that can result from intergovernmental cooperative purchasing. The
aforementioned law applies to all ICPAs regardless of the services, goods, or commodities
purchased. In addition, Section 5- 112(a)(3) of the Education Article, of the Code provides
that local education agencies do not need to conduct competitive procurements for goods
and commodities if they use a contract awarded by public agencies or intergovernmental
purchasing organizations and the originating procuring agency followed public bidding
procedures.
14

--- Page 17 ---
five contracts, for which ACPS’ payments to the vendors totaled $5.7 million in
fiscal years 2016 and 2017, disclosed the following:
 Competitive bidding and the related evaluation criteria were not used in
procurement of a new automated financial system with an estimated cost
of $1.1 million. During April 2015, in lieu of publicly advertising the
solicitation as required by State law, ACPS selected three vendors to
receive a solicitation to implement a new automated financial system
without documenting the basis for its decision to limit the solicitation.
Furthermore, the solicitation did not include a description of the bid
criteria that would serve as the basis for making the contract award, such
as the type of minimum technical qualifications and the impact of the
bidder’s technical and price proposals on the award decision. ACPS
awarded the contract to the vendor with the highest price proposal without
written justification of its decision. The $1.1 million contract award was
$406,000 more (56 percent) than the next highest bidder and $450,000
more (66 percent) than the lowest bidder. Further, a formal documented
assessment of the technical merits of the three proposals was not
performed. Consequently, assurance was lacking that the best value was
obtained. A similar condition was commented upon in our preceding
audit.
 ACPS did not use eMaryland Marketplace to publish bids or awards for
four contracts. ACPS’ payments to the vendors totaled a combined $4
million in fiscal years 2016 and 2017. State law requires a local school
system to publish a procurement solicitation or notice of award greater
than $25,000 on eMaryland Marketplace.
 ACPS did not obtain the Superintendent’s required approval for three
contracts for which fiscal year 2016 and 2017 payments totaled $2.3
million. Additionally, for one of these procurements, for which 2016 and
2017 payments totaled $1.7 million, the required approval of the Board
was not obtained. ACPS policy requires the Superintendent’s approval of
procurements of $25,000 or more and those of $1 million or more must
be approved by the Board.
Recommendation 3
We recommend that ACPS
a. establish and publicize the vendor bid evaluation criteria prior to soliciting
bids, and document evaluation results in support of the related contract
awards;
b. competitively bid all procurements unless adequate justification is
appropriately documented for limiting the vendors solicited (repeat);
15

--- Page 18 ---
c. comply with State procurement law by using eMaryland Marketplace; and
d. obtain required contract approvals in accordance with its policies.
Finding 4
ACPS did not execute a contract modification with its automated student
information system vendor for cloud hosting and data back-up services, which
resulted in a lack of contract provisions to protect its interests.
Analysis
ACPS did not execute a contract modification with its automated student
information system (SIS) vendor for cloud hosting and data back-up services.
Consequently, ACPS’ contract did not establish provisions for required
services, additional fees due, and needed protections and remedies for the
additional system security and operational control risks.
In July 2012, the hosting of the ACPS SIS, which includes student grades and
personally identifiable information (such as students’ social security
numbers), was transferred from an in-house server to an off-site cloud-based
environment, which was to also include data back-up services. The off-site
location vendor was the same as the vendor providing the system application
software for the in-house server. However, ACPS did not execute a contract
modification identifying the increased cost, additional security risks, and other
considerations inherent with off-site hosting and data back-up services with
the existing SIS vendor.
Information technology security and operational controls for maintaining the
data in a cloud-based environment should be implemented in accordance
with best practices2. Specifically, contract provisions should include the
frequency and location of data backups and provide for liquidated damages
for the breach or loss of data. In addition, the contract should have outlined
the specific costs associated with the additional services provided and
required an independent security assurances report such as a System
Organization Controls (SOC) report (which is discussed in greater detail in
Finding 7 below).
ACPS’ payments to the SIS vendor for system software and related services
totaled $643,000 during the period from fiscal years 2013 to 2018. These
2 The Cloud Security Alliance, a not-for-profit organization with a mission to promote the use of
best practices for providing security assurances within cloud computing, details the specific
operational and security risks over data maintained in a cloud-based environment, such as
those cited above, that need to be addressed in applicable cloud contracts.
16

--- Page 19 ---
payments included $117,000 for added cloud hosting and data back-up
services for which no formal agreement existed.
Recommendation 4
We recommend that ACPS
a. ensure that contract modifications are executed as required and specify
the services to be provided and related fees to be paid;
b. ensure that security and operational controls are established for cloud-
based hosting of automated systems and the related data, which include
ensuring protection and timely back-up of critical data, and that a
provision be made for liquidated damages in the event that the vendor
fails to adequately safeguard the ACPS data; and
c. require hosting vendors to obtain an appropriate annual SOC review and
provide a copy to ACPS.
Human Resources and Payroll
Background
Payroll expense represents the largest single cost component in the ACPS
budget. According to ACPS records, fiscal year 2017 salary, wage, and benefit
costs totaled $102.5 million, or 69 percent of the total operating
expenditures. According to Maryland State Department of Education reports,
during the 2016-2017 school year ACPS had 1,188 full-time positions, which
consisted of 845 instructional positions and 343 non-instructional positions.
ACPS uses an automated system to maintain human resources information,
process payroll, track leave usage, and process and record payroll
transactions. Employees submit attendance reports bi-weekly and leave is
recorded and adjustments are processed on the system by central payroll
personnel. The system also generates payroll checks and direct deposit
advices.
Finding 5
ACPS did not ensure employee access to human resources and payroll
systems was appropriate and adequately controlled.
Analysis
ACPS did not ensure employee access to human resources and payroll
systems was appropriate and adequately controlled.
17

--- Page 20 ---
 Employee access to automated human resources and payroll functions
was not subject to periodic supervisory review to ensure that such access
was appropriate and necessary. Our review of critical human resources
and payroll access capabilities (such as, adding employees, processing
payroll transactions) assigned to 12 ACPS employees disclosed that 2
employees who processed payroll transactions also had unnecessary
access to human resources functions. Additionally, these 2 employees
were responsible for authorizing the final release of the bi-weekly payroll.
 ACPS did not perform independent documented reviews of all critical
personnel and payroll transactions processed. Although system reports of
payroll changes processed were generated each pay period for
independent supervisory review, the review of the reports was not
documented. Additionally, the reports were not all inclusive as they
excluded employee terminations.
 ACPS did not perform an independent review of the hourly wages entered
on the system for Transportation Department employees. Specifically, an
independent employee did not review the related time sheets to verify the
accuracy of the hours worked, authorized hourly rate, and calculation of
wages paid. Further, the time sheets were not signed by either the
employee or their supervisor. Consequently, assurance was lacking that
the time worked and wages paid were proper. Transportation Department
payroll expenditures totaled approximately $970,000 in fiscal year 2017.
 ACPS did not obtain the appropriate form of supervisory approval of critical
human resources documentation to add new employees, process salary
increases, and delete employees from the payroll. Although the approval
documentation included a pre-printed signature of the Superintendent, no
other supervisory approvals were written on the form.
Our review did not disclose any inappropriate or erroneous transactions that
were processed by the employees that had unnecessary or incompatible
access. Similar conditions regarding the lack of a documented independent
review of critical human resources and payroll changes was commented upon
in our preceding audit report.
Recommendation 5
We recommend that ACPS
a. periodically (such as annually) ensure that human resources and payroll
system capabilities assigned to employees are appropriate, including
removing human resources functions unnecessarily assigned to the two
employees identified above;
18

--- Page 21 ---
b. perform a documented independent supervisory review of all critical
human resources and payroll transactions processed (including hourly
wages and terminated employees) to ensure that they are supported by
appropriate documentation (repeat); and
c. ensure the supervisory approval of critical payroll documents, such as
personnel transaction forms and time sheets, is properly documented.
Equipment Control and Accountability
Background
According to ACPS’ audited financial statements, the undepreciated value of
its capital equipment was $20 million as of June 30, 2017. ACPS maintains
centralized automated records to track equipment inventory with a cost of
$1,500 or more (including assets capitalized for financial statement
purposes). In addition, ACPS tracks equipment with a cost of less than
$1,500 deemed as sensitive that is subject to theft (such as information
technology items) using automated records for control purposes.
Finding 6
ACPS had not established comprehensive equipment policies, adequate
record keeping practices, and controls over equipment.
Analysis
ACPS had not established comprehensive written equipment policies and
procedures, adequate record keeping requirements, and controls to ensure
adequate accountability over its schools’ equipment inventory.
 ACPS equipment policies and procedures did not include requirements for
investigating and reporting lost or stolen items, or separating the duties of
equipment custody, performing physical inventories, and recordkeeping.
In addition, while policies and procedures require that all purchases of
information technology (IT) equipment be recorded in a separate database
regardless of cost, we were advised by IT personnel that only certain IT
equipment items are recorded and the basis for such decisions varied.
For example, certain items valued at less than $300 (such as, digital
cameras) were not recorded in the database. Furthermore, even though
policies specify that the disposal of capital assets valued at $3,000 or
more require written supervisory approval on a designated form, the
policies did not require written supervisory approval for all other assets.
19

--- Page 22 ---
 Entries in the equipment records for additions, disposals, and adjustments
were not verified to supporting documents by independent supervisory
personnel. For example, our test of 15 disposals of IT equipment items
(such as network servers and laptop computers) totaling $239,601,
disclosed that independent approval was not obtained for any of the
disposals and ACPS could not provide copies of the forms for the disposal
of 6 items totaling $43,024.
 The employee that was primarily responsible for receiving and recording
equipment in the inventory records also investigated missing equipment.
As a result of the deficiencies cited above, equipment could be lost or
misappropriated without detection. A similar condition regarding the lack of
independent approval of disposals was commented upon in our preceding
audit report.
Recommendation 6
We recommend that ACPS ensure
a. comprehensive written policies and procedures are established to govern
the accounting and safeguarding of its equipment, that address the issues
cited above, including the segregation of employee duties; and
b. independent supervisory approval is obtained and documentation is
verified before property records are updated (repeat).
Information Technology
Background
ACPS’ Information Technology Department (ITD) provides information system
services to the Allegany County Commissioners (County Government) and
ACPS. Specifically, ITD maintains and administers the ACPS computer
network, computer operations, and information systems applications. The
ACPS network operates as a wide area network, with Internet connectivity,
which connects the individual ACPS schools’ local networks to the computer
resources located at the ACPS headquarters.
ITD maintains a computer room at the headquarters location in which
computer servers operate to support certain ACPS information system needs,
including a human resources application. Other significant administrative
information system applications involving the ACPS finance and student
information systems are operated and supported by third-party service
providers.
20

--- Page 23 ---
Finding 7
ACPS lacked assurance that adequate information technology security and
operational controls existed over its financial and student information
systems, which were hosted, operated, and maintained by service providers.
Analysis
ACPS lacked assurance that adequate information technology security and
operational controls existed over its financial and student information systems
that were hosted, operated, and maintained by service providers. Specifically,
ACPS had not performed its own security reviews or obtained and reviewed
available independent security review reports.
 Our July 2018 review determined that ACPS had neither performed its own
security review nor obtained reports of independent, standards-based
security reviews for the ACPS’ financial system that was hosted, operated,
and maintained by a service provider, to ensure ACPS information was
properly safeguarded. Based upon our inquiry, ACPS requested and
obtained the service provider’s SOC 2 Type 2 report, dated September 29,
2017, for the period of July 1, 2016 to June 30, 2017.
We reviewed the report and found that no control weaknesses were cited.
However, we also noted that the report did not address certain key
security controls typically addressed by a SOC 2 review. For example, we
noted that the SOC 2 report did not provide test results evidencing
whether data in transit, at rest, and within backups were encrypted; and
that reports of privileged user access activities, authorized and
unauthorized access attempts, and information security events were
generated and retained. Furthermore, the report did not stipulate that
adequate account and password controls were implemented over
applications, databases, and operating systems.
 ACPS had not performed its own security review for the primary service
provider that hosted, operated, and maintained ACPS’ student information
system, and had also not obtained any independent, standards-based
security review for its operations. Furthermore, the subcontractor
providing data center hosting had a SOC 2 Type 2 review performed;
however, ACPS had not obtained and reviewed the related report. We
subsequently obtained and reviewed the data center hosting
subcontractor’s SOC report and noted that no control weakness were
reported.
21

--- Page 24 ---
For ACPS’ financial and student information systems, significant operational
and security risks could exist and remain undetected resulting in limited
assurance of data security.
The American Institute of Certified Public Accountants has issued guidance
concerning examinations of service providers. Based on this guidance,
service providers may contract for an independent review of controls and
resultant independent auditor’s report referred to as a SOC report. There are
several types of SOC reports, with varying scopes and levels of review and
auditor testing. One type of report, referred to as a SOC 2 Type 2 report for
Service Organizations, contains the service organization’s description of its
system and the results of the auditor’s examination of the suitability of the
system design, operating effectiveness for the period under review, and can
include an evaluation of system security, data availability, processing integrity,
confidentiality, and privacy trust criteria. Due to the nature and sensitivity of
the information contained in ACPS’ financial and student information systems,
we believe a SOC 2 Type 2 report covering both the system security and data
availability trust criteria is necessary.
Recommendation 7
We recommend that ACPS, for its financial and student information systems
a. obtain and review copies of SOC 2 Type 2 reports annually and ensure
that these reviews, at a minimum, cover the security and availability trust
criteria including all related critical security controls; and
b. ensure that these reviews adequately address all necessary critical
security and operational concerns and that the service provider
implements all critical report recommendations.
Finding 8
Certain publicly accessible servers were improperly located within the internal
network, intrusion detection prevention system coverage was not adequate or
complete, and ACPS network resources were not secured against improper
access from students using either ACPS owned or their personal devices.
Analysis
The ACPS computer network was not adequately secured. We noted the
following conditions affecting network security.
 Certain publicly accessible servers were located in the ACPS internal
network rather than being isolated in a separate protected network zone
to minimize security risks. These publicly accessible servers, if
compromised, could expose the internal network to attack from external
sources. Recommended security procedures, as stated in the National
22

--- Page 25 ---
Institute of Standards and Technology Guidelines on Firewalls and Firewall
Policy, include placing publicly accessible servers in an external protected
zone to protect those servers as well as the entity’s internal network. A
similar condition was commented upon in our preceding audit report.
 The ACPS network’s intrusion detection prevention system (IDPS) was
configured to detect, log, and report potentially malicious intrusion
attempts instead of blocking these attempts. Accordingly, effective IDPS
protection did not exist for the ACPS network. Additionally, IDPS coverage
for encrypted traffic entering the ACPS network did not exist. Specifically,
host-based intrusion prevention system (HIPS) coverage was not in use on
ACPS servers that processed encrypted traffic, nor was encrypted traffic
subject to inspection by the ACPS network-based IDPS. We identified 12
firewall rules that allowed traffic from any source to access 14 unique
ACPS network destinations via encrypted methods without IDPS coverage.
The absence of IDPS coverage for such encrypted traffic creates network
security risk as such traffic could contain malicious data, which are not
detected or dropped. Best practices in the State of Maryland Information
Security Policy require protection against malicious code and attacks by
using IDPS to monitor system events, detect attacks, and identify
unauthorized use of information systems and/or confidential information.
 ACPS did not adequately secure its internal network from improper
network-level access from ACPS students’ wireless traffic using either
ACPS owned computers or their personal devices. ACPS did not use or
have adequate network-level traffic filtering to protect its network from
activity emanating from these student connections, resulting in improper
access to broad portions of the ACPS internal network. Student access
from these connections should be limited to devices and ports necessary
for these students to perform required educational tasks. Best practices
in the State of Maryland Information Security Policy require that entities’
networks ensure that only authorized individuals have access to
confidential information and that such access is strictly controlled,
audited, and that it supports the concepts of least possible privilege and
need to know.
Recommendation 8
We recommend that ACPS
a. relocate all publicly accessible servers to a separate protected network
zone to limit security exposures to the internal network segment (repeat);
b. perform a documented review and assessment of its network security
risks and identify how preventive mode IDPS coverage should be applied
23

--- Page 26 ---
to its network for all untrusted traffic, including encrypted traffic, and
implement this coverage; and
c. restrict student network-level access to only authorized local school and
headquarters instructional network resources.
Finding 9
Certain ACPS computer workstations were running outdated software or
lacking malware protection software.
Analysis
Certain ACPS computer workstations were running outdated software or
lacking malware protection software. Consequently, assurance was lacking
that the related workstations were properly protected against malicious
software.
 Certain ACPS workstations had not been updated with the latest releases
for software products that are known to have significant security-related
software vulnerabilities. Although the vendors for these software products
frequently provide software patches to address these vulnerabilities, ACPS
had not updated these workstations by applying these patches. For
example, as of August 2018, we identified that 8 of 10 tested
workstations were running outdated versions of a commonly vulnerable
application where the older software versions installed on the
workstations had release dates that ranged from October 2012 to
February 2018.
 Malware protection software was not installed on ACPS workstations that
used a certain operating system software product. In this regard, we were
advised by ACPS personnel that approximately 70 workstations were
operating using this operating system without malware protection software
installed.
The above conditions create potential system security vulnerabilities from
malicious software. Best practices in the State of Maryland Information
Security Policy state that system hardening procedures shall be created and
maintained to ensure up-to-date security best practices are deployed at all
levels of IT systems (operating systems, applications, databases, and network
devices). The Policy also requires that agencies, at a minimum, must protect
against malicious code (viruses, worms, Trojan horses) by implementing anti-
malware solutions that, to the extent possible, include a capability for
automatic updates.
24

--- Page 27 ---
Recommendation 9
We recommend that ACPS
a. promptly install all critical security-related software updates for commonly
vulnerable applications on all computers, and
b. ensure that malware protection software is installed on all computers and
that the related signatures are kept up-to-date.
Facilities Construction, Renovation, and Maintenance
Background
ACPS maintains 21 schools and other administrative and support offices with
a staff of 80 custodial and 21 maintenance personnel. According to the fiscal
year 2018 Capital Improvement Plan, planned construction, major
renovations, and systemic improvements to ACPS facilities over the next six
years (fiscal years 2018 through 2023) are estimated to cost $66.8 million.
ACPS Capital Projects Were Properly Approved By the Board
Our review of four construction-related procurements during fiscal years 2014
through 2016 totaling $54.5 million disclosed that they were competitively
procured and were properly awarded and approved by the Board. In addition,
our test of five invoices totaling $13.2 million disclosed that the invoices were
properly reviewed and approved and the amounts invoiced were in
accordance with related contract terms.
Processes are in Place to Promote Ongoing Facility Maintenance and to
Minimize Energy Costs
ACPS has processes in place to promote ongoing facility maintenance and to
minimize energy costs. For example, ACPS provides preventive maintenance
of its buildings and equipment to prevent emergency repairs. In addition,
ACPS uses energy management systems to monitor heating and air
conditioning systems from a central location to control temperature settings.
ACPS also has written policies that encourage both students and employees
to be aware of and limit their energy use. Finally, ACPS has a commodity
agreement with an independent energy supplier, which results in it receiving
its electricity at a lower rate than its local utility.
25

--- Page 28 ---
Transportation Services
Background
ACPS has approximately 5,300 students eligible to receive student
transportation services. These students were transported on 107 buses, of
which 88 were owned and operated by contractors and the remaining 19 were
owned by ACPS. According to ACPS financial records, fiscal year 2017
transportation costs totaled $5.9 million, with $4.3 million (73 percent)
representing payments for contracted bus services. ACPS reported that 1.6
million route miles were traveled to transport students for the 2016-2017
school year.
Payments to bus contractors consist of amounts for the purchase of a bus
(known as a per-vehicle allotment or PVA, intended as reimbursement for the
cost of a bus and a flat rate for return on investment), hourly reimbursements
for drivers, a per-mile maintenance fee, fuel costs, and an annual
administrative fee. ACPS bus contracts are for a one-year term and renew
automatically over the 12-year useful life of the bus, unless terminated by
either party by giving 30 days written notice.
Finding 10
ACPS had not implemented certain practices to promote more efficient use of
bus operations.
Analysis
ACPS bus routing procedures were not comprehensive, and a periodic system-
wide analysis of bus routes and related bus ridership capacities was not
performed to maximize the efficiency of its bus routes and address bus routes
with low ridership.
ACPS’ bus routing procedures were not comprehensive as they excluded
formal ridership goals and student ride time limits, and existing bus routing
procedures did not address the periodic reassessment of route efficiency on
an individual or system-wide basis. ACPS had established school bus
capacities for high, middle, and elementary school routes based on
manufacturer-stated bus capacities,3 but the percentage of these capacities
to be achieved in planning individual routes was not incorporated into the
procedures. In addition, ACPS had not performed a system-wide analysis of
bus routes and related bus capacities to maximize the efficiency of its bus
3 It is customary for school bus capacities to be lower than manufacturer stated capacities
and differ depending on the school level. For example, for a similar sized bus, the capacity
for elementary school students is higher than for high school students.
26

--- Page 29 ---
routes and address bus routes with low ridership. Although ACPS owned an
automated bus routing software tool, it did not fully use this tool to calculate
alternative routes, route consolidations, or bus stop consolidations that might
reduce costs. Consequently, routes may be inefficiently designed and result
in significantly underutilized capacity on individual buses (as noted below) and
in operating more buses than necessary to fulfill ACPS’ transportation needs.
Our analysis of routing system data for 156 regular routes (we excluded
certain special runs from our analysis) for the 2017-2018 school year
disclosed that 121 routes were designed to transport students at less than 75
percent of ACPS’ recommended bus capacity; including 57 routes that
transported students at less than 50 percent of bus capacity. While we
recognize that Allegany County includes large rural areas, which can make it
difficult to maximize ridership in all cases, our analysis included all regular
routes, so the buses cited were not isolated to only rural regions of the county.
Similar conditions were commented upon in our preceding audit report.
Recommendation 10
We recommend that ACPS
a. develop formal, comprehensive written policies and procedures that
include student ride times, ridership goals, and any other factors affecting
bus routing decisions (repeat); and
b. use its automated bus routing software to periodically perform a system-
wide analysis of its bus routes, to maximize the ridership on its bus routes
(repeat).
Finding 11
Certain elements used to determine payments to bus contractors did not
reflect market conditions, actual costs, or were not properly documented.
Analysis
Certain elements used to determine payments to bus contractors did not
reflect market conditions, actual costs, or were not properly documented. Our
review of the contract terms and related payments disclosed the following
conditions:
27

--- Page 30 ---
 ACPS’ basis for the annual return on investment (ROI) used in the PVA
payment formula was higher than the ROI suggested by certain studies4.
ROI provides a financial return for the contractor investing in the purchase
of a bus instead of another investment option over the 12-year life of the
bus. ACPS’ payment formula resulted in an average ROI of 7 percent for
the 48 buses placed in service by contractors from fiscal years 2013
through 2018. The average ROI ACPS paid was higher because ACPS had
established a minimum of 5 percent for the prime interest rate in its
formula instead of using the actual prime rate plus 2 percent.
If ACPS would have used an ROI methodology based on the
recommendation of a consultant hired by another Maryland school
system, we estimate that its annual PVA payments for each of the 48
buses would have been from $701 to $1,777 lower. Over the 12-year life
of those buses, ACPS could have saved approximately $857,000. The
savings would have resulted from the difference between using the prime
rate (which ranged from 3.25 percent to 4.25 percent during fiscal years
2013 to 2018) plus 2 percent, which was recommended by the
consultant, and the ACPS ROI rate of 7 percent. This analysis does not
include the effects of lost interest income that could have been earned.
 ACPS payments to contractors for bus maintenance and operations costs
were negotiated with the bus contractors; however, the basis for these
costs was not documented nor supported by industry standards. For fiscal
year 2018, ACPS paid a $0.90 per-mile fee to reimburse the contractors
for bus maintenance costs, which based on the number of reported miles
driven by contractor buses; we estimate that ACPS paid approximately
$1.1 million for these costs.
 The standard contracts that ACPS executes with its bus contractors did not
include a right to audit provision. Such a provision would allow ACPS to
4 There is no generally agreed upon formula or method for determining ROI. In 1975, an
MSDE study recommended the prime rate as a reasonable ROI interest rate. The prime
rate is actually a lending rate that nearly always exceeds the available market investment
rate; therefore, it was deemed reasonable for the ROI calculation. The use of the prime
interest rate was again recommended in a November 1999 study commissioned by another
local Maryland school system. In 2012, another school system’s consultant’s report
recommended the prime rate plus 2 percent as a reasonable ROI, which serves as the basis
for our calculations. In ACPS’ case, the use of prime plus 2 percent indicated that its
various ROIs were still potentially excessive. Finally, a May 2010 MSDE PVA Workgroup
commented that the profit (or ROI) to be included in the PVA should reflect what a
reasonable investor or businessperson would expect on a long-term investment, and not
necessarily the prime rate. Under that assumption, we noted that as of October 2016,
current 10 and 30-year US Treasury Note rates, which could be reflective of a reasonable
long-term investment option, were 1.8 and 2.5 percent, respectively.
28

--- Page 31 ---
verify the contractor’s actual costs of purchasing and maintaining the
buses when negotiating the PVA, hourly reimbursements for drivers, the
per-mile maintenance fee, fuel costs, and the annual administrative fees.
The State of Maryland has established a preference in regulation that all
contracts require contractors to make their records available for audit by
authorized representatives of the State at all reasonable times.
Recommendation 11
We recommend that ACPS ensure that all contractor payments have a
documented and justified basis by ensuring that
a. reasonable market investment rates are used as a basis for establishing
contractor rates for the annual PVA;
b. actual bus operating costs are used, or supportable cost estimates are
developed, as the basis for establishing reasonable contractor rates for
per mile maintenance costs; and
c. bus contracts include a right to audit provision.
Food Services
Background
ACPS has a cooking cafeteria at each of its 21 schools. Most food and related
supplies are received and stored at a central warehouse and delivered to the
schools as needed. In fiscal year 2017, ACPS had 71 food service positions
(consisting of 63 cafeteria positions and 8 administrative and warehouse
positions). According to its fiscal year 2017 audited financial statements,
food service operation revenues ($5.2 million) exceeded food service
operation expenditures ($5.1 million) by approximately $100,000. According
to MSDE records, 55 percent of ACPS’ students qualified for free and reduced-
price meals as of October 31, 2017.
Cash Handling Procedures Were Established for Cafeteria Sales
ACPS’ Board of Education has a responsibility to ensure that cafeteria sales
are appropriately controlled, recorded, and safeguarded. ACPS' Food Services
Operations Manual provides a uniform policy for the handling of all cafeteria
sales. Specifically, the Manual outlines responsibilities for inventory
management, cash handling, and cash register sales reconciliations that are
applicable to every school.
Since food service operation revenues exceed expenditures and 55 percent of
its students qualify for free and reduced-price meals, we did not perform any
audit work in the area of food service operations.
29

--- Page 32 ---
School Board Operations
Background
The Allegany County Board of Education (the Board) is composed of five
elected members and a non-voting student representative. In its oversight
responsibilities, the Board contracted with a certified public accounting firm
for independent audits of the ACPS financial statements and federal
programs.
ACPS Adopted an Ethics Policy that Met the Requirements of State Law
The Board adopted a detailed ethics policy that conformed to State Law and
includes provisions for conflicts of interest and financial disclosure.
Provisions of this policy are applicable to Board members as well as all ACPS
employees. ACPS established an Ethics Panel consisting of five members to
interpret the ethics policy and provide advice on policy implementation.
According to the ethics policy, annual financial disclosure statements are
required to be filed by Board members, candidates for the Board, and the
Superintendent by April 30th of each year.
Management of Other Risks
Healthcare Background
ACPS is self-insured and uses a third-party administrator (TPA) to oversee and
administer its employee and retiree healthcare plans. Specifically, for medical
coverage, ACPS contracts with a TPA to provide administrative services, such
as claims processing for participants’ medical costs (including drug costs) and
for stop-loss coverage. Stop-loss coverage indemnifies ACPS against health
insurance claim amounts that exceed a certain threshold for a member. ACPS
periodically bids out its health care services with the assistance of a
consultant. The most recent solicitation was for plan year 2019.
Medical providers submit claims to the TPA who pays them on behalf of ACPS.
ACPS reimburses the TPA for the claims it reports as paid on behalf of ACPS
and pays an administrative fee for these services. ACPS hired contractors to
verify the eligibility of program participants and their listed dependents and to
periodically audit the propriety of claims paid by the TPA. In 2013, a
contractor performed a review of 1,769 dependents of plan participants that
identified 99 ineligible dependents. The contractor projected that the removal
of the ineligible dependents would save the plan over $2 million over the next
5 years. Subsequent to the audit, ACPS instituted a process to verify the
eligibility of employee dependents prior to enrollment in the health care plans.
The most recent claims review was conducted in 2017, which disclosed 11
30

--- Page 33 ---
payment errors related to the 100 claims examined. Collectively, ACPS did
not deem the payment errors to be significant.
According to ACPS records, health care expenditures totaled $20.2 million in
fiscal year 2017, including administrative fees and stop-loss individual
coverage totaling $1.5 million. Our review disclosed that ACPS had adequate
procedures in place for the review of administrative fees and stop-loss
billings.
31

--- Page 34 ---
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We conducted a performance audit to evaluate the effectiveness and
efficiency of the financial management practices of the Allegany County Public
Schools (ACPS). We conducted this audit under the authority of the State
Government Article, Section 2-1220(e) of the Annotated Code of Maryland,
and performed it in accordance with generally accepted government auditing
standards. Those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to
obtain sufficient, appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our
findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives. We believe that the
evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and
conclusions based on our audit objectives.
We had two broad audit objectives:
1. Evaluate whether the ACPS procedures and controls were effective in
accounting for and safeguarding its assets.
2. Evaluate whether the ACPS policies provided for the efficient use of
financial resources.
In planning and conducting our audit of ACPS, we focused on 11 major
financial-related areas of operations as approved on December 6, 2016 by
the Joint Audit Committee of the Maryland General Assembly in accordance
with the enabling legislation. The scope of the work performed in each of
these areas was based on our assessments of significance and risk.
Therefore, our follow-up on the status of findings included in our preceding
audit report on ACPS dated January 29, 2013 was limited to those findings
that were applicable to the current audit scope for each of the 11 areas.
The audit objectives excluded reviewing and assessing student achievement,
curriculum, teacher performance, and other academic-related areas and
functions. Also, we did not evaluate the ACPS Comprehensive Education
Master Plan or related updates, and we did not review the activities, financial
or other, of any parent teacher association, group, or funds not under the local
board of education’s direct control or management.
To accomplish our objectives, we reviewed applicable State laws and
regulations pertaining to public elementary and secondary education, as well
as policies and procedures issued and established by ACPS. We also
interviewed personnel at ACPS and the Maryland State Department of
Education (MSDE), and staff at other local school systems in Maryland (as
appropriate). Our audit procedures included inspections of documents and
32

--- Page 35 ---
records, and observations of ACPS operations. We also tested transactions
and performed other auditing procedures that we considered necessary to
achieve our objectives, generally for the period from July 1, 2015 to February
28, 2018. Generally, transactions were selected for testing based on auditor
judgment, which primarily considers risk. Unless otherwise specifically
indicated, neither statistical nor non-statistical audit sampling was used to
select the transactions tested. Therefore, the results of the tests cannot be
used to project those results to the entire population from which the test
items were selected. For certain areas within the scope of the audit, we relied
on the work performed by the independent accounting firm that annually
audits ACPS’ financial statements and conducts the federal Single Audit.
We used certain statistical data—including financial and operational—
compiled by MSDE from various informational reports submitted by the
Maryland local school systems. This information was used in this audit report
for background or informational purposes, and was deemed reasonable.
We also extracted data from the ACPS automated financial management
system for the purpose of testing expenditure and payroll transactions. We
performed various audit procedures on the relevant data and determined the
data were sufficiently reliable for the purposes the data were used during the
audit.
ACPS’ management is responsible for establishing and maintaining effective
internal control. Internal control is a process designed to provide reasonable
assurance that objectives pertaining to the reliability of financial records;
effectiveness and efficiency of operations including safeguarding of assets;
and compliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations are achieved.
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate. In
addition to the conditions included in this report, other findings were
communicated to ACPS that were not deemed significant and, consequently,
did not warrant inclusion in this report.
We conducted our fieldwork from March 2018 to September 2018. The ACPS
response to our findings and recommendations is included as an appendix to
this report. As prescribed in the State Government Article, Section 2-1224 of
the Annotated Code of Maryland, we will advise ACPS regarding the results of
our review of its response.
33

--- Page 37 ---
Allegany County Public Schools
Agency Response Form
Procurement and Disbursement Cycle
Finding 1
ACPS did not adequately restrict users’ capabilities in its automated procurement and
accounts payable system and certain transactions were not subjected to independent
review or supported by required documents.
We recommend that ACPS strengthen its controls over procurements and disbursements
(repeat). Specifically, we recommend that ACPS
a. restrict user’s capabilities to those needed to perform their job duties, and separate
employee duties to eliminate incompatible procurement and disbursement processing
functions (repeat);
b. perform a periodic documented independent review of procurement and disbursement
system access;
c. ensure that an independent supervisory employee reviews and approves purchase
orders (repeat);
d. ensure that all required documents (for example, receiving reports) are obtained prior to
the completion of payment processing;
e. consider the use of the document approval and tracking features of the automated
procurement and accounts payable system;
f. ensure that changes to the vendor information recorded in the automated system are
verified to appropriate source documentation by an independent employee (repeat); and
g ensure that an independent employee conducts a documented comparison of
transactions and checks processed to the related supporting documentation (repeat).
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide The timing of the audit along with recent launch of a new financial
additional comments as system made it more difficult to meet the audit program
deemed necessary. requirements.
Recommendation 1a Agree Estimated Completion Date: 9/30/19
Please provide details of With the implementation of a new system basically corresponding
corrective action or with the start of the legislative audit, we recognized that there may
explain disagreement. be some incompatible functions in the beginning with the launch of
the new system. ACPS is committed to strengthening its internal
controls where appropriate and as part of that is in the process of
reviewing employee roles to ensure it limits incompatibility and
utilizes exception reporting within the system to verify that
“superusers” are not able to circumvent system controls.
Page 1 of 12

--- Page 38 ---
Allegany County Public Schools
Agency Response Form
Recommendation 1b Agree Estimated Completion Date: 7/15/19
Please provide details of ACPS agrees that system access should be reviewed annually at a
corrective action or minimum.
explain disagreement.
Recommendation 1c Agree Estimated Completion Date: 4/1/20
Please provide details of ACPS will implement this recommendation in the future. The system
corrective action or has robust automated purchase order functionality available and it
explain disagreement. will be phased in in the future. This is something that the district was
working towards prior to the OLA recommendation.
Recommendation 1d Agree Estimated Completion Date: 4/1/20
Please provide details of This recommendation will be completed along with item C. above.
corrective action or Again it has been on our radar and will be phased in in the future.
explain disagreement.
Recommendation 1e Agree Estimated Completion Date: 4/1/20
Please provide details of The district plans to phase in the document approval and tracking
corrective action or features within the new software system.
explain disagreement.
Recommendation 1f Agree Estimated Completion Date: 7/15/19
Please provide details of This function will be assigned to a new staff member independent of
corrective action or the Accounts Payable process. System access within A/P to change
explain disagreement. vendor information or create new vendors will be eliminated from
their profiles.
Recommendation 1g Agree Estimated Completion Date: 7/15/19
Please provide details of We feel this does occur, however, the individual tasked with this
corrective action or function also has certain rights within the system that OLA felt made
explain disagreement. this a matter of incompatibility. We are removing this individual’s
rights relative to making payments with the A/P system so that they
are more independent.
Page 2 of 12

--- Page 39 ---
Allegany County Public Schools
Agency Response Form
Finding 2
ACPS did not assess the benefits of using an intergovernmental cooperative purchasing
agreement (ICPA), nor did it ensure that the ICPA contract was awarded through a
competitive procurement process, as required by State law.
We recommend that ACPS comply with State law by
a. ensuring that a written determination is prepared of the benefits of using ICPAs and,
b. obtaining documentation that the ICPA contract was competitively procured by the
originating agency.
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 2a Agree Estimated Completion Date: 10/1/19
Please provide details of ACPS is committed to complying with all applicable federal and state
corrective action or laws and will make a written determination of the benefits of using
explain disagreement. any ICPA going forward as required by law.
Recommendation 2b Agree Estimated Completion Date: 8/15/19
Please provide details of ACPS will obtain documentation that any contract it uses was
corrective action or competitively procured by the originating entity going forward.
explain disagreement.
Page 3 of 12

--- Page 40 ---
Allegany County Public Schools
Agency Response Form
Finding 3
Contracts were not always properly procured in accordance with established procurement
policy or applicable State law.
We recommend that ACPS
a. establish and publicize the vendor bid evaluation criteria prior to soliciting bids, and
document evaluation results in support of the related contract awards;
b. competitively bid all procurements unless adequate justification is appropriately
documented for limiting the vendors solicited (repeat);
c. comply with State procurement law by using eMaryland Marketplace; and
d. obtain required contract approvals in accordance with its policies.
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 3a Agree Estimated Completion Date: Complete
Please provide details of ACPS agrees
corrective action or
explain disagreement.
Recommendation 3b Agree Estimated Completion Date: Complete
Please provide details of ACPS agrees that competitive bids by their nature typically provide
corrective action or better pricing. The district agrees that it should document
explain disagreement. justification should it limit the vendors submitted.
Recommendation 3c Agree Estimated Completion Date: 10/31/19
Please provide details of ACPS will send this recommendation to the policy committee so that
corrective action or purchasing guidelines can be updated and by policy require the
explain disagreement. district post major procurements on eMaryland Marketplace so the
district will be compliant with Maryland law.
Recommendation 3d Agree Estimated Completion Date: Complete
Please provide details of ACPS agrees, however, there are times that contracts are for agreed
corrective action or upon pricing that usage sometimes surpasses the thresholds for
explain disagreement. signature, but ACPS will try to monitor those instances and secure
the appropriate signatures when the threshold is met.
Page 4 of 12

--- Page 41 ---
Allegany County Public Schools
Agency Response Form
Finding 4
ACPS did not execute a contract modification with its automated student information system
vendor for cloud hosting and data back-up services, which resulted in a lack of contract
provisions to protect its interests.
We recommend that ACPS
a. ensure that contract modifications are executed as required and specify the services to
be provided and related fees to be paid;
b. ensure that security and operational controls are established for cloud-based hosting of
automated systems and the related data, which include ensuring protection and timely
back-up of critical data, and that a provision be made for liquidated damages in the
event that the vendor fails to adequately safeguard the ACPS data; and
c. require hosting vendors to obtain an appropriate annual SOC review and provide a copy
to ACPS.
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide ACPS understands the concerns of the OLA, but also would like to
additional comments as point out that is has had a long term relationship with the vendors of
deemed necessary. concern.
Recommendation 4a Agree Estimated Completion Date: 9/30/19
Please provide details of ACPS will review all IT vendor contracts.
corrective action or
explain disagreement.
Recommendation 4b Agree Estimated Completion Date: 12/31/19
Please provide details of ACPS believes that this does currently occur with its contracts, with
corrective action or the exception of the contract concerns OLA provided relative to a
explain disagreement. particular vendor. ACPS will review that vendor and execute a
contract that addresses the concerns of safeguarding the system and
related data.
Recommendation 4c Agree Estimated Completion Date: 9/30/19
Please provide details of ACPS is in agreement.
corrective action or
explain disagreement.
Page 5 of 12

--- Page 42 ---
Allegany County Public Schools
Agency Response Form
Human Resources and Payroll
Finding 5
ACPS did not ensure employee access to human resources and payroll systems was
appropriate and adequately controlled.
We recommend that ACPS
a. periodically (such as annually) ensure that human resources and payroll system
capabilities assigned to employees are appropriate, including removing human
resources functions unnecessarily assigned to the two employees identified above;
b. perform a documented independent supervisory review of all critical human resources
and payroll transactions processed (including hourly wages and terminated employees),
to ensure that they are supported by appropriate documentation (repeat); and
c. ensure the supervisory approval of critical payroll documents, such as personnel
transaction forms and time sheets, is properly documented.
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide The district will be implementing a new payroll system by year end
additional comments as 2019 and will implement these changes throughout the new system.
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 5a Agree Estimated Completion Date: 7/15/19
Please provide details of ACPS agrees that annually it will review access for HR and payroll
corrective action or employees relative to system capabilities.
explain disagreement.
Recommendation 5b Agree Estimated Completion Date: Complete
Please provide details of ACPS currently does this, but agrees that it should be better
corrective action or documented to ensure an appropriate audit trail exists.
explain disagreement.
Recommendation 5c Agree Estimated Completion Date: Complete
Please provide details of ACPS is in agreement. HR has recently started signing off on all
corrective action or assignment forms. Also, there was one instance where one
explain disagreement. department had not properly approved their payroll documents. This
practice has changed for that department. Also, payroll signs off on
the accuracy of the payroll documents for that department as well.
Page 6 of 12

--- Page 43 ---
Allegany County Public Schools
Agency Response Form
Equipment Control and Accountability
Finding 6
ACPS had not established comprehensive equipment policies, adequate record keeping
practices, and controls over equipment.
We recommend that ACPS ensure
a. comprehensive written policies and procedures are established to govern the accounting
and safeguarding of its equipment, that address the issues cited above, including the
segregation of employee duties; and
b. independent supervisory approval is obtained and documentation is verified before
property records are updated (repeat).
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 6a Agree Estimated Completion Date: 1/1/20
Please provide details of Allegany is a small district and segregation of duties can be difficult.
corrective action or However, the district will consider alternatives that provide better
explain disagreement. segregation of duties. The district also agrees that policies relating to
equipment both regular and sensitive should be updated and
modified to reflect best practices.
Recommendation 6b Agree Estimated Completion Date: 7/15/19
Please provide details of There were instances that supervisory approval was not obtained
corrective action or prior to equipment/property records being updated. However, to that
explain disagreement. end, the technicians are the local experts on the needs of the
schools. However, supervisory approval will be sought prior to
moving forward in the future.
Page 7 of 12

--- Page 44 ---
Allegany County Public Schools
Agency Response Form
Information Technology
Finding 7
ACPS lacked assurance that adequate information technology security and operational
controls existed over its financial and student information systems, which were hosted,
operated, and maintained by service providers.
We recommend that ACPS, for its financial and student information systems
a. obtain and review copies of SOC 2 Type 2 reports annually and ensure that these
reviews, at a minimum, cover the security and availability trust criteria including all
related critical security controls; and
b. ensure that these reviews adequately address all necessary critical security and
operational concerns and that the service provider implements all critical report
recommendations.
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide ACPS acknowledges that the SOC 2 Type 2 reports will be requested
additional comments as annually to adequately address staff and student security concerns.
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 7a Agree Estimated Completion Date: 9/30/19
Please provide details of ACPS is in agreement. This is the same issue as finding five. ACPS
corrective action or will review, store, and approve the documents for future audits.
explain disagreement.
Recommendation 7b Agree Estimated Completion Date: 9/30/19
Please provide details of ACPS is in agreement. ACPS will review, store, and approve the
corrective action or documents for future audits.
explain disagreement.
Page 8 of 12

--- Page 45 ---
Allegany County Public Schools
Agency Response Form
Finding 8
Certain publicly accessible servers were improperly located within the internal network,
intrusion detection prevention system coverage was not adequate or complete, and ACPS
network resources were not secured against improper access from students using either
ACPS owned or their personal devices.
We recommend that ACPS
a. relocate all publicly accessible servers to a separate protected network zone to limit
security exposures to the internal network segment (repeat);
b. perform a documented review and assessment of its network security risks and identify
how preventive mode IDPS coverage should be applied to its network for all untrusted
traffic, including encrypted traffic, and implement this coverage; and
c. restrict student network-level access to only authorized local school and headquarters
instructional network resources.
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 8a Agree Estimated Completion Date: 12/2020
Please provide details of ACPS is moving all locally hosted servers to the cloud. All remaining
corrective action or ACPS servers will be completed by the end of next year.
explain disagreement.
Recommendation 8b Agree Estimated Completion Date: 9/15/19
Please provide details of IDPS coverage has been purchased by the district with the intention
corrective action or of going live in summer 2019.
explain disagreement.
Recommendation 8c Agree Estimated Completion Date: 9/2020
Please provide details of ACPS has started to implement updated policies on both network
corrective action or switches and wireless access points. This will limit student access to
explain disagreement. network resources.
Page 9 of 12

--- Page 46 ---
Allegany County Public Schools
Agency Response Form
Finding 9
Certain ACPS computer workstations were running outdated software or lacking malware
protection software.
We recommend that ACPS
a. promptly install all critical security-related software updates for commonly vulnerable
applications on all computers, and
b. ensure that malware protection software is installed on all computers and that the
related signatures are kept up-to-date.
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 9a Agree Estimated Completion Date: Complete
Please provide details of ACPS purchased a software maintenance product to keep all
corrective action or computers up to date with critical security patches.
explain disagreement.
Recommendation 9b Agree Estimated Completion Date: Complete
Please provide details of We agree that malware protection is needed for all PC’s, however it is
corrective action or not supported or recommended by a manufacturer for its products.
explain disagreement. ACPS will investigate purchasing a specific software product for
additional malware protection.
Page 10 of 12

--- Page 47 ---
Allegany County Public Schools
Agency Response Form
Transportation Services
Finding 10
ACPS had not implemented certain practices to promote more efficient use of bus
operations.
We recommend that ACPS
a. develop formal, comprehensive written policies and procedures that include student
ride times, ridership goals, and any other factors affecting bus routing decisions
(repeat); and
b. use its automated bus routing software to periodically perform a system-wide analysis
of its bus routes, to maximize the ridership on its bus routes (repeat).
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide It is important to understand and acknowledge that the district does
additional comments as review individual bus routes periodically and makes the appropriate
deemed necessary. changes accordingly.
Recommendation 10a Agree Estimated Completion Date: 1/1/20
Please provide details of ACPS agrees that it could bolster some of the existing policies and
corrective action or procedures, where possible.
explain disagreement.
Recommendation 10b Agree Estimated Completion Date: 1/1/20
Please provide details of ACPS does utilize bus routing software to supplement the knowledge
corrective action or of the transportation department employees, bus drivers, and
explain disagreement. assistants. However, bus routing software cannot in and of itself
consider all factors in making bus routes, especially in a rural district,
so it is a piece of data used by the transportation department in
determining bus routes. ACPS agrees that bus routes, especially
those with low ridership, should be scrutinized and reviewed
periodically and we feel they are. Another item to consider is that
ACPS must provide a “seat” on the appropriate bus for all students
within that ridership area. There are cases that students are taken to
school by parents, friends, themselves and others that would make it
appear that ridership on a bus is low, but there is an obligation to
have a seat for every student, whether they regularly ride the bus or
never have.
Page 11 of 12

--- Page 48 ---
Allegany County Public Schools
Agency Response Form
Finding 11
Certain elements used to determine payments to bus contractors did not reflect market
conditions, actual costs, or were not properly documented.
We recommend that ACPS ensure that all contractor payments have a documented and
justified basis by ensuring that
a. reasonable market investment rates are used as a basis for establishing contractor
rates for the annual PVA;
b. actual bus operating costs are used, or supportable cost estimates are developed, as
the basis for establishing reasonable contractor rates for per mile maintenance costs;
and
c. bus contracts include a right to audit provision.
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide It is important to understand and acknowledge that relative to both
additional comments as PVA and the cost of maintenance, the district is competitive with
deemed necessary. what other districts in the state reimburse for these items.
Recommendation 11a Agree Estimated Completion Date: Complete
Please provide details of As a result of the Fed increasing rates, this will no longer be an issue.
corrective action or However, if rates should decline, the district will change its policy and
explain disagreement. use the prime rate at the time of purchase plus 2% when setting the
PVA going forward.
Recommendation 11b Agree Estimated Completion Date: 7/1/19
Please provide details of Bus maintenance in western Maryland is different than other parts of
corrective action or the state. Allegany and Garrett counties face not only significant
explain disagreement. grade elevation differences, but also are impacted by salt and
abrasives used for snow removal that may impact mechanical parts
and systems. The district agrees that it will request access through
the “right to audit” provision to better understand the actual costs of
bus maintenance.
Recommendation 11c Agree Estimated Completion Date: 7/1/19
Please provide details of ACPS will begin putting that provision in all bus contracts going
corrective action or forward.
explain disagreement.
Page 12 of 12

--- Page 49 ---
A T
UDIT EAM
Raymond G. Burton, Jr., CPA, CFE
Audit Manager
Richard L. Carter, CISA
R. Brendan Coffey, CPA, CISA
Information Systems Audit Managers
Jonathan H. Finglass, CPA
Senior Auditor
Edward O. Kendall
Edwin L. Paul, CPA, CISA
Information Systems Senior Auditors
Matthew P. Henry
Samuel Hur, CPA
Marc E. Merius
Staff Auditors
Robert H. Dean
Roman J. Gouin
Information Systems Staff Auditors