Title: Maryland Department of Transportation - Financial Management Information System - Centralized Operations
Date: 07/26/2019
Type: Fiscal Compliance
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5d42dc56a1ce58075c55c4ec
Extracted: 2025-06-19T06:16:56.781913
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Audit Report
Maryland Department of Transportation
Financial Management Information System
Centralized Operations
July 2019
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Senator Craig J. Zucker (Senate Chair) Delegate Shelly L. Hettleman (House Chair)
Senator Adelaide C. Eckardt Delegate Steven J. Arentz
Senator George C. Edwards Delegate Andrew P. Cassilly
Senator Guy J. Guzzone Delegate Mark S. Chang
Senator Katie Fry Hester Delegate Keith E. Haynes
Senator Cheryl C. Kagan Delegate Michael A. Jackson
Senator Benjamin F. Kramer Delegate David Moon
Senator Cory V. McCray Delegate April R. Rose
Senator Douglas J.J. Peters Delegate Geraldine Valentino-Smith
Senator Justin D. Ready Delegate Karen Lewis Young
To Obtain Further Information
Office of Legislative Audits
301 West Preston Street, Room 1202
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Phone: 410-946-5900 ꞏ 301-970-5900 ꞏ 1-877-486-9964 (Toll Free in Maryland)
Maryland Relay: 711
TTY: 410-946-5401 ꞏ 301-970-5401
E-mail: OLAWebmaster@ola.state.md.us
Website: www.ola.state.md.us
To Report Fraud
The Office of Legislative Audits operates a Fraud Hotline to report fraud, waste, or abuse involving State
of Maryland government resources. Reports of fraud, waste, or abuse may be communicated anonymously
by a toll-free call to 1-877-FRAUD-11, by mail to the Fraud Hotline, c/o Office of Legislative Audits, or
through the Office’s website.
Nondiscrimination Statement
The Department of Legislative Services does not discriminate on the basis of age, ancestry, color, creed,
marital status, national origin, race, religion, gender, gender identity, sexual orientation, or disability in the
admission or access to its programs, services, or activities. The Department’s Information Officer has been
designated to coordinate compliance with the nondiscrimination requirements contained in Section 35.107
of the United States Department of Justice Regulations. Requests for assistance should be directed to the
Information Officer at 410-946-5400 or 410-970-5400.

--- Page 5 ---
Background Information
General Information
The Maryland Department of Transportation (MDOT) Financial Management
Information System (FMIS) is an integrated database system with purchasing and
accounting components. The FMIS purchasing and accounting components are
operational in all MDOT transportation business units. FMIS runs on the MDOT
Office of Transportation Technology Services’ (OTTS) mainframe computer.
According to the State’s records, expenditures processed through MDOT FMIS
for fiscal year 2018 totaled approximately $3.4 billion.
A separate version of FMIS (known as Statewide FMIS) is maintained by the
State’s Department of Information Technology and the Comptroller of
Maryland’s General Accounting Division for the use of most Executive Branch
agencies and is outside the scope of this audit. Because of unique MDOT needs,
particularly with respect to federal grants and projects, MDOT maintains its own
version of FMIS.
FMIS Responsibilities
The FMIS Unit, within MDOT’s Secretary’s Office, and the MDOT OTTS are
responsible for daily FMIS administration, including maintenance, operation,
security, and backup of related database records, and the computer programs,
which perform online and overnight processing. The transportation business units
within MDOT are responsible for establishing and monitoring their employees’
security accesses to FMIS.
The Office of Legislative Audits separately audits the Secretary’s Office and each
of MDOT’s transportation business units. Audits of these entities include a
review of their agency-based FMIS responsibilities. This central audit included
elements of FMIS operation and internal control not included in these agency
audits (for example, database and security controls). For an expanded explanation
of the nature and purpose of this audit, see the Audit Scope, Objectives, and
Methodology section of this report.
FMIS Interface
MDOT interfaces certain FMIS financial information to the Statewide FMIS for
recordation, payment processing, and reporting. This audit included a review of
3

--- Page 6 ---
the controls and processing over financial information interfaced to and recorded
on Statewide FMIS.
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report
Our audit included a review to determine the status of the finding contained in our
preceding audit report dated September 9, 2015. We determined that MDOT
satisfactorily addressed this finding.
Findings and Recommendations
Sensitive Personally Identifiable Information (PII)
Background
The Maryland Department of Transportation’s (MDOT) Financial Management
Information System (FMIS) contains vendor information including recorded
vendor names and assigned vendor numbers. For vendors who are individuals,
MDOT FMIS uses their social security numbers (SSNs) as their vendor table
identification numbers. Accordingly, PII exists within MDOT FMIS since State
law defines any record containing an individual’s name combined with a SSN as
PII.
Finding 1
Sensitive PII was not adequately secured within MDOT FMIS.
Analysis
Sensitive PII was not adequately secured within MDOT FMIS. MDOT FMIS
displays vendor information (including PII) in clear text format, via multiple
online screens and on generated reports. Our analysis of this vendor information
identified a substantial number of records which contained PII (vendor names and
SSNs), but we could not determine an exact count of the vendor records
containing such PII due to information limitations.
MDOT FMIS includes security features which allow for restricting employees’
access to online screens, including screens for report generation, based on their
job responsibilities. Despite the existence of MDOT FMIS screen access control
features, MDOT FMIS vendor information was widely accessible. For example,
we identified nine MDOT FMIS screens used for vendor record inquiry and
maintenance and found, as of October 2018, that four of these nine screens were
each accessible by approximately 1,000 MDOT FMIS user accounts.
4

--- Page 7 ---
Historically, access to MDOT FMIS vendor information was broadly assigned for
work efficiency, before concerns increased regarding the existence of sensitive
PII within certain of the vendor records.
The State of Maryland Information Security Policy requires agencies to ensure
access to confidential information is strictly controlled and audited and that it
supports the concepts of least possible privilege and need to know. Consequently,
MDOT should ensure that access to PII within MDOT FMIS is adequately
restricted and determine whether practical alternatives exist in lieu of recording
PII within FMIS vendor record information.
Recommendation 1
We recommend MDOT, in conjunction with its transportation business
units, take the necessary steps to adequately restrict and safeguard PII in
MDOT FMIS.
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the centralized operations of the
Maryland Department of Transportation (MDOT) Financial Management
Information System (FMIS). Fieldwork associated with our audit was conducted
during the period from July 2018 to October 2018. The audit was conducted in
accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards. Those
standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient,
appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and
conclusions based on our audit objectives. We believe that the evidence obtained
provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit
objectives.
As FMIS is a vital procurement and accounting application in all of MDOT’s
transportation business units, internal control over FMIS is critical to these units.
Since we are responsible for auditing these units and evaluating their internal
control, we periodically evaluate FMIS’ internal control. The State of Maryland
maintains its own Statewide version of FMIS, which is not included in the scope
of this audit.
As prescribed by the State Government Article, Section 2-1221 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, the objectives of this audit were to examine the elements of
FMIS operations, relative to the MDOT’s overall internal control, and to evaluate
compliance with applicable State laws, rules, and regulations not included in our
audits of the MDOT’s transportation business units.
5

--- Page 8 ---
In planning and conducting our audit, we focused on the major financial-related
areas of operations based on assessments of significance and risk. The areas
addressed by the audit included central FMIS security administration and
maintenance, database and security controls, and the Relational Standard
Accounting and Reporting System (R*STARS) component operations, which
support MDOT’s accounting operations. We also determined the status of the
finding included in our preceding audit report.
To accomplish our audit objectives, our audit procedures included inquiries of
appropriate personnel, inspections of documents and records, and observations of
FMIS’ operations. We also performed other auditing procedures that we
considered necessary to achieve our audit objectives. The reliability of data used
in this report for background or informational purposes was not assessed.
MDOT management is responsible for establishing and maintaining effective
internal control. Internal control is a process designed to provide reasonable
assurance that objectives pertaining to the reliability of financial records;
effectiveness and efficiency of operations including safeguarding of assets; and
compliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations are achieved.
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate.
Our reports are designed to assist the Maryland General Assembly in exercising
its legislative oversight function and to provide constructive recommendations for
improving State operations. As a result, our reports generally do not address
activities we reviewed that are functioning properly.
This report includes a finding relating to a condition that we consider to be
significant deficiency in the design or operation of internal control that could
adversely affect MDOT’s ability to operate effectively and efficiently, and/or
comply with applicable laws, rules, and regulations. This condition is also a
significant instance of noncompliance with applicable laws, rules, or regulations.
Another less significant finding was communicated to MDOT that did not warrant
inclusion in this report.
MDOT’s response to our finding and recommendations is included as an
appendix to this report. As prescribed in the State Government Article, Section 2-
1224 of the Annotated Code of Maryland, we will advise MDOT regarding the
results of our review of its response.
6

--- Page 11 ---
A T
UDIT EAM
Richard L. Carter, CISA
Information Systems Audit Manager
Edwin L. Paul, CPA, CISA
Information Systems Senior Auditor
Robert H. Dean
Michael A. Kirschbaum
Information Systems Staff Auditors