Title: Comptroller of Maryland - Office of the Comptroller - Bureau of Revenue Estimates
Date: 08/29/2019
Type: Fiscal Compliance
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5d6ec419a1ce580bec54f78c
Extracted: 2025-06-19T06:17:24.027723
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Audit Report
Comptroller of Maryland
Office of the Comptroller
Bureau of Revenue Estimates
August 2019
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Senator Craig J. Zucker (Senate Chair) Delegate Shelly L. Hettleman (House Chair)
Senator Adelaide C. Eckardt Delegate Steven J. Arentz
Senator George C. Edwards Delegate Andrew P. Cassilly
Senator Guy J. Guzzone Delegate Mark S. Chang
Senator Katie Fry Hester Delegate Keith E. Haynes
Senator Cheryl C. Kagan Delegate Michael A. Jackson
Senator Benjamin F. Kramer Delegate David Moon
Senator Cory V. McCray Delegate April R. Rose
Senator Douglas J.J. Peters Delegate Geraldine Valentino-Smith
Senator Justin D. Ready Delegate Karen Lewis Young
To Obtain Further Information
Office of Legislative Audits
301 West Preston Street, Room 1202
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Phone: 410-946-5900 ꞏ 301-970-5900 ꞏ 1-877-486-9964 (Toll Free in Maryland)
Maryland Relay: 711
TTY: 410-946-5401 ꞏ 301-970-5401
E-mail: OLAWebmaster@ola.state.md.us
Website: www.ola.state.md.us
To Report Fraud
The Office of Legislative Audits operates a Fraud Hotline to report fraud, waste, or abuse involving State
of Maryland government resources. Reports of fraud, waste, or abuse may be communicated anonymously
by a toll-free call to 1-877-FRAUD-11, by mail to the Fraud Hotline, c/o Office of Legislative Audits, or
through the Office’s website.
Nondiscrimination Statement
The Department of Legislative Services does not discriminate on the basis of age, ancestry, color, creed,
marital status, national origin, race, religion, gender, gender identity, sexual orientation, or disability in the
admission or access to its programs, services, or activities. The Department’s Information Officer has been
designated to coordinate compliance with the nondiscrimination requirements contained in Section 35.107
of the United States Department of Justice Regulations. Requests for assistance should be directed to the
Information Officer at 410-946-5400 or 410-970-5400.

--- Page 4 ---
2

--- Page 5 ---
Background Information
Agency Responsibilities
The Office of the Comptroller (OOC) maintains the accounting records for the
State’s general obligation debt and administers the State’s capital grants program.
The OOC provides certain support services to all units of the Comptroller of
Maryland, the Board of Public Works, and the Registers of Wills located in
Maryland’s 24 subdivisions. By law, the OOC’s budgetary responsibility for the
Registers of Wills, which are elected positions, is limited to setting the number of
the assistant clerks or deputy registers and related salaries, and increasing the
salary of each nonelected employee consistent with increases granted to State
employees. The OOC is also responsible for providing guidance to the Registers
of Wills regarding fiscal policies, approving certain procurements, and providing
input on personnel matters. The Bureau of Revenue Estimates (BRE) studies and
analyzes State revenue sources and periodically prepares estimates of State
revenues.
According to the State’s records, the expenditures for the OOC and BRE totaled
approximately $12.3 million during fiscal year 2018. According to the OOC’s
records, capital grant expenditures totaled $57.6 million during fiscal year 2018.
Findings and Recommendations
Our audit did not disclose any significant deficiencies in the design or operation
of the OOC’s and BRE’s (hereinafter collectively referred to as the Office)
internal control. Our audit also did not disclose any significant instances of
noncompliance with applicable laws, rules, or regulations. Findings that did not
warrant inclusion in this report were separately communicated to the Office.
A draft copy of this report was provided to the Office. Since there are no
recommendations in this report, a written response was not necessary.
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the Comptroller of Maryland –
Office of the Comptroller and the Bureau of Revenue Estimates (hereinafter
collectively referred to as the Office) for the period beginning March 4, 2015 and
ending January 21, 2019. The audit was conducted in accordance with generally
3

--- Page 6 ---
accepted government auditing standards. Those standards require that we plan
and perform the audit to obtain sufficient, appropriate evidence to provide a
reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives.
We believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings
and conclusions based on our audit objectives.
As prescribed by the State Government Article, Section 2-1221 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, the objectives of this audit were to examine the Office’s
financial transactions, records, and internal control, and to evaluate its compliance
with applicable State laws, rules, and regulations.
In planning and conducting our audit, we focused on the major financial-related
areas of operations based on assessments of significance and risk. The areas
addressed by the audit included capital grants monitoring, procurements and
disbursements, corporate purchasing cards, and payroll. Our audit included
various support services (such as processing of invoices, maintenance of
accounting records, human resources, and related fiscal functions) provided by the
Office to the other units of the Comptroller of Maryland, the Board of Public
Works, and the Registers of Wills located in Maryland’s 24 subdivisions.
Our audit did not include certain support services provided to the Office by the
Comptroller of Maryland – Information Technology Division related to
information technology equipment and related services. These support services
are included in the scope of our audits of the Information Technology Division.
To accomplish our audit objectives, our audit procedures included inquiries of
appropriate personnel, inspections of documents and records, observations of the
Office’s operations, and tests of transactions. Generally, transactions were
selected for testing based on auditor judgment, which primarily considers risk.
Unless otherwise specifically indicated, neither statistical nor non-statistical audit
sampling was used to select the transactions tested. Therefore, the results of the
tests cannot be used to project those results to the entire population from which
the test items were selected.
We also performed various data extracts of pertinent information from the State’s
Financial Management Information System (such as revenue and expenditure
data) and the State’s Central Payroll Bureau (payroll data), as well as from the
contractor administering the State’s Corporate Purchasing Card Program (credit
card activity). The extracts are performed as part of ongoing internal processes
established by the Office of Legislative Audits and were subject to various tests to
determine data reliability. We determined that the data extracted from these
various sources were sufficiently reliable for the purposes the data were used
4

--- Page 7 ---
during this audit. Finally, we performed other auditing procedures that we
considered necessary to achieve our audit objectives. The reliability of data used
in this report for background or informational purposes was not assessed.
The Office’s management is responsible for establishing and maintaining
effective internal control. Internal control is a process designed to provide
reasonable assurance that objectives pertaining to the reliability of financial
records; effectiveness and efficiency of operations including safeguarding of
assets; and compliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations are achieved.
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate.
Our reports are designed to assist the Maryland General Assembly in exercising
its legislative oversight function and to provide constructive recommendations for
improving State operations. As a result, our reports generally do not address
activities we reviewed that are functioning properly.
5

--- Page 8 ---
A
UDIT
T
EAM
Robert A. Wells, Jr., CPA
Audit Manager
W. Thomas Sides
Senior Auditor
Gary B. Staples
Staff Auditor