Title: Comptroller of Maryland - Central Payroll Bureau
Date: 09/03/2019
Type: Fiscal Compliance
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5d6fd561a1ce580bec55224d
Extracted: 2025-06-19T06:17:32.435449
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Audit Report
Comptroller of Maryland
Central Payroll Bureau
October 2023
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Senator Clarence K. Lam, M.D. (Senate Chair) Delegate Jared Solomon (House Chair)
Senator Joanne C. Benson Delegate Steven J. Arentz
Senator Paul D. Corderman Delegate Nicholas P. Charles II
Senator Katie Fry Hester Delegate Andrea Fletcher Harrison
Senator Shelly L. Hettleman Delegate Steven C. Johnson
Senator Cheryl C. Kagan Delegate Mary A. Lehman
Senator Cory V. McCray Delegate David Moon
Senator Justin D. Ready Delegate Julie Palakovich Carr
Senator Bryan W. Simonaire Delegate Stephanie M. Smith
Senator Craig J. Zucker Delegate M. Courtney Watson
To Obtain Further Information
Office of Legislative Audits
The Warehouse at Camden Yards
351 West Camden Street, Suite 400
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Phone: 410-946-5900
Maryland Relay: 711
TTY: 410-946-5401 ꞏ 301-970-5401
E-mail: webmaster@ola.state.md.us
Website: www.ola.state.md.us
To Report Fraud
The Office of Legislative Audits operates a Fraud Hotline to report fraud, waste, or abuse involving State
of Maryland government resources. Reports of fraud, waste, or abuse may be communicated anonymously
by a toll-free call to 1-877-FRAUD-11, by mail to the Fraud Hotline, c/o Office of Legislative Audits, or
through the Office’s website.
Nondiscrimination Statement
The Department of Legislative Services does not discriminate on the basis of age, ancestry, color, creed,
marital status, national origin, race, religion, gender, gender identity, sexual orientation, or disability in the
admission or access to its programs, services, or activities. The Department’s Information Officer has been
designated to coordinate compliance with the nondiscrimination requirements contained in Section 35.107
of the United States Department of Justice Regulations. Requests for assistance should be directed to the
Information Officer at 410-946-5400 or 410-970-5400.

--- Page 3 ---
October 5, 2023
Senator Clarence K. Lam, M.D., Senate Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Delegate Jared Solomon, House Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Members of Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Annapolis, Maryland
Ladies and Gentlemen:
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the Comptroller of Maryland –
Central Payroll Bureau (CPB) for the period beginning January 7, 2019 and
ending March 31, 2023. CPB is primarily responsible for processing and issuing
payroll checks and direct deposit advices for the regular and contractual State
payrolls, and the payrolls of the Maryland Department of Transportation and the
University System of Maryland.
Our audit did not disclose any findings that warrant mention in this report.
We wish to acknowledge the cooperation extended to us during the audit by CPB.
Respectfully submitted,
Gregory A. Hook, CPA
Legislative Auditor

--- Page 4 ---
2

--- Page 5 ---
Background Information
Agency Responsibilities
The Central Payroll Bureau (CPB), a division of the Comptroller of Maryland
(COM), is primarily responsible for processing and issuing payroll checks and
direct deposit advices for the regular and contractual State payrolls, and the
payrolls of the Maryland Department of Transportation and the University System
of Maryland. According to CPB’s records, the payrolls collectively totaled
approximately $9.6 billion during fiscal year 2022. In addition, CPB is
responsible for processing payroll deductions, employee withholding statements
for most employees, and other payroll reports for State government. According to
the State’s accounting records, CPB’s expenditures totaled approximately $4.1
million during fiscal year 2022 (see Figure 1 below).
Figure 1
CPB Positions, Expenditures, and Funding Sources
Full-Time Equivalent Positions as of June 30, 2022
Positions Percent
Filled 42 93.3%
Vacant 3 6.7%
Total 45
Fiscal Year 2022 Expenditures
Expenditures Percent
Salaries, Wages, and Fringe Benefits $3,858,533 94.4%
Technical and Special Fees 48,696 1.2%
Operating Expenses 178,688 4.4%
Total $4,085,917
Fiscal Year 2022 Funding Sources
Funding Percent
General Fund $3,850,328 94.2%
Special Fund 114,695 2.8%
Reimbursable Fund 120,894 3.0%
Total $4,085,917
Source: State financial and personnel records
3

--- Page 6 ---
Our office conducts separate fiscal compliance audits of other COM divisions. A
listing of the most recent fiscal compliance audits of COM divisions performed
during the current audit cycle can be found in Exhibit 1 of this report.
Findings and Recommendations
Our audit did not disclose any significant deficiencies in the design or operation
of CPB’s internal control. Our audit also did not disclose any significant
instances of noncompliance with applicable laws, rules, or regulations. Findings
that did not warrant inclusion in this report were separately communicated to
CPB.
A draft copy of this report was provided to CPB. Since there are no
recommendations in this report, a written response was not necessary.
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the Comptroller of Maryland –
Central Payroll Bureau (CPB) for the period beginning January 7, 2019 and
ending March 31, 2023. The audit was conducted in accordance with generally
accepted government auditing standards. Those standards require that we plan
and perform the audit to obtain sufficient, appropriate evidence to provide a
reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives.
We believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings
and conclusions based on our audit objectives.
As prescribed by the State Government Article, Section 2-1221 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, the objectives of this audit were to examine CPB’s financial
transactions, records, and internal control, and to evaluate its compliance with
applicable State laws, rules, and regulations.
In planning and conducting our audit, we focused on the major financial-related
areas of operations based on assessments of significance and risk. The areas
addressed by the audit included CPB’s management of the State payroll system,
non-budgeted funds maintained for payroll deductions, and critical information
technology systems. Our audit included certain support services (processing
payroll timekeeping records) provided by CPB to other divisions of the
Comptroller of Maryland and the Board of Public Works.
4

--- Page 7 ---
Our audit did not include certain other support services provided to CPB by the
Comptroller of Maryland – Office of the Comptroller. These support services
(such as processing of invoices, maintenance of accounting records, and related
fiscal functions) are included in the scope of our audit of the Office of the
Comptroller. Our audit also did not include certain support services provided to
CPB by the Comptroller of Maryland – Information Technology Division related
to information technology equipment and associated services. These support
services are included in the scope of our audits of the Information Technology
Division.
Our assessment of internal controls was based on agency procedures and controls
in place at the time of our fieldwork. Our tests of transactions and other auditing
procedures were generally focused on the transactions occurring during our audit
period of January 7, 2019 to March 31, 2023, but may include transactions before
or after this period as we considered necessary to achieve our audit objectives.
To accomplish our audit objectives, our audit procedures included inquiries of
appropriate personnel, inspections of documents and records, tests of transactions,
and to the extent practicable, observations of CPB’s operations. Generally,
transactions were selected for testing based on auditor judgment, which primarily
considers risk, the timing or dollar amount of the transaction, or the significance
of the transaction to the area of operation reviewed. As a matter of course, we do
not normally use sampling in our tests, so unless otherwise specifically indicated,
neither statistical nor non-statistical audit sampling was used to select the
transactions tested. Therefore, unless sampling is specifically indicated in a
finding, the results from any tests conducted or disclosed by us cannot be used to
project those results to the entire population from which the test items were
selected.
We also performed various data extracts of pertinent information from the State’s
Financial Management Information System (such as revenue and expenditure
data) and the State’s Central Payroll Bureau (payroll data). The extracts are
performed as part of ongoing internal processes established by the Office of
Legislative Audits and were subject to various tests to determine data reliability.
We determined that the data extracted from these sources were sufficiently
reliable for the purposes the data were used during this audit. Finally, we
performed other auditing procedures that we considered necessary to achieve our
audit objectives. The reliability of data used in this report for background or
informational purposes was not assessed.
CPB’s management is responsible for establishing and maintaining effective
internal control. Internal control is a process designed to provide reasonable
5

--- Page 8 ---
assurance that objectives pertaining to the reliability of financial records;
effectiveness and efficiency of operations, including safeguarding of assets; and
compliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations are achieved. As
provided in Government Auditing Standards, there are five components of
internal control: control environment, risk assessment, control activities,
information and communication, and monitoring. Each of the five components,
when significant to the audit objectives, and as applicable to CPB, were
considered by us during the course of this audit.
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate.
Our reports are designed to assist the Maryland General Assembly in exercising
its legislative oversight function and to provide constructive recommendations for
improving State operations. As a result, our reports generally do not address
activities we reviewed that are functioning properly.
6

--- Page 9 ---
Exhibit 1
Listing of Most Recent Office of Legislative Audits
Fiscal Compliance Audits of Comptroller of Maryland Divisions
As of September 2023
Most Recent
Name of Audit Areas Covered
Report Date
 Procurement
 Equipment
Information Technology
1  Support services to other divisions of the Comptroller 02/02/22
Division (Fiscal Operations)
for monitoring information technology related services
and maintaining information technology equipment
inventory records
 Confiscated property
2 Field Enforcement Bureau 09/07/21
 Business licenses
 Routine inspections
 Investigations, collection of delinquent taxes, and
other taxpayer compliance activities related to
individual income taxes
3 Compliance Division  Audits and investigations, collection of delinquent 12/18/20
taxes, and other taxpayer compliance activities related
to business taxes
 Identification, collection, and distribution of
unclaimed property
 State agency vendor payment processing
4 General Accounting Division  Vendor table maintenance 11/09/20
 State agency working funds
 Corporate purchasing card program
Information Technology  Maintenance and monitoring of mainframe operating
5 Division – Annapolis Data system, various security functions, and critical 07/27/20
Center Operations databases
 Processing, evaluating, verifying, and recording tax
Revenue Administration
6 data as reported by taxpayers and other parties 06/01/20
Division
 Collection of tax receipts
 Distribution of tax refunds
 Capital grants monitoring
 Procurement and disbursements
Office of the Comptroller –  Corporate purchasing cards
7 08/29/19
Bureau of Revenue Estimates  Support services to other divisions of the Comptroller,
such as processing invoices, maintenance of
accounting records, human resources, and related
fiscal functions
7

--- Page 10 ---
A T
UDIT EAM
Michael J. Murdzak, CPA
Audit Manager
Edwin L. Paul, CPA, CISA
Information Systems Audit Manager
Sandra C. Medeiros
Senior Auditor
Peter W. Chong
Information Systems Senior Auditor
Tari J. Covington
Keli R. Edmonds
Staff Auditors