Title: Maryland School for the Deaf
Date: 09/04/2019
Type: Fiscal Compliance
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5d727b03a1ce580720ff8811
Extracted: 2025-06-19T06:17:52.143759
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Audit Report
Maryland School for the Deaf
January 2024
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Senator Clarence K. Lam, M.D. (Senate Chair) Delegate Jared Solomon (House Chair)
Senator Joanne C. Benson Delegate Steven J. Arentz
Senator Paul D. Corderman Delegate Andrea Fletcher Harrison
Senator Katie Fry Hester Delegate Steven C. Johnson
Senator Shelly L. Hettleman Delegate Mary A. Lehman
Senator Cheryl C. Kagan Delegate David Moon
Senator Cory V. McCray Delegate Julie Palakovich Carr
Senator Justin D. Ready Delegate Stephanie M. Smith
Senator Bryan W. Simonaire Delegate M. Courtney Watson
Senator Craig J. Zucker One Vacancy
To Obtain Further Information
Office of Legislative Audits
The Warehouse at Camden Yards
351 West Camden Street, Suite 400
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Phone: 410-946-5900
Maryland Relay: 711
TTY: 410-946-5401 ꞏ 301-970-5401
E-mail: webmaster@ola.state.md.us
Website: www.ola.state.md.us
To Report Fraud
The Office of Legislative Audits operates a Fraud Hotline to report fraud, waste, or abuse involving State
of Maryland government resources. Reports of fraud, waste, or abuse may be communicated anonymously
by a toll-free call to 1-877-FRAUD-11, by mail to the Fraud Hotline, c/o Office of Legislative Audits, or
through the Office’s website.
Nondiscrimination Statement
The Department of Legislative Services does not discriminate on the basis of age, ancestry, color, creed,
marital status, national origin, race, religion, gender, gender identity, sexual orientation, or disability in the
admission or access to its programs, services, or activities. The Department’s Information Officer has been
designated to coordinate compliance with the nondiscrimination requirements contained in Section 35.107
of the United States Department of Justice Regulations. Requests for assistance should be directed to the
Information Officer at 410-946-5400 or 410-970-5400.

--- Page 3 ---
January 16, 2024
Senator Clarence K. Lam, M.D., Senate Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Delegate Jared Solomon, House Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Members of Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Annapolis, Maryland
Ladies and Gentlemen:
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the Maryland School for the Deaf
(MSD) for the period beginning November 30, 2018 and ending January 31,
2023. MSD provides a comprehensive educational program for school-age deaf
students and operates two campuses in Frederick and Columbia, Maryland.
Our audit disclosed that MSD did not always comply with State procurement
regulations. For example, MSD did not obtain Department of General Services
and Board of Public Works approval for a multi-year sole source contract for
curriculum and other educational materials, as well as sign language interpreting
services contracts. Additionally, MSD increased the amount of a consulting
contract without proper justification and awarded a paving contract without
performing a competitive procurement. Furthermore, MSD did not publish the
contract awards on eMaryland Marketplace Advantage as required.
Our audit also disclosed deficiencies with MSD’s use of its corporate purchasing
cards and that MSD could not document that it used available Level-3 data in its
review to ensure the propriety of the purchases, as required. Level-3 data, which
are reported by certain merchants, consist of detailed descriptions of items
purchased and provide supervisory personnel with additional information to help
detect potential questionable purchases. Additionally, MSD’s memorandum of
agreement with its affiliated foundation was not sufficiently comprehensive, and
reports of the foundation’s financial activity were not submitted to MSD as
required.
Finally, our audit also included a review to determine the status of the finding
contained in our preceding audit report. We determined that MSD did not
satisfactorily address this finding, therefore, it is repeated in this report.

--- Page 4 ---
MSD’s response to this audit is included as an appendix to this report. We
reviewed the response to our findings and related recommendations, and have
concluded that the corrective actions identified are sufficient to address all audit
issues.
We wish to acknowledge the cooperation extended to us during the audit by MSD
and its willingness to address the audit issues and implement appropriate
corrective actions.
Respectfully submitted,
Gregory A. Hook, CPA
Legislative Auditor
2

--- Page 5 ---
Table of Contents
Background Information 4
Agency Responsibilities 4
Affiliated Foundation 5
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report 6
Findings and Recommendations 7
Procurements and Disbursements
Finding 1 – The Maryland School for the Deaf (MSD) did not always 8
comply with State procurement regulations.
* Finding 2 – MSD’s procurement and use of vendors for sign language 10
interpreting services did not comply with State procurement
regulations and did not ensure the services were received at the
lowest price.
Finding 3 – MSD artificially split certain corporate purchasing 12
card transactions, circumventing competitive procurement
requirements and/or cardholder single transaction limits. Also,
MSD could not document that it used available Level-3 detailed
purchasing data to ensure the propriety of purchases.
Affiliated Foundation
Finding 4 – MSD’s memorandum of agreement with its affiliated 13
foundation was not sufficiently comprehensive, and reports of the
foundation’s financial activity were not submitted to MSD as
required.
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology 15
Agency Response Appendix
* Denotes item repeated in full or part from preceding audit report
3

--- Page 6 ---
Background Information
Agency Responsibilities
The Maryland School for the Deaf (MSD) is an independent agency governed by
a 19-member Board of Trustees appointed by the Governor. MSD provides a
comprehensive educational program for school-age deaf students at its campuses
located in Frederick and Columbia. MSD also provides a family education and
early childhood development program, through cooperative agreements with local
health departments or local education agencies, that involves working with young
deaf children and their families in the development of early language skills.
Beginning in fiscal year 2023, MSD began providing a secondary transition
education program, called the Orioles Career Academy, to individuals 18 to 21
years of age. The Academy is intended to help further develop participants’
independent living, social and emotional growth, problem-solving, employment,
and self-advocacy skills.
MSD has a memorandum of understanding (MOU) with the Maryland State
Department of Education (MSDE) to help meet the educational needs of deaf
children. MSDE has the responsibility to review MSD’s budget and certain
services, including criteria for admission. MSDE also provides consultation on
the quality of deaf children education and assists MSD in developing its
agreements with local education agencies and other State agencies. Additionally,
MSDE provides assistance to ensure MSD’s educational programs and services
comply with applicable Federal and State laws.
In response to the COVID-19 pandemic health crisis, on March 13, 2020, MSD
closed operations on its campuses to students and most of the staff. Students and
teachers finished the 2019-2020 school year with virtual learning. MSD
distributed laptops and other electronic devices to students and staff in order to
facilitate virtual learning. Virtual learning continued for a majority of the 2020-
2021 school year. In February 2021, MSD began to bring students back to
campus, in small groups, for in-person instruction and opened its dorms to
students who did not have access to bus transportation. For the 2021-2022 school
year, MSD returned to full in-person instruction and activities effective August
30, 2021.
According to State records, as of June 2022, 448 students were enrolled in MSD,
and expenditures totaled approximately $42.2 million during fiscal year 2022 (see
Figure 1 on the following page). The primary source of funds for MSD’s
expenditures were State general funds, reimbursable funds from MSDE, and
federal funds.
4

--- Page 7 ---
Figure 1
MSD Positions, Expenditures, and Funding Sources
Full-Time Equivalent Positions as of June 30, 2022
Positions Percent
Filled 295.5 88.1%
Frozen1 1.0 0.3%
Vacant 39.0 11.6%
Total 335.5
Fiscal Year 2022 Expenditures
Expenditures Percent
Salaries, Wages, and Fringe Benefits $31,085,956 73.7%
Technical and Special Fees 4,696,421 11.1%
Operating Expenses 6,421,341 15.2%
Total $42,203,718
Fiscal Year 2022 Funding Sources
Funding Percent
General Fund $36,023,174 85.3%
Special Fund 390,742 0.9%
Federal Fund 657,244 1.6%
Reimbursable Fund 5,132,558 12.2%
Total $42,203,718
Source: State financial and personnel records
Affiliated Foundation
MSD has an affiliated foundation that was created in 1987 (The Maryland School
for the Deaf Foundation, Inc.). The foundation is a tax-exempt organization
under Section 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Service code whose purpose is to
support and enhance the educational goals established by MSD’s Board of
Trustees through fundraising and providing grants and scholarships to students.
As of June 2023, the foundation had a five-member board of directors who each
serve for a five-year term. The board members are nominated by current board
members and are selected based on a majority vote of the board. According to the
1 Prior to December 1, 2021, a hiring freeze resulted in certain positions being frozen. Frozen
positions were unauthorized to be filled according to budgetary instructions from the Department
of Budget and Management. Any position that is currently marked as frozen has not been filled
since the freeze was lifted; however, these positions now are available to be filled.
5

--- Page 8 ---
foundation's fiscal year 2021 tax filing, revenues and expenditures totaled
$166,670 and $69,617, respectively, and the foundation’s assets totaled
$1,870,862 as of June 30, 2021. The foundation awarded $24,377 (35 percent of
the total fiscal year 2021 expenditures) in grants and scholarships to MSD
students and teachers in fiscal year 2021.
Status of Finding From Preceding Audit Report
Our audit included a review to determine the status of the finding contained in our
preceding audit report dated September 4, 2019. We determined that MSD did
not satisfactorily address this finding; therefore, it is repeated in this report.
6

--- Page 9 ---
Findings and Recommendations
Procurements and Disbursements
Background
According to State records, the Maryland School for the Deaf (MSD) issued 5,049
purchase orders for contracts totaling $12.9 million during the period from
November 30, 2018 to January 31, 2023. We judgmentally selected and reviewed
the procurement of six contracts (see Figure 2). We also reviewed MSD’s
contract monitoring and disbursement processes by judgmentally selecting 19
invoices totaling $549,405 related to these 6 contracts. Additionally, we reviewed
contracts for sign language interpreting services for which several deficiencies
were identified in our preceding audit report.
Figure 2
Summary Contracts Reviewed
Total
Date of Initial
Procurement Payments as
Item Description of Goods or Services Contract Contract
Method of January
Award Amount
2023
No
English Language Arts Curriculum/
1 Sole Source October 2020 Estimated $367,615
Educational Material
Value
Removal and Replacement of Asphalt at
2 Competitive Bid June 2021 $ 58,616 157,466
Columbia Campus
3 Laptops for Students Competitive Bid May 2021 57,791 57,791
Removal and Replacement of Asphalt at
4 Competitive Bid June 2020 52,440 84,584
Columbia Campus
Assessment of MSD’s Culture of
5 Competitive Bid May 2021 45,450 65,695
Impartiality, Equity, and Inclusion
6 Pathway paving at the Frederick Campus Competitive Bid June 2019 15,500 15,500
Total $229,797 $748,651
Source: State Financial Records
7

--- Page 10 ---
Finding 1
MSD did not always comply with State procurement regulations.
Analysis
MSD did not always comply with State procurement regulations. Our test of six
contracts (one sole source procurement with no initial contract amount and five
competitively bid procurements totaling $229,797) disclosed the following
conditions.
 MSD increased a $45,450 consulting contract by $20,245 without proper
justification and did not receive all the required deliverables. MSD contracted
with a consultant in May 2021 to conduct an independent assessment of
MSD’s culture of impartiality, equity, and inclusion based on various
allegations and complaints from alumni, students, teachers, parents, and staff.
MSD advised us that the increase in the contract was due to the consultant
asserting that the initial contract amount was not sufficient to perform the
required work, together with the consultant’s unfamiliarity with MSD’s
culture. The consultant’s assertions could not be supported by MSD, and
consequently there was no documented justification for the increase in the
total contract amount, especially as the scope of the contract remained
unchanged.
In addition, as of March 2023 (approximately 10 months after having already
paid the consultant a total of $65,695), MSD had not received the consultant’s
required written report. Furthermore, the consultant did not provide the
guidance and training to key stakeholders, as required by the contract. Upon
bringing this to MSD’s attention, it contacted the consultant about the missing
report. MSD was advised by the consultant that it was finalizing the written
report; however, as of June 2023 MSD had not yet received the report.
 MSD did not competitively procure paving services totaling $32,144.
Specifically, MSD awarded these services to an existing vendor doing other
paving work under a $52,440 contract instead of competitively procuring
these additional services, which also included $1,350 that was paid by MSD
for work that was included in the original contact.
 MSD did not obtain Department of General Services (DGS) and Board of
Public Works (BPW) approvals for a multi-year sole source contract awarded
in August 2020 for curriculum and other educational materials. Additionally,
MSD did not publish the contract award on eMaryland Marketplace
Advantage (eMMA) as required. Furthermore, although MSD had a purchase
order with this vendor, it did not have a written contract with the vendor
8

--- Page 11 ---
which would include negotiated pricing for the materials, contract period, and
a maximum not to exceed amount for the contract.2 According to MSD
records, as of January 2023, payments to the vendor totaled $367,615.
State procurement regulations require DGS approval for competitively
procured contracts totaling more than $50,000 and BPW approval for
contracts totaling more than $200,000. Additionally, sole source procurement
awards exceeding $50,000 are required to be published on eMMA. Finally,
procurements exceeding $5,000 must have written contracts and include
certain standard contract provisions (such as, contract term ending date and
contract maximum value or estimated value).
 MSD did not use eMMA to obtain bids and did not safeguard electronically
submitted bids, as required by State procurement regulations. Specifically, for
the five competitively procured contracts tested totaling $229,797 (see Figure
2 above), MSD instructed vendors to submit their bids via email to its
procurement officer. MSD did not require the vendors to password protect the
bids and submit passwords at the time of the bid opening to ensure the bids
were not prematurely accessed. Consequently, there is a risk that bid
information could be accessed prior to the bid opening without detection.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that MSD comply with State procurement regulations.
Specifically, we recommend that MSD
a. ensure contract deliverables are received before approving invoices for
payment;
b. obtain the aforementioned missing deliverables from the independent
assessment consultant or pursue recovery of payments if the deliverables
are not provided;
c. document contract modifications and obtain required approvals;
d. execute written contracts that include all relevant contract provisions;
e. obtain DGS and BPW approval as required, including retroactive
approval for the previously awarded unapproved sole source curriculum
contract;
f. publish contract solicitations and awards in eMMA; and
g. solicit competitive bids when required and ensure contract bids are
submitted via eMMA or adequately secured prior to being opened.
2 Although a purchase order was in place, it did not include or otherwise stipulate the referenced
three contractual terms.
9

--- Page 12 ---
Finding 2
MSD’s procurement and use of vendors for sign language interpreting
services did not comply with State procurement regulations and did not
ensure the services were received at the lowest price.
Analysis
MSD did not comply with State procurement regulations when procuring sign
language interpreting services from 17 vendors, which included 10 individuals.
In response to our prior report, which included a finding on the failure to comply
with certain State procurement regulations, MSD competitively procured sign
language services and in March 2021 made awards to 17 vendors with hourly
rates ranging from $45 to $90. MSD advised us that multiple vendors were
needed because no single vendor had the capacity to provide all the required
services. According to State records, MSD’s expenditures for sign language
interpreting services totaled $469,000 from the beginning of the contract in March
2021 to January 2023. Our review of the procurement and use of these contracts
disclosed the following conditions.
 MSD could not provide the technical proposals for 16 of the 17 vendors.
Additionally, although each vendor was paid differing hourly rates under their
respective contracts, MSD could not document that it had conducted an
evaluation of the bidders’ price proposals to ensure that the costs for services
were reasonable or represented a fair value to the State.
 MSD did not obtain DGS and BPW approvals or publish the contract award
on eMaryland Marketplace Advantage (eMMA) as required by State
procurement regulations. MSD contacted DGS for guidance on the
procurement before it solicited bids. Although DGS advised MSD to proceed
with the solicitation and obtain approval from DGS after evaluating the bids,
MSD did not obtain approval from DGS or BPW and did not publish the
contract award as required.
 The MSD supervisory review of vendor invoices did not always detect billing
errors. Our test of five invoices totaling $20,804 disclosed that one invoice
totaling $8,546 was not billed at the rate provided in the related contract.
Although a supervisor signed off that the invoice was reviewed, they did not
identify the erroneous rate. After we brought this matter to MSD
management’s attention, other invoices from the vendor were reviewed and
MSD determined that the vendor was overpaid $6,307 from October 2021 to
November 2022, based on the incorrect rates we identified. As of March 30,
2023, MSD was in the process of recovering the identified overpayments.
10

--- Page 13 ---
 MSD relied on one of the 17 vendors to assign certain sign language services
to the other vendors and itself, without documenting or approving the
methodology. In October 2021, MSD issued a $27,650 sole source contract to
one of the 17 vendors with an hourly rate of $35 to coordinate the sign
language services including the selection of vendors to provide the services.
Given the aforementioned differing vendor rates, the methodology used to
assign work could have an adverse financial impact if it did not result in the
lowest cost vendors being assigned work first. As of January 2023, this
vendor had received $126,150 of the total $469,000 (27 percent) MSD paid
for sign language services under this contract.
A similar condition over non-compliance with certain procurement regulations for
sign language services was commented upon in our preceding audit report. In
response to that report, MSD agreed with our finding and recommendation and
proposed to work with the Department of Budget and Management for approval
of sign language interpreting services contracts that exceed $50,000. Although
MSD took action to competitively bid for sign language interpreting services, as
noted above, it did not obtain appropriate approvals for the contract from
applicable control agencies.
State procurement regulations require contracts with payments over $200,000 to
be approved by BPW and that procurement files include documentation of the
procurement officer’s process of vendor selection (such as, technical proposals
and bid evaluations) be maintained by the contract monitor. The regulations
further require contracts valued in excess of $15,000 to be awarded though a
formal written competitive bidding process with publication of the solicitation on
eMMA. Finally, competitively bid service contracts valued over $50,000 require
publication of the contract award on eMMA.
Recommendation 2
We recommend that MSD
a. procure sign language interpreting services contracts in accordance with
State procurement regulations (repeat);
b. obtain control agencies’ (DGS and BPW) approvals, as required (repeat),
including retroactive approval for the above mentioned contract;
c. ensure that the supervisory review of invoices is effectively conducted and
determine if amounts were improperly paid, recouping any overpayments
(including those noted above); and
d. develop a methodology to independently ensure services are obtained at
the lowest cost.
11

--- Page 14 ---
Finding 3
MSD artificially split certain corporate purchasing card transactions,
circumventing competitive procurement requirements and/or cardholder
single transaction limits. Also, MSD could not document that it used
available Level-3 detailed purchasing data to ensure the propriety of
purchases as required.
Analysis
MSD artificially split certain corporate purchasing card transactions (CPC)
circumventing competitive procurement requirements and/or the cardholder’s
single transaction spending limits. Also, MSD could not document that it used
available Level-3 data to ensure the propriety of purchases as required.
According to MSD’s records, during the period from July 1, 2019 through
January 31, 2023, CPC transactions totaled $2 million and were primarily made
by 2 of MSD’s 22 cardholders.
 MSD artificially split certain purchases into smaller transactions,
circumventing competitive procurement requirements and/or the cardholder’s
single transaction spending limit. Specifically, our test of 16 transactions
totaling $136,125 made by the aforementioned two cardholders, from the
same merchant on the same dates, disclosed that these transactions were
artificially split into several smaller transactions, each under the applicable
cardholder’s single transaction limit of $5,000. For example, one cardholder
split a purchase totaling $20,459 into four equal payments of $4,990 and one
payment of $499, circumventing both the State’s competitive bidding
requirements for purchases over $5,000 and the cardholder’s single
transaction limit.
 Supervisory reviews of monthly CPC activity logs did not use available
Level-3 data to ensure the propriety of the purchases as required. Level-3
data, which are reported by certain merchants, consist of detailed descriptions
of items purchased and provide supervisory personnel with additional
information to help detect questionable purchases. We were advised by MSD
management that supervisors periodically reviewed Level-3 data, independent
of the monthly supervisory reviews of the activity logs; however, MSD could
not provide documentation to support Level-3 data reviews. During the
period from November 30, 2018 through January 31, 2023, we determined
Level-3 data was available for 4,701 CPC transactions totaling $1.1 million.
The Comptroller of Maryland’s Corporate Purchasing Card Policy and
Procedures Manual and State procurement regulations prohibit procurements
from being artificially divided to circumvent competition. The Manual further
12

--- Page 15 ---
requires State agencies to verify Level-3 data to transaction logs and document
monthly reviews of Level-3 data as part of transaction monitoring.
Recommendation 3
We recommend that MSD comply with the Manual by ensuring
a. corporate purchasing card transactions are not artificially split to
circumvent established controls and competitive procurement
requirements, and
b. supervisors use available Level-3 data as a part of a documented monthly
review to aid in the assessment of the propriety of purchases and
payments.
Affiliated Foundation
Finding 4
MSD’s memorandum of agreement (MOA) with its affiliated foundation was
not sufficiently comprehensive, and reports of the foundation’s financial
activity were not submitted to MSD as required.
Analysis
MSD’s MOA with its affiliated foundation was not sufficiently comprehensive,
and reports of the foundation’s financial activity were not submitted to MSD as
required. Our review of the MOA disclosed that it did not include sufficient
details to ensure funds collected on behalf of MSD by the foundation were
properly safeguarded and used for their intended purpose.
 The MOA did not address controls over collected funds including proper
collateralization of funds, the use of interest-bearing accounts, and procedures
for the accounting and reporting of fund balances.
 The MOA did not include guidelines for the distribution of funds and the
amounts that need to be used for the foundation’s stated purpose to enhance
the educational goals established by MSD’s Board of Trustees through
fundraising and providing grants and scholarships to students. As noted
earlier in this report, according to the foundation’s fiscal year 2021 tax filing,
the foundation had a fund balance of $1,870,862. In addition, of the $69,617
expended during that year only $24,377 was for scholarships and grants, with
the remaining $45,240 used for other foundation expenses. The MOA also
did not include guidelines for foundation purchases and disbursements, such
as the use of a competitive procurement process and review and approval of
transactions.
13

--- Page 16 ---
 The MOA did not require the foundation to maintain a conflict-of-interest
policy for board members and foundation employees. Although the
foundation had an ethics policy, the policy was not as comprehensive as that
provided for under State Ethics law, which addresses standards of conduct,
ethics training, and the completion of annual financial disclosures by board
members and officers. Such a policy would provide additional assurance
regarding the integrity of the foundation’s board and its processes and should
include a requirement to disclose to MSD any conflicts-of-interest.
 The foundation has not submitted required financial reports to MSD’s Board
of Trustees since 2019. The MOA requires the foundation to submit to the
Board of Trustees a detailed annual report of reimbursements to foundation
employees and expenditures on behalf of others.
Recommendation 4
We recommend that MSD
a. revise its MOA with the foundation to include details to ensure funds
collected on behalf of MSD are properly safeguarded and used for the
intended purpose, funds are distributed properly, and conflicts of interest
are disclosed; and
b. obtain and review the required annual report of reimbursements and
expenditures, including those noted above.
14

--- Page 17 ---
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the Maryland School for the Deaf
(MSD) for the period beginning November 30, 2018 and ending January 31,
2023. The audit was conducted in accordance with generally accepted
government auditing standards. Those standards require that we plan and perform
the audit to obtain sufficient, appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis
for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives. We believe that
the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and
conclusions based on our audit objectives.
As prescribed by the State Government Article, Section 2-1221 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, the objectives of this audit were to examine MSD’s financial
transactions, records, and internal control, and to evaluate its compliance with
applicable State laws, rules, and regulations.
In planning and conducting our audit, we focused on the major financial-related
areas of operations based on assessments of significance and risk. The areas
addressed by the audit included procurements and disbursements, corporate
purchasing cards, equipment, and payroll. We also determined the status of the
finding contained in our preceding audit report.
Our assessment of internal controls was based on agency procedures and controls
in place at the time of our fieldwork. Our tests of transactions and other auditing
procedures were generally focused on the transactions occurring during our audit
period of November 30, 2018 to January 31, 2023, but may include transactions
before or after this period as we considered necessary to achieve our audit
objectives.
To accomplish our audit objectives, our audit procedures included inquiries of
appropriate personnel, inspections of documents and records, tests of transactions,
and to the extent practicable, observations of MSD’s operations. Generally,
transactions were selected for testing based on auditor judgment, which primarily
considers risk, the timing or dollar amount of the transaction, or the significance
of the transaction to the area of operation reviewed. As a matter of course, we do
not normally use sampling in our tests, so unless otherwise specifically indicated,
neither statistical nor non-statistical audit sampling was used to select the
transactions tested. Therefore, unless sampling is specifically indicated in a
finding, the results from any tests conducted or disclosed by us cannot be used to
project those results to the entire population from which the test items were
selected.
15

--- Page 18 ---
We also performed various data extracts of pertinent information from the State’s
Financial Management Information System (such as revenue and expenditure
data) and the State’s Central Payroll Bureau (payroll data). The extracts are
performed as part of ongoing internal processes established by the Office of
Legislative Audits and were subject to various tests to determine data reliability.
We determined that the data extracted from these sources were sufficiently
reliable for the purposes the data were used during this audit. Finally, we
performed other auditing procedures that we considered necessary to achieve our
audit objectives. The reliability of data used in this report for background or
informational purposes was not assessed.
MSD’s management is responsible for establishing and maintaining effective
internal control. Internal control is a process designed to provide reasonable
assurance that objectives pertaining to the reliability of financial records;
effectiveness and efficiency of operations, including safeguarding of assets; and
compliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations are achieved. As
provided in Government Auditing Standards, there are five components of
internal control: control environment, risk assessment, control activities,
information and communication, and monitoring. Each of the five components,
when significant to the audit objectives, and as applicable to MSD, were
considered by us during the course of this audit.
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate.
Our reports are designed to assist the Maryland General Assembly in exercising
its legislative oversight function and to provide constructive recommendations for
improving State operations. As a result, our reports generally do not address
activities we reviewed that are functioning properly.
This report includes findings relating to conditions that we consider to be
significant deficiencies in the design or operation of internal control that could
adversely affect MSD’s ability to maintain reliable financial records, operate
effectively and efficiently, and/or comply with applicable laws, rules, and
regulations. Our report also includes findings regarding significant instances of
noncompliance with applicable laws, rules, or regulations. Other less significant
findings were communicated to MSD that did not warrant inclusion in this report.
MSD’s response to our findings and recommendations is included as an appendix
to this report. As prescribed in the State Government Article, Section 2-1224 of
16

--- Page 19 ---
the Annotated Code of Maryland, we will advise MSD regarding the results of our
review of its response.
17

--- Page 20 ---
APPENDIX
January 9, 2024
Mr. Gregory Hook
Office of Legislative Audits
The Warehouse at Camden Yards
351 West Camden Street
Suite 400
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Dear Mr. Hook:
Enclosed please find the Agency Response Form for the Maryland School for the Deaf. The
agency agrees with all findings and has either completed the recommended action or is in the
process of completing the recommended actions.
Should you have any questions, please do not hesitate to contact either Ann Miller, 301-360-
2010 or ann.miller@msd.edu or I, 301-360-2005 or john.serrano@msd.edu.
Sincerely,
John A. Serrano
Superintendent

--- Page 21 ---
Maryland School for the Deaf
Agency Response Form
Procurements and Disbursements
Finding 1
MSD did not always comply with State procurement regulations.
We recommend that MSD comply with State procurement regulations. Specifically, we
recommend that MSD
a. ensure contract deliverables are received before approving invoices for payment;
b. obtain the aforementioned missing deliverables from the independent assessment
consultant or pursue recovery of payments if the deliverables are not provided;
c. document contract modifications and obtain required approvals;
d. execute written contracts that include all relevant contract provisions;
e. obtain DGS and BPW approval as required, including retroactive approval for the
previously awarded unapproved sole source curriculum contract;
f. publish contract solicitations and awards in eMMA; and
g. solicit competitive bids when required and ensure contract bids are submitted via
eMMA or adequately secured prior to being opened.
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide MSD is taking steps to clean up procurement processes.
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 1a Agree Estimated Completion Date: February
2024
Please provide details of Training of contract monitors in approving invoices and monitoring
corrective action or deliverables on contracts and ensure contract deliverables are
explain disagreement. received before approving invoices for payment
Recommendation 1b Agree Estimated Completion Date: September
2023
Please provide details of Independent consultant provided deliverables in September 2023.
corrective action or
explain disagreement.
Recommendation 1c Agree Estimated Completion Date: Spring 2024
Page 1 of 6

--- Page 22 ---
Maryland School for the Deaf
Agency Response Form
Please provide details of MSD will require agency procurement staff take courses from the
corrective action or Office of State Procurement. This has already begun and will
explain disagreement. continue through the spring of 2024. It will also occur whenever a
new procurement person is hired. We will document contract
modifications and obtain required approvals.
Recommendation 1d Agree Estimated Completion Date: Fall 2024
Please provide details of MSD will request an additional PIN with the FY 2025 budget to
corrective action or assist in the paperwork required of multi-year solicitations for
explain disagreement. curriculum purchases. MSD currently only has one procurement
officer and one agency buyer. To increase the volume of contracts
MSD will require an additional person. In addition, the current
procurement officer will take courses from the Office of State
Procurement. We will execute written contracts that include all
relevant contract provisions.
Recommendation 1e Agree Estimated Completion Date: Fall 2024
Please provide details of MSD has begun working with the Office of State Procurement on
corrective action or retroactive procurements.
explain disagreement.
Recommendation 1f Agree Estimated Completion Date: Fall 2023
Please provide details of MSD is now publishing contract awards in eMMA.
corrective action or
explain disagreement.
Recommendation 1g Agree Estimated Completion Date: Fall 2023
Please provide details of MSD is now receiving contract bids securely through eMMA.
corrective action or
explain disagreement.
Page 2 of 6

--- Page 23 ---
Maryland School for the Deaf
Agency Response Form
Finding 2
MSD’s procurement and use of vendors for sign language interpreting services did not
comply with State procurement regulations and did not ensure the services were received
at the lowest price.
We recommend that MSD
a. procure sign language interpreting services contracts in accordance with State
procurement regulations (repeat);
b. obtain control agencies’ (DGS and BPW) approvals, as required (repeat), including
retroactive approval for the above mentioned contract;
c. ensure that the supervisory review of invoices is effectively conducted and determine if
amounts were improperly paid, recouping any overpayments (including those noted
above); and
d. develop a methodology to independently ensure services are obtained at the lowest cost.
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide MSD only completed half of the procurement process for the
additional comments as previous American Sign Language Interpreting contract. MSD is
deemed necessary. working to correct this error.
Recommendation 2a Agree Estimated Completion Date: Spring 2024
Please provide details of MSD has submitted a solicitation request to the Office of State
corrective action or Procurement for an American Sign Language Interpreter contract.
explain disagreement. The process is taking longer than anticipated and MSD anticipates a
new contract to be awarded in the spring of 2024.
Recommendation 2b Agree Estimated Completion Date: Summer 2024
Please provide details of MSD is working with the Office of State Procurement on a
corrective action or retroactive procurement.
explain disagreement.
Recommendation 2c Agree Estimated Completion Date: Fall 2023
Please provide details of MSD has assigned an independent person to review invoices for
corrective action or proper hourly rates and all approval documents. The past
explain disagreement. overpayment of $5,933.00 has been recovered by the agency.
Recommendation 2d Agree Estimated Completion Date: Spring 2024
Page 3 of 6

--- Page 24 ---
Maryland School for the Deaf
Agency Response Form
Please provide details of MSD will award the American Sign Language Interpreting contract
corrective action or to an interpreting agency with additional agencies on the contract
explain disagreement. should the lowest priced agency be unable to fill an interpreting job.
MSD is expecting the amount expended on interpreters to increase
with this new contract, due to the shortage of interpreters.
Page 4 of 6

--- Page 25 ---
Maryland School for the Deaf
Agency Response Form
Finding 3
MSD artificially split certain corporate purchasing card transactions, circumventing
competitive procurement requirements and/or cardholder single transaction limits. Also,
MSD could not document that it used available Level-3 detailed purchasing data to ensure
the propriety of purchases as required.
We recommend that MSD comply with the Manual by ensuring
a. corporate purchasing card transactions are not artificially split to circumvent
established controls and competitive procurement requirements, and
b. supervisors use available Level-3 data as a part of a documented monthly review to aid
in the assessment of the propriety of purchases and payments.
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide MSD purchased air purifiers and other COVID supplies in order to
additional comments as return students to in person instruction. MSD does not expect to
deemed necessary. operate in this type of situation again.
Recommendation 3a Agree Estimated Completion Date: Fall 2023
Please provide details of MSD is now complying with all corporate purchasing card
corrective action or regulations
explain disagreement.
Recommendation 3b Agree Estimated Completion Date: Fall 2023
Please provide details of MSD is reviewing and documenting the Level – 3 data.
corrective action or
explain disagreement.
Page 5 of 6

--- Page 26 ---
Maryland School for the Deaf
Agency Response Form
Affiliated Foundation
Finding 4
MSD’s memorandum of agreement (MOA) with its affiliated foundation was not
sufficiently comprehensive, and reports of the foundation’s financial activity were not
submitted to MSD as required.
We recommend that MSD
a. revise its MOA with the foundation to include details to ensure funds collected on
behalf of MSD are properly safeguarded and used for the intended purpose, funds are
distributed properly, and conflicts of interest are disclosed; and
b. obtain and review the required annual report of reimbursements and expenditures,
including those noted above.
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide The MOA is outdated and will be updated.
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 4a Agree Estimated Completion Date: Spring 2024
Please provide details of MSD’s assistant attorney general is currently revising the original
corrective action or MOA between MSD and the MSD Foundation to ensure funds
explain disagreement. collected are properly safeguarded and used for the intended
purpose, funds are distributed properly and conflicts of interest are
disclosed.
Recommendation 4b Agree Estimated Completion Date: Spring 2024
Please provide details of MSD is working with the MSD Foundation to receive the financial
corrective action or statements.
explain disagreement.
Page 6 of 6

--- Page 27 ---
A T
UDIT EAM
Bekana Edossa, CPA, CFE
Audit Manager
Matusala Y. Abishe
Senior Auditor
Jennifer N. Sayre, CFE
Staff Auditor