Title: Department of Commerce
Date: 09/04/2019
Type: Fiscal Compliance
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5d727a79a1ce580720ff75e6
Extracted: 2025-06-19T06:18:00.896791
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Audit Report
Department of Commerce
December 2023
Public Notice
In compliance with the requirements of the State Government Article Section
2-1224(i), of the Annotated Code of Maryland, the Office of Legislative Audits
has redacted cybersecurity findings and related auditee responses
from this public report.
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Senator Clarence K. Lam, M.D. (Senate Chair) Delegate Jared Solomon (House Chair)
Senator Joanne C. Benson Delegate Steven J. Arentz
Senator Paul D. Corderman Delegate Andrea Fletcher Harrison
Senator Katie Fry Hester Delegate Steven C. Johnson
Senator Shelly L. Hettleman Delegate Mary A. Lehman
Senator Cheryl C. Kagan Delegate David Moon
Senator Cory V. McCray Delegate Julie Palakovich Carr
Senator Justin D. Ready Delegate Stephanie M. Smith
Senator Bryan W. Simonaire Delegate M. Courtney Watson
Senator Craig J. Zucker One Vacancy
To Obtain Further Information
Office of Legislative Audits
The Warehouse at Camden Yards
351 West Camden Street, Suite 400
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Phone: 410-946-5900
Maryland Relay: 711
TTY: 410-946-5401 ꞏ 301-970-5401
E-mail: webmaster@ola.state.md.us
Website: www.ola.state.md.us
To Report Fraud
The Office of Legislative Audits operates a Fraud Hotline to report fraud, waste, or abuse involving State
of Maryland government resources. Reports of fraud, waste, or abuse may be communicated anonymously
by a toll-free call to 1-877-FRAUD-11, by mail to the Fraud Hotline, c/o Office of Legislative Audits, or
through the Office’s website.
Nondiscrimination Statement
The Department of Legislative Services does not discriminate on the basis of age, ancestry, color, creed,
marital status, national origin, race, religion, gender, gender identity, sexual orientation, or disability in the
admission or access to its programs, services, or activities. The Department’s Information Officer has been
designated to coordinate compliance with the nondiscrimination requirements contained in Section 35.107
of the United States Department of Justice Regulations. Requests for assistance should be directed to the
Information Officer at 410-946-5400 or 410-970-5400.

--- Page 3 ---
December 13, 2023
Senator Clarence K. Lam, M.D., Senate Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Delegate Jared Solomon, House Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Members of Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Annapolis, Maryland
Ladies and Gentlemen:
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the Department of Commerce
(DOC) for the period beginning December 19, 2017 and ending January 31, 2022.
DOC’s primary purpose is to stimulate and strengthen the Maryland economy by
developing policies and implementing programs to help generate new jobs and
retain existing jobs. DOC also helps develop policies and implements programs
to help generate investments by attracting businesses to the State, by facilitating
the expansion and retention of existing companies, and by promoting Maryland’s
strategic assets. DOC uses various financing programs and incentives, such as
loans, grants, tax credits, and other financial investments to accomplish its
purpose.
Our audit disclosed that DOC did not have an effective process to verify that
institutions of higher education had secured private matching funds as required,
and that expenditures were made only for eligible purposes when awarding
research funds from the Maryland E-Nnovation Fund, which totaled $38.9 million
in fiscal years 2019 through 2022. In addition, DOC did not have sufficient
controls over the transfer of funds from the Small, Minority, and Women-Owned
Businesses Account to fund manager accounts and for the subsequent
disbursement of those funds, which totaled $25.3 million during our audit period.
Our audit also disclosed that DOC had not established adequate procedures and
controls over the award and disbursement of certain Maryland State Arts Council
grants, such as verifying certain critical eligibility requirements. Those awards
totaled $15.2 million during fiscal year 2021.

--- Page 4 ---
Furthermore, our audit disclosed cybersecurity-related findings. However, in
accordance with the State Government Article, Section 2-1224(i) of the
Annotated Code of Maryland, we have redacted these findings from this audit
report. Specifically, State law requires the Office of Legislative Audits to redact
cybersecurity findings in a manner consistent with auditing best practices before
the report is made available to the public. The term “cybersecurity” is defined in
the State Finance and Procurement Article, Section 3.5-301(b), and using our
professional judgment we have determined that the redacted findings fall under
the referenced definition. The specifics of the cybersecurity findings were
previously communicated to those parties responsible for acting on our
recommendations.
Finally, our audit included a review to determine the status of the nine findings
contained in our preceding audit report. For the non-cybersecurity-related
findings we determined that DOC satisfactorily addressed six of those eight
findings. The remaining two findings are repeated in this report.
DOC’s response to this audit is included as an appendix to this report. In
accordance with State law, we have reviewed the response and, while DOC
generally agrees with the recommendations in this report, we identified certain
instances in which statements in the response conflict with or disagree with the
report findings. In each instance, we reviewed and reassessed our audit
documentation, and reaffirmed the validity of our finding. In accordance with
generally accepted government auditing standards, we have included “auditor’s
comments” within DOC’s Finding 3 response to explain our position. In addition,
there are other aspects of DOC’s response which will require further clarification,
but we do not anticipate that these will require the Joint Audit and Evaluation
Committee’s attention to resolve. In addition, in accordance with our policy, we
have edited DOC’s response to remove any vendor names or products mentioned
by DOC in this document. Finally, consistent with State law, we have redacted
the elements of DOC’s response related to the cybersecurity audit findings.
We wish to acknowledge the cooperation extended to us during the audit by DOC.
We also wish to acknowledge DOC’s willingness to address the audit issues and
implement appropriate corrective actions.
Respectfully submitted,
Gregory A. Hook, CPA
Legislative Auditor
2

--- Page 5 ---
Table of Contents
Background Information 4
Agency Responsibilities 4
State Grants Audit 6
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report 6
Findings and Recommendations 8
Maryland E-Nnovation Initiative Fund (MEIF)
* Finding 1 – The Department of Commerce (DOC) did not have an 8
effective process to ensure that MEIF recipients secured and
deposited required private funding (donations), and that the related
expenditures were made for qualified purposes.
Small, Minority, and Women-Owned Businesses Account (SMWOBA)
Finding 2 – DOC did not have sufficient controls over the transfer of 10
funds from the SMWOBA to fund manager accounts, as well as the
subsequent disbursement of those funds by managers.
Maryland State Arts Council Grants
* Finding 3 – DOC had not established adequate procedures and controls 11
over the award and disbursement of Grants for Organizations
program grants.
Information Systems Security and Control
Finding 4 – Redacted cybersecurity-related finding 13
Finding 5 – Redacted cybersecurity-related finding 13
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology 14
Agency Response Appendix
 Denotes item repeated in full or part from preceding audit report
3

--- Page 6 ---
Background Information
Agency Responsibilities
The Department of Commerce (DOC) is a principal department of Maryland State
government and operates in accordance with the Economic Development Article
of the Annotated Code of Maryland. DOC’s mission is to stimulate and
strengthen the Maryland economy by developing policies and implementing
programs to help generate new jobs and retain existing jobs. It also develops
policies and implements programs to help generate investment by attracting
businesses to the State, by facilitating the expansion and retention of existing
companies, and by promoting Maryland’s strategic assets. DOC uses various
financing programs and incentives, such as loans, grants, tax credits, and other
financial investments to accomplish its mission.
DOC’s fiscal year 2022 appropriation provided for 189 employee positions.
According to the State’s records, during fiscal year 2022, DOC’s expenditures
totaled approximately $154.7 million (see Figure 1 on the following page).
4

--- Page 7 ---
Figure 1
DOC Positions, Expenditures, and Funding Sources
Full Time Equivalent Positions as of June 30, 2022
Positions Percent
Filled 173 91.5%
Frozen1 2 1.1%
Vacant 14 7.4%
Total 189
Fiscal Year 2022 Expenditures
Expenditures Percent
Salaries, Wages, and Fringe Benefits $ 22,241,561 14.4%
Technical and Special Fees 1,795,301 1.1%
Operating Expenses 130,673,834 84.5%
Total $ 154,710,696
Fiscal Year 2022 Funding Sources
Funding Percent
General Fund $ 86,423,701 55.9%
Special Fund 64,345,120 41.6%
Federal Fund 2,168,167 1.4%
Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and
Economic Security Act 942,008 0.6%
American Rescue Plan Act of 21 831,700 0.5%
Total $ 154,710,696
Source: State financial and personnel records
1 Prior to December 1, 2021, a hiring freeze resulted in certain positions being frozen. Frozen
positions were unauthorized to be filled according to budgetary instructions from the Department
of Budget and Management. Any position that is currently marked as frozen has not been filled
since the freeze was lifted; however, these positions now are available to be filled.
5

--- Page 8 ---
State Grants Audit
On November 10, 2021, we issued a performance report on State Grants to assess
the State’s policies and guidance for advertising, awarding, and monitoring State-
funded grants. The report contained two findings related to DOC.
 DOC did not use a competitive method to award discretionary tourism
grants and documentation was not available to support the propriety of the
awards, including one award which was not calculated properly.
 DOC did not obtain documentation for a $373,200 payment to a local
government for a tourism marketing grant, as required.
In response to the report, DOC agreed with these findings and related
recommendations. Based on professional judgment (our assessment of risk and
significance), we did not review tourism grants during our current audit, but we
did review other selected grants based on materiality and risk and the related
results of our review are included in this report.
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report
Our audit included a review to determine the status of the nine findings contained
on our preceding audit report dated September 4, 2019. As disclosed in Figure 2
on the following page, for the non-cybersecurity-related findings, we determined
that DOC satisfactorily addressed six of those eight findings. The remaining two
findings are repeated in this report.
6

--- Page 9 ---
Figure 2
Status of Preceding Findings
Preceding Implementation
Finding Description
Finding Status
DOC had not established effective procedures to ensure
that One Maryland Tax Credit applicants accurately
Finding 1 reported their compliance with required new job creation Not repeated
numbers, and a tax credit was issued to one applicant
based on ineligible project costs.
DOC did not have procedures to ensure biotechnology
companies accurately reported employment and
ownership information prior to being certified and the
Finding 2 Not repeated
issuance of tax credits to investors. In addition, DOC
did not establish procedures to identify tax credits
subject to recapture.
DOC did not establish a sufficient process to verify loan
recipients met employment requirements before
forgiving conditional loans. In addition, DOC paid
Finding 3 Not repeated
certain loan guarantees without obtaining, reviewing,
and verifying adequate documentation to support lender
claims.
DOC did not have an established process to ensure that
MEIF recipients secured and deposited required private Repeated
Finding 4
funding (donations), and that the related expenditures (Current Finding 1)
were made for qualified purposes.
DOC had not established effective procedures and Repeated
Finding 5 (Current Finding 3)
controls over the MSAC’s GFO program.
DOC did not have a process to ensure that fund manager
Finding 6 agreements included critical details relating to loan Not repeated
underwriting processes.
DOC did not establish an effective process to verify
Finding 7 Not repeated
fund manager compensation.
DOC did not verify data reported by fund managers
Finding 8 relating to their efforts to meet certain specific program Not repeated
lending goals.
Certain purchasing and disbursement transactions and
Finding 9 access to the State’s Financial Management Information Status Redacted 2
System (FMIS) were not sufficiently controlled.
2 Specific information on the current status of this cybersecurity–related finding has been redacted
from the publicly available report in accordance with State Government Article, Section 2-
1224(i) of the Annotated Code of Maryland.
7

--- Page 10 ---
Findings and Recommendations
Maryland E-Nnovation Initiative Fund
Background
The Maryland E-Nnovation Initiative Fund (MEIF) provides State matching funds
in support of research endowments at Maryland non-profit institutions of higher
education (NPIHE). NPIHEs generally include any institution of postsecondary
education that receives State funds in its annual operating budget and awards
degrees at the associate, baccalaureate, or graduate level. State law requires the
Governor to appropriate at least $8.5 million annually for MEIF through fiscal
year 2026.3 According to its records, the Department of Commerce (DOC)
awarded funds to 14 NPIHEs totaling approximately $38.9 million during fiscal
years 2019 through 2022.
To receive MEIF funds, an institution must submit an application that includes its
research endowment plan and identify qualified donations in the form of cash or
cash equivalents to match the amount of State funding requested. Within 90 days
after approval, the institution must deposit into the endowment an amount of
qualified donations equal to or greater than the total amount of MEIF funds it was
allocated. State regulations allow the institution to use MEIF funds to establish
new positions associated with the research endowment, such as research
scientists, and to purchase research infrastructure, such as laboratory equipment.
Finding 1
DOC did not have an effective process to ensure that MEIF recipients
secured and deposited required private funding (donations), and that the
related expenditures were made for qualified purposes.
Analysis
DOC did not have an effective process to verify that MEIF recipients secured and
deposited the required qualified donations, and that the related expenditures were
for the purposes allowed by State regulations. We reviewed five awards totaling
$5.7 million made to five NPIHEs during fiscal years 2020 through 2022.
 DOC did not obtain sufficient support to ensure that matching funds were
received and deposited into the appropriate endowment fund, as required.
Specifically, DOC obtained gift receipts and investment statements showing
3 Chapter 14, Laws of Maryland 2021 extended the annual appropriation requirement from fiscal
year 2021 to fiscal year 2026.
8

--- Page 11 ---
endowment fund balances but did not obtain supporting documentation that
such receipts and balances represented matching qualified donations.
 DOC did not independently verify that State matching funds were used for
permitted purposes. Specifically, DOC relied on annual unaudited reports
prepared by each NPIHE, as well as a signed certification by each NPIHE,
that the funds were spent in accordance with State regulations. DOC did not
independently verify the amounts reported, by requesting supporting
documentation or conducting periodic audits, as provided for in the grant
agreements.
Similar conditions were noted in our preceding audit report. Although DOC
expressed concerns during our prior audit with requiring additional support and
conducting audits, its response to our prior report indicated that by December 31,
2019, its Office of Internal Audits would, on a test basis, periodically review
MEIF documents for a sampled number of NPIHEs, to determine compliance
with MEIF requirements. This review was not implemented during the current
audit period.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that DOC establish a process to verify, at least on a test
basis, NPIHE compliance with MEIF requirements. Such a process could
include on-site audits or obtaining appropriate documentation from MEIF
recipients to ensure that qualified donations were deposited into the
designated research endowment, and verifying that State funds were only
used for purposes allowed by State regulations (repeat).
Small, Minority, and Women-Owned Businesses Account
Background
The Small, Minority, and Women-Owned Businesses Account (SMWOBA)
provides investment capital and loans to small, minority, and women-owned
businesses throughout Maryland. The SMWOBA has historically been funded by
1.5 percent of video lottery terminal (VLT) proceeds4 collected by the State’s six
casinos with VLTs and State law provides that 50 percent of loans are to be
allocated to businesses in the jurisdictions and communities surrounding these
facilities. DOC has agreements with nine fund managers to provide investment
4 In accordance with State law, fiscal year 2019 and 2020 VLT proceeds were credited to the
Education Trust Fund. In 2021 1.5 percent of VLT proceeds were again dedicated to the
SMWOBA and an additional $10 million was allocated to SMWOBA through the American
Rescue Plan Act of 2021.
9

--- Page 12 ---
capital and loans to small, minority, and women-owned businesses. The
agreements provide descriptions of the services and responsibilities of the fund
managers, including making and servicing loans or investing in targeted
businesses, and submitting certain reports and audited financial statements to
DOC.
Fund managers request monies from the SMWOBA investment account up to the
amount of their award, as funds are needed for investment and loan activity. Each
manager maintains any funds received from DOC in a separate bank account
established in trust for the benefit of the State. These funds, plus any repaid loan
principal, are made available for new investment capital and loans. With the
exception of fund manager compensation, all grants, loan assets, and related
records remain the property of the State. Under the agreements, the fund
managers are primarily compensated for program costs by origination and
transaction fees paid by the businesses, and interest earned on loan assets.
Fund managers are required to have certain agreed upon procedures performed by
an independent auditor to examine certain program activity, and the results of
these examinations are reported to DOC. According to DOC records, during our
audit period, approximately $25.4 million was disbursed to fund managers from
the investment account. The available SMWOBA balance as of June 30, 2022
was $8.5 million.
Finding 2
DOC did not have sufficient controls over the transfer of funds from the
SMWOBA to fund manager accounts, as well as the subsequent
disbursement of those funds by managers.
Analysis
DOC did not have sufficient controls over the transfer of funds from the
SMWOBA to fund manager accounts, or the subsequent disbursement of those
funds. Specifically, one DOC employee was unilaterally responsible for verifying
the propriety of transfer requests and supporting documentation, such as loan
promissory notes, received from fund managers. This employee approved a
memo to DOC’s fiscal unit authorizing transfer of the funds. Although certain
other employees also reviewed the transfer requests and signed the memo to the
fiscal unit, they did so only to ensure and represent that the requested funds were
available, not that the request was valid. Under these conditions, errors or other
discrepancies could occur without timely detection.
Furthermore, we were advised by DOC that it relies on the aforementioned agreed
upon procedures to ensure that all disbursements from fund manager accounts are
10

--- Page 13 ---
proper. However, the agreed upon procedures were not comprehensive as they
did not include selecting and testing disbursements from independent
documentation of all disbursements made, specifically the bank statements for
fund manager accounts. Consequently, there was a lack of assurance that all
disbursements were subject to testing.
Recommendation 2
We recommend that DOC establish sufficient controls over the transfer and
disbursement of SMWOBA funds. Specifically, we recommend that DOC
a. implement a procedure to independently verify all transfers from the
SMWOBA to a valid fund manager request and supporting
documentation; and
b. modify the agreed upon procedures to ensure that all disbursements from
fund manager accounts are subject to testing, by requiring selection and
testing of disbursements from fund manager account bank statements.
Maryland State Arts Council Grants
Background
The Maryland State Arts Council (MSAC), a unit under DOC’s Division of
Tourism, Film, and the Arts, administers the Grants for Organizations (GFO)
program that provides annual unrestricted general operating funds to nonprofit
and tax-exempt organizations and units of government that produce or present
ongoing arts programming open to the public. According to MSAC’s fiscal year
2022 annual report, MSAC disbursed $16 million to 260 GFO grantees.
Finding 3
DOC had not established adequate procedures and controls over the award
and disbursement of GFO program grants.
Analysis
DOC had not established adequate procedures and control over the award and
disbursement of GFO program grants.
 DOC did not adequately ensure applicants were qualified to receive a grant.
Specifically, DOC did not verify that applicants were incorporated in
Maryland or had a significant presence in Maryland (such as by reviewing the
State’s Department of Assessments and Taxation website), which is required
to be eligible for a grant. In addition, our judgmental test of nine GFO grants
totaling approximately $2.9 million, disclosed that DOC could not document
that it conducted site visits for four grants with awards totaling approximately
11

--- Page 14 ---
$440,000. GFO guidelines require the site visits to aid in the decision-making
process by evaluating if potential grantees meet GFO guidelines.
 DOC did not have adequate documentation of the Secretary’s final approval
of grant awards as required by DOC guidelines for GFO grants. DOC could
not provide a decision memo, which is required to document the Secretary’s
annual approval of the final funding for all grants, for fiscal year 2021. In
addition, although a memo was provided for fiscal year 2022, it did not
specifically include documentation of the Secretary’s approval. We were
advised by DOC that the Secretary verbally approved the grant funding for
fiscal year 2022 during a MSAC meeting.
 DOC did not obtain documentation from GFO grantees, such as bank
statements and invoices, to ensure that State funds were appropriately
matched and were used for allowable expenditures. Grantees are required to
provide matching funds of at least a three-to-one level and must use the funds
for specific expenses (such as for artist salaries, theater sets, and marketing).
DOC relied on a grantee self-certified report to show matching funds received
and related expenditures, without obtaining and reviewing supporting
documents to ensure the amounts reported were valid. The GFO grant
agreements provide that DOC may inspect the grantee records at any time.
A similar condition was included in our preceding audit report. In response to
that report, DOC indicated that a spot check of 1 in every 30 applications
would be performed to ensure matching funds were provided. However,
during our current audit period no spot checks were being conducted.
 DOC did not reconcile total GFO grant disbursements recorded in its grants
management system with the State’s accounting records to help ensure that
only valid transactions had been processed and recorded. Our review
disclosed that the $11,120,768 of disbursements recorded in the grants
management system for the period of July 1, 2021 through December 31,
2021 exceeded the disbursements recorded in the State’s accounting records
($10,895,362) by $225,406. DOC could not readily explain the difference. A
similar condition was commented upon in our preceding audit report. In
response to that report, DOC had agreed to conduct a comprehensive
reconciliation on a quarterly basis, however, no comprehensive reconciliations
were performed during the audit period.
12

--- Page 15 ---
Recommendation 3
We recommend that DOC establish effective procedures and control over the
award and disbursement of GFO program grants. Specifically, we
recommend that DOC
a. takes steps prior to awarding a grant to ensure that an applicant is
incorporated in Maryland, and perform a site visit as required;
b. ensure that the Secretary’s review of annual GFO awards is formally
documented in writing;
c. obtain and review appropriate documentation, such as bank statements
and invoices, at least on a test basis, to ensure that each grantee matched
the grant funds received as required and that grant funds were used for
allowable purposes (repeat); and
d. periodically reconcile grant disbursements in the grants management
system with similar amounts in the State’s accounting records and
investigate and resolve any differences noted (repeat).
Information Systems Security and Control
We determined that the Information Systems Security and Control section,
including Findings 4 and 5 related to “cybersecurity”, as defined by the State
Finance and Procurement Article, Section 3.5-301(b) of the Annotated Code of
Maryland, and therefore are subject to redaction from the publicly available audit
report in accordance with the State Government Article 2-1224(i). Consequently,
the specifics of the following findings, including the analysis, related
recommendations, along with DOC’s responses, have been redacted from this
report copy.
Finding 4
Redacted cybersecurity-related finding.
Finding 5
Redacted cybersecurity-related finding.
13

--- Page 16 ---
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the Department of Commerce
(DOC) for the period beginning December 19, 2017 and ending January 31, 2022.
The audit was conducted in accordance with generally accepted government
auditing standards. Those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to
obtain sufficient, appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our
findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives. We believe that the
evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions
based on our audit objectives.
As prescribed by the State Government Article, Section 2-1221 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, the objectives of this audit were to examine DOC’s financial
transactions, records, and internal control, and to evaluate its compliance with
applicable State laws, rules, and regulations.
In planning and conducting our audit, we focused on the major financial-related
areas of operations based on assessments of significance and risk. The areas
addressed by the audit included financing programs, tax incentive programs, grant
programs, COVID-19 relief funds, and the State’s Financial Management
Information System (FMIS) security and control. We also determined the status
of the findings contained in our preceding audit report.
Our assessment of internal controls was based on agency procedures and controls
in place at the time of our fieldwork. Our tests of transactions and other auditing
procedures were generally focused on the transactions occurring during our audit
period of December 19, 2017 and ending January 31, 2022, but may include
transactions before or after this period as we considered necessary to achieve our
audit objectives.
To accomplish our audit objectives, our audit procedures included inquiries of
appropriate personnel, inspections of documents and records, tests of transactions,
and to the extent practicable, observations of DOC’s operations. Generally,
transactions were selected for testing based on auditor judgment, which primarily
considers risk, the timing or dollar amount of the transaction, or the significance
of the transaction to the area of operation reviewed. As a matter of course, we do
not normally use sampling in our tests, so unless otherwise specifically indicated,
neither statistical nor non-statistical audit sampling was used to select the
transactions tested. Therefore, unless sampling is specifically indicated in a
finding, the results from any tests conducted or disclosed by us cannot be used to
project those results to the entire population from which the test items were
selected.
14

--- Page 17 ---
We also performed various data extracts of pertinent information from the State’s
Financial Management Information System (such as revenue and expenditure
data). The extracts are performed as part of ongoing internal processes
established by the Office of Legislative Audits and were subject to various tests to
determine data reliability. We determined that the data extracted from this source
was sufficiently reliable for the purposes the data were used during this audit.
We also extracted data from DOC’s automated grant management systems and
automated financing programs monitoring system for the purpose of testing
certain attributes and functions, such as grant awards, eligibility for financing, and
DOC’s monitoring efforts. We performed various tests of the relevant data and
determined that the data were sufficiently reliable for the purposes the data were
used during the audit. Finally, we performed other auditing procedures that we
considered necessary to achieve our audit objectives. The reliability of data used
in this report for background or informational purposes was not assessed.
DOC’s management is responsible for establishing and maintaining effective
internal control. Internal control is a process designed to provide reasonable
assurance that objectives pertaining to the reliability of financial records;
effectiveness and efficiency of operations, including safeguarding of assets; and
compliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations are achieved. As
provided in Government Auditing Standards, there are five components of
internal control: control environment, risk assessment, control activities,
information and communication, and monitoring. Each of the five components,
when significant to the audit objectives, and as applicable to DOC, were
considered by us during the course of this audit.
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate.
Our reports are designed to assist the Maryland General Assembly in exercising
its legislative oversight function and to provide constructive recommendations for
improving State operations. As a result, our reports generally do not address
activities we reviewed that are functioning properly.
This report includes findings relating to conditions that we consider to be
significant deficiencies in the design or operation of internal control that could
adversely affect DOC’s ability to maintain reliable financial records, operate
effectively and efficiently, and/or comply with applicable laws, rules, and
regulations. Our report also includes findings regarding significant instances of
15

--- Page 18 ---
noncompliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations. Other less significant
findings were communicated to DOC that did not warrant inclusion in this report.
State Government Article Section 2-1224(i) requires that we redact in a manner
consistent with auditing best practices any cybersecurity findings before a report
is made available to the public. This results in the issuance of two different
versions of an audit report that contains cybersecurity findings – a redacted
version for the public and an unredacted version for government officials
responsible for acting on our audit recommendations.
The State Finance and Procurement Article, Section 3.5-301(b), states that
cybersecurity is defined as “processes or capabilities wherein systems,
communications, and information are protected and defended against damage,
unauthorized use or modification, and exploitation.” Based on that definition, and
in our professional judgment, we concluded that certain findings in this report fall
under that definition. Consequently, for the publicly available audit report all
specifics as to the nature of cybersecurity findings and required corrective actions
have been redacted. We have determined that such aforementioned practices, and
government auditing standards, support the redaction of this information from the
public audit report. The specifics of these cybersecurity findings have been
communicated to DOC and those parties responsible for acting on our
recommendations in an unredacted audit report.
DOC’s response to our findings and recommendations is included as an appendix
to this report. Depending on the version of the audit report, responses to any
cybersecurity findings may be redacted in accordance with State law. As
prescribed in the State Government Article, Section 2-1224 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, we will advise DOC regarding the results of our review of its
response.
16

--- Page 19 ---
APPENDIX
•
Maryland Wes Moore I Governor
Aruna Miller I Lt. Governor
Kevin A. Anderson I Secretary of Commerce
DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE Signe Pringle I Deputy Secretary of Commerce
November 16, 2023
Mr. Gregory A. Hook, CPA
Legislative Auditor
Office of Legislative Audits
301 W. Preston Street
Baltimore, MD 21201
Dear Hook:
Please find enclosed the Maryland Department of Commerce response to the Legislative
Auditor's draft report for our fiscal/compliance audit for the period beginning.
December 19, 2017, and ending January 31, 2022.
I would like to personally thank you and your team for the work to complete the audit. I
value your efforts to ensure the state government is run as efficiently and effectively as possible.
The audit team partnered closely with the team here at Commerce and we appreciate the effort to
support the quality of our .department and its important work for the State of Maryland. I look
forward to continued collaboration during my tenure.
We also appreciate the audit team meeting with the Commerce team to review findings and
final recommendations. I will direct my team to continue to collaborate and partner with the auditors
to implement recommendations to continue driving improvements to the productivity and efficiency
of my department.
Should you have any questions, please contact David McDaniels at 410-767-6294.
Sine rely
Kevm Anderson
Secretary
OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY
World Trade Center I 401 East Pratt Street I Baltimore, MD ·21202 I 410-767-6301 I 888-246-6736
commerce.maryland.gov

--- Page 20 ---
Department of Commerce
Agency Response Form
Maryland E-Nnovation Initiative Fund
Finding 1
DOC did not have an effective process to ensure that MEIF recipients secured and
deposited required private funding (donations), and that the related expenditures were
made for qualified purposes.
We recommend that DOC establish a process to verify, at least on a test basis, NPIHE
compliance with MEIF requirements. Such a process could include on-site audits or
obtaining appropriate documentation from MEIF recipients to ensure that qualified
donations were deposited into the designated research endowment, and verifying that State
funds were only used for purposes allowed by State regulations (repeat).
Agency Response
Analysis Factually Accurate
Please provide
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 1 Agree Estimated Completion Date: Complete
Please provide details of DOC has established a process to verify, at least on a test basis, NPIHE
corrective action or compliance with MEIF requirements. This process includes on-site
explain disagreement. audits or obtaining appropriate documentation from MEIF recipients to
ensure that qualified donations were deposited into the designated
research endowment, and verifying that State funds were only used for
purposes allowed by State regulations.
Page 1 of 6

--- Page 21 ---
Department of Commerce
Agency Response Form
Small, Minority, and Women-Owned Businesses Account
Finding 2
DOC did not have sufficient controls over the transfer of funds from the SMWOBA to fund
manager accounts, as well as the subsequent disbursement of those funds by managers.
We recommend that DOC establish sufficient controls over the transfer and disbursement
of SMWOBA funds. Specifically, we recommend that DOC
a. implement a procedure to independently verify all transfers from the SMWOBA to a
valid fund manager request and supporting documentation; and
b. modify the agreed upon procedures to ensure that all disbursements from fund
manager accounts are subject to testing, by requiring selection and testing of
disbursements from fund manager account bank statements.
Agency Response
Analysis Factually Accurate
Please provide
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 2a Agree Estimated Completion Date: 01/01/2024
Please provide details of DOC is implementing a control checklist for all SMWOBA
corrective action or disbursements to verify all transactions and to confirm the transfers were
explain disagreement. verified to a valid fund manager’s request. The control checklist will be
signed off by the accounting specialist and the program manager. The
reviewers will verify previous disbursements by checking bank
statements, check copies received when available, and other independent
documentation. The reviewers will also check other independent
documentation such as Commitment/Approvals uploaded into the
database. Furthermore, at the end of the year, the reviewers will
randomly select SMWOBA recipients to confirm the business received
the funds from the fund manager.
Recommendation 2b Agree Estimated Completion Date: Complete
Please provide details of DOC updated its Agreed Upon Procedures letter in December of 2022 to
corrective action or include tracing the disbursement from the bank statement to the actual
explain disagreement. borrower and comparing the amount of the loan from the promissory
note to the fund manager’s general ledger.
Page 2 of 6

--- Page 22 ---
Department of Commerce
Agency Response Form
Maryland State Arts Council Grants
Finding 3
DOC had not established adequate procedures and controls over the award and
disbursement of GFO program grants.
We recommend that DOC establish effective procedures and control over the award and
disbursement of GFO program grants. Specifically, we recommend that DOC
a. takes steps prior to awarding a grant to ensure that an applicant is incorporated in
Maryland, and perform a site visit as required;
b. ensure that the Secretary’s review of annual GFO awards is formally documented in
writing;
c. obtain and review appropriate documentation, such as bank statements and invoices, at
least on a test basis, to ensure that each grantee matched the grant funds received as
required and that grant funds were used for allowable purposes (repeat); and
d. periodically reconcile grant disbursements in the grants management system with
similar amounts in the State’s accounting records and investigate and resolve any
differences noted (repeat).
Agency Response
Analysis Factually Inaccurate
Please provide DOC offers the following clarification: A reconciliation procedure was
additional comments as created in response to a previous finding and was performed.
deemed necessary. Reconciliations were provided to the audit team on 3/17/22, 3/22/22,
3/31/22, and 10/12/22. The discrepancies found by the audit team most
likely reflect the difference between the invoices submitted for payment
(reflected in the report from the grants platform) and the payments made
in the same period (reflected in the report from FMIS). Because of the
time State payments take to process, these discrepancies are expected
and addressed as part of the reconciliation.
Auditor’s Comment: DOC disagreed that reconciliations were not performed. Although
DOC provided us examples of the two most recent semi-annual reconciliations, they were
not sufficiently comprehensive since they only reconciled a percentage of the grant
awards. Based upon follow-up correspondence to our preceding audit report, DOC
agreed to implement a comprehensive reconciliation encompassing all disbursements.
Page 3 of 6

--- Page 23 ---
Department of Commerce
Agency Response Form
Recommendation 3a Agree Estimated Completion Date: Complete
Please provide details of Beginning with FY25 applications, MSAC staff is taking steps to check
corrective action or SDAT records for incorporation in Maryland for new applicants before
explain disagreement. awarding a Grants for Organizations grant. Staff will continue to check
for a significant presence in Maryland for all applicants as indicated
within the required activities chart in the application as part of initial
eligibility reviews.
Site visits are performed for all on-year GFO applicants. Since the FY22
grant cycle, documentation of site visits (in the form of panelist notes) is
retained within MSAC’s grants system, and recordings of panel
meetings include verbal reports, which provide additional confirmation
of site visits by panelists.
Recommendation 3b Agree Estimated Completion Date: Complete
Please provide details of DOC has implemented a procedure to ensure documentation of the
corrective action or Secretary’s review of GFO awards. MSAC’s executive director records
explain disagreement. the Secretary's (or designee’s) email acknowledgments and approvals of
departmental briefing and decision memos and retains the
documentation.
Recommendation 3c Agree Estimated Completion Date: Complete
Please provide details of DOC agrees with the auditor’s recommendations and believes current
corrective action or procedures ensure that State funds were appropriately matched and were
explain disagreement. used for allowable expenditures. Under current procedures, program
directors review financial statements of organizations against self-
reported financials included in reporting and application materials for all
grantees for allowable use of funds and matching income. Beginning in
FY23, staff have documented meeting the matching fund requirement in
an internal spreadsheet. If any questions were to arise as to whether a
grantee did not meet the match requirement or use GFO funds for
allowable purposes, DOC would exercise its right in its grant agreement
to obtain and review appropriate documentation.
Auditor’s Comment: Although the response indicates “Agree”, it also states that
appropriate documentation will only be obtained and reviewed if questions arise from
DOC’s review of self-reported information from the grantees. The use of self-reported
information in this instance is not an adequate approach to ensure that matching funds
were received and that actual expenditures were proper.
Page 4 of 6

--- Page 24 ---
Department of Commerce
Agency Response Form
Recommendation 3d Agree Estimated Completion Date: Complete
Please provide details of MSAC’s fiscal officer reconciles grant disbursements in the grants
corrective action or management system with similar amounts in the State’s accounting
explain disagreement. records and investigates and resolves any differences quarterly.
Page 5 of 6

--- Page 25 ---
Department of Commerce
Agency Response Form
Information Systems Security and Control
The Office of Legislative Audits (OLA) has determined that the Information Systems Security
and Control section, including findings 4 and 5 related to “cybersecurity”, as defined by the State
Finance and Procurement Article, Section 3.5-301(b) of the Annotated Code of Maryland, and
therefore are subject to redaction from the publicly available audit report in accordance with the
State Government Article 2-1224(i). Although the specifics of the following findings, including
the analysis, related recommendations, along with DOC’s responses, have been redacted from
this report, DOC’s responses indicated agreement with the findings and related
recommendations.
Finding 4
Redacted cybersecurity-related finding.
Agency Response has been redacted by OLA.
Finding 5
Redacted cybersecurity-related finding.
Agency Response has been redacted by OLA.
Page 6 of 6

--- Page 26 ---
A T
UDIT EAM
Robert A. Wells Jr., CPA
Audit Manager
Nicholas J. Caronna, CPA
Senior Auditor
Johanna K. Bachman
Sporthi J. Carnelio
Meredith K. Hale
Kareem R. Jackson
John B. Wachter, CFE
Staff Auditors