Title: Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services - Regional Operations


NOTE: Effective July 1, 2015, DPSCS completed a structural reorganization.  The audit of DPSCS regional operations includes certain financial activities of DPSCS' 5 regional fiscal offices on behalf of 21 facilities.  In the past, the regional fiscal offices were audited as the South Region, the North Region, and the Central Region.  The financial activities of the Division of Correction, Division of Pretrial Detention, and Patuxent Institution are also included.
Date: 09/05/2019
Type: Fiscal Compliance
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5d72b7eaa1ce580720ffb2e5
Extracted: 2025-06-19T06:17:43.439766
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Audit Report
Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services
Regional Operations
September 2019
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Senator Craig J. Zucker (Senate Chair) Delegate Shelly L. Hettleman (House Chair)
Senator Adelaide C. Eckardt Delegate Steven J. Arentz
Senator George C. Edwards Delegate Andrew P. Cassilly
Senator Guy J. Guzzone Delegate Mark S. Chang
Senator Katie Fry Hester Delegate Keith E. Haynes
Senator Cheryl C. Kagan Delegate Michael A. Jackson
Senator Benjamin F. Kramer Delegate David Moon
Senator Cory V. McCray Delegate April R. Rose
Senator Douglas J.J. Peters Delegate Geraldine Valentino-Smith
Senator Justin D. Ready Delegate Karen Lewis Young
To Obtain Further Information
Office of Legislative Audits
301 West Preston Street, Room 1202
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Phone: 410-946-5900 ꞏ 301-970-5900 ꞏ 1-877-486-9964 (Toll Free in Maryland)
Maryland Relay: 711
TTY: 410-946-5401 ꞏ 301-970-5401
E-mail: OLAWebmaster@ola.state.md.us
Website: www.ola.state.md.us
To Report Fraud
The Office of Legislative Audits operates a Fraud Hotline to report fraud, waste, or abuse involving State
of Maryland government resources. Reports of fraud, waste, or abuse may be communicated anonymously
by a toll-free call to 1-877-FRAUD-11, by mail to the Fraud Hotline, c/o Office of Legislative Audits, or
through the Office’s website.
Nondiscrimination Statement
The Department of Legislative Services does not discriminate on the basis of age, ancestry, color, creed,
marital status, national origin, race, religion, gender, gender identity, sexual orientation, or disability in the
admission or access to its programs, services, or activities. The Department’s Information Officer has been
designated to coordinate compliance with the nondiscrimination requirements contained in Section 35.107
of the United States Department of Justice Regulations. Requests for assistance should be directed to the
Information Officer at 410-946-5400 or 410-970-5400.

--- Page 6 ---
Table of Contents
Background Information 5
Agency Responsibilities and Organizational Change 5
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report 6
Findings and Recommendations 8
Inmate Funds
* Finding 1 – Monthly reconciliations between the Maryland Offenders 8
Banking System II and the Comptroller’s records were not always
sufficiently comprehensive, timely, and supported.
Finding 2 – The Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services 10
(DPSCS) did not have adequate controls over inmate fund collections
and disbursements at the two regional fiscal offices reviewed.
Payroll
Finding 3 – Access to the biometric timekeeping system was not 12
periodically reviewed and adequately restricted, resulting in numerous
employees with the ability to edit and approve their own time and
leave records. In addition, DPSCS did not ensure that time and leave
recorded in the timekeeping system were accurately transferred to the
Statewide Personnel System for biweekly payroll processing.
Finding 4 – Overtime for employees at certain facilities whose payroll 13
was processed by the Jessup fiscal office was not pre-approved and
employee overtime was not restricted to a maximum of 80 hours per
pay period, as required by DPSCS policy.
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology 15
Agency Response Appendix
* Denotes item repeated in full or part from preceding audit report
4

--- Page 7 ---
Background Information
Agency Responsibilities and Organizational Change
Through its correctional institutions and parole and probation programs, the
Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services (DPSCS) has statewide
responsibility for the supervision and rehabilitation of incarcerated and paroled
individuals. DPSCS also sets standards for criminal justice training and operates
criminal justice information systems. In addition, DPSCS is responsible for
administering the 9-1-1 Trust Fund, as required by law. We conduct separate
audits of DPSCS Central Operations (which includes the Division of Parole and
Probation), DPSCS Regional Operations, DPSCS Information Technology and
Communications Division, and Maryland Correctional Enterprises.
This audit of DPSCS regional operations included certain financial activities of
DPSCS’ five regional fiscal offices on behalf of 21 facilities.1
Jessup
Baltimore City Correctional Center Maryland Correctional Institution for Women
Brockbridge Correctional Facility Maryland Correctional Institution - Jessup
Central Maryland Correctional Facility
Maryland Reception, Diagnostic, and
Classification Center
Chesapeake Detention Facility
Dorsey Run Correctional Facility Metropolitan Transition Center
Eastern Pre-Release Unit Patuxent Institution
Jessup Correctional Institution Southern Maryland Pre-Release Unit
Baltimore
Baltimore Central Booking and Intake Center Baltimore Pretrial Complex
Hagerstown
Maryland Correctional Training Center
Maryland Correctional Institution -
Hagerstown
Roxbury Correctional Institution
Cumberland
North Branch Correctional Institution Western Correctional Institution
Eastern Shore
Eastern Correctional Institution and Annex
1 In the past, the Jessup and Eastern Shore regional fiscal offices were audited as the South
Region; the Hagerstown and Cumberland regional fiscal offices were audited as the North
Region; and the Baltimore regional fiscal office was audited as the Central Region.
5

--- Page 8 ---
We reviewed activities for these regional fiscal offices that were unique to the
facilities, such as inmate cash receipts, inmate funds, and the biometric
timekeeping system used by correctional officers. According to DPSCS records,
during fiscal year 2018, inmate fund collections and disbursements totaled $27.7
million and $8.1 million, respectively. DPSCS payroll costs for all employees at
correctional and detention facilities totaled approximately $652.4 million during
fiscal year 2018.
The DPSCS Central Operations audit included all DPSCS payroll processed
within the Statewide Personnel System, all disbursements and procurement
transactions, all corporate purchasing card activity, equipment, information
systems, and all non-inmate cash receipts. The Information Technology and
Communications Division audit includes the activities associated with the
maintenance and support of DPSCS’ information systems, and the Maryland
Correctional Enterprises audit includes the work and job training provided to
inmates of the Maryland correctional system.
Beginning in September 2012, DPSCS operated under a regional approach to
providing its inmate-related functions; however, effective July 1, 2015, DPSCS
returned to its former organizational structure with individual functional divisions
(the Division of Correction, the Division of Parole and Probation, and the
Division of Pretrial Detention), and the Patuxent Institution.
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report
Our audit included a review to determine the status of eight findings contained in
our preceding audit reports of DPSCS. These audits included the Central Region,
dated May 1, 2015 (two findings); the South Region, dated October 28, 2015
(four of five findings); and the North Region, dated October 28, 2015 (two of
three findings). As disclosed in the following table, we determined that DPSCS
satisfactorily addressed five of these eight findings. The remaining three findings
are repeated in this report as one finding.
6

--- Page 9 ---
Table 1
Status of Preceding Findings
Preceding Implementation
Finding Description
Finding Status
Central Region
Finding 1 The Central Region had not fully Repeated
reconciled its inmate fund records with the (Current Finding 1)
corresponding records maintained by the
Comptroller of Maryland.
Finding 2 The Central Region did not adequately Not Repeated
verify that certain cash receipts were
deposited.
South Region
Finding 1 The Region had not fully reconciled its Repeated
inmate fund records with corresponding (Current Finding 1)
Comptroller records.
Finding 2 Controls were lacking over certain inmate Not Repeated
fund transactions and records.
Finding 4 A management employee was in a position Not Repeated
to influence the Region’s decision to hire
an immediate family member.
Finding 5 Procedures and controls over overtime Not repeated
payments and leave recordkeeping need
improvement.
North Region
Finding 1 The Region had not timely reconciled its Repeated
inmate fund records with corresponding (Current Finding 1)
Comptroller records.
Finding 2 Critical controls were lacking over certain Not Repeated
inmate fund transactions and records.
7

--- Page 10 ---
Findings and Recommendations
Inmate Funds
Background
The five regional fiscal offices of the Department of Public Safety and
Correctional Services (DPSCS) maintain
inmate funds on behalf of individuals
incarcerated in State correctional and Table 2
Fiscal Year 2018 Inmate Fund Activity
detention facilities. All receipts are
(In Thousands)
initially deposited in the State’s
Balance as
General Fund and then transferred to
Funds Funds of June 30,
checking accounts maintained by each
Office Received Disbursed 2018
regional fiscal office. Regional fiscal
Jessup $11,427 $3,667 $14,514
office staff record all inmate fund
Hagerstown 7,039 1,914 21,753
activity in the Maryland Offenders
Eastern Shore 3,983 1,152 10,631
Banking System II (MOBS II).
Cumberland 3,570 1,106 9,942
Disbursements of inmate funds are
Baltimore 1,648 256 2,204
made by check or cash to inmates or
Total $27,667 $8,095 $59,044
their designees. See Table 2 for inmate
Source:DPSCS Records
fund activity for fiscal year 2018 by
regional fiscal office. During this audit,
we reviewed inmate fund procedures at the Jessup and Hagerstown regional fiscal
offices, and tested selected transactions, including inmate fund reconciliations,
from each of the five regional fiscal offices.
Finding 1
Monthly reconciliations between MOBS II and the Comptroller’s records
were not always sufficiently comprehensive, timely, and supported.
Analysis
Monthly reconciliations between MOBS II and the Comptroller’s records were
not always sufficiently comprehensive, timely, and supported. These
reconciliations are required by DPSCS policy as a means to ensure inmate funds
are appropriately accounted for. Our review of the reconciliations disclosed the
following conditions:
 The DPSCS regional fiscal offices reconciled monthly collections and
disbursements on MOBS II with the related Comptroller’s records; however,
the fiscal offices did not reconcile the related fund balances. While an ending
fund balance was calculated during the individual reconciliation process,
8

--- Page 11 ---
differences between the calculated fund balance and the related MOBS II and
Comptroller balances were not readily identified and resolved, and certain
calculated fund balances appeared questionable. Specifically, our review of
the February 2018 reconciliations for the five regional fiscal offices disclosed
that the combined calculated fund balance ($51.6 million) exceeded the
MOBS II balance ($49.0 million) and Comptroller’s balance ($6.6 million) by
$2.6 million and $45 million, respectively. Furthermore, our review of the
August and September 2017 Jessup fiscal office reconciliations disclosed that
the August ending calculated fund balance ($23.5 million) was not used as the
September beginning fund balance ($7.7 million). DPSCS management
advised us that it did not have an efficient way to reconcile the monthly
ending fund balances and could not readily determine the reason for these
differences.
 Reconciliations were not conducted monthly as required. Specifically, as of
August, 3, 2018, the reconciliations at four regional fiscal offices had not been
conducted for periods ranging from three to seven months. For example, the
most recent reconciliation prepared for the Jessup fiscal office was January
2018.
 Reconciling transactions were not sufficiently supported in one reconciliation
reviewed. Specifically, on the June 2017 reconciliation, the Jessup fiscal
office indicated certain reconciling transactions totaling a negative $100,000,
but the documentation supporting these transactions equaled positive $1.1
million. Jessup fiscal office management could not readily explain why the
amount recorded on the reconciliation did not agree with supporting
documentation.
The DPSCS Financial Operations Manual provides that, on a monthly basis,
inmate fund balances on MOBS II should be reconciled with the related balances
on the Comptroller’s records. Similar conditions regarding the failure to conduct
comprehensive and timely reconciliations were included in a number of preceding
audit reports for various DPSCS entities dating back to 2002.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that DPSCS
a. prepare comprehensive monthly reconciliations between MOBS II and
the Comptroller’s records as required (repeat);
b. prepare these monthly reconciliations on a timely basis (repeat);
c. adequately document these reconciliations; and
9

--- Page 12 ---
d. consult with appropriate control agency personnel (such as the
Comptroller’s General Accounting Division), as needed, regarding the
resolution of the aforementioned longstanding differences (repeat).
Finding 2
DPSCS did not have adequate controls over inmate fund collections and
disbursements at the two regional fiscal offices reviewed.
Analysis
DPSCS did not have adequate controls over inmate fund collections and
disbursements at the two regional fiscal offices reviewed. According to DPSCS
records, the Jessup fiscal office had lockbox collections of $5.8 million and
remotely deposited collections of $1.5 million during fiscal year 2018, and the
Hagerstown fiscal office remotely deposited collections of $3.7 million during
fiscal year 2018.
 The two regional fiscal offices did not perform proper deposit verifications.
Specifically, our review of 15 deposits processed by the Jessup fiscal office
during the period from July 2017 through March 2018, totaling $336,000,
disclosed that there was no deposit verification for 13 of the deposits totaling
$292,000. For the Hagerstown fiscal office, the employee conducting the
deposit verification had access to the related collections and, therefore, was
not independent. In addition, this employee did not use the initial record of
collections received in the verification process. As a result, there was a lack
of assurance that all funds received at these regional fiscal offices were
subsequently deposited.
 Inmate fund check collections were not restrictively endorsed upon receipt at
10 of the facilities supported by the Jessup fiscal office. Rather, these checks
were forwarded to the Jessup fiscal office, via courier or by regional fiscal
office staff, where they were restrictively endorsed.
 As of August 22, 2018, the most recent bank reconciliation for the
Hagerstown fiscal office checking account was for January 2018. In addition,
this reconciliation did not indicate the date prepared so that the timeliness of
its preparation could be assessed.
 Disbursement duties were not segregated at the Jessup fiscal office.
Specifically, one employee had access to the blank check stock, could process
a disbursement on MOBS II, and was authorized to sign checks. This
employee was also responsible for sending reports of approved checks to the
10

--- Page 13 ---
bank for its use as a fraud prevention tool. As a result, this employee could
process a disbursement without any independent review and approval, and
could circumvent these fraud prevention controls. Our review of the MOBS II
disbursement file for the period from July 2017 to May 2018 did not identify
any disbursements unilaterally processed by this employee.
The Comptroller of Maryland’s Accounting Procedures Manual provides that
collections should be recorded and restrictively endorsed upon receipt and the
initial record should be verified to the deposit record by an employee independent
of the collections function. In addition, the DPSCS Financial Operations Manual
provides that an employee who can process disbursements should not be able sign
the related disbursement checks.
Recommendation 2
We recommend that DPSCS
a. perform and document independent deposit verifications using the initial
record of collections received,
b. restrictively endorse checks immediately upon receipt,
c. prepare bank reconciliations in a timely manner and document the date
prepared, and
d. properly segregate the duties of processing disbursements and signing
related checks.
We advised the regional fiscal offices on accomplishing the necessary
separation of duties using existing personnel.
Payroll
Background
DPSCS began using a biometric timekeeping system at one facility in December
2016 and finished implementing it in all facilities in May 2017. DPSCS facility
employees scan their fingerprints into the timekeeping system each day to record
their “in” and “out” times. Employee leave taken is manually posted into the
timekeeping system by each employee’s immediate supervisor. The supervisor is
responsible for the initial approval of employee time for the pay period and for
any needed adjustments. The approved time and leave information is then
interfaced into the Statewide Personnel System (SPS) for payroll processing.
We were advised that, as of February 12, 2019, there were 5,672 employees using
the biometric system and, according to DPSCS records as of July 2018, there
were 721 users who could manually post, edit, and/or approve time and leave on
11

--- Page 14 ---
the system. We reviewed the access for all 721 of these users on the system. In
addition, we reviewed procedures at the Jessup regional fiscal office and tested
timekeeping system transactions from five of the facilities supported by this
office. We also tested other earnings and overtime payments at the Jessup,
Hagerstown, Cumberland, and Eastern Shore regional fiscal offices. According to
its records, DPSCS payroll costs for all employees at correctional and detention
facilities totaled approximately $652.4 million during fiscal year 2018.
Finding 3
Access to the biometric timekeeping system was not periodically reviewed
and adequately restricted, resulting in numerous employees with the ability
to edit and approve their own time and leave records. In addition, DPSCS
did not ensure that the time and leave recorded in the timekeeping system
were accurately transferred to SPS for biweekly payroll processing.
Analysis
Access to the biometric timekeeping system was not periodically reviewed and
adequately restricted, resulting in numerous employees with the ability to edit and
approve their own time and leave records. In addition, DPSCS did not ensure that
the time and leave recorded in the timekeeping system were accurately transferred
to SPS for payroll processing by the Comptroller of Maryland.
 DPSCS had not reviewed the propriety of user access capabilities in the
timekeeping system since its implementation in fiscal year 2017. As a result,
we noted that the vast majority of users had incompatible system access.
Specifically, as of July 2018, there were 659 (of 721) supervisory employees
who could edit and approve their own time and leave records. Furthermore,
our review of the timekeeping records for five Jessup-supported facilities
during the period from June 1, 2017 through March 31, 2018 disclosed
instances in which this occurred. Specifically, we noted that 18 of 173
supervisors processed 990 edits to their own work time without any
independent approval and supporting documentation to justify overriding the
data in the biometric timekeeping system. We also identified 1,750 instances
when 11 supervisors approved their own daily work time.
 DPSCS did not have a process for regional fiscal offices to reconcile time and
leave data transferred from the biometric timekeeping system to SPS and
resolve any differences. As a result, DPSCS did not readily identify and could
not readily explain certain differences. Specifically, we compared overtime
records for five employees working at Jessup-supported facilities during one
pay period with the related SPS records. Our review disclosed that SPS
reflected 500 hours of overtime hours for these employees but the related
12

--- Page 15 ---
timekeeping system records only reflected 422 overtime hours—a difference
of 78 hours. DPSCS management personnel were able to provide
documentation to justify 44 of these hours, but could not explain the
remaining variance of 34 hours.
The State of Maryland Information Security Policy provides that agencies must
continuously (at least annually) monitor the security controls over their
information systems to ensure access is strictly controlled and restricted to
appropriate personnel. In addition, the Comptroller of Maryland’s Internal
Control Manual provides that controls, such as edit checks, should be established
at an application's interface to verify inputs and outputs.
Recommendation 3
We recommend that DPSCS
a. establish a process to periodically review the propriety of user access to
the timekeeping system;
b. immediately modify system access to prevent individuals from editing
and approving their own time and leave records;
c. review work time and leave edited and approved by the aforementioned
employees for propriety; and
d. implement a procedure to reconcile time and leave data transferred to
SPS from the timekeeping system and resolve any differences, including
those differences noted above.
Finding 4
Overtime for employees at certain facilities whose payroll was processed by
the Jessup fiscal office was not pre-approved and employee overtime was not
restricted to a maximum of 80 hours per pay period, as required by DPSCS
policy.
Analysis
Overtime for employees at certain facilities whose payroll was processed by the
Jessup fiscal office was not pre-approved and employee overtime was not
restricted to a maximum of 80 hours per pay period. The DPSCS Overtime Policy
- Correctional Staff requires supervisors to approve overtime before it is worked.
In addition, the Policy prohibits employees from working more than 80 hours of
overtime in a pay period. According to State records, overtime payments at the
facilities for which the Jessup fiscal office processed payroll totaled
approximately $43.5 million in calendar year 2018.
13

--- Page 16 ---
Our test of 885 hours of overtime worked by 10 employees at five different
facilities whose payroll was processed by the Jessup fiscal office for one pay
period in March 2018 disclosed that the fiscal office did not have the required
authorization forms on file to document the pre-approval of the overtime hours to
be worked. In addition, the region did not have any process to restrict employees
from working more than 80 hours of overtime each pay period. Our review of
timekeeping records for 1,093 correctional employees at five Jessup-supported
facilities for the pay period ending March 27, 2018 disclosed that 38 employees
were paid for working more than 80 hours of overtime (up to 106 hours).
Recommendation 4
We recommend that DPSCS ensure that processes are in place to comply
with its overtime policy. Specifically, these processes should ensure
a. that the required pre-approval of overtime hours to be worked is
obtained or, absent pre-approval, that an employee is prohibited from
working overtime; and
b. that employees do not work and are not paid for working more than 80
overtime hours in a pay period.
14

--- Page 17 ---
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the Department of Public Safety
and Correctional Services (DPSCS) Regional Operations. DPSCS reorganized
into its current structure, effective July 1, 2015. Because of that reorganization
(as further explained on page 8 of this report), our audit included the following
units for the periods indicated:
For the period beginning July 1, 2014 and ending June 30, 2015
 South Region
 Central Region
For the period beginning April 1, 2015 and ending June 30, 2015
 North Region
For the period beginning July 1, 2015 and ending March 31, 2018
 Division of Correction
 Division of Pretrial Detention
 Patuxent Institution
The audit was conducted in accordance with generally accepted government
auditing standards. Those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to
obtain sufficient, appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our
findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives. We believe that the
evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions
based on our audit objectives.
As prescribed by the State Government Article, Section 2-1221 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, the objectives of this audit were to examine DPSCS’ financial
transactions, records, and internal control, and to evaluate its compliance with
applicable State laws, rules, and regulations.
In planning and conducting our audit, we focused on the major financial-related
areas of operations based on assessments of significance and risk. The areas
addressed by the audit included inmate funds and payroll activity unique to the
regional fiscal offices, including the timekeeping system. We also determined the
status of the findings contained in our preceding audit report of DPSCS – Central
Region (two findings), as well as the status of four of five findings contained in
our preceding audit report DPSCS – South Region, and two of three findings
contained in our preceding audit report of DPSCS – North Region.
15

--- Page 18 ---
Our audit did not include procurements and disbursements, equipment, and
payroll processed within the State Personnel System, other earnings and overtime
payments related to the Division of Pretrial Detention employees, and corporate
purchasing card activity. These activities are included within the scope of our
DPSCS – Central Operations audit. Our audit also did not include the computer
operations of the DPSCS Information and Technology and Communications
Division and the Maryland Correctional Enterprises, which are audited separately.
To accomplish our audit objectives, our audit procedures included inquiries of
appropriate personnel, inspections of documents and records, and observations of
DPSCS - regional fiscal office operations and tests of transactions. Generally,
transactions were selected for testing based on auditor judgment, which primarily
considers risk. Unless otherwise specifically indicated, neither statistical nor non-
statistical audit sampling was used to select the transactions tested. Therefore, the
results of the tests cannot be used to project those results to the entire population
from which the test items were selected.
We also performed various data extracts of pertinent information from the State’s
Central Payroll Bureau (payroll data). The extracts are performed as part of
ongoing internal processes established by the Office of Legislative Audits and
were subject to various tests to determine data reliability. We also extracted data
from DPSCS’ biometric timekeeping system used for recording correctional
employee time. We performed various tests of the relevant data and determined
that the data were sufficiently reliable for the purposes the data were used during
the audit. Finally, we performed other auditing procedures that we considered
necessary to achieve our objectives. The reliability of data used in this report for
background or informational purposes was not assessed.
DPSCS management is responsible for establishing and maintaining effective
internal control. Internal control is a process designed to provide reasonable
assurance that objectives pertaining to the reliability of financial records;
effectiveness and efficiency of operations including safeguarding of assets; and
compliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations are achieved.
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate.
Our reports are designed to assist the Maryland General Assembly in exercising
its legislative oversight function and to provide constructive recommendations for
16

--- Page 19 ---
improving State operations. As a result, our reports generally do not address
activities we reviewed that are functioning properly.
This report includes findings relating to conditions that we consider to be
significant deficiencies in the design or operation of internal control that could
adversely affect DPSCS’ ability to maintain reliable financial records, operate
effectively and efficiently, and/or comply with applicable laws, rules, and
regulations. Our report also includes findings regarding significant instances of
noncompliance with applicable laws, rules, or regulations. Other less significant
findings were communicated to DPSCS that did not warrant inclusion in this
report.
The DPSCS Office of the Secretary’s response, on behalf of the regional fiscal
offices, to our findings and recommendations is included as an appendix to this
report. As prescribed in the State Government Article, Section 2-1224 of the
Annotated Code of Maryland, we will advise DPSCS regarding the results of our
review of its response.
17

--- Page 21 ---
Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services
Regional Operations
Agency Response Form
Inmate Funds
Finding 1
Monthly reconciliations between MOBS II and the Comptroller’s records were not always
sufficiently comprehensive, timely, and supported.
We recommend that DPSCS
a. prepare comprehensive monthly reconciliations between MOBS II and the
Comptroller’s records as required (repeat);
b. prepare these monthly reconciliations on a timely basis (repeat);
c. adequately document these reconciliations; and
d. consult with appropriate control agency personnel (such as the Comptroller’s General
Accounting Division), as needed, regarding the resolution of the aforementioned
longstanding differences (repeat).
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide N/A
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 1a Agree Estimated Completion Date: 6/30/20
Please provide details of The Division of Financial Services is working to ensure that
corrective action or comprehensive reconciliations between MOBS II and the Comptroller’s
explain disagreement. records are completed on a monthly basis. Increased vacancies and
turnover have impeded the Division’s ability to fully implement prior
corrective action plans. In addition, the conversion to MOBS II and
system upgrades have required changes to how the accounts are
reconciled. For example, the consolidation of all the Prisoner’s Fund
transactions for the Department into one PCA (A0450), requires that a
consolidated reconciliation for the entire Department be completed.
Therefore, the timely completion and reconciliation of the MOBS II to
FMIS on a regional basis is necessary as the first step to ensure that a
consolidated reconciliation is completed for the entire Department.
Comprehensive regional monthly reconciliations between MOBS II and
the Comptroller’s records are in process. The Department is currently
recruiting to fill additional vacancies in this area and staff will require
further training.
Page 1 of 7

--- Page 22 ---
Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services
Regional Operations
Agency Response Form
Recommendation 1b Agree Estimated Completion Date: 12/31/19
Please provide details of Comprehensive regional monthly reconciliations between MOBS II and
corrective action or the Comptroller’s records are in process. The Department is currently
explain disagreement. recruiting to fill additional vacancies in this area and staff will require
further training.
Recommendation 1c Agree Estimated Completion Date: 6/30/20
Please provide details of The Division of Financial Services will maintain supporting
corrective action or documentation to document the comprehensive regional monthly
explain disagreement. reconciliations between MOBS II and the Comptroller’s records by
12/31/19. Documentation for the consolidated Department
reconciliation will be completed by 6/30/20.
Recommendation 1d Agree Estimated Completion Date: 12/31/20
Please provide details of After the Department has completed the monthly reconciliations
corrective action or between MOBS II and the Comptroller’s records (for the entire
explain disagreement. Department), and there has been a period of at least 6 months with no
change to the irreconcilable difference, the Department will then work
with the Comptroller’s General Accounting Division and the Department
of Budget and Management to reach an appropriate resolution for any
final difference between the MOBS II and Comptroller’s records.
Page 2 of 7

--- Page 23 ---
Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services
Regional Operations
Agency Response Form
Finding 2
DPSCS did not have adequate controls over inmate fund collections and disbursements at
the two regional fiscal offices reviewed.
We recommend that DPSCS
a. perform and document independent deposit verifications using the initial record of
collections received,
b. restrictively endorse checks immediately upon receipt,
c. prepare bank reconciliations in a timely manner and document the date prepared, and
d. properly segregate the duties of processing disbursements and signing related checks.
We advised the regional fiscal offices on accomplishing the necessary separation of duties
using existing personnel.
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide N/A
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 2a Agree Estimated Completion Date: 4/30/19
Please provide details of The Division of Financial Services is ensuring that adequate controls
corrective action or over inmate fund collections and disbursements are performed and
explain disagreement. independently verified.
Deposit verifications are being performed and documented using the
initial record of collections and are being completed by an employee
independent of the collections.
Recommendation 2b Agree Estimated Completion Date: 4/30/19
Please provide details of The Division of Financial Services is ensuring that all inmate fund
corrective action or checks are being restrictively endorsed upon receipt in accordance with
explain disagreement. established procedures.
Recommendation 2c Agree Estimated Completion Date: 4/30/19
Please provide details of The Division of Financial Services is completing all outdated bank
corrective action or reconciliations in conjunction with the Comptroller’s General
explain disagreement. Accounting Division. Bank reconciliations have been hindered in the
past due to staffing issues. The Division has temporarily realigned work
duties to assist in completing outstanding bank reconciliations and is in
Page 3 of 7

--- Page 24 ---
Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services
Regional Operations
Agency Response Form
the process of recruiting to fill vacancies to ensure appropriate staffing
levels in order to complete the bank reconciliations in a timely manner
(including documenting date prepared), and in accordance with
established policies and procedures.
Recommendation 2d Agree Estimated Completion Date: 3/01/19
Please provide details of The Division of Financial Services has taken corrective action to ensure
corrective action or that the duties for processing the disbursement of checks, and employees
explain disagreement. responsible for signing the related checks, are properly segregated and
not handled by one employee in accordance with established policies
and procedures.
Page 4 of 7

--- Page 25 ---
Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services
Regional Operations
Agency Response Form
Payroll
Finding 3
Access to the biometric timekeeping system was not periodically reviewed and adequately
restricted, resulting in numerous employees with the ability to edit and approve their own
time and leave records. In addition, DPSCS did not ensure that the time and leave
recorded in the timekeeping system were accurately transferred to SPS for biweekly
payroll processing.
We recommend that DPSCS
a. establish a process to periodically review the propriety of user access to the timekeeping
system;
b. immediately modify system access to prevent individuals from editing and approving
their own time and leave records;
c. review work time and leave edited and approved by the aforementioned employees for
propriety; and
d. implement a procedure to reconcile time and leave data transferred to SPS from the
timekeeping system and resolve any differences, including those differences noted
above.
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide N/A
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 3a Agree Estimated Completion Date: 7/01/18
Please provide details of The Department is, on a quarterly basis, periodically reviewing the
corrective action or propriety of user access to the timekeeping system.
explain disagreement.
Recommendation 3b Agree Estimated Completion Date: 7/01/18
Please provide details of The Department has modified the system access to prevent individuals
corrective action or from editing and approving their own time records. Only the users’
explain disagreement. supervisors will be able to edit and approve their time and leave records.
Page 5 of 7

--- Page 26 ---
Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services
Regional Operations
Agency Response Form
Recommendation 3c Agree Estimated Completion Date: 7/01/19
Please provide details of The Department is ensuring that work time and leave edited and
corrective action or approved are appropriately reviewed for propriety. The Department has
explain disagreement. worked with the vendor to establish a drop down menu that provides a
listing of the names of all supervisors with the authority to approve and
adjust time and leave in the time clock system. The user names and
profiles are programed to prevent supervisors from editing and
approving their own leave balances. All time and leave edits and
approvals for supervisors must be handled by their immediate manager.
Recommendation 3d Agree Estimated Completion Date: 12/31/19
Please provide details of The Department will ensure that procedures are established to reconcile
corrective action or time and leave data currently transferred from the timekeeping system to
explain disagreement. SPS, and resolve any differences. The Department is in the process of
creating a centralized payroll audit group that will be responsible for
reviewing and reconciling any identified differences. Additionally, the
Department is working with the timekeeping vendor and SPS personnel
to test various reports to assist with automating these reconciliations.
Finally, further procedures and documentation are being required in
order to implement adjustments to time and leave which may occur after
the submission of time from the timekeeping system to SPS.
Page 6 of 7

--- Page 27 ---
Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services
Regional Operations
Agency Response Form
Finding 4
Overtime for employees at certain facilities whose payroll was processed by the Jessup
fiscal office was not pre-approved and employee overtime was not restricted to a maximum
of 80 hours per pay period, as required by DPSCS policy.
We recommend that DPSCS ensure that processes are in place to comply with its overtime
policy. Specifically, these processes should ensure
a. that the required pre-approval of overtime hours to be worked is obtained or, absent
pre-approval, that an employee is prohibited from working overtime; and
b. that employees do not work and are not paid for working more than 80 overtime hours
in a pay period.
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide N/A
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 4a Agree Estimated Completion Date: 4/30/19
Please provide details of The Department is ensuring that processes are in place to comply with
corrective action or DPSCS policy to obtain the pre-approval of overtime hours to be
explain disagreement. worked, and if pre-approval is not provided, that employees are
prohibited from working overtime.
Recommendation 4b Agree Estimated Completion Date: 4/30/19
Please provide details of The Department is ensuring that processes are in place to comply with
corrective action or DPSCS policy that prohibits regional operations staff from working, and
explain disagreement. getting paid for, more than 80 overtime hours in a pay period.
Page 7 of 7

--- Page 28 ---
A T
UDIT EAM
Adam J. Westover, CPA
Audit Manager
Menachem Katz, CPA
Senior Auditor
Albert E. Davison
John B. Wachter, CFE
Staff Auditors