Title: Maryland State Department of Education - Division of Early Childhood
Date: 09/06/2019
Type: Fiscal Compliance
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5d77f695a1ce580d38fe0928
Extracted: 2025-06-19T06:18:10.021591
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Audit Report
Maryland State Department of Education
Division of Early Childhood
March 2022
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Senator Clarence K. Lam, M.D. (Senate Chair) Delegate Carol L. Krimm (House Chair)
Senator Malcolm L. Augustine Delegate Steven J. Arentz
Senator Adelaide C. Eckardt Delegate Mark S. Chang
Senator George C. Edwards Delegate Nicholas P. Charles II
Senator Katie Fry Hester Delegate Andrea Fletcher Harrison
Senator Cheryl C. Kagan Delegate Trent M. Kittleman
Senator Benjamin F. Kramer Delegate David Moon
Senator Cory V. McCray Delegate Julie Palakovich Carr
Senator Justin D. Ready Delegate Elizabeth G. Proctor
Senator Craig J. Zucker Delegate Geraldine Valentino-Smith
To Obtain Further Information
Office of Legislative Audits
The Warehouse at Camden Yards
351 West Camden Street, Suite 400
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Phone: 410-946-5900
Maryland Relay: 711
TTY: 410-946-5401 ꞏ 301-970-5401
E-mail: OLAWebmaster@ola.state.md.us
Website: www.ola.state.md.us
To Report Fraud
The Office of Legislative Audits operates a Fraud Hotline to report fraud, waste, or abuse involving State
of Maryland government resources. Reports of fraud, waste, or abuse may be communicated anonymously
by a toll-free call to 1-877-FRAUD-11, by mail to the Fraud Hotline, c/o Office of Legislative Audits, or
through the Office’s website.
Nondiscrimination Statement
The Department of Legislative Services does not discriminate on the basis of age, ancestry, color, creed,
marital status, national origin, race, religion, gender, gender identity, sexual orientation, or disability in the
admission or access to its programs, services, or activities. The Department’s Information Officer has been
designated to coordinate compliance with the nondiscrimination requirements contained in Section 35.107
of the United States Department of Justice Regulations. Requests for assistance should be directed to the
Information Officer at 410-946-5400 or 410-970-5400.

--- Page 3 ---
March 14, 2022
Senator Clarence K. Lam, M.D., Senate Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Delegate Carol L. Krimm, House Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Members of Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Annapolis, Maryland
Ladies and Gentlemen:
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the Division of Early Childhood
(DEC) of the Maryland Department of Education (MSDE) for the period
beginning January 1, 2018 and ending June 30, 2021. DEC is responsible for all
child care programs in the State, including licensing facilities, monitoring facility
compliance with regulations, and taking enforcement actions related to child care
facilities. DEC is also responsible for the Child Care Scholarship Program, which
provides financial assistance to eligible families to meet their child care needs.
Our audit disclosed that DEC headquarters did not ensure that its regional offices
were effectively monitoring regulated child care facilities. Specifically, DEC did
not ensure that regional office staff finalized complaints within 35 days after
receipt of a complaint regarding child care facilities or employees. According to
DEC records, 1,041 of the 5,443 complaints received during the period January 1,
2018 to June 30, 2021 were not finalized until 36 to 668 days after receipt;
including complaints involving conditions that could present an imminent danger
to children.
In addition, DEC did not conduct a documented supervisory review to verify that
regional offices investigated criminal background check alerts as required. Also,
DEC did not always document the rationale for not taking available
administrative action, such as license suspension or revocation, when inspection
deficiencies were not corrected timely. For example, DEC did not document its
rationale for not taking administrative action for one facility that did not correct
10 inspection deficiencies for conditions, such as a lack of staffing records to

--- Page 4 ---
verify required training and medical requirements, and children’s health
screenings. Finally, DEC did not always document that child care employees
were properly recorded in its automated system, as required.
Our audit also included a review to determine the status of the four findings
contained in our preceding audit report. While we determined that DEC had
made improvement by satisfactorily addressing three of those prior findings, the
fourth finding is repeated in this report.
MSDE’s response to this audit, on behalf of DEC, is included as an appendix to
this report. We reviewed the response to our findings and related
recommendations, and have concluded that the corrective actions identified are
sufficient to address all issues.
We wish to acknowledge the cooperation extended to us during the audit by DEC
and its willingness to address the audit issues and implement appropriate
corrective actions.
Respectfully submitted,
Gregory A. Hook, CPA
Legislative Auditor
2

--- Page 5 ---
Table of Contents
Background Information 4
Agency Responsibilities 4
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report 5
Findings and Recommendations 6
Child Care Facility Complaint Investigations
Finding 1 – The Division of Early Childhood’s (DEC) regional offices 6
did not always finalize complaints within 35 days after being received,
as required by its policy.
Criminal Background Check Alert Follow-up
Finding 2 – DEC did not verify the information recorded by its 7
regional offices for criminal background check alerts received from
the Criminal Justice Information System, and did not review related
documentation to ensure that the resultant investigations were
completed in a timely manner.
Child Care Facility Inspections
* Finding 3 – DEC did not always document the rationale for not taking 8
available administrative actions when inspection deficiencies were
not corrected timely by child care facilities. In addition, DEC did not
always document that all individuals working at child care facilities
were recorded in the Child Care Administration Tracking System.
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology 11
Agency Response Appendix
* Denotes item repeated in full or part from preceding audit report
3

--- Page 6 ---
Background Information
Agency Responsibilities
The Maryland State Department of Education’s (MSDE) Division of Early
Childhood (DEC) is responsible for overseeing all child care programs in the
State, including licensing child care facilities, and monitoring and enforcing
facility compliance with regulations (such as health and safety standards and
criminal background check requirements). DEC oversees these facilities through
its 13 regional child care offices across the State. On March 26, 2020, the MSDE
Superintendent ordered all licensed child care providers to close due to the
COVID-19 pandemic health crisis. On March 30, 2020, the child care providers
were authorized to reopen in order to provide care for children of essential
personnel. According to State records, as of June 2021, the State’s licensed child
care facilities consisted of 4,744 family child care homes and 2,594 child care
centers, which were licensed to serve approximately 193,000 children, which
represents a decrease of 24,000 children served from our prior audit report.
DEC is also responsible for the Child Care Scholarship (formerly known as Child
Care Subsidy) Program which provides financial assistance to eligible families to
meet their child care needs. This program is primarily administered by a vendor,
under contract with DEC, in conjunction with the State’s 24 local departments of
social services. During our audit period, eligibility for the scholarship program,
which is primarily federally funded, was expanded to provide financial assistance
to additional families. According to State records, during fiscal year 2020, child
care scholarship program expenditures totaled approximately $248.3 million
($43.5 million in general funds, and $204.8 million in federal funds, which
included $45.8 million in COVID-related funding).
DEC uses the automated Child Care Administration Tracking System (CCATS) to
record, approve, and monitor child care facility licenses; to track individuals
associated with those facilities and help ensure that all required criminal
background checks are obtained; and to process scholarship-related eligibility,
vouchers, and payments. CCATS is operated by a primary service provider,
under a State of Maryland contract, which is responsible for system management
and operations support, with related system hosting services being provided by a
subcontractor.
According to the State’s records, DEC’s operating expenditures totaled
approximately $35.6 million during fiscal year 2020.
4

--- Page 7 ---
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report
Our audit included a review to determine the status of the four findings contained
in our preceding audit report dated September 6, 2019. As disclosed in Figure 1,
we determined that the office satisfactorily addressed three of these findings. The
remaining finding is repeated in this report.
Figure 1
Status of Preceding Findings
Preceding Implementation
Finding Description
Finding Status
The Division of Early Childhood (DEC) headquarters did not
provide sufficient oversight to ensure that regional offices
Finding 1 Not repeated
were effectively monitoring child care facility compliance
with criminal background check requirements.
DEC headquarters did not ensure that regional offices
conducted comprehensive annual inspections of child care
Repeated
Finding 2 facilities, followed up with facilities regarding the correction
(Current Finding 3)
of deficiencies, and took appropriate administrative action
when facilities did not correct deficiencies.
DEC lacked sufficient procedures to effectively monitor
subsidy program eligibility determinations and the related
Finding 3 Not repeated
payments made by its vendor, certain of which could not be
supported.
DEC lacked assurance that its Child Care Administration
Finding 4 Tracking System was sufficiently protected against Not repeated
operational and security risks.
5

--- Page 8 ---
Findings and Recommendations
Child Care Facility Complaint Investigations
Finding 1
Division of Early Childhood (DEC) regional offices did not always finalize
complaints within 35 days after being received, as required by its policy.
Analysis
Regional offices did not always finalize complaints within 35 days after being
received, as required by DEC’s policy. DEC receives complaints, including those
considered as possible imminent danger to children (such as abuse, and fire/health
safety hazards), via telephone, email, and mail, and forwards the complaints to the
appropriate regional office. DEC classifies complaints as either priority 1
complaints against licensed facilities or priority 2 complaints against unlicensed
facilities. DEC policy requires each regional office to record the completion of its
complaint investigation in the DEC Child Care Administration Tracking System
(CCATS) within 30 days of its receipt of the complaint. The same policy also
requires that a supervisory review, by an official at the applicable regional office,
of the investigation must be documented within 5 days after the investigation was
completed in CCATS, after which the complaint investigation is finalized. This
review is intended to verify the propriety of the original investigations outcome
(conclusions). According to DEC records, during fiscal year 2021, the regional
offices received 1,071 complaints that were subject to investigation.
Our Data Analytics Unit obtained a data file
from CCATS, which we deemed reliable for
our purposes, of all 5,443 priority 1 and 2
complaints received during the period
January 1, 2018 to June 30, 2021. Our
analysis of these records determined that for
1,041 finalized complaints (19 percent), the
required supervisory review was not recorded in
CCATS until 36 to 668 days after receipt.
For example, 765 priority 1 complaints were
not finalized, in some cases for more than 125 days after initial receipt (see Figure
2). Furthermore, as of October 22, 2021, an additional 257 complaints had not
been finalized according to CCATS even though the regional offices initiated a
review on dates ranging from January 1, 2018 to May 28, 2021.
While it appears, based on CCATS data, that most of the related investigations for
the 1,041 complaints were completed within 30 days, supervisory review of these
6

--- Page 9 ---
investigations had not been documented to officially finalize the complaint
investigation outcomes. According to DEC policy, without a documented
supervisory review, the compliant investigation is not considered finalized.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that DEC conduct a documented supervisory review to
ensure that regional offices complete complaint investigations and related
supervisory reviews timely, and record the results in CCATS within 35 days,
as required.
Criminal Background Check Alert Follow-up
Finding 2
DEC did not verify the information recorded by its regional offices for
criminal background check alerts received from the Criminal Justice
Information System (CJIS), and did not review related documentation to
ensure that the resultant investigations were completed in a timely manner.
Analysis
DEC headquarters did not verify the information recorded by the regional offices
for criminal background check (CBC) alerts received from CJIS1 and did not
review related documentation to ensure that the investigations were completed in
a timely manner. To facilitate DEC monitoring of the CBC requirements,
licensed child care facilities are required to provide their respective DEC regional
office with information on each new employee (such as name, address, date of
birth, and social security number).
DEC headquarters receives weekly updates from CJIS on the results of the initial
child care facility employee CBCs and alerts on any subsequent criminal activity
for these employees. Headquarters records these alerts on a shared electronic file
and emails the file to the appropriate regional office at that time. The regional
offices are responsible for conducting an investigation and documenting the
results on the file. DEC’s policy requires an investigation be initiated by regional
office staff within 5 business days of receiving a CJIS alert to determine if
offenses identified are qualifying crimes that would preclude an individual from
1 Included in its responsibility for overseeing all child care programs in the State, DEC is
responsible for ensuring that licensed child care facilities comply with CBC requirements.
According to State and federal law, on or before the first day of employment at a licensed child
care facility, all individuals who will have unsupervised access to children must apply for a CBC,
which includes checks of federal and State criminal background databases and sex offender
registries.
7

--- Page 10 ---
being a child care worker. The policy also requires that the investigation must be
completed within 30 days after initiation of the investigation. According to DEC
records, during fiscal year 2021 the regional offices received 2,067 CJIS alerts
from headquarters that were subject to investigation.
Our test of 15 alerts received by DEC headquarters and forwarded to regional
offices during the period February 2018 through June 2021, disclosed that
according to the recordation on the electronic file, 3 investigations were
completed 62, 177, and 642 days after initiation. For example, according to the
file, the investigation for an alert for driving under the influence was not
completed until 642 days after it was initiated. After we brought this example to
DEC’s attention, it provided us with additional documentation that indicated the
investigation was completed timely, but the investigation was not accurately
recorded on the file.
Recommendation 2
We recommend DEC perform a periodic documented supervisory review, at
least on a test basis, of the CBC file to ensure that alert investigations are
properly documented and completed in a timely manner.
Child Care Facility Inspections
Finding 3
DEC did not always document the rationale for not taking available
administrative action when inspection deficiencies were not corrected timely
by child care facilities. In addition, DEC did not always document that all
individuals working at child care facilities were recorded in CCATS.
Analysis
DEC did not always document the rational for not taking available administrative
actions when inspection deficiencies were not corrected timely. In addition,
inspection forms did not always include documentation that a verification was
conducted to ensure that employees working at child care facilities were recorded
in CCATS. State regulations require annual physical inspections of all licensed
child care facilities for a number of attributes, including updated health records
and proper employee training certifications. DEC procedures require its regional
offices to follow up with facilities until all inspection report deficiencies are
satisfactorily resolved. In accordance with State regulations, facilities that do not
address deficiencies may be subject to administrative action (such as license
suspension and revocation). According to DEC records during fiscal year 2021,
the regional offices conducted 10,391 inspections of 7,004 licensed facilities.
8

--- Page 11 ---
Additionally, 6,039 of the 9,822 inspections performed during fiscal year 2020
had at least one or more unresolved deficiency as of September 2021.
 Our test of 79 deficiencies from inspections conducted during the period
November 2019 through May 2021 for 10 facilities in 7 of the 13 separate
regions disclosed that according to CCATS, as of September 2021, 25
deficiencies identified at 3 facilities had not been corrected. In addition, DEC
did not take available administrative actions for these 3 facilities, and did not
document its rationale for the lack of administrative actions. For example,
one facility had not corrected 10 deficiencies for conditions such as a lack of
staffing records to verify required training and medical requirements, and
children’s health screenings.
DEC advised us it will work with child care providers to resolve deficiencies
that it determines do not result in an immediate risk to children, and State
regulations allow DEC to have discretion with administrative actions. DEC
reviewed the three facilities we identified and advised us that the inspection
reports would be updated to reflect that deficiencies were corrected for two of
the three facilities. According to DEC records, during the period July 15,
2020 through December 29, 2021, DEC initiated 221 enforcement actions,
including 122 suspensions or revocations.
 Regional offices did not always document that they verified that all employees
working at child care facilities were recorded in CCATS, as required, which
would assist in monitoring of facility compliance with criminal background
check requirements. Specifically, the inspections are required to include a
verification that all employees on the facility’s employment records are
recorded in CCATS (which is used to monitor criminal background checks
and follow up on related alerts). As a result, our test of inspections conducted
between November 2020 and June 2021 for 10 facilities in 8 regions that
employed 74 child care workers disclosed that inspections for 3 facilities
lacked specific documentation, such as a comment field on the inspection
form denoting the verification of CCATS employment recordation. Our test
did disclose that the names of all 74 workers were recorded in CCATS.
Similar conditions regarding the lack of follow up on deficiencies noted during
inspections, and documentation that facility employees were recorded in CCATS
were commented upon in our preceding audit report and in our preceding audit
reports of the Maryland State Department of Education dating back to February
2013.
9

--- Page 12 ---
Recommendation 3
We recommend DEC headquarters ensure that regional offices
a. initiate administrative actions as deemed appropriate, or provide written
justification for not taking actions, for facilities with continued non-
compliance (repeat); and
b. document its verification that all employees working at the facilities are
recorded in CCATS (repeat).
10

--- Page 13 ---
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the Division of Early Childhood
(DEC) of the Maryland State Department of Education (MSDE) for the period
beginning January 1, 2018 and ending June 30, 2021. The audit was conducted in
accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards. Those
standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient,
appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and
conclusions based on our audit objectives. We believe that the evidence obtained
provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit
objectives.
As prescribed by the State Government Article, Section 2-1221 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, the objectives of this audit were to examine DEC’s financial
transactions, records, and internal control, and to evaluate its compliance with
applicable State laws, rules, and regulations.
In planning and conducting our audit, we focused on the major financial-related
areas of operations based on assessments of significance and risk. The areas
addressed by the audit included licensing and monitoring of child care facilities,
criminal background checks and alerts of child care providers, the child care
scholarship program, and information systems security and control. We also
determined the status of the findings contained in our preceding audit report.
Our audit did not include support services provided to DEC by MSDE. These
support services (including payroll processing, purchasing, maintenance of
accounting records, federal fund recoveries, and related fiscal functions) are
included within the scope of our audits of MSDE.
Our assessment of internal controls was based on agency procedures and controls
in place at the time of our fieldwork. Our tests of transactions and other auditing
procedures were generally focused on the transactions occurring during our audit
period of January 1, 2018 to June 30, 2021, but may include transactions before or
after this period as we considered necessary to achieve our audit objectives.
To accomplish our audit objectives, our audit procedures included inquiries of
appropriate personnel, inspections of documents and records, tests of transactions,
and to the extent practicable, observations of DEC’s operations. Generally,
transactions were selected for testing based on auditor judgment, which primarily
considers risk, the timing or dollar amount of the transaction, or the significance
of the transaction to the area of operation reviewed. As a matter of course, we do
not normally use statistical sampling in our tests, so unless otherwise specifically
11

--- Page 14 ---
indicated, neither statistical nor non-statistical sampling was used to select the
transactions tested. Therefore, unless sampling is specifically indicated in a
finding, the results from any tests conducted or disclosed by us cannot be used to
project those results to the entire population from which the test items were
selected.
We also performed various data extracts of pertinent information from the State’s
Financial Management Information System (such as revenue and expenditure
data). The extracts are performed as part of ongoing internal processes
established by the Office of Legislative Audits and were subject to various tests to
determine data reliability. We determined that the data extracted from this source
were sufficiently reliable for the purposes the data were used during this audit.
We also extracted data from DEC’s Child Care Administrative Tracking System
(CCATS) for the purpose of testing child care facilities, providers, child care
scholarships, and user access. We performed various tests of the relevant data
and determined that the data were sufficiently reliable for the purposes the data
were used during the audit. Finally, we performed other auditing procedures that
we considered necessary to achieve our audit objectives. The reliability of data
used in this report for background or informational purposes was not assessed.
DEC’s management is responsible for establishing and maintaining effective
internal control. Internal control is a process designed to provide reasonable
assurance that objectives pertaining to the reliability of financial records;
effectiveness and efficiency of operations, including safeguarding of assets; and
compliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations are achieved. As
provided in Government Auditing Standards, there are five components of
internal control: control environment, risk assessment, control activities,
information and communication, and monitoring. Each of the five components,
when significant to the audit objectives, and as applicable to DEC, were
considered by us during the course of this audit.
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate.
Our reports are designed to assist the Maryland General Assembly in exercising
its legislative oversight function and to provide constructive recommendations for
improving State operations. As a result, our reports generally do not address
activities we reviewed that are functioning properly.
12

--- Page 15 ---
This report includes findings relating to conditions that we consider to be
significant deficiencies in the design or operation of internal control that could
adversely affect DEC’s ability to maintain reliable financial records, operate
effectively and efficiently, and/or comply with applicable laws, rules, and
regulations. Our report also includes a finding regarding a significant instance of
noncompliance with applicable laws, rules, or regulations. Other less significant
findings were communicated to DEC that did not warrant inclusion in this report.
The response from the MSDE, on behalf of DEC, to our findings and
recommendations is included as an appendix to this report. As prescribed in the
State Government Article, Section 2-1224 of the Annotated Code of Maryland,
we will advise MSDE regarding the results of our review of its response.
13

--- Page 16 ---
APPENDIX

--- Page 17 ---
Maryland State Department of Education
Division of Early Childhood
Agency Response Form
Child Care Facility Complaint Investigations
Finding 1
Division of Early Childhood (DEC) regional offices did not always finalize complaints within 35
days after being received, as required by its policy.
We recommend that DEC conduct a documented supervisory review to ensure that regional
offices complete complaint investigations and related supervisory reviews timely, and record
the results in CCATS within 35 days, as required.
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide The DEC has verified the facts in the Analysis Section and found that they
additional comments were accurate.
as deemed necessary.
Recommendation 1 Agree Estimated Completion Date: Ongoing
Please provide details As stated in the Analysis section, DEC procedures require each Regional
of corrective action or Licensing Office to record the completion of its complaint investigation in
explain disagreement. the DEC Child Care Administration Tracking System (CCATS) within 30
days of its receipt. These procedures also require that a supervisory review,
by an official at the applicable Regional Licensing Office of the investigation
must be documented within five days after the investigation was completed
in CCATS, after which the complaint investigation is finalized.
As a result of the audit, during February 2022, the DEC headquarters
commenced monitoring on a monthly basis the Regional Licensing Offices’
compliance to completing and documenting investigations in CCATS within
thirty days of the receipt date of a complaint. This monitoring will also
provide assurance that a supervisory review of the investigation was
performed and documented in CCATS within five days of the date when the
investigation was recorded as completed in CCATS. DEC headquarters will
notify the Regional Licensing Offices of any exceptions and will require the
Regional Licensing Offices to explain the reason why the specified timelines
were not met and will also require resolution on a timely basis. Finally, DEC
headquarters will create and maintain documentation regarding utilization of
the aforementioned monitoring process.
Page 1 of 4

--- Page 18 ---
Maryland State Department of Education
Division of Early Childhood
Agency Response Form
Criminal Background Check Alert Follow-up
Finding 2
DEC did not verify the information recorded by its regional offices for criminal background
check alerts received from the Criminal Justice Information System (CJIS), and did not review
related documentation to ensure that the resultant investigations were completed in a timely
manner.
We recommend DEC perform a periodic documented supervisory review, at least on a test
basis, of the CBC file to ensure that alert investigations are properly documented and
completed in a timely manner.
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide The DEC has verified the facts in the Analysis Section and found that they
additional were accurate.
comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 2 Agree Estimated Completion Date: Ongoing
Please provide As a result of this audit, a Quarterly Alert Log Audit procedure was developed
details of corrective and implemented beginning January 31, 2022. This procedure will be used by
action or explain DEC headquarters to monitor each Regional Licensing Office CBC Alert Log
disagreement.
on a quarterly basis. In this regard, a comprehensive review of 20% of alerts
will be performed which will include a review of the initiation and completion
dates to determine whether the investigation was initiated and completed on a
timely basis. Furthermore, the accuracy of the information recorded on the
Alert Log spreadsheet and actions taken will be determined by review of all
documentation obtained during the investigation of the alert. Subsequently, the
Regional Licensing Offices will be notified of any alerts that were not
investigated timely, accurately or completely and they will be requested to
correct any information on the Alert Log on a timely basis. The quarterly
reviews will be documented on a regional spreadsheet and a summary of the
review will be shared with the Licensing Branch Chief. Furthermore, two
other existing DEC procedures, Clearance Admin CJIS Alert Log Review
Guidance and CJIS Alert Log Review Guidance, will be amended to include a
verification as to whether alert investigations were completed on a timely
basis.
In view of the procedures mentioned above, the DEC would like to note that
some alert investigations may exceed the required day time frames due to a
pending court case or a case involving a Child Protective Services
investigation which could impact the outcome of the agency’s decision and
achieving the required investigation timeframes.
Page 2 of 4

--- Page 19 ---
Maryland State Department of Education
Division of Early Childhood
Agency Response Form
Child Care Facility Inspections
Finding 3
DEC did not always document the rationale for not taking available administrative action
when inspection deficiencies were not corrected timely by child care facilities. In addition,
DEC did not always document that all individuals working at child care facilities were
recorded in CCATS.
We recommend DEC headquarters ensure that regional offices
a. initiate administrative actions as deemed appropriate, or provide written justification for
not taking actions, for facilities with continued non-compliance (repeat); and
b. document its verification that all employees working at the facilities are recorded in
CCATS (repeat).
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide The DEC has verified the facts in the Analysis Section and found that they were
additional accurate.
comments as
deemed
necessary.
Recommendation
3a Agree Estimated Completion Date: June 1, 2022
Please provide The DEC will continue to follow its procedures on enforcements and initiate them
details of as appropriate.
corrective action
or explain
As stated in the Analysis section, the DEC procedures require its Regional
disagreement.
Licensing Offices to follow up with facilities until all inspection report deficiencies
are satisfactorily resolved. Currently, the DEC’s “Closing Open Summary of
Findings” guidance requires continued follow-up at 30, 60 and 90-day time frames
including the issuance of reminder letters and emails requesting the corrections. If
the corrections are not received after the 90-day time frame, then it is referred to
the supervisor or manager at the Regional Licensing Office to determine the next
course of action including possible enforcement action. As a result of this audit,
these procedures will be amended and reviewed with all regional staff by June 1,
2022, to require that documentation be created and placed in the “Provider’s
Notes” tab in CCATS which justifies the DEC’s decision to not take an
enforcement action after the 90 day timeframe including those cases involving a
facility with continued deficiencies.
Page 3 of 4

--- Page 20 ---
Maryland State Department of Education
Division of Early Childhood
Agency Response Form
In addition, Regional Licensing Office supervisors and managers review the Open
Summary Of Findings (SOF) report with the Licensing Specialists on at least a
monthly basis to assist with obtaining corrections and compliance information.
This guidance will be reviewed with all regional licensing staff by June 1, 2022.
Finally, funding has been provided for a contractual position whose responsibilities
will include following up on open deficiencies. In cases where a facility continues
to have open deficiencies that have not been addressed, the Regional Licensing
Office will be contacted to follow up on the status of the deficiencies.
Recommendation
3b Agree Estimated Completion Date: Ongoing
Please provide The agency agrees that the Regional Licensing Offices do not consistently
details of document during annual inspections the verification of all employees working in
corrective action childcare facilities as required per Section II. B. 3. of guidance ‘Verifying Staff
or explain
Employment in Child Care Facilities During Annual Inspections’. Consequently, in
disagreement.
view of the OLA’s observation on March 1, 2022, the DEC headquarters reviewed
this guidance with all Regional Licensing Office staff to enhance the Licensing
Specialists’ awareness and understanding of the employee verification process,
which is required to be performed and documented during annual inspections of
childcare facilities.
Also, supervisors or managers at Regional Licensing Offices are required to review
all documentation during the two-year anniversary review of a child care facility to
determine compliance to required procedures and documentation including the
verification of staff. Finally, the DEC headquarters will further ensure that
Regional Licensing Offices document its verification of all employees working at
facilities and ensure they are recorded in the CCATS by conducting yearly audits
where a sample of each Regional Licensing Office's inspection documentation will
be checked to ensure they are complying with the prior referenced employee
verification process. These audits will be completed and documented by the
Deputy Branch Chief –Licensing during the annual regional report card reviews.
The above actions will help to ensure that Regional Licensing Office Staff
consistently document the verification that all employees working at the facilities
are recorded in CCATS.
Page 4 of 4

--- Page 21 ---
A T
UDIT EAM
Mark S. Hagenbuch, CPA
Audit Manager
Joshua A. Naylor
Senior Auditor
Keli R. Edmonds
Staff Auditor
David R. Fahnestock, CPA
Charles H. Hinds IV, CPA
Data Analytics Unit Auditors