Title: Presentation to the House Health and Government Operations Committee - Maryland Department of Health - Developmental Disabilities Administration


Related Report Dated (7/8/2019)
Date: 09/24/2019
Type: Presentations to the Legislature
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5d88c87da1ce581390b7f738
Extracted: 2025-06-19T06:18:28.147226
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Maryland Department of Health (MDH) -
Developmental Disabilities
Administration (DDA)
Presentation on Fiscal Management
Services (FMS) Vendor Contracts
Fiscal Compliance Audit
Report Dated July 8, 2019

--- Page 2 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Background
Our July 8, 2019 DDA fiscal compliance audit report
contained 11 findings (including 5 items repeated
from the prior audit) related to the following areas:
 Consumer Budgets
 Provider Payments
 Procurements and Billings related to the
 Fiscal Management Services Contracts
 Financial Restructuring Contract
 Community Services Agency Billings
 Contribution to Care
 Federal Funds
 Provider Consumer Information System
We determined that DDA’s accountability and
compliance level was unsatisfactory, in accordance
with the rating system we established in conformity
with State law. The primary factors contributing to
the unsatisfactory rating were the significance of our
audit findings and the number of repeat findings.
Developmental Disabilities Administration Page 2

--- Page 3 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Fiscal Management Services (Overview)
 DDA provides a service delivery option for
consumers and their families to self-direct their
care to exercise greater control over the services
they receive, how they receive them, and who
provides them.
 DDA contracted with two Fiscal Management
Services (FMS) vendors to assist the self-directed
consumers with the fiscal activities associated
with their care. The current contracts were
entered into in 2006.
 DDA paid the two FMS vendors $32.3 million
(including administrative fees) to provide
services to 695 self-directed consumers during
fiscal year 2017.
Developmental Disabilities Administration Page 3

--- Page 4 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Fiscal Management Services (Finding 4)
Procurement of FMS Vendor Contracts
 The FMS vendor contracts were not approved by
the Department of Budget and Management and
the Board of Public Works.
 The contracts lacked critical provisions such as
the administrative fees to be charged and the
period to be covered.
 DDA could not provide a breakdown between the
cost of consumer services and administrative
fees paid to FMS vendors.
 Accordingly, there was a lack of assurance that
services were provided at the most
advantageous prices.
Developmental Disabilities Administration Page 4

--- Page 5 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Fiscal Management Services (Finding 4)
Monitoring of FMS Vendors
 Required site visits were not performed as a
means to ensure consumers received all
required services.
 Independent financial audits of the FMS vendors
were not obtained to ensure payments were
proper.
 DDA did not ensure FMIS vendors submitted
timely required annual accountings that
compared actual costs with DDA advances.
 Unspent funds totaling $7.1 million were not
returned timely, resulting in lost interest income
of $92,000.
 Certain service providers were paid at higher
rates than were approved by DDA.
 DDA did not ensure the FMS vendors recorded
all provider payments in the MDH MMIS II
system, and we identified federal
reimbursements totaling $4.9 million that were
not obtained as a result.
Developmental Disabilities Administration Page 5

--- Page 6 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Fiscal Management Services (Finding 4)
We recommend that DDA
 Execute contracts for fiscal management
services that include all relevant terms and
provisions, and obtain required approvals;
 Monitor FMS vendors to ensure that consumers
receive the required services, and provider
payments are proper and accounted for;
 Ensure FMS vendors record all provider
payments in MDH MMIS II timely; and
 Take appropriate corrective action to obtain
federal reimbursement for any outstanding
claims, and pursue recovery of identified
overpayments and any lost investment income
resulting from untimely vendor actions.
Developmental Disabilities Administration Page 6