Title: University System of Maryland - Coppin State University
Date: 09/23/2019
Type: Fiscal Compliance
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5d8bbadca1ce580e0c9e5f5f
Extracted: 2025-06-19T06:19:04.172212
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Audit Report
University System of Maryland
Coppin State University
November 2023
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Senator Clarence K. Lam, M.D. (Senate Chair) Delegate Jared Solomon (House Chair)
Senator Joanne C. Benson Delegate Steven J. Arentz
Senator Paul D. Corderman Delegate Nicholas P. Charles II
Senator Katie Fry Hester Delegate Andrea Fletcher Harrison
Senator Shelly L. Hettleman Delegate Steven C. Johnson
Senator Cheryl C. Kagan Delegate Mary A. Lehman
Senator Cory V. McCray Delegate David Moon
Senator Justin D. Ready Delegate Julie Palakovich Carr
Senator Bryan W. Simonaire Delegate Stephanie M. Smith
Senator Craig J. Zucker Delegate M. Courtney Watson
To Obtain Further Information
Office of Legislative Audits
The Warehouse at Camden Yards
351 West Camden Street, Suite 400
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Phone: 410-946-5900
Maryland Relay: 711
TTY: 410-946-5401 · 301-970-5401
E-mail: webmaster@ola.state.md.us
Website: www.ola.state.md.us
To Report Fraud
The Office of Legislative Audits operates a Fraud Hotline to report fraud, waste, or abuse involving State
of Maryland government resources. Reports of fraud, waste, or abuse may be communicated anonymously
by a toll-free call to 1-877-FRAUD-11, by mail to the Fraud Hotline, c/o Office of Legislative Audits, or
through the Office’s website.
Nondiscrimination Statement
The Department of Legislative Services does not discriminate on the basis of age, ancestry, color, creed,
marital status, national origin, race, religion, gender, gender identity, sexual orientation, or disability in the
admission or access to its programs, services, or activities. The Department’s Information Officer has been
designated to coordinate compliance with the nondiscrimination requirements contained in Section 35.107
of the United States Department of Justice Regulations. Requests for assistance should be directed to the
Information Officer at 410-946-5400 or 410-970-5400.

--- Page 3 ---
November 1, 2023
Senator Clarence K. Lam, M.D., Senate Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Delegate Jared Solomon, House Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Members of Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Annapolis, Maryland
Ladies and Gentlemen:
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the University System of
Maryland (USM) – Coppin State University (CSU) for the period beginning July
25, 2018 and ending June 30, 2022. CSU offers a broad range of baccalaureate
programs in both traditional arts and sciences, teacher education and nursing, as
well as selected professionally-oriented graduate programs including a doctoral
level program in Nursing Practice.
Our audit disclosed that CSU should establish or enhance existing procedures to
ensure that financial assistance is awarded to those students most in need of aid.
Specifically, CSU awarded Higher Education Emergency Relief Funds to students
without consideration of individual student cost of attendance and financial need,
and additional hardship assistance grants were awarded to students who did not
appear to meet eligibility criteria. In addition, CSU did not have formal written
guidelines for certain institutional need-based aid and could not provide required
support for certain financial aid awards to justify the propriety of the award.
Additionally, CSU did not obtain Board of Public Works approval for its food
service vendor contract, as required by State law, and did not ensure that the
vendor remitted all required commissions. Furthermore, CSU’s reviews of
changes to student residency status were either not performed or when performed
were not sufficiently comprehensive. Our audit also disclosed that CSU did not
have adequate controls over collections totaling $4.8 million in fiscal year 2022.

--- Page 4 ---
Finally, our audit included a review to determine the status of the six findings
contained in our preceding audit report. We determined that CSU satisfactorily
addressed five of those findings. The remaining finding is repeated in this report.
The USM Office’s response to this audit, on behalf of CSU, is included as an
appendix to this report. We reviewed the response to our findings and related
recommendations, and have concluded that the corrective actions identified are
sufficient to address the audit issues. While USM generally agrees with the
recommendations in this report, the response includes a disagreement with certain
conclusions included in our analysis. In accordance with generally accepted
government auditing standards, we have included an “auditor’s comment” to
further explain our position.
We wish to acknowledge the cooperation extended to us during the audit by CSU.
We also wish to acknowledge USM’s and CSU’s willingness to address the audit
issues and implement appropriate corrective actions.
Respectfully submitted,
Gregory A. Hook, CPA
Legislative Auditor
2

--- Page 5 ---
Table of Contents
Background Information 5
Agency Responsibilities 5
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report 7
Findings and Recommendations 8
Student Financial Aid
Finding 1 – Coppin State University (CSU) awarded most Higher 9
Education Emergency Relief Fund grants without consideration of
individual student cost of attendance and financial need, and
additional hardship assistance grants were awarded to students who
did not appear to meet eligibility criteria.
* Finding 2 – CSU did not have required formal written policy guidelines 11
including eligibility criteria for the award of certain institutional
need-based financial aid and could not provide required support for
certain financial aid awards to justify the propriety of the award.
Procurement and Disbursements
Finding 3 – CSU did not obtain Board of Public Works approval for 12
its food service vendor contract as required by State law, and did
not ensure that the vendor remitted all required commissions.
Student Residency Status
Finding 4 – CSU’s reviews of changes to student residency status were 13
either not performed or when performed were not sufficiently
comprehensive.
Cash Receipts
Finding 5 – CSU did not have adequate controls over collections 14
totaling $4.8 million in fiscal year 2022. Specifically, certain critical
cash receipts functions were not adequately separated, and independent
deposit verifications were not performed.
* Denotes item repeated in full or part from preceding audit report
3

--- Page 6 ---
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology 16
Agency Response Appendix
4

--- Page 7 ---
Background Information
Agency Responsibilities
Coppin State University (CSU) is a comprehensive public institution of the
University System of Maryland (USM) and operates under the jurisdiction of the
USM Board of Regents. CSU provides a broad range of baccalaureate programs
in both traditional arts and sciences, teacher education and nursing, as well as
select professionally-oriented graduate programs including a doctoral level
program in Nursing Practice. Student enrollment for the fall 2022 semester
totaled 2,006, consisting of 1,757 undergraduate students and 249 graduate
students. Approximately 85 percent of CSU's student enrollment for the fall 2022
semester was classified as in-state and 15 percent was out-of-state.
CSU's budget is funded by unrestricted revenues, such as tuition and fees and a
State general fund appropriation, and restricted revenues, such as federal grants
and contracts. According to the State's records, CSU's revenues for fiscal year
2022 totaled approximately $104 million, including a State general fund
appropriation of approximately $43.9 million. As of June 30, 2022,
approximately 16 percent of CSU’s positions were vacant (see Figure 1 on the
following page). The vacancies included certain positions which may have
contributed, at least in part, to some of the issues identified in this report.
5

--- Page 8 ---
Figure 1
CSU Positions, Expenditures, and Funding Sources
Full-Time Equivalent Positions as of June 30, 2022
Positions Percent
Filled 350 83.9%
Vacant 67 16.1%
Total 417
Fiscal Year 2022 Expenditures
Expenditures Percent
Salaries, Wages, and Fringe Benefits $ 44,533,001 42.8%
Technical and Special Fees 6,165,847 5.9%
Operating Expenses 53,317,727 51.3%
Total $104,016,575
Fiscal Year 2022 Funding Sources
Funding Percent
Unrestricted
General Fund $ 43,909,646 42.2%
Tuition and Fees 12,068,774 11.6%
Other University Revenues1 16,877,345 16.2%
72,855,765 70.0%
Restricted
Federal Grants and Contracts 29,623,870 28.5%
Other Gifts, Grants and Contracts 1,536,940 1.5%
31,160,810 30.0%
Total $104,016,575
Source: State financial records and CSU personnel records
1
1 Includes revenues from Auxiliary Services ($8.4M) and from the Higher Education Investment
Fund ($4.1M).
6

--- Page 9 ---
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report
Our audit included a review to determine the status of the six findings contained
in our preceding audit report dated September 23, 2019. As disclosed in Figure 2,
we determined that CSU satisfactorily addressed five of these findings. The
remaining finding is repeated in this report.
Figure 2
Status of Preceding Findings
Preceding Implementation
Finding Description
Finding Status
CSU had not established adequate controls over
Finding 1 student residency status changes, which could Not repeated
significantly impact a student's tuition charges.
CSU had not established sufficient controls to
Finding 2 ensure the propriety of financial aid awards to Not repeated
students.
CSU had not established written eligibility criteria
for the award of certain institutional need-based
aid, which totaled $2.2 million during fiscal years Repeated
Finding 3
2017 and 2018. In addition, student tuition (Current Finding 2)
remission was not considered when determining
eligibility for aid and the maximum award amounts.
CSU lacked adequate procedures to ensure that all
purchase orders processed were valid, as two
Finding 4 employees were unilaterally responsible for both Not repeated
initiating and approving 1,582 purchase orders
totaling $11.5 million.
CSU made termination payments totaling $308,000
Finding 5 to three former employees that were not consistent Not repeated
with USM Board of Regents policy.
Sensitive personally identifiable information
Finding 6 maintained by CSU was stored without adequate Not repeated
safeguards.
7

--- Page 10 ---
Findings and Recommendations
Student Financial Aid
Background
During fiscal year 2022, Coppin State University (CSU) disbursed financial aid to
students totaling approximately $22.8 million, including $15.5 million in federal
aid, $5 million in institutional aid, $1.6 million in State aid, and $735,000 in
private aid. In addition to the aforementioned aid, during our audit period a
significant amount of financial aid scholarships were awarded from federal
Higher Education Emergency Relief Funds (HEERF) which were to, in part,
provide assistance grants to students as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic.
Three different rounds of HEERF assistance were authorized by federal
legislation, which are referred to as HEERF I, HEERF II, and HEERF III. In
total, CSU received and distributed to students approximately $13 million in
HEERF assistance which included $63,000 in additional financial hardship
assistance awarded on a case-by-case basis and that required an application. See
Figure 3 for the details of how CSU used these funds relating to student accounts.
Figure 3
Higher Education Emergency Relief Funds for Students
Amount Amount
Number of for for
HEERF Amount
Students Full- Part- Semesters
Assistance Disbursed
Participating Time Time
Students Students
Direct Payments to Students
HEERF I $ 1,363,953 2,179 $ 735 $345 Spring 2020
HEERF II 1,363,953 1,932 $ 840 $445 Spring 2021
1,967 $1,175 $775 Fall 2021
HEERF III 4,160,291
1,767 $1,400 $870 Spring 2022
Subtotal $ 6,888,197
Tuition Credit
$ 2,413,200 2,011 $1,200 Fall 2021
HEERF III
2,127,600 1,773 $1,200 Spring 2022
Subtotal $ 4,540,800
Student Debt Relief
Fall 2020
HEERF III $ 1,518,806 662 $1 to $12,964 through
Winter 2021
Additional Financial Hardship Assistance
Assistance payments
Summer and
HEERF III $ 62,689 28 ranged from
Fall 2021
$341 to $3,247
Total $13,010,492
Source: CSU records
8

--- Page 11 ---
Given the significance of the HEERF funds during the audit period and the impact
on virtually every CSU student, our review of financial aid focused on the
procedures and controls for awarding those funds. We also followed up on our
prior finding related to institutional need-based aid.
Finding 1
CSU awarded most HEERF grants without consideration of individual
student cost of attendance and financial need, and additional hardship
assistance grants were awarded to students who did not appear to meet
eligibility criteria.
Analysis
CSU awarded most HEERF grants without consideration of an individual
student’s cost of attendance and actual financial need, and additional hardship
assistance grants were awarded to students who did not appear to meet eligibility
criteria.
Individual Cost of Attendance and Financial Need Was Not Considered
CSU awarded most HEERF grants without consideration of individual student
cost of attendance (which includes tuition and fees, room and board,
transportation, and certain other necessary expenses) and actual financial need.
Rather, CSU provided the vast majority of its HEERF student aid in equal
predetermined amounts to every enrolled student, distinguishing only between
full-time and part-time status. For example, for the Fall 2021 semester, all full-
time students received a $1,175 grant and all part-time students received a $775
grant. In addition, for the same semester, all students received a $1,200 credit to
their account regardless of the student’s actual cost of attendance.
Students whose costs of attendance were paid in part or whole by other means -
such as other scholarships or the University System of Maryland (USM) tuition
remission policy for employees, spouses, and dependents - and students with
lighter course loads (lower tuition costs) were less likely to have needed the same
HEERF funding, and consequently more likely to have received a refund of that
aid. We noted that one part-time graduate student who took six credits in the Fall
2021 semester and incurred total tuition and fee charges of approximately $2,900
received the same HEERF funding as all other part-time students (defined as
taking up to 8 credits for graduate students and 11 credits for undergraduate
students) in spite of also receiving other scholarships totaling approximately
$9,000. That student received a cash refund of $8,111 for the semester. Based on
CSU’s method for distributing HEERF funds, there was no assurance that any
such aid included in the refund was needed by the student to meet their cost of
attendance.
9

--- Page 12 ---
In addition, certain individuals appeared to have taken advantage of the USM
tuition remission policy and HEERF funding for financial benefit. Specifically,
we noted three CSU employees who enrolled in just one class (three credits) for
two semesters for which HEERF funds were awarded and received the same
HEERF payments and credits as all part-time students, as well as remission of
their tuition costs. As a result, these individuals each received cash refunds for
these two semesters, which for all three totaled $8,390. None of these three
employees were enrolled in the semester prior or subsequent to the
aforementioned semesters, and each employee was classified as a non-degree
seeking student.
We also found that CSU’s methodology for awarding the HEERF funds was not
as restrictive as other USM institutions contacted. We contacted two other USM
institutions and were advised that each had established procedures to consider
individual student financial need, including other assistance, when awarding
HEERF aid.
Additional Hardship Grants were Awarded to Potentially Ineligible Students
CSU awarded additional hardship grants to potentially ineligible students using
HEERF funds. CSU management advised the additional hardship grants2 were
made available to students who were eligible for federal Pell grant funding and
submitted an application for this additional assistance that demonstrated the need
for the funds. CSU received 181 applications for an additional hardship grant and
awarded grants totaling approximately $63,000 to 28 students.
Our review of the 28 students disclosed 9 were not Pell eligible and had not, in
our opinion, demonstrated an “exceptional need” (CSU had not defined
“exceptional need”). For example, we noted one student, the child of a CSU
management employee, was awarded a grant for $3,247. In addition, the student
had only applied for a grant of $2,500. The student had no tuition costs because
they were receiving USM tuition remission, and the stated reasons specified for
the hardship grant included to fix a car and to buy a computer, which in our
opinion, did not seem consistent with the intent of the grant. In total, this student
received HEERF aid of $5,622 for the Fall 2021 semester, and a cash refund of
$8,299.
2 These grants were reported by CSU as being funded by the American Rescue Plan (HEERF III),
which according to federal law should be allocated with the same terms and conditions as the
Coronavirus Response and Relief Supplemental Appropriations Act (HEERF II). Under that act,
institutions receiving HEERF may use the funds to provide financial aid grants to students. In
making financial aid grants to students, an institution shall prioritize grants to students with
exceptional need, such as students who receive Pell grants.
10

--- Page 13 ---
The award of these grants to students who were not Pell eligible is significant,
because there were Pell eligible students among the 153 who had applied for and
were denied the additional hardship grants. Specifically, our review of 15
applicants who were Pell eligible but were denied the additional hardship grant
disclosed several who appear to have been denied because they were receiving
other aid, including one student who had previously received a waiver of tuition
due to being a foster child. This justification for denying the grants does not
appear to have been consistently applied by CSU, given the award to the
aforementioned student who was receiving USM tuition remission.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that CSU
a. develop criteria to ensure that aid intended solely for the purpose of
meeting student financial need is distributed based on a specific
determination of each student’s unmet need, including consideration of
other sources of assistance, such as tuition remission, and number of
credits being taken; and
b. follow established eligibility criteria for distributing student aid.
Finding 2
CSU did not have required formal written policy guidelines including
eligibility criteria for the award of certain institutional need-based financial
aid and could not provide required support for certain financial aid awards
to justify the propriety of the award.
Analysis
CSU did not have formal written policy guidelines, required by USM Board of
Regents policy, including eligibility criteria for the award of institutional need-
based financial aid, which totaled $1 million during fiscal year 2022. In addition,
CSU could not provide required support for certain financial aid awards to justify
the propriety of the award. We reviewed the CSU need-based institutional aid,
which according to CSU’s records, was awarded to 320 students during fiscal
year 2022 in amounts that generally ranged between $1,000 and $5,000 for each
aid year.
• CSU could not provide formal written policy guidelines including criteria for
the financial aid award programs tested. Accordingly, we found these
financial aid awards to be highly subjective and susceptible to inconsistencies.
Subsequent to our current inquiries, CSU drafted certain eligibility criteria,
but it omitted important information, such as the intent of the program,
eligible costs, and the impact of other assistance received. Furthermore, the
11

--- Page 14 ---
criteria provided that “the Director of Financial Aid may allocate this aid
based on professional judgment,” without any guidelines for determining the
amount allocated or independent review and approval of this decision.
• Our review of 12 students who had been awarded institutional need-based aid
totaling $40,244, disclosed 3 students who received $7,362 in aid for which
CSU could not provide the required aid application from the student. Another
student who received $3,000 in aid, submitted an application stating that the
aid was needed because “living away from home and school is expensive”
without any other support for the financial need.
The USM Board of Regents Policies and Procedures require each USM
institution to develop policy guidelines for the award of institutional financial aid
to undergraduate students that specifically include the criteria for awarding such
aid. The lack of formal eligibility criteria was commented upon in our preceding
audit report. In response to that report, USM, on behalf of CSU, indicated that
written eligibility criteria would be included in CSU’s policy and procedures
manual by spring of 2020. However, as noted above, CSU could not provide any
documentation of the formal eligibility criteria.
Recommendation 2
We recommend that CSU
a. establish required formal written policy guidelines for institutional
financial aid including eligibility criteria, as well as the intent of the
program, eligible costs, the impact of other assistance received by the
student, student documentation requirements, and clarification on the
use, review, and approval of professional judgment when awarding aid
(repeat); and
b. obtain the required documentation to support the propriety of financial
aid awards, including for those noted above.
Procurement and Disbursements
Finding 3
CSU did not obtain Board of Public Works (BPW) approval for its food
service vendor contract as required by State law, and did not ensure that the
vendor remitted all required commissions.
Analysis
CSU did not obtain required BPW approval for its food service vendor contract,
as required by State law, and did not ensure that the vendor remitted all required
12

--- Page 15 ---
commissions. The current contract term is August 1, 2019 to July 31, 2024, and
as of June 2022, CSU had paid the vendor approximately $6.6 million. State law
requires universities with service contracts valued over $1 million to obtain BPW
approval. CSU management advised us that, under USM Board of Regents
Procurement Policies and Procedures, BPW approval was not required for the
food service contract because it was a revenue generating contract. However, in
response to our inquiry, BPW personnel advised us that this food service contract
would be considered a service contract and require BPW approval, and that other
USM institutions have submitted similar contracts to BPW for approval in the
past.
In addition, CSU did not verify that the vendor submitted required commissions
due to the lack of available sales reports from the automated point of sales system
used by the vendor to record sales during the audit period. The food service
contract required the vendor to pay CSU the greater of 9.25 percent of the annual
revenue from certain specified sources (such as internal and external catering,
summer camps, and concessions), or $250,000. Although during fiscal year 2022
CSU received commissions totaling $258,813 from the vendor, we were unable to
verify the completeness of commissions received due to the lack of the
aforementioned sales reports.
Recommendation 3
We recommend that CSU
a. submit all service contracts over $1 million to BPW for approval as
required, including the food service contract; and
b. generate sales reports and use them to verify that all required
commissions are received from the vendor.
Student Residency Status
Finding 4
CSU’s reviews of changes to student residency status were either not
performed or when performed were not sufficiently comprehensive.
Analysis
CSU’s reviews of changes to student residency status processed by the Office of
Records and Registration were either not performed or were not sufficiently
comprehensive. Specifically, no reviews were conducted prior to February 2022
and reviews conducted subsequent to that period did not include a review of the
supporting documentation to ensure the determinations were proper. In July
2022, CSU began to retroactively review output reports of changes made since
13

--- Page 16 ---
February 2022. However, the reviews were not sufficient since they did not
include an examination for and of adequate supporting documentation, such as
proof of in-state residency submitted by the student.
Our review of five residency changes from out-of-state to in-state disclosed one
student for whom there was no documentation to support they were eligible for
in-state status. Specifically, the documentation submitted stated that the student’s
primary reason for moving to Maryland was to attend CSU. The student received
in-state tuition for two semesters prior to leaving CSU.
The USM Board of Regents Policy on Student Classification for Admission and
Tuition Purposes states that an individual seeking in-state status shall have the
burden of providing clear and convincing evidence that he or she satisfies the
requirements set forth in the Policy.3 Accurate student residency determinations
are critical because of the significant differences between in-state and out-of-state
student tuition rates. For example, full-time undergraduate tuition charges for the
Fall 2022 semester totaled $2,418 for Maryland residents (in-state) and $5,746 for
nonresidents (out-of-state).
Recommendation 4
We recommend that CSU
a. conduct comprehensive reviews of residency status changes, at least on a
test basis, including those prior to February 2022; and
b. take appropriate corrective action for any unsupported changes,
including the unsupported change noted above.
Cash Receipts
Finding 5
CSU did not have adequate controls over collections totaling $4.8 million in
fiscal year 2022. Specifically, certain critical cash receipts functions were not
adequately separated, and independent deposit verifications were not
performed.
Analysis
CSU did not establish adequate controls over collections which, according to
records provided by CSU, totaled $4.8 million in fiscal year 2022 ($3.2 million in
3 In August 2023, CSU announced that it will implement a new policy, effective for the Fall 2024
semester, that will make certain new out-of-state full-time undergraduate students eligible to pay
in-state tuition rates. This policy change was approved by the USM Board of Regents in April
2023. This policy change will not apply to students currently enrolled at CSU.
14

--- Page 17 ---
cash and checks, and $1.6 million in online payments). Specifically, our review
disclosed the following conditions:
• The employee who verified that all cash and checks were subsequently
deposited was not independent since they participated in the cash register
closeout and had access to the collections prior to deposit.
• CSU did not use available reports of online payments processed by its third-
party vendor to verify that all online payments were deposited into the State’s
bank account. Our test of 10 online payments disclosed that all were
deposited into the State’s bank account.
The Comptroller of Maryland’s Accounting Procedures Manual requires an
independent verification of collections from the initial point of recordation to
amounts deposited.
Recommendation 5
We recommend that CSU
a. ensure an employee independent of the collection process verifies all
collections received at CSU are deposited intact, and
b. use available reports of online payments processed by its third-party
vendor to verify that all such payments were deposited into the State’s
bank account.
We advised CSU on how to accomplish the proper segregation of duties using
existing personnel.
15

--- Page 18 ---
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the University System of
Maryland (USM) – Coppin State University (CSU) for the period beginning July
25, 2018 and ending June 30, 2022. The audit was conducted in accordance with
generally accepted government auditing standards. Those standards require that
we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient, appropriate evidence to
provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit
objectives. We believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for
our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives.
As prescribed by the State Government Article, Section 2-1221 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, the objectives of this audit were to examine CSU’s financial
transactions, records, and internal control, and to evaluate its compliance with
applicable State laws, rules, and regulations.
In planning and conducting our audit, we focused on the major financial-related
areas of operations based on assessments of significance and risk. The areas
addressed by the audit included procurements and disbursements, student
accounts receivable, cash receipts, student financial aid, payroll, corporate
purchasing cards, and information systems security and control. We also
determined the status of the findings contained in our preceding audit report.
Our audit did not include certain support services provided to CSU by the USM
Office, such as bond financing and endowment accounting, and by the University
of Maryland Baltimore (UMB), such as processing vendor payment transmittals
and payroll, and capital project management. These support services are included
within the scope of our audits of the USM Office and UMB, respectively. In
addition, our audit did not include an evaluation of internal controls over
compliance with federal laws and regulations for federal financial assistance
programs and an assessment of CSU’s compliance with those laws and
regulations because the State of Maryland engages an independent accounting
firm to annually audit such programs administered by State agencies, including
the components of the USM.
Our assessment of internal controls was based on agency procedures and controls
in place at the time of our fieldwork. Our tests of transactions and other auditing
procedures were generally focused on the transactions occurring during our audit
period of July 25, 2018 to June 30, 2022, but may include transactions before or
after this period as we considered necessary to achieve our audit objectives.
16

--- Page 19 ---
To accomplish our audit objectives, our audit procedures included inquiries of
appropriate personnel, inspections of documents and records, tests of transactions,
and to the extent practicable, observations of CSU’s operations. Generally,
transactions were selected for testing based on auditor judgment, which primarily
considers risk, the timing or dollar amount of the transaction, or the significance
of the transaction to the area of operation reviewed. As a matter of course, we do
not normally use sampling in our tests, so unless otherwise specifically indicated,
neither statistical nor non-statistical audit sampling was used to select the
transactions tested. Therefore, unless sampling is specifically indicated in a
finding, the results from any tests conducted or disclosed by us cannot be used to
project those results to the entire population from which the test items were
selected.
We also performed various data extracts of pertinent information from the State’s
Financial Management Information System (such as revenue and expenditure
data) and the State’s Central Payroll Bureau (payroll data), as well as from the
contractor administering the State’s Corporate Purchasing Card Program (credit
card activity). The extracts are performed as part of ongoing internal processes
established by the Office of Legislative Audits and were subject to various tests to
determine data reliability. We determined that the data extracted from these
sources were sufficiently reliable for the purposes the data were used during this
audit.
We also extracted data from CSU’s financial systems for the purpose of testing
certain areas, such as financial aid and student accounts receivable. We
performed various tests of the relevant data and determined that the data were
sufficiently reliable for the purposes the data were used during the audit. Finally,
we performed other auditing procedures that we considered necessary to achieve
our audit objectives. The reliability of data used in this report for background or
informational purposes was not assessed.
CSU’s management is responsible for establishing and maintaining effective
internal control. Internal control is a process designed to provide reasonable
assurance that objectives pertaining to the reliability of financial records;
effectiveness and efficiency of operations, including safeguarding of assets; and
compliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations are achieved. As
provided in Government Auditing Standards, there are five components of
internal control: control environment, risk assessment, control activities,
information and communication, and monitoring. Each of the five components,
when significant to the audit objectives, and as applicable to CSU, were
considered by us during the course of this audit.
17

--- Page 20 ---
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate.
Our reports are designed to assist the Maryland General Assembly in exercising
its legislative oversight function and to provide constructive recommendations for
improving State operations. As a result, our reports generally do not address
activities we reviewed that are functioning properly.
This report includes findings relating to conditions that we consider to be
significant deficiencies in the design or operation of internal control that could
adversely affect CSU’s ability to maintain reliable financial records, operate
effectively and efficiently, and/or comply with applicable laws, rules, and
regulations. Our report also includes findings regarding significant instances of
noncompliance with applicable laws, rules, or regulations. Other less significant
findings were communicated to CSU that did not warrant inclusion in this report.
The response from the USM Office, on behalf of CSU, to our findings and
recommendations is included as an appendix to this report. As prescribed in the
State Government Article, Section 2-1224 of the Annotated Code of Maryland,
we will advise the USM Office regarding the results of our review of its response.
18

--- Page 21 ---
APPENDIX
3300 METZEROTT ROAD // ADELPHI, MD 20783
WWW.USMD.EDU // 301.445.1923
OFFICE OF ADMINISTRATION AND FINANCE
October 27, 2023
Mr. Gregory A. Hook, CPA
Legislative Auditor
Office of Legislative Audits
The Warehouse at Camden Yards
351 West Camden Street, Suite 400
Baltimore, MD 21201
Re: University System of Maryland – Coppin State University
Period of Audit: July 25, 2018 through June 30, 2022
Dear Mr. Hook,
Thank you for the work of your team and the recommendations you provided. I have enclosed the revised
University System of Maryland’s responses to your draft report covering the examination of the accounts and
records of the University System of Maryland – Coppin State University. Our comments refer to the individual
items in the report.
Sincerely,
Ellen Herbst
Senior Vice Chancellor for Administration and Finance
Enclosures
cc: Dr. Anthony L. Jenkins, President, CSU
Ms. Linda R. Gooden, Chair, University System of Maryland Board of Regents
Mr. Louis M. Pope, University System of Maryland Board of Regents
Dr. Jay A. Perman, Chancellor, University System of Maryland
Ms. Celeste Denson, Associate Vice Chancellor for Financial Affairs, USM Office
Mr. David Mosca, Vice Chancellor for Accountability, USM Office
Mr. Michael C. Eismeier, Associate Vice Chancellor and CIO, USM Office
Ms. Samantha Norris, Director, Financial Planning and Analysis, USM Office
Mr. Stephen Danik, Vice President, Administration and Finance, CSU

--- Page 22 ---
University System of Maryland
Coppin State University
Agency Response Form
Student Financial Aid
Finding 1
CSU awarded most HEERF grants without consideration of individual student cost of
attendance and financial need, and additional hardship assistance grants were awarded to
students who did not appear to meet eligibility criteria.
We recommend that CSU
a. develop criteria to ensure that aid intended solely for the purpose of meeting student
financial need is distributed based on a specific determination of each student’s unmet
need, including consideration of other sources of assistance, such as tuition remission,
and number of credits being taken; and
b. follow established eligibility criteria for distributing student aid.
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide Coppin State University followed the guidelines provided by the
additional comments as federal government related to the distribution of Supplemental
deemed necessary. Grant Funds for Students. In one specific section of the guidelines, it
reads “The Secretary does not consider these individual financial aid
grants to constitute Federal financial aid under Title IV of the
Higher Education Act (HEA).” Hence there is no requirement to
follow established criteria for distributing student aid. In addition,
the U.S. Dept. of Education provided this language “HEERF-
student share dollars are to aid students for expenses related to the
disruption of campus operations due to the coronavirus; this is
different than a change in a student’s financial need…” This
language further differentiates these funds from financial aid
dollars.
Recommendation 1a Agree Estimated Completion Date: May 2024
Please provide details of If similar funds are provided by the Federal Government in the
corrective action or future, CSU will follow Federal Guidelines and CSU Financial Aid
explain disagreement. criteria to the extent that it does not contradict Federal guidelines.
Recommendation 1b Agree Estimated Completion Date: May 2024
Please provide details of Student aid will be distributed based on criteria developed in
corrective action or responses 2a and 2b and 1a if applicable.
explain disagreement.
Page 1 of 8

--- Page 23 ---
University System of Maryland
Coppin State University
Agency Response Form
Finding 2
CSU did not have required formal written policy guidelines including eligibility criteria for
the award of certain institutional need-based financial aid and could not provide required
support for certain financial aid awards to justify the propriety of the award.
We recommend that CSU
a. establish required formal written policy guidelines for institutional financial aid
including eligibility criteria, as well as the intent of the program, eligible costs, the
impact of other assistance received by the student, student documentation
requirements, and clarification on the use, review, and approval of professional
judgment when awarding aid (repeat); and
b. obtain the required documentation to support the propriety of financial aid awards,
including for those noted above.
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 2a Agree Estimated Completion Date: May 2024
Please provide details of Coppin State University (CSU) will develop an independent
corrective action or financial aid advisory committee to review and implement policies
explain disagreement. and procedures for awarding all need-based aid award programs.
The independent financial aid advisory committee will comprise
campus constituents from various departments such as Athletics,
Academic Affairs, Administration and Finance, and Enrollment
Management and Student Affairs. The Director of Financial Aid will
serve as an ex-officio advisor of this committee. All need-based aid
funding sources will have policies that describe 1) the intent of the
program, 2) outline awarding criteria, i.e., need, merit, residency
status, etc., 3) selection criteria, 4) awarding process and exception
criteria, 5) review and reconciliation 6) reporting process.
1a) the program's intent will describe each fund's purpose, source,
awarding timelines, and outcomes expectations if applicable.
Page 2 of 8

--- Page 24 ---
University System of Maryland
Coppin State University
Agency Response Form
2a) The awarding criteria will include the following: a review of the
cost of attendance, a review of the recipients' receipt of other
funding (internal and external), a calculation of need, academic
attributes, residency status, housing status, frequency, and required
documentation.
3a) The selection criteria will document the adherence to the
awarding criteria and define how competitive awards are decided.
4a) The awarding of students will be determined by an established
awarding formula for each award type. The awarding appeal
process, if needed by the funding types, will be defined, and include
an outline of any required supplemental documentation and
procedures. To eliminate the utilization of individual professional
judgment, the independent financial aid advisory committee will
assist in determinations on need-based funding exceptions during
the selection and awarding process.
5a) Internal checks and balances will consist of a review of all funds
awarded and will be managed following the timeline established for
each award.
6a) A report of funding activities for each fund type will be provided
to the independent financial aid advisory committee quarterly. The
committee will report to CSU leadership on proper institutional aid
management.
The Student Financial Planning (SFP) system will support CSU's
execution of the management, selection, awarding, and reconciling
of all need or merit-based funding types.
Recommendation 2b Agree Estimated Completion Date: May 2024
Please provide details of The policies and procedures developed and implemented [a manual]
corrective action or by the independent financial aid advisory committee, as noted in
explain disagreement. [recommendation A], will adhere to any obtained federal, State, or
institutional restrictions and document the support and awarding of
all funds. Examples of documents that will be requested include the
Additional Financial Aid document, documents to verify residency,
documentation related to dependency status, employment status
documentation with income information, housing status or
statements from social service agencies about housing insecurity, a
statement from a third party (i.e., social services), loss of job (i.e.,
termination letter, information from the state department of labor),
birth certificates or adoption certificate for new family member, or
notice of death for loss of family member. The documentation is
stored on two secured institutional platforms: the Student Financial
Planning (SFP) system and ImageNow.
Page 3 of 8

--- Page 25 ---
University System of Maryland
Coppin State University
Agency Response Form
As noted in [recommendation B], Coppin State's implementation of
these practices will assist with the awarding of students accurately.
Coppin State will continue to investigate and locate documentation
for the (5) student files reviewed during this process.
Procurement and Disbursements
Finding 3
CSU did not obtain Board of Public Works (BPW) approval for its food service vendor
contract as required by State law, and did not ensure that the vendor remitted all required
commissions.
We recommend that CSU
a. submit all service contracts over $1 million to BPW for approval as required, including
the food service contract; and
b. generate sales reports and use them to verify that all required commissions are received
from the vendor.
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 3a Agree Estimated Completion Date: Unknown
Please provide details of Coppin State University is a constituent institution within the
corrective action or University System of Maryland. As such it is required to adhere to
explain disagreement. the policies and procedures established by the USM Board of
Regents. At the time CSU entered its food service contract, it
adhered to the existing BOR approved USM Procurement Policies
and Procedures which specifically lists revenue generating contracts
as an exclusion to USM Procurement Policies. If there is a change in
USM Procurement Policies and Procedures relative to revenue
Page 4 of 8

--- Page 26 ---
University System of Maryland
Coppin State University
Agency Response Form
generating contracts, Coppin State will adhere to the amended
policies and procedures established at such time.
Auditor’s Comment: Although the response indicates agreement, the response further
states that CSU adhered to USM Procurement Policies and Procedures regarding its food
service contract. Specifically, the response implies that, under current USM Procurement
Policies and Procedures, CSU did not need to and will not submit its food service
contract to BPW for approval. However, as indicated in the finding, BPW personnel
advised us that the contract would be considered a service contract requiring BPW
approval. As such, we continue to believe and recommend that food service contracts be
submitted to BPW when exceeding the established dollar threshold. Given the advice we
were provided by BPW, we also believe the related USM policy should be clarified.
Recommendation 3b Agree Estimated Completion Date: Sept. 2023
Please provide details of Coppin State is running sales reports from the POS system and
corrective action or utilizing these reports to verify all commissionable sales and ensure
explain disagreement. accurate reconciliations of commission payments from its food
service vendor. The reconciliation of the sales report to commission
sales is being prepared by staff monthly and reviewed by the
supervisor.
Student Residency Status
Finding 4
CSU’s reviews of changes to student residency status were either not performed or when
performed were not sufficiently comprehensive.
We recommend that CSU
a. conduct comprehensive reviews of residency status changes, at least on a test basis,
including those prior to February 2022; and
b. take appropriate corrective action for any unsupported changes, including the
unsupported change noted above.
Page 5 of 8

--- Page 27 ---
University System of Maryland
Coppin State University
Agency Response Form
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide The institution has reviewed the finding and concurs with the stated
additional comments as finding.
deemed necessary.
In June 2023, the Records and Registration Office and the Office of
Information Technology (IT) provided a subsequent Residency
Change Report, Residency Code Log, and a live screenshot of the
test sample pulled for residency data to confirm the accuracy of the
residency change process and data provided during the on-site
audit.
Recommendation 4a Agree Estimated Completion Date: Spring 2024
Please provide details of The initial residency determination is handled during a student’s
corrective action or admission process by the Office of Admissions and must be
explain disagreement. confirmed by the first day of classes for their (a student’s) selected
semester starts. After that, a student would petition the Office of
Records and Registration if an additional review is required. The
Office of Records and Registration will review each student petition
on a case-by-case basis and will provide follow-up, an outcome, and
an appeal process (if required) to a student. As noted in
[recommendation A], The administrative assistant will periodically
review residency changes made in the Office of Records and
Registration and reviewed monthly by the Registrar to review prior
student residency petition changes. The review process will be
updated to include the following steps:
1. Pull the Residency Audit Report the first week of the month
to review the prior month's changes.
2. Check the Residency Folder for each student changed by the
Office of Records and Registration to verify the Residency
Change Form has been completed and signed and that all
appropriate documentation is included as outlined in the
Residency Petition Application.
3. Verify in EagleLinks (Student Information System SIS) that
the change has been made on the residency page.
Once the steps have been completed for the Residency Audit
Monthly Review, the form is filled out by the Administrative
Assistant and then verified and signed by the Registrar. In addition,
the residency monthly review will be reviewed and verified by the
Vice President of Enrollment Management and Student Affairs.
CSU will review residency status changes that occurred prior to
Page 6 of 8

--- Page 28 ---
University System of Maryland
Coppin State University
Agency Response Form
February 2022 on an as-needed basis. CSUwill continue to review
petitions and appeals submitted by enrolled students.
Recommendation 4b Agree Estimated Completion Date: Spring 2024
Please provide details of This review process will be conducted by the Administrative
corrective action or Assistant in Records and Registration, reviewed, and verified by the
explain disagreement. Registrar, and subsequently reviewed and verified by the Vice
President of Enrollment Management and Student Affairs.
Additional corrective action will work to incorporate the residency
form processes within the Application for Admission to adequately
capture a student’s residency earlier in the Admissions process and
not to require changes.
All corrective action will be implemented and addressed as outlined
in [recommendation A]. The described monthly audit will be
performed by the Administrative Assistant in the Office of Records
and Registration. The Registrar will approve the audit. The Vice
President of Enrollment Management and Student Affairs will
verify the monthly check. The Registrar will oversee the changes
required to implement these steps, with status updates provided
twice monthly to the Vice President of Enrollment Management and
Student Affairs.
As noted in [recommendation B], Coppin will be consulting with the
AG's Office on whether a student's record who has an inaccurate
(non-documented or supporting documentation) of a residency
changed during July 28, 2018, and ending June 30, 2022, to
investigate if Coppin is to retroactively alter (correct) a student(s)
residency who is/are still currently enrolled, or a student(s) who
is/are no longer enrolled. Coppin will implement appropriate
corrective actions upon guidance from the AG's Office.
Page 7 of 8

--- Page 29 ---
University System of Maryland
Coppin State University
Agency Response Form
Cash Receipts
Finding 5
CSU did not have adequate controls over collections totaling $4.8 million in fiscal year
2022. Specifically, certain critical cash receipts functions were not adequately separated,
and independent deposit verifications were not performed.
We recommend that CSU
a. ensure an employee independent of the collection process verifies all collections received
at CSU are deposited intact, and
b. use available reports of online payments processed by its third-party vendor to verify
that all such payments were deposited into the State’s bank account.
We advised CSU on how to accomplish the proper segregation of duties using existing
personnel.
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 5a Agree Estimated Completion Date: Dec. 2023
Please provide details of
corrective action or The independent review to verify that all cash and checks were
explain disagreement. subsequently deposited will be performed by a member in the
General Accounting unit instead of the Bursar unit. Transitioning
the monthly bank reconciliation to this unit will provide the
recommended independence as relates to daily cash transactions.
Recommendation 5b Agree Estimated Completion Date: May 2023
Please provide details of .
corrective action or
explain disagreement. The information staff have been using in the vendor portal is now
being printed daily as evidence of the existing verification process of
all payments deposited into the State’s bank account and serves as
source documentation for the daily payments as well as the monthly
banking reconciliation. The corrective action was implemented
immediately to resolve any future concerns.
Page 8 of 8

--- Page 30 ---
AUDIT TEAM
Robert A. Wells, Jr., CPA
Audit Manager
R. Brendan Coffey, CPA, CISA
Edwin L. Paul, CPA, CISA
Information Systems Audit Managers
Lauren E. Franchak, CPA
Senior Auditor
Peter W. Chong
Edward O. Kendall, CISA
Information Systems Senior Auditors
Timothy Moon
Jillian A. Novak, CPA
Oluwafemi E. Ogundolie
John E. Rooney
Staff Auditors
Malcolm J. Woodard
Information Systems Staff Auditor