Title: Presentation to the Senate Budget and Taxation Full Committee - Department of Commerce


Related Report Dated (9/4/2019)
Date: 10/15/2019
Type: Presentations to the Legislature
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5da60154a1ce580dfcfd2979
Extracted: 2025-06-19T06:19:22.212164
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Department of Commerce (DOC)
Report Dated September 4, 2019
Presentation to Senate Budget and Taxation
Committee
Gregory A. Hook, CPA
Paul R. Denz, CPA
Bekana Edossa, CPA
October 15, 2019

--- Page 2 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Audit Overview
 DOC develops policies and implements programs to help
generate new jobs and retain existing jobs in Maryland, and
to attract business investment to the State, including the
expansion and retention of existing companies. DOC uses
financing programs and incentives—such as loans, grants,
tax credits, and other financial investments—to accomplish
its purpose. DOC also administers the Small, Minority, and
Women-Owned Businesses Account (SMWOBA), which is
funded from a portion of video lottery terminal proceeds.
 DOC spent $125.6 million during fiscal year 2018 on
operating expenses and grants, loans, and other
investments.
 Our audit focused primarily on DOC’s procedures and
controls for fulfilling its responsibilities with regard to
monitoring compliance with program requirements
established in State laws and regulations, or by written
agreement.
 Our report included 9 findings, 2 of which (Findings 1 and
9) were repeated from our preceding audit report on DOC
(then the Department of Business and Economic
Development).
Department of Commerce
Page 2

--- Page 3 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Audit Overview (continued)
The following two tables reflect fiscal year 2018 activity for
loans, grants, loan guarantees, and tax credits.
DOC Financing Programs and Related Activity – Fiscal Year 2018
Loans and Loan
Financing Programs
Grants Guarantees
Economic Development
Assistance Authority and Fund $13,350,000 Not Applicable
Industrial Development
Financing Authority $10,770,000 $1,350,300
Video Lottery Terminal Fund $9,632,225 Not Applicable
E-Nnovation Initiative $7,020,000 Not Applicable
Small Business Development
Financing Authority $6,032,050 $203,600
Sunny Day $5,000,000 Not Applicable
Other Programs $1,632,652 Not Applicable
Department of Commerce
Page 3

--- Page 4 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Audit Overview (continued)
DOC Tax Credit Programs and Related Activity
Fiscal Year 2018
Certificates
Tax Credit Programs
Issued
One Maryland $22,947,031
Biotechnology Investment 12,379,430
Research and Development 12,000,000
Aerospace, Electronic, and 7,500,000
Defense
Film Production 7,047,304
Job Creation 4,344,464
Employer Security 2,000,000
Other Programs 671,497
Department of Commerce
Page 4

--- Page 5 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Key Findings
 DOC lacked adequate procedures and processes for
verifying compliance with certain requirements established
for participation in several of its financing programs and
incentives that we examined.
 These requirements included, for example,
• creating and maintaining a specified number of
jobs,
• providing for matching funds,
• using State funds for acceptable purposes, and
• verifying lender claims for payment.
 We examined the following programs and incentives:
• One Maryland Tax Credit Program
• Biotechnology Investment Tax Credit
• Loans – Conditional and Guaranteed
• Maryland E-Nnovation Initiative Fund
• Maryland State Arts Council Grants
 With respect to its Small, Minority, and Women-Owned
Businesses Account (SMWOBA), DOC did not have an
effective process for ensuring that
 Fund manager agreements included details regarding
certain critical loan processing procedures,
 Fund manager compensation was proper, and
 Data reported by fund managers regarding efforts to
meet program goals were accurate.
Department of Commerce
Page 5

--- Page 6 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Tax Credit Programs - Findings 1 and 2
DOC did not have adequate procedures for verifying certain critical
requirements for the receipt of tax credits totaling approximately
$116 million during our audit period.
Finding 1 - One Maryland Tax Credit Program ($69.8 million)
 DOC lacked effective procedures for verifying the accuracy of
new positions claimed by applicants, as well as the duration for
which those positions were filled. An eligible business may
receive a credit for costs incurred for expanding or establishing
a new facility in the State if at least 25 new positions are
created for at least 12 months.
 DOC reviewed applicant payroll records for only 3 ($15
million) of the 15 credits ($69.8 million) certified during our
audit period, and our review of 2 of the 3 disclosed that the
department did not verity the date the positions were
created or filled or that the 12 month employment
requirement was met. The 12 credits with no review were
issued based on applicant supplied data and
representations.
 Our test of 6 credits found one credit for $5.5 million (maximum
allowed) that was issued for costs that were ineligible according
to State regulations because they were incurred through a sale
and purchase transaction between related parties. DOC advised
that the regulation is antiquated and needs to be amended.
Department of Commerce
Page 6

--- Page 7 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Tax Credit Programs - Findings 1 and 2 (continued)
Finding 2 – Biotechnology Investment Tax Credit ($47 million)
 DOC lacked effective procedures for verifying employment
and ownership information provided by biotechnology
companies prior to issuing tax credits to eligible investors.
 Our review of records for $8 million in credits relating
to 5 companies disclosed that DOC had not verified
employment reports provided by any of the companies.
For certification under the program, a biotechnology
company must be based in Maryland and have fewer
than 50 employees. DOC advised us that it obtains a
self-certification of the employee count from each
company, and that through its working knowledge of
the companies, knows that each company employs
fewer than 50 employees.
 DOC did not adequately verify the ownership interest of
investors receiving tax credits. A tax credit not
exceeding $500,000 may be issued to an investor in a
certified company if the investment does not result in
the investor owning more than a 25 percent equity
interest in the company. DOC did not obtain and verify
complete ownership information to ensure compliance
with this requirement.
Department of Commerce
Page 7

--- Page 8 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Conditional Loans & Loan Guarantees - Finding 3
Conditional Loans
 DOC lacked sufficient procedures to verify employment
reports received from loan recipients to support the
forgiveness of loans. Generally, loan recipients must hire
and maintain a minimum number of qualified employees
at certain wage, hour, and benefit levels to warrant loan
forgiveness. During fiscal years 2015 through 2018, DOC
forgave 20 loans ($8.3 million) under one financing
program tested.
 Employment data obtained by DOC from the State’s
Department of Labor for verification purposes did not
provide the specificity needed to confirm employment
reports received.
 Verifications performed by DOC’s Office of Internal
Audits were limited. Payroll data were verified for only
4 of the 20 forgiven loans, and 2 of the verifications
did not include all years of the loan as would be
necessary to verify eligibility for forgiveness of the
entire loan.
 DOC advised that it also relies on loan recipients to
submit accurate employment reports under penalty of
perjury.
Department of Commerce
Page 8

--- Page 9 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Conditional Loans & Loan Guarantees - Finding 3 (cont.)
Loan Guarantees
 DOC paid certain lender claims on guaranteed loans without
receiving and reviewing adequate supporting
documentation. During fiscal years 2015 through 2018,
DOC paid $1.6 million for guarantees associated with 4
loans under one financing program. Upon default of a
guaranteed loan, lenders must first exhaust recovery efforts
with the borrower, including liquidating collateral, before
turning to DOC for any guaranteed portion of the loan.
 A review of claims paid totaling $1.3 million for 3 loans
disclosed that interest claimed by the applicable
lenders was not properly calculated in all 3 instances,
resulting in DOC overpayments.
 For one claim of $632,000, DOC did not obtain
adequate independent documentation supporting the
lender’s assertion that there was no equity available
for recovery in two collateralized properties.
 Similarly, DOC did not obtain documentation, as
required in the guarantee agreement, supporting one
lender’s claim of $89,000 in costs incurred when
liquidating collateral.
Department of Commerce
Page 9

--- Page 10 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Maryland E-Nnovation Initiative Fund - Finding 4
This program provides matching funds ($16.8 million between
July 2015 and December 2017) to support research
endowments at Maryland non-profit institutions of higher
education, and can be used, for example, to fund new research
positions and equipment.
 DOC did not have established procedures to
 verify that recipients of State funds from this program
secured and deposited qualified donations to serve as
matching funds as required, and
 require recipients to submit documentation supporting
the appropriate use of State funds provided.
 A review of 10 awards to 5 recipients disclosed that DOC
did not verify that the recipients of 6 awards totaling $6.3
million had obtained qualified donations as required.
Although not requested by DOC, recipients of the other 4
awards provided such documentation.
 As for documentation that State funds were used properly,
DOC believes that annual reports accounting for these
funds and signed self-certifications received from recipients
are sufficient. Since these recipient reports are not
independently prepared, OLA believes that documentation,
such as invoices and cancelled checks, should also be
obtained and examined.
Department of Commerce
Page 10

--- Page 11 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Maryland State Arts Council Grants - Finding 5
 DOC had not established effective procedures and
controls over the award and disbursement of Grants for
Organizations funds provided to eligible organizations
and units of government to support arts programming
open to the public.
 According to DOC records, 285 grants were awarded
in fiscal year 2017 with disbursements totaling
$13.8 million.
 DOC grant guidelines specify both allowable and
non-qualified expenses under the grants.
 Grantees are required to provide certain matching
funds.
 Our test of 10 grants totaling $7.5 million disclosed that
DOC did not obtain documentation from any of the
grantees, such a bank statements and invoices, to
ensure that State fund were properly matched and used
in accordance with program guidelines.
 DOC did not reconcile grant disbursements according to
its records with the State’s records. During fiscal year
2017, OLA noted a difference of $700,000 between the
two sets of records.
Department of Commerce
Page 11

--- Page 12 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Small, Minority, and Women-Owned Businesses
Account (SMWOBA) - Finding 6
Under the SMWOBA Program, DOC has agreements with eight
fund managers to provide investment capital and loans to small,
minority, and women-owned businesses throughout Maryland.
The Fund manager agreements provide descriptions of the
services and responsibilities, including making and servicing
loans or investing in targeted businesses (based on DOC
established goals), and submitting certain reports and audited
financial statements to DOC. During our audit period, $25.7
million was disbursed to fund managers for this purpose.
Finding 6
DOC did not have a process to ensure that fund manager
agreements included critical details relating to loan underwriting
processes, such as procedures for determining borrower
eligibility, minimum borrower requirements, and collateral
requirements.
 Our review of 4 fund manager agreements disclosed that 3
lacked details of the underwriting process. These fund
managers settled 37 loans totaling $5.3 million in fiscal
year 2017. The fourth agreement included adequate
underwriting details.
 A lack of appropriate underwriting standards and practices
can expose the SMWOB Program to greater risk of loss.
Department of Commerce
Page 12

--- Page 13 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Small, Minority, and Women-Owned Businesses
Account (SMWOBA) - Findings 7 and 8 (cont.)
Finding 7
DOC did not establish an effective process to verify the propriety
and accuracy of compensation that fund managers periodically
withdrew from their accounts of funds made available to them by
DOC.
 DOC did not obtain supporting documentation of fund
manager compensation, and our tests disclosed certain
discrepancies between actual and reported compensation.
 Fund manager compensation includes a percentage of
grant awards made; loan origination and transaction fees
paid by borrowers; and any interest, capital gains, and
dividend earnings from investments.
 Manager compensation totaled $2.6 million in fiscal year
2017.
Finding 8
DOC did not verify data reported by fund managers relating to
their efforts to meet certain annual program lending goals
established by DOC, including, for example, making loans to at
least one veteran-owned business, two women-owned
businesses, and two businesses in rural targeted areas. Our
review of fiscal years 2016 and 2017 loan activity for three fund
managers disclosed that none had met all of the stated goals.
Department of Commerce
Page 13

--- Page 14 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Purchases and Disbursements (Finding 9)
 DOC had not established effective controls over certain
purchases and disbursements, as well as user access to the
State’s automated financial system.
 Adequate online approval requirements for
disbursements had not been established in two
departments as the same employee was able to initiate,
approve, and transmit a voucher for payment.
 Four employees in one department had the ability to
initiate and approve purchase orders as high as
$25,000 without independent review and approval.
Purchase orders totaling $6.6 million were processed
during our audit period without independent approval.
 DOC lacked effective controls to ensure that employees
had appropriate access capabilities in the State’s
financial system. All access was monitored by a single
employee who was not necessarily in position to know if
access granted to a particular employee was necessary.
Department of Commerce
Page 14

--- Page 15 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Conclusions
 DOC should establish adequate procedures and processes
for verifying compliance with critical requirements,
established in law, in regulation, and/or by written
agreement, for participation in its financing programs and
incentives. Critical requirements to be independently
verified include requirements for creating and maintaining a
specified number of jobs, providing for matching funds,
using State funds for acceptable purposes, and verifying
lender claims for payment.
 With respect to its Small, Minority, and Women-Owned
Businesses, DOC should establish an effective process for
ensuring
 fund manager agreements include details regarding all
critical loan processing procedures,
 fund manager compensation was proper, and
 data reported by fund managers regarding efforts to
meet program goals were accurate.
 DOC should establish effective controls over its purchasing
and disbursement transactions and the assignment of
system access capabilities for disbursements processed
through the State’s automated accounting system.
Department of Commerce
Page 15