Title: University System of Maryland - Salisbury University
Date: 10/22/2019
Type: Fiscal Compliance
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5db0a8b0a1ce5804fc391f19
Extracted: 2025-06-19T06:20:08.194874
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Audit Report
University System of Maryland
Salisbury University
March 2024
Public Notice
In compliance with the requirements of the State Government Article Section
2-1224(i), of the Annotated Code of Maryland, the Office of Legislative Audits
has redacted cybersecurity findings and related auditee responses
from this public report.
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Senator Clarence K. Lam, M.D. (Senate Chair) Delegate Jared Solomon (House Chair)
Senator Joanne C. Benson Delegate Steven J. Arentz
Senator Paul D. Corderman Delegate Andrea Fletcher Harrison
Senator Katie Fry Hester Delegate Steven C. Johnson
Senator Shelly L. Hettleman Delegate Mary A. Lehman
Senator Cheryl C. Kagan Delegate David Moon
Senator Cory V. McCray Delegate Julie Palakovich Carr
Senator Justin D. Ready Delegate Stephanie M. Smith
Senator Bryan W. Simonaire Delegate M. Courtney Watson
Senator Craig J. Zucker One Vacancy
To Obtain Further Information
Office of Legislative Audits
The Warehouse at Camden Yards
351 West Camden Street, Suite 400
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Phone: 410-946-5900
Maryland Relay: 711
TTY: 410-946-5401 ꞏ 301-970-5401
E-mail: webmaster@ola.state.md.us
Website: www.ola.state.md.us
To Report Fraud
The Office of Legislative Audits operates a Fraud Hotline to report fraud, waste, or abuse involving State
of Maryland government resources. Reports of fraud, waste, or abuse may be communicated anonymously
by a toll-free call to 1-877-FRAUD-11, by mail to the Fraud Hotline, c/o Office of Legislative Audits, or
through the Office’s website.
Nondiscrimination Statement
The Department of Legislative Services does not discriminate on the basis of age, ancestry, color, creed,
marital status, national origin, race, religion, gender, gender identity, sexual orientation, or disability in the
admission or access to its programs, services, or activities. The Department’s Information Officer has been
designated to coordinate compliance with the nondiscrimination requirements contained in Section 35.107
of the United States Department of Justice Regulations. Requests for assistance should be directed to the
Information Officer at 410-946-5400 or 410-970-5400.

--- Page 3 ---
March 5, 2024
Senator Clarence K. Lam, M.D., Senate Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Delegate Jared Solomon, House Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Members of Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Annapolis, Maryland
Ladies and Gentlemen:
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the University System of
Maryland (USM) – Salisbury University (SU) for the period beginning December
11, 2018 and ending October 31, 2022. SU is a comprehensive public institution
of USM and provides a broad range of baccalaureate programs as well as selected
professionally-oriented master’s programs and doctoral programs.
Our audit disclosed certain cybersecurity-related findings. However, in
accordance with the State Government Article, Section 2-1224(i) of the
Annotated Code of Maryland, we have redacted the findings from this audit
report. Specifically, State law requires the Office of Legislative Audits to redact
cybersecurity findings in a manner consistent with auditing best practices before
the report is made available to the public. The term “cybersecurity” is defined in
the State Finance and Procurement Article, Section 3.5-301(b), and using our
professional judgment we have determined that the redacted findings fall under
the referenced definition. The specifics of the cybersecurity findings were
previously communicated to those parties responsible for acting on our
recommendations.
Our audit also included a review to determine the status of the five findings
contained in our preceding audit report. We call your attention to our
determination that SU satisfactorily addressed these findings.
The USM Office’s response to this audit, on behalf of SU, is included as an
appendix to this report; however, consistent with the requirements of State law,
we have redacted all elements of the USM Office’s response since they are related
to cybersecurity findings. We reviewed the response and noted general agreement

--- Page 4 ---
to our findings and related recommendations, and have concluded that the
corrective actions identified are sufficient to address the audit issues.
We wish to acknowledge the cooperation extended to us during the audit by SU.
We also wish to acknowledge USM’s and SU’s willingness to address the audit
issues and implement appropriate corrective actions.
Respectfully submitted,
Gregory A. Hook, CPA
Legislative Auditor
2

--- Page 5 ---
Background Information
Agency Responsibilities
Salisbury University (SU) is a comprehensive public institution of the University
System of Maryland (USM) and operates under the jurisdiction of the USM Board
of Regents. SU offers baccalaureate, master’s, and doctoral programs. During
the audit period, student enrollment dropped significantly with enrollment for the
fall 2022 semester totaling 7,123, including 6,378 undergraduate students and 745
graduate students1.
SU’s budget is funded by unrestricted revenues, such as tuition and fees and a
State general fund appropriation, and restricted revenues, such as federal grants
and contracts. According to the State’s records, SU’s revenues for fiscal year
2022 totaled approximately $213.3 million, including a State general fund
appropriation of approximately $58.3 million (see Figure 1 on the following
page).
1 Fall 2018 semester enrollment totaled 8,567, including 7,650 undergraduate students and 917
graduate students.
3

--- Page 6 ---
Figure 1
SU Positions, Expenditures, and Funding Sources
Full-Time Equivalent Positions as of June 30, 2022
Positions Percent
Filled 997 91.0%
Vacant 99 9.0%
Total 1,096
Fiscal Year 2022 Expenditures
Expenditures Percent
Salaries, Wages, and Fringe Benefits $ 106,888,637 50.1%
Technical and Special Fees 22,941,887 10.8%
Operating Expenses 83,420,292 39.1%
Total $213,250,816
Fiscal Year 2022 Funding Sources
Funding Percent
Unrestricted
General Fund $ 58,302,681 27.3%
Tuition and Fees 70,422,048 33.1%
Other University Revenues2 62,135,258 29.1%
190,859,987 89.5%
Restricted
Federal Grants and Contracts 18,448,789 8.7%
Other Gifts, Grants, and Contracts 3,942,040 1.8%
22,390,829 10.5%
Total $213,250,816
Source: State financial records and SU personnel records
2 Includes revenues from Auxiliary Services ($47.4M) and from the Higher Education Investment
Fund ($5.6M).
4

--- Page 7 ---
Status of Findings from Preceding Audit Report
Our audit included a review to determine the status of the five findings contained
in our preceding audit report dated October 22, 2019. We determined that SU
satisfactorily addressed these findings.
Findings and Recommendations
Information Systems Security and Control
We determined that the Information Systems Security and Control section,
including Findings 1 and 2 related to “cybersecurity,” as defined by the State
Finance and Procurement Article, Section 3.5-301(b) of the Annotated Code of
Maryland, and therefore are subject to redaction from the publicly available audit
report in accordance with the State Government Article 2-1224(i). Consequently,
the specifics of the following findings, including the analysis, related
recommendations, along with the USM Office’s responses, have been redacted
from this report copy.
Finding 1
Redacted cybersecurity-related finding.
Finding 2
Redacted cybersecurity-related finding.
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the University System of
Maryland (USM) – Salisbury University (SU) for the period beginning December
11, 2018 and ending October 31, 2022. The audit was conducted in accordance
with generally accepted government auditing standards. Those standards require
that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient, appropriate evidence to
provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit
objectives. We believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for
our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives.
As prescribed by the State Government Article, Section 2-1221 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, the objectives of this audit were to examine SU’s financial
5

--- Page 8 ---
transactions, records and internal control, and to evaluate its compliance with
applicable State laws, rules, and regulations.
In planning and conducting our audit, we focused on the major financial-related
areas of operations based on assessments of significance and risk. The areas
addressed by the audit included procurements and disbursements, student
accounts receivable, student financial aid, cash receipts, payroll, and information
systems security and control. We also determined the status of the findings
contained in our preceding audit report.
Our audit did not include certain support services provided to SU by the USM
Office. These support services (such as bond financing) are included within the
scope of our audit of the USM Office. In addition, our audit did not include an
evaluation of internal controls over compliance with federal laws and regulations
for federal financial assistance programs and an assessment of SU’s compliance
with those laws and regulations because the State of Maryland engages an
independent accounting firm to annually audit such programs administered by
State agencies, including the components of the USM.
Our assessment of internal controls was based on agency procedures and controls
in place at the time of our fieldwork. Our tests of transactions and other auditing
procedures were generally focused on the transactions occurring during our audit
period of December 11, 2018 to October 31, 2022, but may include transactions
before or after this period as we considered necessary to achieve our audit
objectives.
To accomplish our audit objectives, our audit procedures included inquiries of
appropriate personnel, inspections of documents and records, tests of transactions,
and to the extent practicable, observations of SU’s operations. Generally,
transactions were selected for testing based on auditor judgment, which primarily
considers risk, the timing or dollar amount of the transaction, or the significance
of the transaction to the area of operation reviewed. As a matter of course, we do
not normally use sampling in our tests, so unless otherwise specifically indicated,
neither statistical nor non-statistical audit sampling was used to select the
transactions tested. Therefore, unless sampling is specifically indicated in a
finding, the results from any tests conducted or disclosed by us cannot be used to
project those results to the entire population from which the test items were
selected.
We also performed various data extracts of pertinent information from the State’s
Financial Management Information System (such as revenue and expenditure
data) and the State’s Central Payroll Bureau (payroll data), as well as from the
6

--- Page 9 ---
contractor administering the State’s Corporate Purchasing Card Program (credit
card activity). The extracts are performed as part of ongoing internal processes
established by the Office of Legislative Audits and were subject to various tests to
determine data reliability. We determined that the data extracted from these
sources were sufficiently reliable for the purposes the data were used during this
audit.
We also extracted data from SU’s financial system for the purpose of testing
certain areas, such as student accounts receivable and student financial aid. We
performed various tests of the relevant data and determined that the data were
sufficiently reliable for the purposes the data were used during the audit. Finally,
we performed other auditing procedures that we considered necessary to achieve
our objectives. The reliability of data used in this report for background or
informational purposes was not assessed.
SU’s management is responsible for establishing and maintaining effective
internal control. Internal control is a process designed to provide reasonable
assurance that objectives pertaining to the reliability of financial records;
effectiveness and efficiency of operations, including safeguarding of assets; and
compliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations are achieved. As
provided in Government Auditing Standards, there are five components of
internal control: control environment, risk assessment, control activities,
information and communication, and monitoring. Each of the five components,
when significant to the audit objectives, and as applicable to SU, were considered
by us during the course of this audit.
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate.
Our reports are designed to assist the Maryland General Assembly in exercising
its legislative oversight function and to provide constructive recommendations for
improving State operations. As a result, our reports generally do not address
activities we reviewed that are functioning properly.
This report includes findings relating to conditions that we consider to be
significant deficiencies in the design or operation of internal control that could
adversely affect SU’s ability to maintain reliable financial records, operate
effectively and efficiently, and/or comply with applicable laws, rules, and
regulations. Our report also includes findings regarding significant instances of
7

--- Page 10 ---
noncompliance with applicable laws, rules, or regulations. Other less significant
findings were communicated to SU that did not warrant inclusion in this report.
State Government Article Section 2-1224(i) requires that we redact in a manner
consistent with auditing best practices any cybersecurity findings before a report
is made available to the public. This results in the issuance of two different
versions of an audit report that contains cybersecurity findings – a redacted
version for the public and an unredacted version for government officials
responsible for acting on our audit recommendations.
The State Finance and Procurement Article, Section 3.5-301(b), states that
cybersecurity is defined as “processes or capabilities wherein systems,
communications, and information are protected and defended against damage,
unauthorized use or modification, and exploitation.” Based on that definition, and
in our professional judgment, we concluded that all findings in this report fall
under that definition. Consequently, for the publicly available audit report all
specifics as to the nature of the cybersecurity finding and required corrective
actions have been redacted. We have determined that such aforementioned
practices, and government auditing standards, support the redaction of this
information from the public audit report. The specifics of the cybersecurity
findings have been communicated to SU and those parties responsible for acting
on our recommendations in an unredacted audit report.
The response from the USM Office, on behalf of SU, to our findings and
recommendations is included as an appendix to this report. Depending on the
version of the audit report, responses to any cybersecurity findings may be
redacted in accordance with State law. As prescribed in the State Government
Article, Section 2-1224 of the Annotated Code of Maryland, we will advise the
USM Office regarding the results of our review of its response.
8

--- Page 11 ---
APPENDIX
3300 METZEROTT ROAD // ADELPHI, MD 20783
WWW.USMD.EDU // 301.445.1923
OFFICE OF ADMINISTRATION AND FINANCE
March 1, 2024
Mr. Gregory A. Hook, CPA
Legislative Auditor
Office of Legislative Audits
The Warehouse at Camden Yards
351 West Camden Street, Suite 400
Baltimore, MD 21201
Re: University System of Maryland – Salisbury University
Period of Audit: December 11, 2018 through October 31, 2022
Dear Mr. Hook,
Thank you for the work of your team and the recommendations you provided. I have enclosed the
University System of Maryland’s responses to your draft report covering the examination of the accounts
and records of the University System of Maryland – Salisbury University. Our comments refer to the
individual items in the report.
Sincerely,
Ellen Herbst
Senior Vice Chancellor for Administration and Finance
Enclosures
cc: Dr. Carolyn Ringer Lepre, President, SU
Ms. Linda R. Gooden, Chair, University System of Maryland Board of Regents
Mr. Louis M. Pope, University System of Maryland Board of Regents
Dr. Jay A. Perman, Chancellor, University System of Maryland
Ms. Celeste Denson, Associate Vice Chancellor for Financial Affairs, USM Office
Mr. David Mosca, Vice Chancellor for Accountability, USM Office
Mr. Michael C. Eismeier, Associate Vice Chancellor and CIO, USM Office
Ms. Samantha Norris, Director, Financial Planning and Analysis, USM Office
Ms. Aurora Edenhart-Pepe, Vice President, Administration and Finance, SU

--- Page 12 ---
University System of Maryland
Salisbury University
Agency Response Form
Information Systems Security and Control
The Office of Legislative Audits (OLA) has determined that the Information Systems Security
and Control section, including Findings 1 and 2 related to “cybersecurity,” as defined by the
State Finance and Procurement Article, Section 3.5-301(b) of the Annotated Code of Maryland,
and therefore are subject to redaction from the publicly available audit report in accordance with
the State Government Article 2-1224(i). Although the specifics of the following findings,
including the analysis, related recommendations, along with the USM Office’s responses, have
been redacted from this report copy, the USM Office’s responses indicated agreement with the
findings and related recommendations.
Finding 1
Redacted cybersecurity-related finding.
Agency Response has been redacted by OLA.
Finding 2
Redacted cybersecurity-related finding.
Agency Response has been redacted by OLA.
Page 1 of 1

--- Page 13 ---
A T
UDIT EAM
Adam J. Westover, CPA
Audit Manager
R. Brendan Coffey, CPA, CISA
Edwin L. Paul, CPA, CISA
Information Systems Audit Managers
Ken H. Johanning, CPA, CFE
Senior Auditor
Eric Alexander, CPA, CISA
Edward O. Kendall, CISA
Information Systems Senior Auditors
Jammie A. Brown
Keli R. Edmonds
Staff Auditors
Vickey K. Micah
Joshua A. Nicodemus
Neha S. Tirkey
Malcolm J. Woodard
Information Systems Staff Auditors