Title: Review of Community College Audit Reports - Fiscal Year Ending June 30, 2018
Date: 10/28/2019
Type: Special Reports and Letters
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5db9b7e7a1ce5810fc42658f
Extracted: 2025-06-19T06:20:26.402989
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Review of Community College Audit Reports
Fiscal Year Ending June 30, 2018
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Senator Craig J. Zucker (Senate Chair) Delegate Shelly L. Hettleman (House Chair)
Senator Adelaide C. Eckardt Delegate Steven J. Arentz
Senator George C. Edwards Delegate Andrew P. Cassilly
Senator Guy J. Guzzone Delegate Mark S. Chang
Senator Katie Fry Hester Delegate Keith E. Haynes
Senator Cheryl C. Kagan Delegate Michael A. Jackson
Senator Benjamin F. Kramer Delegate David Moon
Senator Cory V. McCray Delegate April R. Rose
Senator Douglas J.J. Peters Delegate Geraldine Valentino-Smith
Senator Justin D. Ready Delegate Karen Lewis Young
To Obtain Further Information
Office of Legislative Audits
301 West Preston Street, Room 1202
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Phone: 410-946-5900 ꞏ 301-970-5900 ꞏ 1-877-486-9964 (Toll Free in Maryland)
Maryland Relay: 711
TTY: 410-946-5401 ꞏ 301-970-5401
E-mail: OLAWebmaster@ola.state.md.us
Website: www.ola.state.md.us
To Report Fraud
The Office of Legislative Audits operates a Fraud Hotline to report fraud, waste, or abuse involving State
of Maryland government resources. Reports of fraud, waste, or abuse may be communicated anonymously
by a toll-free call to 1-877-FRAUD-11, by mail to the Fraud Hotline, c/o Office of Legislative Audits, or
through the Office’s website.
Nondiscrimination Statement
The Department of Legislative Services does not discriminate on the basis of age, ancestry, color, creed,
marital status, national origin, race, religion, gender, gender identity, sexual orientation, or disability in the
admission or access to its programs, services, or activities. The Department’s Information Officer has been
designated to coordinate compliance with the nondiscrimination requirements contained in Section 35.107
of the United States Department of Justice Regulations. Requests for assistance should be directed to the
Information Officer at 410-946-5400 or 410-970-5400.

--- Page 5 ---
Purpose of Review and Background Information
In accordance with the provisions of the Education Article, Section 16-315(h) of
the Annotated Code of Maryland, we have reviewed the audit reports that must be
filed by 15 of the State’s community colleges with the Maryland Higher
Education Commission (MHEC) for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2018. We
reviewed these audit reports to determine compliance with the applicable statutes
and the guidelines promulgated by MHEC. We also reviewed the reports to
determine if any of the community colleges had deficit balances in unrestricted
net position, or uninsured/uncollateralized bank deposits. This report contains the
results of that review.
According to the State’s records, State aid totaling approximately $317.0 million
was granted to 15 of Maryland’s 16 community colleges for the fiscal year ended
June 30, 2018. This aid primarily consisted of funding based on cost and student
enrollment data. In addition, it included certain retirement benefits and various
other grants. The remaining college (Baltimore City Community College) is a
budgetary unit of the State and receives an annual State appropriation. Baltimore
City Community College is not subject to the Education Article, Section 16-
315(h) of the Annotated Code of Maryland; however, it obtains annual financial
statement audits that are conducted by a certified public accounting firm. The
College is also subject to fiscal compliance audits by the Office of Legislative
Audits for which separate audit reports are issued.
The Education Article, Section 16-315(a) of the Annotated Code of Maryland
requires MHEC to adopt guidelines for the preparation of annual audit reports on
the colleges. The guidelines promulgated by MHEC require independent auditors
to express opinions as to the fairness of presentation of the colleges’ financial
statements as well as of the cost and student enrollment data used for calculating
the State aid to the colleges. The guidelines also require the auditors to issue
management letters containing all material weaknesses in the colleges’ systems of
internal controls. While not required, many of the auditors issue management
letters that contain additional recommendations that were not considered material
weaknesses.
3

--- Page 6 ---
Results of Review
Audit Reports
All 15 audit reports for fiscal year 2018 were filed timely.
Our review disclosed that all 15 community college audit reports were filed
timely with the Maryland Higher Education Commission (MHEC) for the fiscal
year ended June 30, 2018.
The State’s community colleges are required by law to file annual audit reports
within 90 days of the fiscal year end (June 30) unless an extension is granted.
All audit reports expressed unqualified opinions; however, two reports were
not presented in accordance with generally accepted auditing standards.
Our review disclosed that all 15 community college audit reports for the fiscal
year ended June 30, 2018 contained unqualified opinions from their auditors. An
unqualified opinion is issued when the auditor states that the applicable financial
statements are presented fairly, in all material respects, in conformity with
accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America.
However, one community college’s audit report reviewed for fiscal year 2018 did
not express opinions on all opinion units included in the college’s basic financial
statements as required by generally accepted auditing standards. Specifically, the
independent auditor’s report for Wor-Wic Community College did not express an
opinion regarding the college’s aggregate remaining fund information (that is, the
college’s Fiduciary Funds). This situation was also noted during our preceding
year’s review.
One other community college’s audit report (Garrett College) did not include the
appropriate emphasis-of-matter paragraph related to the change in the accounting
principle implemented in fiscal year 2018. In this regard, the College
implemented Government Accounting Standards Board Statement No. 75 entitled
Accounting and Financial Reporting for Postemployment Benefits Other Than
Pensions effective for fiscal year ended June 30, 2018. The implementation of
Statement No. 75 resulted in a number of changes to the College’s financial
statements, including the restatement of beginning net position.
4

--- Page 7 ---
MHEC advised us that it would notify the colleges of these deficiencies and
ensure that the deficiencies are corrected in future audits.
MHEC’s audit guidelines require the auditors to express opinions as to the
fairness of the presentation of the colleges’ financial statements and that the audits
be performed in accordance with generally accepted auditing standards.
Financial Statements
Six community colleges’ financial statements disclosed deficit balances in the
unrestricted portion of their net position at June 30, 2018.
Our review disclosed six colleges with deficit balances in the unrestricted
component of their net position as of June 30, 2018.
Colleges with Deficit Unrestricted Balances as of June 30, 2018
Unrestricted Net Position
College
Deficit
Anne Arundel Community College $54,689,617
Community College of Baltimore County $71,228,444
Carroll Community College $27,374,023
Howard Community College $9,253,201
Montgomery College $31,339,713
Prince George’s Community College $44,904,070
This situation was also noted in the financial statements for Anne Arundel
Community College, Community College of Baltimore County, and Carroll
Community College for each fiscal year since 2011, 2016, and 2009, respectively.
The unrestricted net position deficits increased during fiscal year 2018 for each of
the three community colleges. An unrestricted net position deficit balance
5

--- Page 8 ---
represents the costs of current or past services that will need to be financed in
future periods and could indicate a potential financial problem.
We did not perform a detailed analysis to determine the cause of these deficits;
nevertheless, the colleges’ financial statements and accompanying notes
contained certain pertinent information relative to the deficits. Specifically,
review of the colleges’ financial statements disclosed that the unrestricted net
position could be attributed to other postemployment benefit liabilities which at
June 30, 2018 totaled $58.3 million for Anne Arundel Community College; $71.9
million for the Community College of Baltimore County; $31.5 million for
Carroll Community College; $33.3 million for Howard Community College;
$64.4 million for Montgomery College; and $80.9 million for Prince George’s
Community College.
Generally accepted accounting principles specify that liabilities for
postemployment benefits (such as healthcare benefits), which are deferred until
retirement or another future event, be recognized in the years in which the
employee provides services rather than during the postemployment period when
payments are made.
Management Letters and Compliance
Management letters for fiscal year 2018 included a total of 11
recommendations for improvement related to a college’s compliance with
requirements. Two of these recommendations were considered material
weaknesses.
We reviewed the management letters applicable to the audits of the community
colleges that were filed with MHEC for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2018. Our
review disclosed that 9 of the community colleges did not receive any
recommendations; the remaining 6 community colleges received a total of 11
recommendations. Two of these recommendations were considered material
weaknesses. The material weaknesses existed at Prince George’s Community
College related to accounting and financial reporting and grants and contracts.
As required by the Education Article, Section 16-315(c) of the Annotated Code of
Maryland, MHEC evaluated the adequacy of the College’s response to the
material weaknesses, determined that appropriate corrective action was indicated,
and stated that it would continue to monitor corrective actions taken by the
College.
6

--- Page 9 ---
MHEC was not required to formally evaluate the adequacy of the colleges’
responses to the 9 other recommendations since, in accordance with MHEC’s
guidelines, comments and suggestions related to these deficiencies are not
required. When auditors include such items in the letters, the colleges’ follow-up
actions are subject to the auditors’ review during subsequent audits.
The following schedule provides a summary of the fiscal year 2018
recommendations by fiscal area. Two of the 11 recommendations were repeated
from the preceding year.
Management Letter Recommendations for Fiscal Year 2018
Number of
Fiscal Area of Recommendation Recommendations
Student enrollment and residency 4
Accounting and financial reporting 3
Financial aid 2
Grants and contracts 2
Total 11
The auditors’ report for one community college contained a qualified opinion
related to compliance with requirements applicable to a major federal
program.
The Independent Auditors’ Report on Compliance for Each Major Federal
Program and Report on Internal Control Over Compliance Required by the
Uniform Guidance for the Prince George’s Community College contained a
qualified opinion related to compliance with the requirements of a major federal
program. A qualified opinion is a statement that, except for the noncompliance
described, the college complied, in all material respects, with the types of
compliance requirements contained in the Federal Office of Management and
Budget’s Compliance Supplement that could have a direct and material effect on
the major federal programs. According to the report, as reported in one of the
aforementioned material weaknesses, the College did not maintain documentation
to support the eligibility of certain participants in the related federal program.
7

--- Page 10 ---
A T
UDIT EAM
Bekana Edossa, CPA, CFE
Audit Manager
Catherine M. Easter
Senior Auditor