Title: University System of Maryland - University of Maryland University College


NOTE: Effective July 1, 2019, UMUC is now named the University of Maryland Global Campus.
Date: 11/06/2019
Type: Fiscal Compliance
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5dcacd8ba1ce580aa0a026f4
Extracted: 2025-06-19T06:21:24.687854
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Audit Report
University System of Maryland
University of Maryland University College
November 2019
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Senator Craig J. Zucker (Senate Chair) Delegate Shelly L. Hettleman (House Chair)
Senator Adelaide C. Eckardt Delegate Steven J. Arentz
Senator George C. Edwards Delegate Andrew P. Cassilly
Senator Guy J. Guzzone Delegate Mark S. Chang
Senator Katie Fry Hester Delegate Keith E. Haynes
Senator Cheryl C. Kagan Delegate Michael A. Jackson
Senator Benjamin F. Kramer Delegate David Moon
Senator Cory V. McCray Delegate April R. Rose
Senator Douglas J.J. Peters Delegate Geraldine Valentino-Smith
Senator Justin D. Ready Delegate Karen Lewis Young
To Obtain Further Information
Office of Legislative Audits
301 West Preston Street, Room 1202
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Phone: 410-946-5900 ꞏ 301-970-5900 ꞏ 1-877-486-9964 (Toll Free in Maryland)
Maryland Relay: 711
TTY: 410-946-5401 ꞏ 301-970-5401
E-mail: OLAWebmaster@ola.state.md.us
Website: www.ola.state.md.us
To Report Fraud
The Office of Legislative Audits operates a Fraud Hotline to report fraud, waste, or abuse involving State
of Maryland government resources. Reports of fraud, waste, or abuse may be communicated anonymously
by a toll-free call to 1-877-FRAUD-11, by mail to the Fraud Hotline, c/o Office of Legislative Audits, or
through the Office’s website.
Nondiscrimination Statement
The Department of Legislative Services does not discriminate on the basis of age, ancestry, color, creed,
marital status, national origin, race, religion, gender, gender identity, sexual orientation, or disability in the
admission or access to its programs, services, or activities. The Department’s Information Officer has been
designated to coordinate compliance with the nondiscrimination requirements contained in Section 35.107
of the United States Department of Justice Regulations. Requests for assistance should be directed to the
Information Officer at 410-946-5400 or 410-970-5400.

--- Page 5 ---
Table of Contents
Background Information 4
Agency Responsibilities and Name Change 4
University of Maryland University College (UMUC) Business Initiatives 4
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report 6
Findings and Recommendations 7
Student Residency Status
Finding 1 – UMUC did not have a process to independently verify 7
the propriety of students granted military residency status.
Employee Termination Payments
Finding 2 – UMUC made termination payments totaling $292,000 to a 8
former employee that were not consistent with UMUC’s policy
on such payments.
Information Systems Security and Control
* Finding 3 – Certain malware protection controls did not exist for 10
numerous UMUC computers to provide adequate assurance that the
computers were properly protected from security risks.
Outsourced Information Technology (IT) Functions
Finding 4 – For UMUC’s outsourced IT functions, two System and 11
Organization Controls reports did not address certain IT security and
operational controls.
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology 13
Agency Response Appendix
* Denotes item repeated in full or part from preceding audit report
3

--- Page 6 ---
Background Information
Agency Responsibilities and Name Change
The University of Maryland University College (UMUC) is a public institution of
the University System of Maryland (USM) and operates under the jurisdiction of
the USM’s Board of Regents (BOR). UMUC offers degree and non-credit
educational programs to students who prefer not to enroll in more traditional
programs. UMUC strives to broaden educational opportunities through online
education; the majority of UMUC’s courses are taught online.
UMUC consists of three major divisions: the Statewide Division, the Asian
Division, and the European Division. These three divisions offer educational
programs at a number of locations primarily throughout the State of Maryland, as
well as in numerous foreign countries. The Statewide Division also administers
educational and training programs for adults, and maintains a residential
conference center that includes conference rooms, guest accommodations, dining
facilities, and an auditorium. UMUC’s main administrative office and residential
conference center are located in Adelphi, Maryland. The Asian Division is
headquartered in Tokyo, Japan and the European Division is headquartered in
Kaiserslautern, Germany.
For fiscal year 2018, UMUC’s enrollment totaled 89,383 students. UMUC’s
budget is funded by unrestricted revenues, such as tuition and student fees; a State
general fund appropriation; and restricted revenues, such as federal grants.
According to UMUC’s records, fiscal year 2018 revenues totaled approximately
$431 million, which included a State general fund appropriation of approximately
$43.2 million.
Chapter 40, Laws of Maryland 2019, effective July 1, 2019, changed the name of
UMUC to the University of Maryland Global Campus (UMGC).
UMUC Business Initiatives
In February 2015, the USM BOR approved the framework for a new business
model for UMUC aimed at addressing its long-term challenges in maintaining its
position in a changing global marketplace. Under this new model, UMUC
remains within USM, but was granted certain autonomies and exemptions from
USM and State laws, rules, and procedures, and strengthened protections of
UMUC’s proprietary and competitive information.
4

--- Page 7 ---
During the audit period, UMUC established certain business entities consistent
with this new business model, two of which were designated as High Impact
Economic Development Activities (HIEDA). HIEDAs are initiatives which,
according to State law, may be established by designated institutions of higher
education, including USM, to promote the economic interests of the State in areas
such as job creation and workforce development, technology transfer,
commercialization, and entrepreneurship. Proposals for establishing a HIEDA
must be presented to the USM Chancellor to obtain certification as meeting the
required criteria established in the law. Employees of these business entities,
including any former UMUC employees who transferred to these entities, are not
State employees.
In September 2015, the BOR approved UMUC’s first HIEDA entity—a spin-off
of its Office of Analytics into a private company—as a way to establish a new
revenue stream. Specifically, HelioCampus, was established as a legally distinct
entity with UMUC as the sole shareholder. HelioCampus provides services, such
as data analytics and data-sharing platforms, to assist universities with increasing
enrollment, improving student success, and ensuring financial stability. In
October 2015, UMUC transferred $10 million to HelioCampus for startup
funding. According to UMUC management, UMUC plans to support
HelioCampus during its first five years of existence, but then will be open to
monetization opportunities, such as selling HelioCampus or taking it public.
In June 2016, the BOR approved the creation of a second HIEDA entity, UMUC
Ventures, as a tax-exempt holding company. UMUC Ventures was created to (1)
help commercialize the technology, business processes, and intellectual property
of UMUC; (2) increase UMUC’s enrollment revenues through corporate
partnerships; and (3) expand the revenues of UMUC into new areas to support
UMUC and to build an endowment to reduce the cost of higher education for
Maryland residents. UMUC Ventures acts as the holding company for businesses
commercialized by UMUC. The president of UMUC appoints the chairperson
and the majority of UMUC Ventures’ 11-member board of directors. UMUC
transferred $15 million, through three installments, to UMUC Ventures for start-
up funding. In September 2016, UMUC transferred its ownership in
HelioCampus to UMUC Ventures.
Finally, in June 2017, the BOR approved UMUC’s spin-off of its Office of
Technology into a subsidiary company within UMUC Ventures. The subsidiary
company, AccelerEd, offers professional information technology services, for a
fee, to educational institutions, including UMUC. UMUC did not provide any
start-up funding for AccelerEd, which is not classified as a HIEDA.
5

--- Page 8 ---
According to UMUC’s records, in addition to the $25 million in start-up funding,
UMUC paid UMUC Ventures (including AccelerEd) and HelioCampus
approximately $44 million during the audit period for contracted services these
entities provided to UMUC, such as professional information technology services
and data analytics.
An independent certified public accounting firm was engaged to perform audits of
UMUC Ventures and its subsidiaries’ financial statements for fiscal years 2017
and 2018. Since these are not State entities, the financial activity of these entities
is not subject to audit by the Office of Legislative Audits.
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report
Our audit included a review to determine the status of the three findings contained
in our preceding audit report dated June 8, 2015. As disclosed in the following
table, we determined that UMUC satisfactorily addressed two of these findings.
The remaining finding is repeated in this report.
Status of Preceding Findings
Preceding Implementation
Finding Finding Description Status
Security and access controls over certain
Finding 1 Not repeated
UMUC systems were not sufficient.
UMUC workstations and servers were not Repeated
Finding 2
sufficiently protected against malware. (Current Finding 3)
Service level agreements and related
Not repeated
Finding 3 independent reports did not address certain
security and operational risks.
6

--- Page 9 ---
Findings and Recommendations
Student Residency Status
Finding 1
The University of Maryland University College (UMUC) did not establish a
process for independent reviews of students granted military residency
status.
Analysis
UMUC did not have a process to independently verify the propriety of students
granted military residency status. For tuition purposes, UMUC students are
classified as an in-state resident, an out-of-state resident, or as military. Although
UMUC used output reports to verify the propriety of in-state classifications to
supporting documentation on a test basis, the propriety of military status granted
to students was not similarly verified.
UMUC students eligible for military status are generally required to submit
supporting documentation from the military, such as an enlistment agreement.
Students must also submit documentation of their expected date of separation
from the military for entry into UMUC’s records as a means for UMUC to
determine when military status is no longer appropriate. The required
documentation is reviewed by admissions staff when recording critical data
relating to a student’s military status in the system. However, UMUC did not use
available automated output reports to independently verify the propriety of
students granted military status, including the accuracy of related data recorded in
the system, through a review of supporting documentation, at least on a test basis.
Ensuring that students are assigned the correct residency status is critical since
tuition costs charged to a student vary greatly depending on the assigned status.
For example, the undergraduate tuition rate for students with military status was
$250 for each credit taken during the 2018-2019 academic year, whereas the
undergraduate tuition rate for students with out-of-state status was $499 for each
credit. Tuition charges for in-state and military status were generally comparable.
According to its records, during fiscal year 2018, UMUC’s tuition revenue totaled
$330.7 million, of which $51.3 million was for students with military status.
During the spring 2018 semester, 12,139 (22 percent) of enrolled students at
UMUC were classified as military.
7

--- Page 10 ---
Recommendation 1
We recommend that UMUC use available automated output reports to verify
to supporting documentation the propriety of students granted military
status, at least on a test basis.
Employee Termination Payments
Finding 2
UMUC made termination payments totaling $292,000 to a former employee
that were not consistent with UMUC’s policy on such payments.
Analysis
UMUC made termination payments totaling $292,000 to a former exempt
employee during our audit period that were not consistent with UMUC’s Policy
on Separation for Regular Exempt and Overseas Staff Employees, under which
the payments were made. According to the Policy, which has been approved by
the Board of Regents (BOR), regular exempt employees serve on an at-will basis
and their employment may be terminated at any time by either the employee or
UMUC. The Policy provides that, upon involuntary separation by UMUC other
than for cause, such as for gross misconduct, the employee shall be provided with
a period of notice during which the employee may be placed on administrative
leave with pay for part or all of the period of notice. The length of this period is
dependent on the employee’s length of service, and ranges between one and 12
months.
We reviewed five payments made to employees under this Policy totaling
approximately $733,000. Our review of supporting documentation disclosed that
payments made to one such employee, totaling $292,000, were not made in
accordance with the Policy. Specifically, the documentation of this employee’s
separation from UMUC on June 30, 2018 stated that the employee voluntarily
resigned and included an agreement releasing UMUC from any future claims by
the employee. Under these circumstances, the employee would not be eligible for
compensation under the Policy, which addresses only involuntary separations;
nevertheless, the agreement indicated that the separation payments were made
under this Policy.
The payments, totaling $292,000, included two components: (1) $221,000,
disbursed in July 2018, as compensation for the 8-month period from July 1, 2018
through March 2, 2019; and (2) $71,000 for additional administrative leave for the
3 months preceding the employee’s termination. In total, the employee received
compensation for 11 months of administrative leave under what was documented
8

--- Page 11 ---
as a voluntary separation, notwithstanding the fact that, based on this employee’s
length of service, the Policy would have only provided a maximum of 9 months
of leave for an involuntary separation.
While the termination documentation supports that this was a voluntary
termination, UMUC subsequently advised us that it actually did involuntarily
terminate this employee. However, UMUC lacked documentation that this was
anything other than a voluntary termination. UMUC believes that the Policy can
be reasonably interpreted to include circumstances in which an employee facing
involuntary termination requests to resign in lieu of termination and UMUC may
agree to accommodate this request under the Policy on Separation. Since the
Policy provides for a period of notice to the employee only upon involuntary
separation, absent specific clarifying language by the BOR, we question UMUC’s
interpretation of the Policy.
Recommendation 2
We recommend that UMUC
a. formally clarify its Policy regarding the permissibility of making
payments described above and seek approval from the BOR, or refrain
from making termination payments under the Policy to regular exempt
employees who voluntarily resign;
b. ensure that the administrative leave payments resulting from the
application of this Policy are consistent with an employee’s length of
service; and
c. absent retroactive approval from the BOR in the form of clarifying
language confirming UMUC’s interpretation of this Policy, pursue
recovery of the $292,000 paid under this voluntary separation.
Information Systems Security and Control
Background
UMUC has outsourced all of its critical information technology (IT) functions to
third party service providers. The UMUC internal network, the associated wide
area network locations in the United States, Europe, and Asia, and numerous
support servers were maintained by an infrastructure service provider. The
described network locations serve the broader UMUC student body and provide
UMUC students with IT resources and classroom space. Per its November 2018
records, the infrastructure service provider maintained 179 servers within
UMUC’s Maryland administrative offices in Adelphi and a backup datacenter
located in Largo, with 326 additional supported servers residing with a cloud
hosting service provider. Other critical IT functions outsourced by UMUC
9

--- Page 12 ---
include its financial, human resources, payroll and student information services
systems. These systems are maintained and operated by a combination of outside
service providers.
UMUC’s online education function is heavily reliant on information technology
for providing an interactive classroom experience to its students and faculty.
Online education services range from supplementing traditional classroom
sessions to providing complete course delivery elements, including learning
materials, instructor and student interactions, and class work submissions. The
online educational courses serve students around the world and account for a
significant portion of UMUC’s revenues. UMUC’s online education services are
delivered using a software as a service platform, provided by a third party service
provider.
Finding 3
Certain malware protection controls did not exist for numerous UMUC
computers to provide adequate assurance that the computers were properly
protected from security risks.
Analysis
Certain malware protection controls did not exist for numerous UMUC computers
to provide adequate assurance that the computers were properly protected from
security risks. As of December 2018, UMUC utilized approximately 2,400 active
computers per its infrastructure service provider’s records. We noted the
following conditions:
 UMUC did not have malware protection software installed on all of its active
computers. UMUC’s infrastructure service provider advised us that almost all
servers using a specific operating system software product did not have
malware protection software installed. Per the infrastructure service
provider’s April 2019 records, 202 servers existed which utilized this
operating system software. Servers without installed malware protection
software operate at increased risks of being compromised. A similar
condition was commented upon in our prior audit report.
 UMUC’s infrastructure service provider advised us that, generally, host-based
firewalls were not enabled on UMUC laptops. We were advised that,
according to the service provider’s records query as of January 16, 2019,
across the world there were 1,420 laptops defined to UMUC’s network
management software. Although provider records did not quantify the
number of laptops without enabled host-based firewalls, if these laptops were
10

--- Page 13 ---
used outside of the UMUC global network locations, those without such
firewalls would be susceptible to attack from untrusted traffic.
The University System of Maryland (USM) IT Security Standards state that
institutions must implement controls to detect and prevent malware and operate
host-based firewalls on laptop computers operated outside of secured USM
networks.
Recommendation 3
We recommend that UMUC ensure that
a. malware protection software is installed and maintained on all UMUC
servers (repeat), and
b. all laptop computers are protected by an enabled and properly
configured host-based firewall.
Outsourced IT Functions
Background
Having outsourced all of its critical IT functions, UMUC entered into service
provider service level agreements (which defined the terms and controls
requirements for the contractual services) for the operation and maintenance of its
critical financial, human resources, payroll, student information, and online
learning environment systems. To provide assurance that the terms of these
service agreements were complied with, the service providers procured and
obtained independent System and Organization Controls (SOC) reviews and
related SOC 2 Type 2 reports which included descriptions of the service
providers’ controls and security procedures, and the results of tests designed to
ensure that these controls and security procedures were effective for designated
periods. We reviewed the independent reports issued for two service providers
responsible for the maintenance and operation of the financial, human resources,
payroll, student information, and online learning environment systems.
Finding 4
For UMUC’s outsourced IT functions, the two SOC reports we reviewed did
not address certain IT security and operational controls.
Analysis
For UMUC’s outsourced IT functions, two SOC 2 Type 2 reports did not address
certain IT security and operational controls. Without complete and
comprehensive SOC 2 Type 2 reviews and reports, UMUC lacked assurance that
all necessary IT security controls existed to ensure the security and availability of
11

--- Page 14 ---
these two critical systems. Specifically, as examples, we determined the
independent SOC report for the student information system did not address
whether UMUC production data was stored separately from non-production
environments and from other customers of the provider. Additionally, the recent
SOC report for UMUC’s online learning environment system did not indicate
whether network controls restricting access between trusted and untrusted
network segments were tested and whether audit logs recording security-related
activities were retained and reviewed on a regular basis. We provided UMUC
with complete lists of significant security controls that were not addressed by the
independent SOC reviews and reports.
The USM IT Security Standards for cloud technology services requires, for third
party contracts, that institutions review and assess independent control reports to
determine whether service providers are adequately protecting institutional
information.
Recommendation 4
We recommend that UMUC, for its various IT service providers, obtain and
assess the related independent SOC reports to ensure the independent
reviews addressed all critical security and operational controls, including
ensuring corrective actions are taken for any reported issues, with these
assessments being documented and retained.
12

--- Page 15 ---
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the University System of
Maryland (USM) - University of Maryland University College (UMUC) for the
period beginning July 1, 2014 and ending September 30, 2018. The audit was
conducted in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards.
Those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient,
appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and
conclusions based on our audit objectives. We believe that the evidence obtained
provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit
objectives.
As prescribed by the State Government Article, Section 2-1221 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, the objectives of this audit were to examine UMUC’s financial
transactions, records, and internal control, and to evaluate its compliance with
applicable State laws, rules, and regulations.
In planning and conducting our audit, we focused on the major financial-related
areas of operations based on assessments of significance and risk. The areas
addressed by the audit included purchases and disbursements, student accounts
receivable, cash receipts, information systems security and control, payroll,
student financial aid, and corporate purchasing cards. We also determined the
status of the findings contained in our preceding audit report.
Our audit did not include an evaluation of financial transactions, records, and
internal controls and an assessment of compliance with State laws, rules, and
regulations with respect to UMUC’s Asian and European Divisions. These
Divisions, which according to UMUC’s records accounted for approximately 2.2
percent and 2.9 percent of UMUC’s fiscal year 2018 revenues, respectively, are
reviewed on a triennial basis by the USM internal auditors on whose work we
relied to reduce the scope of our audit work.
In addition, our audit did not include certain support services provided to UMUC
by the USM Office, such as endowment accounting, and by the University of
Maryland, College Park (UMCP), such as certain payroll processing functions.
These support services are included within the scope of our audits of the USM
Office and UMCP, respectively. Furthermore, our audit did not include an
evaluation of internal controls over compliance with federal laws and regulations
for federal financial assistance programs and an assessment of UMUC’s
compliance with those laws and regulations because the State of Maryland
engages an independent accounting firm to annually audit such programs
administered by State agencies, including the components of the USM.
13

--- Page 16 ---
To accomplish our objectives, our audit procedures included inquiries of
appropriate personnel, inspections of documents and records, observations of
UMUC’s operations, and tests of transactions. Generally, transactions were
selected for testing based on auditor judgment, which primarily considers risk.
Unless otherwise specifically indicated, neither statistical nor non-statistical audit
sampling was used to select the transactions tested. Therefore, the results of the
tests cannot be used to project those results to the entire population from which
the test items were selected.
We also performed various data extracts of pertinent information from the State’s
Financial Management Information System (such as revenue and expenditure
data) and the State’s Central Payroll Bureau (payroll data), as well as from the
contractor administering the State’s Corporate Purchasing Card Program (credit
card activity). The extracts are performed as part of ongoing internal processes
established by the Office of Legislative Audits and were subject to various tests to
determine data reliability. We determined that the data extracted from these
various sources were sufficiently reliable for the purposes the data were used
during this audit. We also extracted data from UMUC’s financial systems for the
purpose of testing certain areas, such as financial aid and student accounts
receivable. We performed various tests of the relevant data and determined that
the data were sufficiently reliable for the purposes the data were used during the
audit. Finally, we performed other auditing procedures that we considered
necessary to achieve our audit objectives. The reliability of data used in this
report for background or informational purposes was not assessed.
UMUC’s management is responsible for establishing and maintaining effective
internal control. Internal control is a process designed to provide reasonable
assurance that objectives pertaining to the reliability of financial records;
effectiveness and efficiency of operations, including safeguarding of assets; and
compliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations are achieved.
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate.
Our reports are designed to assist the Maryland General Assembly in exercising
its legislative oversight function and to provide constructive recommendations for
improving State operations. As a result, our reports generally do not address
activities we reviewed that are functioning properly.
14

--- Page 17 ---
This report includes findings relating to conditions that we consider to be
significant deficiencies in the design or operation of internal control that could
adversely affect UMUC’s ability to maintain reliable financial records, operate
effectively and efficiently, and/or comply with applicable laws, rules, and
regulations. Our report also includes findings regarding significant instances of
noncompliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations. Other less significant
findings were communicated to the UMUC that that did not warrant inclusion in
this report.
The response from the USM Office, on behalf of UMUC, to our findings and
recommendations is included as an appendix to this report. As prescribed in the
State Government Article, Section 2-1224 of the Annotated Code of Maryland,
we will advise the USM Office regarding the results of our review of its response.
15

--- Page 19 ---
University System of Maryland
University of Maryland University College
Agency Response Form
Student Residency Status
Finding 1
The University of Maryland University College (UMUC) did not establish a process for
independent reviews of students granted military residency status.
We recommend that UMUC use available automated output reports to verify to supporting
documentation the propriety of students granted military status, at least on a test basis.
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 1 Agree Estimated Completion Date: 09/5/2019
Please provide details of A periodic review of supporting documentation for military status
corrective action or students will be performed on a test basis at the end of each term.
explain disagreement. The first review was conducted in September 2019 for the summer
term.
Page 1 of 9

--- Page 20 ---
University System of Maryland
University of Maryland University College
Agency Response Form
Employee Termination Payments
Finding 2
UMUC made termination payments totaling $292,000 to a former employee that were not
consistent with UMUC’s policy on such payments.
We recommend that UMUC
a. formally clarify its Policy regarding the permissibility of making payments described
above and seek approval from the BOR, or refrain from making termination payments
under the Policy to regular exempt employees who voluntarily resign;
b. ensure that the administrative leave payments resulting from the application of this
Policy are consistent with an employee’s length of service; and
c. absent retroactive approval from the BOR in the form of clarifying language
confirming UMUC’s interpretation of this Policy, pursue recovery of the $292,000 paid
under this voluntary separation.
See response below:
Page 2 of 9

--- Page 21 ---
University System of Maryland
University of Maryland University College
Agency Response Form
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide The University disagrees with this finding. The employee referenced in
additional comments as this finding was released by the President and as stated in the release was
deemed necessary. “permitted to resign” in lieu of termination. This was not a voluntary
resignation. The period of notice provided to this employee was within
the President’s discretion and consistent with the policy.
Auditor’s Comment: UMUC disagrees that the referenced employee was voluntarily
separated from employment with UMUC because the employee was permitted to resign
in lieu of termination. As noted in the audit report, the cited UMUC Policy provides only
for administrative leave for employees involuntarily separated for reasons other than for
cause and, in our opinion, a resignation does not qualify as an involuntary termination.
Furthermore, as UMUC was unable to provide any documentation as to the
circumstances of the employee’s termination, our finding is consistent with the known
facts. In spite of this disagreement, UMUC does agree to clarify the Policy and seek
Board of Regents approval for the revised Policy.
Recommendation 2a Disagree Estimated Completion Date:
Please provide details of The employee referenced in this finding was released by the President
corrective action or and as stated in the release was “permitted to resign” in lieu of
explain disagreement. termination. This was not a voluntary resignation. Even though we
disagree with the finding because it was explicit in the release that the
employee was “permitted to resign”, UMUC will clarify the policy
regarding the permissibility of making payments under these
circumstances and seek approval from the BOR.
The policy referenced in this finding, UMUC Policy VII-1.22-UC,
permits an employee at the Senior Vice President level to be provided a
period of notice at the discretion of the President:
At the discretion of the President or designee, in consultation with
the CHRO and UMUC Office of Legal Affairs, an employee who is
involuntarily separated at or above the Assistant Vice President or
Assistant Vice Provost level may be provided a period of notice.
This policy was approved by the University System of Maryland Board
of Regents on April 21, 2017. (See agenda item at this link:
https://www.usmd.edu/BORPortal/Materials/2017/FB/20170421/ps_2.f.x.pdf ).
Page 3 of 9

--- Page 22 ---
University System of Maryland
University of Maryland University College
Agency Response Form
Prior to submission to the Board of Regents, this policy was approved
for form and legal sufficiency by the Office of Attorney General.
Auditor’s Comment: UMUC disagrees that the length of the period of notice (and
associated administrative leave payment) provided to this employee was inconsistent with
the Policy, and asserts that the period of notice is at the discretion of the President. We
acknowledge the discretion implicit in the referenced Policy, but continue to believe that
the period of notice and administrative leave payment provided to this terminated
employee was inconsistent with the plain language of the Policy, which establishes the
period of notice based on the employee’s length of service.
Recommendation 2b Disagree Estimated Completion Date:
Please provide details of The employee’s length of service is not applicable at the Senior Vice
corrective action or President level under UMUC Policy VII-1.22-UC, the policy provides
explain disagreement. discretion to the President in determining the period of notice.
Recommendation 2c Disagree Estimated Completion Date:
Please provide details of This was not a voluntary separation, therefore would not warrant
corrective action or recovery of the amount paid or retroactive approval from the BOR.
explain disagreement.
Page 4 of 9

--- Page 23 ---
University System of Maryland
University of Maryland University College
Agency Response Form
Information Systems Security and Control
Finding 3
Certain malware protection controls did not exist for numerous UMUC computers to
provide adequate assurance that the computers were properly protected from security
risks.
We recommend that UMUC ensure that
a. malware protection software is installed and maintained on all UMUC servers (repeat),
and
b. all laptop computers are protected by an enabled and properly configured host-based
firewall.
See response below:
Page 5 of 9

--- Page 24 ---
University System of Maryland
University of Maryland University College
Agency Response Form
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 3a Disagree Estimated Completion Date: FY20
Please provide details of The servers in one of UMUC’s environment are running a specific
corrective action or operating system (OS) and are configured and operating effectively with
explain disagreement. current, vendor supported anti-malware software. A different UMUC
server environment, running another OS identified by the auditor, does
not have anti-malware software installed due a risk based decision. One
of the criteria for deploying the latter OS was based on the fact it is
known to be more secure and less susceptible to malware attacks. To
further harden this OS and mitigate the risk of malware infections,
UMUC implements a defense-in-depth strategy, to include:
 HIPS
 Periodic vulnerability scanning, and integrity monitoring
 Automated and manual monitoring of the servers
UMUC is confident that these measures have significantly reduced the
overall risk of malware attacks in the environment.
To enhance our security posture, UMUC is in the process of testing a
malware protection solution to determine the impact to the UMUC
environment. Results of our initial testing have seen some degradation in
performance. UMUC will continue to test malware protection solution(s)
to determine the impact to the UMUC environment and perform a
cost/benefit analysis. We anticipate completing this work in FY20.
Auditor’s Comment: UMUC disagrees with the finding stating that it made a risk based
decision to deploy the operating system that does not have malware protection software
installed, due to the fact that the system itself is deemed more secure and less susceptible
to malware attacks. UMUC also states that it has implemented a defense-in-depth
strategy and that these measures have significantly reduced the overall risk of malware
attacks. OLA continues to believe, and UMUC has not been able to refute, the basic
premise that servers without installed malware protection software operate at increased
risks of being compromised. Nevertheless, UMUC does agree with the related
recommendation and is in the process of testing malware protection solutions.
Page 6 of 9

--- Page 25 ---
University System of Maryland
University of Maryland University College
Agency Response Form
Recommendation 3b Agree Estimated Completion Date: FY20
Please provide details of UMUC is in the process of evaluating host-based firewalls and
corrective action or determining the impact to the environment.
explain disagreement.
Page 7 of 9

--- Page 26 ---
University System of Maryland
University of Maryland University College
Agency Response Form
Outsourced IT Functions
Finding 4
For UMUC’s outsourced IT functions, the two SOC reports we reviewed did not address
certain IT security and operational controls.
We recommend that UMUC, for its various IT service providers, obtain and assess the
related independent SOC reports to ensure the independent reviews addressed all critical
security and operational controls, including ensuring corrective actions are taken for any
reported issues, with these assessments being documented and retained.
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 4 Disagree Estimated Completion Date: FY20
Please provide details of UMUC does not agree with the finding. A SOC 2 audit was performed
corrective action or by a reputable 3rd party auditor using criteria established by the
explain disagreement. American Institute of Certified Public Accountants (AICPA) and OLA
in its own language considers the AICPA SOC a reliable and industry-
wide used standard. The 2 SOC reports identified no control deficiencies
for either vendor. Additionally, UMUC has a formalized process for
requesting SOCs for critical systems on an annual basis. SOCs are
reviewed and issues are raised to UMUC upper management in the event
the auditor identifies control deficiencies. While UMUC does not agree
with the finding, UMUC is in the process of requesting both vendors to
include the controls identified by OLA to be included in the next SOC
audit. One of the vendors has agreed to have its auditor perform
additional control testing in its next SOC audit. It’s important to note
that UMUC does not have the authority to compel vendors to conduct
specific control testing beyond what is recommended by the AICPA.
UMUC is confident in AICPA’s SOC process and will not terminate our
relationship with the vendor solely upon its refusal to conduct control
testing that falls outside of AICPA’s scope.
Auditor’s Comment: UMUC does not agree with the finding, stating that the SOC
reports did not identify control deficiencies for either vendor. OLA provided UMUC
with complete lists of significant security controls that were not addressed by the
Page 8 of 9

--- Page 27 ---
University System of Maryland
University of Maryland University College
Agency Response Form
independent SOC reviews and reports. Nevertheless, UMUC has taken steps to
implement the recommendation and is in the process of requesting both vendors to
include the identified controls in its next SOC audit.
Page 9 of 9

--- Page 28 ---
A T
UDIT EAM
Robert A. Wells, Jr., CPA
Audit Manager
Richard L. Carter, CISA
R. Brendan Coffey, CPA, CISA
Information Systems Audit Managers
Mindy R. Garrett
Senior Auditor
J. Gregory Busch, CISA
Edwin L. Paul, CPA, CISA
Information Systems Senior Auditors
Stephen R. Alexander
Syed M. A. Taqvi, CPA
Staff Auditors
Peter W. Chong
Joseph R. Clayton
Michael A. Kirschbaum
Information Systems Staff Auditors