Title: Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services - Central Operations


NOTE: Effective July 1, 2015, DPSCS completed a structural reorganization. The audit of DPSCS central operations covers certain fiscal activities performed for other DPSCS units as well as the Office of the Secretary and various other units as detailed in the report.
Date: 11/20/2019
Type: Fiscal Compliance
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5dd6f35ca1ce580a8419ccad
Extracted: 2025-06-19T06:21:53.589665
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Audit Report
Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services
Central Operations
November 2019
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Senator Craig J. Zucker (Senate Chair) Delegate Shelly L. Hettleman (House Chair)
Senator Adelaide C. Eckardt Delegate Steven J. Arentz
Senator George C. Edwards Delegate Andrew P. Cassilly
Senator Guy J. Guzzone Delegate Mark S. Chang
Senator Katie Fry Hester Delegate Keith E. Haynes
Senator Cheryl C. Kagan Delegate Michael A. Jackson
Senator Benjamin F. Kramer Delegate David Moon
Senator Cory V. McCray Delegate April R. Rose
Senator Douglas J.J. Peters Delegate Geraldine Valentino-Smith
Senator Justin D. Ready Delegate Karen Lewis Young
To Obtain Further Information
Office of Legislative Audits
301 West Preston Street, Room 1202
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Phone: 410-946-5900 ꞏ 301-970-5900 ꞏ 1-877-486-9964 (Toll Free in Maryland)
Maryland Relay: 711
TTY: 410-946-5401 ꞏ 301-970-5401
E-mail: OLAWebmaster@ola.state.md.us
Website: www.ola.state.md.us
To Report Fraud
The Office of Legislative Audits operates a Fraud Hotline to report fraud, waste, or abuse involving State
of Maryland government resources. Reports of fraud, waste, or abuse may be communicated anonymously
by a toll-free call to 1-877-FRAUD-11, by mail to the Fraud Hotline, c/o Office of Legislative Audits, or
through the Office’s website.
Nondiscrimination Statement
The Department of Legislative Services does not discriminate on the basis of age, ancestry, color, creed,
marital status, national origin, race, religion, gender, gender identity, sexual orientation, or disability in the
admission or access to its programs, services, or activities. The Department’s Information Officer has been
designated to coordinate compliance with the nondiscrimination requirements contained in Section 35.107
of the United States Department of Justice Regulations. Requests for assistance should be directed to the
Information Officer at 410-946-5400 or 410-970-5400.

--- Page 6 ---
4

--- Page 7 ---
Table of Contents
Background Information 7
Agency Responsibilities and Organizational Change 7
Pharmacy Contract 8
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report 8
Findings and Recommendations 10
Payroll
Finding 1 – Adequate controls had not been established to ensure the 10
propriety of payroll, including adjustments to employee pay.
Inmate Medical and Mental Health Contracts
Finding 2 – The Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services 12
(DPSCS) did not conduct a documented review of consumer price
index adjustments for the inmate medical and mental health contracts.
We noted errors resulting in overpayments totaling $1 million.
Contract Procurements
* Finding 3 – DPSCS made repeated purchases of fresh produce and 13
maintenance services without consolidating and appropriately
soliciting competitive bids and executing written contracts.
Finding 4 – DPSCS did not always publish contract awards, as required 15
by State procurement regulations, and artificially split certain
purchases made with purchasing cards to avoid soliciting vendor bids.
9-1-1 Trust Fund
Finding 5 – DPSCS did not verify that 9-1-1 Trust Fund fees were 17
properly collected and remitted to the State. We identified one carrier
that appeared to be improperly collecting excessive fees from
subscribers.
Finding 6 – The annual report of 9-1-1 Trust Fund activities was not 18
submitted as required by law.
* Denotes item repeated in full or part from preceding audit report
5

--- Page 8 ---
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology 19
Agency Response Appendix
6

--- Page 9 ---
Background Information
Agency Responsibilities and Organizational Change
Through its correctional institutions and parole and probation programs, the
Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services (DPSCS) has statewide
responsibility for the supervision and rehabilitation of incarcerated and paroled
individuals. DPSCS also sets standards for criminal justice training, and operates
criminal justice information systems. In addition, DPSCS is responsible for
administering the 9-1-1 Trust Fund as required by law.
This audit included DPSCS central operations, including (1) the Office of the
Secretary, which provides overall executive direction and coordination for the
activities of DPSCS operating units; (2) the three main DPSCS functional
divisions – Correction, Parole and Probation, and Pretrial Detention and Services;
and (3) the Patuxent Institution. The scope of this DPSCS central operations audit
included payroll processed within the State Personnel System, all departmental
disbursements and procurement transactions, all corporate purchasing card
activity, equipment, certain controls over information systems, and all non-inmate
cash receipts. According to the State’s records, during fiscal year 2018,
expenditures for the budgetary units audited, which are detailed on page 19,
totaled approximately $1.3 billion.
A separate DPSCS regional operations audit was also conducted and a separate
audit report was issued. The DPSCS regional operations audit included financial
activities unique to the facilities, such as inmate cash receipts, inmate funds, and
the biometric timekeeping system used by correctional officers.
Finally, we continue to conduct separate audits of the DPSCS Information
Technology and Communications Division and the Maryland Correctional
Enterprises. The Information Technology and Communications Division
develops, maintains, and supports DPSCS’ information systems, and the
Maryland Correctional Enterprises provides work and job training for inmates of
the Maryland correctional system.
Prior to July 1, 2015, DPSCS operated under a regional approach to providing its
inmate-related functions; however, effective July 1, 2015, DPSCS returned to its
former organizational structure with the aforementioned individual functional
divisions (the Division of Correction, the Division of Parole and Probation, and
the Division of Pretrial Detention), and the Patuxent Institution. This
organizational change was the catalyst for the varying audit periods of the units
and activities subject to audit and included in this report.
7

--- Page 10 ---
Pharmacy Contract
DPSCS continues to obtain pharmaceuticals under a June 2005 contract. The
contract has been extended 14 times since the expiration of the third renewal
option in June 2010 and has been subject to numerous modifications. The
original two-year contract value was approximately $32 million and, as of
September 5, 2018, the cumulative value of the contract, from inception, was
approximately $518.3 million. According to State records, contract expenditures
through June 30, 2018 totaled approximately $425.3 million.
DPSCS attempted to procure a new contract in 2011 but, after the award was the
subject of a vendor protest and related litigation, the procurement was cancelled
in October 2013. A new pharmacy contract request for proposal (RFP) was
released on June 22, 2017, with proposals due August 22, 2017. The due date for
proposals was extended multiple times as a result of the volume of questions
received and a protest to the specifications filed on April 11, 2018. Numerous
amendments were issued that ultimately extended the due date for proposals to
April 22, 2019; proposals received are currently under evaluation.
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Reports
Our audit included a review to determine the status of 15 findings contained in
our preceding audit reports of DPSCS. These audit reports included the Office of
the Secretary and Other Units, dated November 18, 2015 (9 findings); the
Division of Parole and Probation – Probation Intake and Fee Assessment
Processes, dated November 30, 2015 which was based on an allegation received
through our fraud hotline (4 findings); the South Region, dated October 28, 2015
(1 of 5 findings) and the North Region, dated October 28, 2015 (1 of 3 findings).
As disclosed in the following table, we determined that DPSCS satisfactorily
addressed 13 of these 15 findings. The remaining 2 findings are repeated in this
report as one finding (Finding 3). Due to their subject matter, the status of the
remaining findings from the South Region and North Region reports will be
addressed during our audit of DPSCS – Regional Operations.
8

--- Page 11 ---
Status of Preceding Findings
Preceding Implementation
Finding Finding Description Status
Office of the Secretary and Other Units
The structure of an inmate services procurement may have
limited competition and the procurement improperly
Finding 1 Not repeated
included items available from a provider with procurement
preference.
Interagency agreements enabled the Office to augment its
Finding 2 staff beyond its budgeted positions and enhance related Not repeated
salaries.
Liquidated damages were not always assessed for an inmate
Finding 3 mental health care contract, and contract changes were Not repeated
authorized without timely Board of Public Works approval.
The Office did not ensure certain information was properly
Finding 4 Not repeated
transferred to its new offender case management system.
Personally identifiable information was not appropriately
Finding 5 Not repeated
safeguarded.
Account, password, and monitoring controls were not
Finding 6 Not repeated
sufficient.
The cash balance of fines, costs, fees, and restitution funds
Finding 7 was not adequately reconciled with the corresponding Not repeated
balance on the State’s records.
The Office had not established adequate procedures and
Finding 8 Not repeated
controls over certain critical transactions.
Information technology equipment was not adequately
Finding 9 Not repeated
controlled and accounted for.
Division of Parole and Probation – Probation Intake and Fee Assessment Processes
The Division of Parole and Probation (DPP) lacked policies
Finding 1 Not repeated
to guide the offender intake process at field office locations.
DPP had not established adequate procedures and controls to
Finding 2 Not repeated
ensure that all fees and restitution were properly assessed.
Procedures and controls over Offender Case Management
System user access were not sufficient, system roles were not
Finding 3 Not repeated
appropriately restricted, and data input validation controls
were not comprehensive.
Drinking Driver Monitor Program and supervision fees were
not properly assessed in the Offender-Based State
Finding 4 Not repeated
Correctional Information System II for 32 of the 45 cases
judgmentally selected for review.
South Region
The Region made repeated purchases from two vendors Repeated
Finding 3
without competitive bids and written contracts. (Current Finding 3)
North Region
The Region made repeated purchases from a vendor without
Repeated
Finding 3 consolidating and soliciting bids or executing written
(Current Finding 3)
contracts.
9

--- Page 12 ---
Findings and Recommendations
Payroll
Finding 1
Adequate controls had not been established to ensure the propriety of
payroll, including adjustments to employee pay.
Analysis
The Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services (DPSCS) had not
established adequate controls over the processing of payroll under the Statewide
Personnel System (SPS), which was implemented for DPSCS in October 2016.
Specifically, manually processed adjustments to employee pay and leave balance
adjustments were not sufficiently reviewed to ensure their propriety. In addition,
total biweekly payments from the Central Payroll Bureau (CPB) were not
reconciled with total payroll as reflected in the agency payroll reports generated
from SPS. According to the State’s records, DPSCS’ payroll expenditures
(excluding Maryland Correctional Enterprises, which is audited separately)
totaled approximately $855.7 million during fiscal year 2018.
Employee Pay and Leave Balance Adjustments Were Not Adequately Reviewed
Adjustments to employee pay and leave balances were not adequately reviewed
for propriety and to ensure proper processing. During the period from October
12, 2016 through March 31, 2018, DPSCS processed 5,878 payroll adjustments,
such as retroactive payroll payments, which increased employee pay by
approximately $1.8 million. During this period, DPSCS also processed 9,979
leave adjustments, such as leave bank donations, which resulted in a net increase
to employee leave balances of 29,162 hours.
Each pay period, a DPSCS employee was responsible for submitting a manually
prepared listing of payroll adjustments to the Department of Budget and
Management (DBM) for processing in SPS. Although DPSCS advised us that the
listing was reviewed by supervisory personnel prior to submission, there was no
documentation to substantiate that this occurred. In addition, DPSCS did not have
a procedure in place to verify the propriety of leave balance adjustments that
could be processed by 36 DPSCS employees directly in SPS. DPSCS also did not
use available system output reports of all payroll and leave adjustments recorded
to ensure that only authorized adjustments had been processed.
Total Payroll Disbursements Were Not Verified
Biweekly payroll payments from CPB were not reconciled, in the aggregate, to
the payroll payments reflected in reports generated from SPS. Generally,
10

--- Page 13 ---
employees recorded their work time directly into SPS for online approval by their
assigned supervisors. Payroll payments were processed by CPB based on the
approved work time for the pay period and the salary information reflected in
SPS. However, DPSCS did not compare the total payroll, as reflected in the CPB
payroll registers, with the SPS payroll summary reports reflecting the amount that
should have been paid based on each employee’s approved work time and salary
information. While DPSCS advised us that detailed biweekly payroll registers
from CPB were reviewed for unusual items, there was no documentation that
these reviews occurred.
This reconciliation is particularly important with respect to SPS because certain
unique system design features often resulted in differences between the CPB and
SPS reports. For example, we compared DPSCS’ CPB payroll register with the
SPS payroll summary report for the pay period ending March 13, 2018. Our
comparison disclosed that the total payroll reflected in the CPB payroll register
($21,088,575) exceeded the SPS payroll summary report total ($20,961,486) by
$127,089. We were able to reconcile $73,962 of the difference, which related to
employees assigned to other “supervisory organizations.”
Specifically, within SPS, employees appear on the SPS payroll summary report
for their assigned “supervisory organization” which, in some cases, does not
correspond with the agencies for which they work. For example, employees from
the Office of the Attorney General provided services to and were paid by DPSCS,
but were reflected on SPS payroll summary reports for the Office of the Attorney
General supervisory organization. Accordingly, these salaries represented
reconciling items between DPSCS’ SPS payroll summary report and the CPB
payroll register.
While we were unable to readily reconcile the remaining $53,127 because of the
large number of DPSCS employees, this difference could be attributed to
adjustments processed after the pay period. Specifically, the SPS payroll
summary reports reflect all activity relevant to the pay period irrespective of when
the transactions are processed, including adjustments to employee pay processed
in subsequent pay periods. The CPB check register only reflects employee pay
adjustments that have been processed during the specific pay period.
Because these reconciliations were not performed, DPSCS lacked assurance that
payroll payments were proper and were supported by the related time records and
salary information maintained within SPS.
11

--- Page 14 ---
Recommendation 1
We recommend that DPSCS
a. ensure that manually prepared listings of payroll adjustments are
reviewed and approved by independent supervisory personnel, and that
this approval is documented, before the listings are submitted to DBM for
processing;
b. independently verify SPS output reports of payroll and leave balance
adjustments to ensure only authorized adjustments had been processed,
at least on a test basis; and
c. reconcile payroll registers received from CPB each pay period with SPS
payroll summary reports, investigate any differences, and ensure that
these reconciliations are documented.
Inmate Medical and Mental Health Contracts
Finding 2
DPSCS did not conduct a documented review of consumer price index (CPI)
adjustments for the inmate medical and mental health contracts. We noted
errors resulting in overpayments totaling $1 million.
Analysis
DPSCS did not conduct documented reviews of CPI adjustments for the inmate
medical and mental health contracts. We noted errors resulting in overpayments
totaling $1 million. Both contracts provide for annual increases in the monthly
fee paid the contractors based on changes in the applicable CPI specified in the
contracts. Annually, DPSCS staff manually calculated the new monthly
contractor fixed fee based on a 12-month change in the CPI. Although DPSCS
management advised us that these CPI adjustments were subject to an
independent review, it could not provide any documentation of the reviews.
We reviewed the CPI adjustments for the inmate medical and mental health
contracts for fiscal years 2016, 2017, and 2018. Our review disclosed that, for
both contracts, DPSCS did not use the correct CPI factor for 2016. Specifically,
DPSCS used a CPI factor of .019 rather than .016 to increase the monthly fee paid
to the contractor. Furthermore, while the CPI factors used in the fiscal year 2017
and 2018 adjustments were proper, because each year’s contractor fee was based
on the preceding year’s fee, the fiscal year 2016 error also caused the fees to be
overstated for both 2017 and 2018. As a result, during the period from July 1,
2015 through December 31, 2017, we determined that DPSCS overpaid the
inmate medical and mental healthcare contractors $883,000 and $120,000,
respectively.
12

--- Page 15 ---
According to the State’s records, DPSCS paid the inmate medical and mental
health contractors $245.8 million and $39.9 million, respectively, during the
period from July 1, 2015 through December 31, 2017.
Recommendation 2
We recommend that DPSCS
a. ensure CPI adjustments to inmate healthcare contracts are subject to a
documented supervisory review and approval; and
b. review the CPI adjustments made during the audit period and recover
any amounts improperly paid, including those noted above.
Contract Procurements
Finding 3
DPSCS made repeated purchases of fresh produce and maintenance services
without consolidating and appropriately soliciting competitive bids and
executing written contracts.
Analysis
DPSCS did not consolidate repeated purchases from certain vendors for fresh
produce and maintenance services, and did not appropriately solicit competitive
bids and execute written contracts. The purchases were made by staff at DPSCS
Office of the Secretary, as well as DPSCS Regional fiscal offices.
Fresh Produce Purchases
According to the State’s records, during fiscal years 2014 through 2018 (as of
April 30, 2018), DPSCS made 3,568 individual payments to three produce
vendors totaling approximately $9,861,000. DPSCS did not consolidate the
purchases to maximize its leverage as a high-volume purchaser and did not
have any written contracts. Rather, the purchases were made by the respective
units as separate purchases during the year.
In addition, DPSCS did not always competitively solicit bids as required by
State procurement regulations. We judgmentally selected for review 13
produce purchases (from all DPSCS purchasing locations) totaling
approximately $147,000. For one purchase totaling $27,990, there was no
documentation to substantiate the purchase was subject to competitive bidding
and was approved by the Department of General Services (DGS), as required.
For 3 other purchases ranging from $6,840 to $15,387, there was no
documentation of the solicitation of vendor bids, and for another 3 purchases
13

--- Page 16 ---
totaling $26,594, only one vendor quote was obtained. DPSCS did not enter
into formal written contracts for any of the 13 purchases tested.
Maintenance Services Procurements
DPSCS repeatedly used corporate purchasing cards to procure correctional
facility maintenance services from one vendor without soliciting competitive
bids and entering into written contracts as required. During the period from
July 14, 2014 to May 18, 2018, DPSCS made 240 payments to this vendor
totaling approximately $677,000. Although the individual purchases were
valued at $5,000 or less, which do not require formal competitive bids,
combined purchases to this vendor significantly exceeded this level.
Consequently, this procurement methodology may not have maximized
DPSCS’ leverage as a high-volume purchaser in order to obtain services at the
best value.
A similar condition regarding the procurement of fresh produce was commented
upon in our preceding reports of the DPSCS North and South Regions. State
procurement regulations generally require a formal written competitive
procurement and Board of Public Works (BPW) and/or control agency approvals
for larger procurements. For example, while DGS delegated the procurement of
fresh produce to DPSCS, contracts exceeding $25,000 require DGS approval.
Also under State procurement regulations, purchases expected to cost between
$5,000 and $15,000 require at least two bids, which can be solicited in writing or
orally directly from vendors at the discretion of the agency’s purchasing agent.
Recommendation 3
We recommend that DPSCS comply with State procurement regulations.
Specifically, we recommend that DPSCS
a. work with DGS, if necessary, to competitively procure fresh produce and
maintenance services in a manner that meets DPSCS’ needs and ensures
these goods and services are obtained at the best value (repeat); and
b. ensure that formal written contracts are executed and control agency
approvals are obtained, as needed (repeat).
14

--- Page 17 ---
Finding 4
DPSCS did not always publish contract awards, as required by State
procurement regulations, and artificially split certain purchases made with
purchasing cards to avoid soliciting vendor bids.
Analysis
DPSCS did not always adhere to State procurement regulation requirements to
publish contract awards and artificially split certain purchasing card purchases.
 Our test of 17 contracts totaling $230.7 million disclosed that, for 7 contracts
totaling $186 million (including the $156 million inmate mental health
contract), DPSCS did not publish the awards on eMaryland Marketplace as
required. State regulations require that contract awards greater than $25,000
be published on eMaryland Marketplace not more than 30 days after the
execution and approval of the contract. Publishing awards provides
transparency regarding winning bidders and award amounts.
 Our test of 25 purchasing card purchases totaling $93,820 made from ten
vendors, by 9 cardholders, disclosed that 5 purchases totaling $22,297 from
two of these vendors had been artificially split. Splitting purchases allows the
cardholder to circumvent the cardholder’s single transaction limit, as well as
to avoid soliciting competitive bids. State procurement regulations prohibit
procurements from being artificially divided to circumvent these regulations,
and generally require vendor bids be obtained for purchases of $5,000 or
more. DPSCS management advised us that its Division of Procurement
Services periodically reviews purchasing card purchases to identify
opportunities to consolidate procurements for similar services, but could not
provide any documentation that these reviews occurred.
Recommendation 4
We recommend that DPSCS
a. publish contract awards on eMaryland Marketplace as required;
b. refrain from the practice of artificially splitting purchasing card
purchases and solicit competitive bids, as required; and
c. document the periodic review of cardholder activity for opportunities to
consolidate procurements.
15

--- Page 18 ---
9-1-1 Trust Fund
Background
State law requires all counties and Baltimore City to operate a 9-1-1 emergency
telephone system. These systems, which may be used by the public to summon
emergency aid, are intended to eliminate delays caused by a lack of familiarity
with emergency telephone numbers and to eliminate confusion during periods of
crisis. The Emergency Number Systems Board, which is a budgetary program
under DPSCS, is responsible for coordinating the enhancement of these systems.
DPSCS provides support services to the Board and is responsible for
administering the 9-1-1 Trust Fund, which finances the operation, maintenance,
and enhancement of 9-1-1 systems.
The 9-1-1 Trust Fund is financed by a monthly fee paid by subscribers to their
service carriers. Prior to July 1, 2019, the monthly subscriber fee, which is
included on customer bills, consisted of a State fee of 25 cents per subscriber and
a local jurisdiction fee of up to 75 cents per subscriber. (Currently all local
jurisdictions have established the local fee at 75 cents.) Beginning July 1, 2019,
the State fee was increased to 50 cents, with both the State and local jurisdiction
fees to be charged on a per-line basis rather than per subscriber.
Carriers are required to report activity and remit fee collections monthly to the
Comptroller of Maryland for deposit into the 9-1-1 Trust Fund. The Comptroller
forwards these activity reports to DPSCS. According to DPSCS records, 9-1-1
Trust Fund deposits totaled approximately $55.5 million in fiscal year 2018. On a
quarterly basis, DPSCS distributes the local jurisdiction fees on a prorated basis in
accordance with the level of fees collected in each jurisdiction as reported by the
carriers. DPSCS receives an appropriation from the 9-1-1 Trust Fund to carry out
the purposes of the enabling legislation, pay administrative costs (including those
of the Board), and reimburse local jurisdictions for the cost of enhancing the 9-1-1
system.
During our current audit, we reviewed the DPSCS procedures for monitoring the
service carrier collections.
16

--- Page 19 ---
Finding 5
DPSCS did not verify that 9-1-1 Trust Fund fees were properly collected and
remitted to the State. We identified one carrier that appeared to be
improperly collecting excessive fees from subscribers.
Analysis
DPSCS did not verify that 9-1-1 Trust Fund fees were properly collected by
mobile telecommunication service carriers (wireless providers) and by telephone
service carriers (wired providers) and remitted to the State. Specifically, the
carriers submitted a report of State and local fees collected from subscribers in
each local jurisdiction along with their monthly fee submissions, but did not
provide a detailed listing of the subscribers to enable verification of the
collections reported. While DPSCS asked the carriers to explain any significant
variances in fees compared to the prior month, it did not conduct audits or any
other verifications of the collections reported. Consequently, DPSCS failed to
identify one wireless carrier that appeared to be improperly collecting and
remitting excessive fees from its subscribers.
Because of the lack of detailed records and audits, we obtained a detailed listing
of the 9-1-1 fees collected for January 2019 directly from one carrier. Our review
disclosed that, although this carrier reported to the Comptroller that the January
2019 fees remitted were collected on a per-subscriber basis, the carrier actually
charged and collected the 9-1-1 fee on a per-line basis. For example, a subscriber
with seven lines was charged a monthly fee of $7 per month rather than $1 per
month. We consulted with DPSCS legal counsel who confirmed that, prior to
July 1, 2019, the fee should have been charged on a per-subscriber basis.
Through a review of the January 2019 fees submitted by this carrier and the
aforementioned related supporting documentation, we determined that the carrier
collected and remitted approximately $490,000 in excess fees from its subscribers
for that month. We could not determine the extent or the duration of the excess
fees collected by this provider due to the lack of readily available records at
DPSCS.
State regulations require DPSCS and/or the Board to adopt procedures for
auditing the collection and remittance of 9-1-1 fees by telecommunication and
telephone service carriers. Although DPSCS developed procedures for auditing
the 9-1-1 fees in September 2007, it has not conducted any audits since 2009.
The 2009 audit reviewed the collection and remittance of fees during fiscal years
2004 to 2007 and identified $179,000 in fees that were not remitted. DPSCS
management advised that no audits have been conducted since 2009 because
DPSCS had determined that the audits were not cost-effective.
17

--- Page 20 ---
Recommendation 5
We recommend DPSCS
a. audit service carriers to ensure the proper fees are being collected and
subsequently remitted to the 9-1-1 Trust Fund;
b. take appropriate action regarding any improper fees collected identified
by the audits; and
c. work with the aforementioned service carrier to determine the extent of
improper fees collected, and consult with legal counsel on the feasibility
and options for refunding subscribers for amounts improperly collected.
Finding 6
The annual report of 9-1-1 Trust Fund activities was not submitted as
required by law.
Analysis
As of September 19, 2019, the Emergency Numbers System Board had not
submitted the annual report of 9-1-1 Trust Fund activities as required by State law
for 2018. Public Safety Article, Section 1-307 of the Annotated Code of
Maryland requires the Board to submit an annual report on the Fund to the
Governor, the Secretary of DPSCS, and the Legislative Policy Committee. The
reports are intended to provide information regarding various aspects of the 9-1-1
Trust Fund, such as State and local jurisdiction fees charged, the funding formula
in effect, and any statutory or regulatory violations noted in annual subdivision
audit reports.
Recommendation 6
We recommend that DPSCS ensure that the Board submits annual reports
on the Fund on a timely basis, as required by law.
18

--- Page 21 ---
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the Department of Public Safety
and Correctional Services (DPSCS). DPSCS reorganized into its current
structure, effective July 1, 2015. Because of that reorganization (as further
explained on page 6 of this report), our audit included the following units for the
periods indicated:
For the period beginning October 21, 2014 and ending March 31, 2018:
Office of the Secretary (including the 9-1-1 Trust Fund)
Deputy Secretary for Operations
Maryland Parole Commission
Inmate Grievance Office
Police and Correctional Training Commissions
Maryland Commission on Correctional Standards
For the period beginning July 1, 2015 and ending March 31, 2018:
Division of Parole and Probation (DPP)
Division of Corrections (DOC)
Division of Pretrial Detention
Patuxent Institution
For the period beginning July 1, 2014 and ending June 30, 2015:
South Region
Central Region
For the period beginning April 1, 2015 and ending June 30, 2015:
North Region
The audit was conducted in accordance with generally accepted government
auditing standards. Those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to
obtain sufficient, appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our
findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives. We believe that the
evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions
based on our audit objectives.
As prescribed by State Government Article, Section 2-1221 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, the objectives of this audit were to examine the Office’s
financial transactions, records and internal control, and to evaluate its compliance
with applicable State laws, rules, and regulations.
19

--- Page 22 ---
In planning and conducting our audit, we focused on the major financial-related
areas of operations based on assessments of significance and risk. The areas
addressed by the audit included procurements and disbursements (including
certain purchasing activities of the DPSCS Regional fiscal offices); contracts;
cash receipts; equipment; payroll; collection and disbursement of fines, costs,
fees, and restitution; and information systems security and control. Our audit also
included certain support services (such as payroll, purchasing, maintenance of
accounting records and related fiscal functions) provided by the DPSCS – Office
of the Secretary on a centralized basis for the Regional offices and for the
Criminal Injuries Compensation Board (CICB) through June 30, 2018 when
CICB operations were transferred from DPSCS to the Victim’s Services Unit
within the Governor’s Office of Crime Control and Prevention.
We also determined the status of the findings contained in our preceding audit
reports of the DPSCS – Office of the Secretary and Other Units, and the DPSCS –
DPP – Probation Intake and Fee Assessment Processes. We also determined the
status of one finding included in our preceding audit report of the DPSCS-South
Region and one finding included in our preceding report of the DPSCS-North
Region.
Our audit did not include the computer operations of the DPSCS Information and
Technology and Communications Division and the Maryland Correctional
Enterprises, which are audited separately. Our audit also did not include inmate
cash receipts, inmate funds, other earnings and overtime payments related to the
Division of Correction employees, and usage of a biometric timekeeping system
by correctional officers; these activities are audited during our DPSCS regional
operations audit.
To accomplish our audit objectives, our audit procedures included inquiries of
appropriate personnel, inspections of documents and records, observations of the
DPSCS’ operations, and tests of transactions. Generally, transactions were
selected for testing based on auditor judgment, which primarily considers risk.
Unless otherwise specifically indicated, neither statistical nor non-statistical audit
sampling was used to select the transactions tested. Therefore, the results of the
tests cannot be used to project those results to the entire population from which
the test items were selected.
We also performed various data extracts of pertinent information from the State’s
Financial Management Information System (such as revenue and expenditure
data) and the State’s Central Payroll Bureau (payroll data). The extracts are
performed as part of ongoing internal processes established by the Office of
Legislative Audits and were subject to various tests to determine data reliability.
20

--- Page 23 ---
We also extracted data from the Office’s Offender Based State Correctional
Information System II and Offender Case Management System for the purposes
of testing fines, costs, fees, and restitution transactions and system access. We
determined that the data extracted from these various sources were sufficiently
reliable for the purposes the data were used during this audit. Finally, we
performed other auditing procedures that we considered necessary to achieve our
objectives. The reliability of data used in this report for background or
informational purposes was not assessed.
DPSCS management is responsible for establishing and maintaining effective
internal control. Internal control is a process designed to provide reasonable
assurance that objectives pertaining to the reliability of financial records;
effectiveness and efficiency of operations including safeguarding of assets; and
compliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations are achieved.
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate.
Our reports are designed to assist the Maryland General Assembly in exercising
its legislative oversight function and to provide constructive recommendations for
improving State operations. As a result, our reports generally do not address
activities we reviewed that are functioning properly.
This report includes findings relating to conditions that we consider to be
significant deficiencies in the design or operation of internal control that could
adversely affect DPSCS’ ability to maintain reliable financial records, operate
effectively and efficiently, and/or comply with applicable laws, rules, and
regulations. Our report also includes findings regarding significant instances of
noncompliance with applicable laws, rules, or regulations. Other less significant
findings were communicated to DPSCS that did not warrant inclusion in this
report.
The DPSCS – Office of the Secretary’s response to our findings and
recommendations is included as an appendix to this report. As prescribed in the
State Government Article, Section 2-1224 of the Annotated Code of Maryland,
we will advise the Office regarding the results of our review of its response.
21

--- Page 25 ---
Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services
Central Operations
Agency Response Form
Payroll
Finding 1
Adequate controls had not been established to ensure the propriety of payroll, including
adjustments to employee pay.
We recommend that DPSCS
a. ensure that manually prepared listings of payroll adjustments are reviewed and
approved by independent supervisory personnel, and that this approval is documented,
before the listings are submitted to DBM for processing;
b. independently verify SPS output reports of payroll and leave balance adjustments to
ensure only authorized adjustments had been processed, at least on a test basis; and
c. reconcile payroll registers received from CPB each pay period with SPS payroll
summary reports, investigate any differences, and ensure that these reconciliations are
documented.
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide Page 10: response to OLA’s “In addition, DPSCS did not have a
additional comments as procedure in place to verify the propriety of leave balance adjustments
deemed necessary. that could be processed by 36 DPSCS employees directly in SPS.”
Response: DPSCS leave balance adjustments were primarily a result of
reconciliations between the previous leave system and SPS because of
the conversion and incomplete transfer of old balances to SPS.
Recommendation 1a Agree Estimated Completion Date: 8/22/19
Please provide details of The Division of Financial Services shall ensure that manually prepared
corrective action or listings of payroll adjustments are reviewed and approved by
explain disagreement.
independent supervisory personnel, and that this approval is documented
before the listings are submitted to DBM for processing.
Each Regional Timekeeper Supervisor shall provide documented review
of payroll adjustments submitted to the Office of the Secretary (OSEC)
Payroll Office. The OSEC Payroll Unit shall prepare one Excel payroll
input spreadsheet for review by the Supervisor, and certified by the
Payroll Director or designee. In addition, the OSEC Payroll Office shall
complete, sign and submit the DBM External Process Audit Checklist
for Input Packet.
Page 1 of 9

--- Page 26 ---
Recommendation 1b Agree Estimated Completion Date: 12/31/19
Please provide details of The Division of Financial Services shall independently verify SPS
corrective action or output reports of payroll and leave balance adjustments to ensure only
explain disagreement.
authorized adjustments have been processed, at least on a test basis. This
shall be evidenced by a biweekly documented review of the SPMS
Payroll Summary Report and the SPMS Accrual and Time Off
Adjustments Overrides Reports by Regional Timekeeper Supervisors
and the OSEC Payroll Audit Team.
Recommendation 1c Agree Estimated Completion Date: 12/31/19
Please provide details of The Division of Financial Services shall reconcile payroll registers
corrective action or received from CPB each pay period with SPS payroll summary reports,
explain disagreement.
investigate any differences, and ensure that these reconciliations are
documented. The Division of Financial Services is in the process of
developing a query report to assist in identifying the exceptions, and to
effectively and timely complete the analysis and reconciliation.
Page 2 of 9

--- Page 27 ---
Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services
Central Operations
Agency Response Form
Inmate Medical and Mental Health Contracts
Finding 2
DPSCS did not conduct a documented review of consumer price index (CPI) adjustments
for the inmate medical and mental health contracts. We noted errors resulting in
overpayments totaling $1 million.
We recommend that DPSCS
a. ensure CPI adjustments to inmate healthcare contracts are subject to a documented
supervisory review and approval; and
b. review the CPI adjustments made during the audit period and recover any amounts
improperly paid, including those noted above.
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide The DPSCS prior Contract Manager used an incorrect period to calculate
additional comments as the FY 16 CPI adjustments for the Inmate Medical and Mental Health
deemed necessary.
contracts.
Recommendation 2a Agree Estimated Completion Date: Dec. 31, 2018
Please provide details of For FY 17 – FY 19, the DPSCS current Contract Manager has ensured
corrective action or that all CPI adjustments have been in accordance with the contract and
explain disagreement. have been properly documented with a supervisory review and approval.
The Medical contract expired December 31, 2018, and the Mental
Health contract expired December 31, 2017. New Medical and Mental
Health fixed price contracts have no CPI adjustment requirements.
Recommendation 2b Agree Estimated Completion Date: June 6, 2019
Please provide details of The Contracts Administration Unit reviewed the OLA’s audit finding
corrective action or with the Office of the Inspector General to determine the actual amount
explain disagreement.
of overpayment to the prior Medical Contractor. On November 20,
2018, the DPSCS Contract Manager informed the prior Medical
Contractor of DPSCS’ intent to deduct the amount of the overpayment
from their next monthly invoice, absent any dispute.
On November 27, 2018, the prior Medical Contractor submitted a
dispute challenging DPSCS’ attempt to recover the overpaid amounts
resulting from the error to adjust the FY 16 CPI properly. On December
Page 3 of 9

--- Page 28 ---
11, 2018, the Contract Manager forwarded the vendor’s dispute to the
DPSCS Procurement Director and the Assistant Attorney General for
their review. The Department determined that since the FY 16 CPI
adjustment rate was mutually agreed to between the Department’s
former Contract Manager and the former Medical Contractor, the
Department would not pursue the recovery of the aforementioned
overpayment to the Medical Contractor. The Department considers this
matter closed. The Medical contract expired on December 31, 2018.
The amount of overpayment to the Mental Health Contractor has been
recovered without dispute. That contract expired on December 31, 2017,
and is closed.
Page 4 of 9

--- Page 29 ---
Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services
Central Operations
Agency Response Form
Contract Procurements
Finding 3
DPSCS made repeated purchases of fresh produce and maintenance services without
consolidating and appropriately soliciting competitive bids and executing written contracts.
We recommend that DPSCS comply with State procurement regulations. Specifically, we
recommend that DPSCS
a. work with DGS, if necessary, to competitively procure fresh produce and maintenance
services in a manner that meets DPSCS’ needs and ensures these goods and services are
obtained at the best value (repeat); and
b. ensure that formal written contracts are executed and control agency approvals are
obtained, as needed (repeat).
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 3a Agree Estimated Completion Date: 06/30/2020
Please provide details of The Department will create a strategic plan with DGS to competitively
corrective action or procure and obtain best value for the listed items in a manner that meets
explain disagreement. DPSCS’ needs. Depending on the value of the procurement, the
Department will determine the appropriate procurement method to
utilize and award these contracts.
Recommendation 3b Agree Estimated Completion Date: 06/30/2020
Please provide details of Formal written contracts for these items and services will be executed
corrective action or upon the approval of the Department of General Services and the Board
explain disagreement. of Public Works.
Page 5 of 9

--- Page 30 ---
Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services
Central Operations
Agency Response Form
Finding 4
DPSCS did not always publish contract awards, as required by State procurement
regulations, and artificially split certain purchases made with purchasing cards to avoid
soliciting vendor bids.
We recommend that DPSCS
a. publish contract awards on eMaryland Marketplace as required;
b. refrain from the practice of artificially splitting purchasing card purchases and solicit
competitive bids, as required; and
c. document the periodic review of cardholder activity for opportunities to consolidate
procurements.
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 4a Agree Estimated Completion Date: Immediately
Please provide details of Publishing of awarded contracts over the small procurement threshold
corrective action or will be placed on eMaryland Marketplace as required.
explain disagreement.
Recommendation 4b Agree Estimated Completion Date: Immediately
Please provide details of The Department is conducting reviews of all purchasing card
corrective action or requisitions and combining requisitions whenever possible to eliminate
explain disagreement. artificial split purchases, and will solicit competitive bids as required.
Recommendation 4c Agree Estimated Completion Date: Immediately
Please provide details of Credit card purchases are reviewed on a quarterly basis to seek
corrective action or opportunities to consolidate procurements and established contracts.
explain disagreement. These reviews will be documented.
Page 6 of 9

--- Page 31 ---
Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services
Central Operations
Agency Response Form
9-1-1 Trust Fund
Finding 5
DPSCS did not verify that 9-1-1 Trust Fund fees were properly collected and remitted to
the State. We identified one carrier that appeared to be improperly collecting excessive
fees from subscribers.
We recommend that DPSCS
a. audit service carriers to ensure the proper fees are being collected and subsequently
remitted to the 9-1-1 Trust Fund;
b. take appropriate action regarding any improper fees collected identified by the audits;
and
c. work with the aforementioned service carrier to determine the extent of improper fees
collected, and consult with legal counsel on the feasibility and options for refunding
subscribers for amounts improperly collected.
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide While the ENSB has not conducted carrier audits on a routine basis, it
additional comments as has in the past and has found minimal discrepancies. The ENSB does
deemed necessary. verify that each carrier that does business in Maryland is remitting the
required fees.
Recommendation 5a Agree Estimated Completion Date: July 31, 2020
Please provide details of The ENSB is currently preparing a Task Order Request For Proposal
corrective action or (TORFP) to contract with an auditing service to provide carrier audits of
explain disagreement. those companies that are currently remitting 9-1-1 fees to the State.
However, it is anticipated that emergency legislation will be pre-filed for
the 2020 General Assembly Session that, if passed, will transfer the
auditing authority from the ENSB to another State entity. If that occurs
before an auditing contract is awarded, the ENSB itself may no longer be
able to legally conduct this audit, and the TORFP will be cancelled.
Recommendation 5b Agree Estimated Completion Date: September
30, 2020
Please provide details of This recommendation completion timeframe is dependent on the
corrective action or completion of the audits outlined in Recommendation 5a. If
explain disagreement. discrepancies are found, the ENSB will work with each carrier not in
compliance to rectify the improper fee collection. The ENSB has no
statutory authority to implement penalties or force compliance, so if any
Page 7 of 9

--- Page 32 ---
companies refuse to come into compliance, they will be referred to the
Attorney General’s Office for additional action.
Recommendation 5c Agree Estimated Completion Date: February 29,
2020
Please provide details of The ENSB will work with the aforementioned carrier in question to
corrective action or determine the extent of any improper fees collected. Once the scope of
explain disagreement. the issue is determined, the ENSB will consult with legal counsel to
determine the best way to remedy this situation.
Page 8 of 9

--- Page 33 ---
Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services
Central Operations
Agency Response Form
Finding 6
The annual report of 9-1-1 Trust Fund activities was not submitted as required by law.
We recommend that DPSCS ensure that the Board submits annual reports on the Fund on
a timely basis, as required by law.
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide The FY 2018 Annual Report was delayed by the late submission of
additional comments as certain county 9-1-1 fee audits by the county’s selected independent
deemed necessary. auditors. These audits are required by the legislature to demonstrate that
each county has not supplanted or diverted its county additional 9-1-1
fees to non 9-1-1 uses.
Recommendation 6 Agree Estimated Completion Date: October 31,
2019
Please provide details of The FY 2018 Annual Report has been submitted to the legislative
corrective action or library. Future Annual Reports on the Trust Fund will be submitted on a
explain disagreement. timely basis.
Page 9 of 9

--- Page 34 ---
A T
UDIT EAM
Adam J. Westover, CPA
Audit Manager
Richard L. Carter, CISA
Information Systems Audit Manager
Robert A. Wells, Jr., CPA
Senior Auditor
Matthew D. Walbert, CISA
Information Systems Senior Auditor
Anthony V. Calcagno
Walter L. Horan, IV
Timothy S. Rice
Staff Auditors
Zachary D. Brillhart
Staff Auditor Intern