Title: Maryland 529


NOTE: Effective July 1, 2016, the College Savings Plans of Maryland is now named Maryland 529.
Date: 12/03/2019
Type: Fiscal Compliance
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5de7fb99a1ce58102858af36
Extracted: 2025-06-19T06:22:04.125996
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Audit Report
Maryland 529
December 2019
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Senator Craig J. Zucker (Senate Chair) Delegate Shelly L. Hettleman (House Chair)
Senator Adelaide C. Eckardt Delegate Steven J. Arentz
Senator George C. Edwards Delegate Andrew P. Cassilly
Senator Guy J. Guzzone Delegate Mark S. Chang
Senator Katie Fry Hester Delegate Keith E. Haynes
Senator Cheryl C. Kagan Delegate Michael A. Jackson
Senator Benjamin F. Kramer Delegate David Moon
Senator Cory V. McCray Delegate April R. Rose
Senator Douglas J.J. Peters Delegate Geraldine Valentino-Smith
Senator Justin D. Ready Delegate Karen Lewis Young
To Obtain Further Information
Office of Legislative Audits
301 West Preston Street, Room 1202
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Phone: 410-946-5900 ꞏ 301-970-5900 ꞏ 1-877-486-9964 (Toll Free in Maryland)
Maryland Relay: 711
TTY: 410-946-5401 ꞏ 301-970-5401
E-mail: OLAWebmaster@ola.state.md.us
Website: www.ola.state.md.us
To Report Fraud
The Office of Legislative Audits operates a Fraud Hotline to report fraud, waste, or abuse involving State
of Maryland government resources. Reports of fraud, waste, or abuse may be communicated anonymously
by a toll-free call to 1-877-FRAUD-11, by mail to the Fraud Hotline, c/o Office of Legislative Audits, or
through the Office’s website.
Nondiscrimination Statement
The Department of Legislative Services does not discriminate on the basis of age, ancestry, color, creed,
marital status, national origin, race, religion, gender, gender identity, sexual orientation, or disability in the
admission or access to its programs, services, or activities. The Department’s Information Officer has been
designated to coordinate compliance with the nondiscrimination requirements contained in Section 35.107
of the United States Department of Justice Regulations. Requests for assistance should be directed to the
Information Officer at 410-946-5400 or 410-970-5400.

--- Page 7 ---
Table of Contents
Background Information 7
Name Change and Agency Responsibilities 7
Maryland Prepaid College Trust 7
Maryland College Investment Plan 8
Maryland Achieving a Better Life Experience 9
Financial Information 9
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report 10
Findings and Recommendations 11
Maryland 529 Conditions and Board Oversight
Finding 1 – A significant lack of documentation raised questions 13
regarding the adequacy of the Maryland 529 Board’s oversight over
Maryland Prepaid College Trust (MPCT) operations and whether
appropriate actions were taken in response to several issues
discovered by Maryland 529 after the departure of the Chief
Executive Officer and the Chief Financial Officer in May 2015.
MPCT Disbursements and Adjustments
Finding 2 – Maryland 529’s procedures did not require that independent 16
supervisory reviews of calculations supporting disbursement
transactions be documented, and our testing of a limited number of
disbursements disclosed certain errors in the amounts paid.
Finding 3 – Adjustments to Maryland 529 MPCT accounts were 17
unilaterally processed and were not subject to independent
supervisory review and approval. Such transactions exceeded $32.1
million for fiscal year 2018.
Bank Account Reconciliations
Finding 4 – Maryland 529 did not prepare adequate bank reconciliations 19
for three bank accounts used to administer MPCT activities, and
certain reconciliations we reviewed lacked documentation of
supervisory review.
5

--- Page 8 ---
Abandoned Funds
 Finding 5 – Maryland 529 did not determine the disposition of uncashed 21
checks from 2014, nor did it take action to determine the applicability
of the Maryland Abandoned Property Act to its trust accounts.
Rollover and Refund Payment Methodology
Finding 6 (Policy Issue) – Maryland 529’s methodology for calculating 23
disbursement amounts for MPCT account holder refunds and
rollovers (transfers), in our opinion often resulted in excessive
payments.
System Access and Security
Finding 7 – Maryland 529 did not adequately monitor access granted to 28
the automated system used to administer MPCT. We identified
improper access for 26 system users, including 11 former employees
whose access had not been disabled.
Finding 8 – Maryland 529 lacked assurance that the automated system 29
used for administration of MPCT was sufficiently protected against
operational and security risks.
Cash Receipts
Finding 9 – Controls were not established to ensure that all mail 31
collections for MPCT were properly accounted for and deposited.
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology 32
Agency Response Appendix
* Denotes item repeated in full or part from preceding audit report
6

--- Page 9 ---
Background Information
Name Change and Agency Responsibilities
Chapter 39, Laws of Maryland 2016, effective July 1, 2016, renamed the College
Savings Plans of Maryland to be Maryland 529 and established the Maryland
Achieving a Better Life Experience (ABLE) program. Maryland 529 is an
independent State agency that currently provides two separate college savings
plans—the Maryland Senator Edward J. Kasemeyer Prepaid College Trust
(MPCT) and the Maryland Senator Edward J. Kasemeyer College Investment
Plan (MCIP)—to help individuals save for future college expenses and to reduce
dependence on student loans and other forms of debt. Effective October 1, 2008,
State law authorized Maryland 529 to establish a third plan option—the Maryland
Broker-Dealer College Investment Plan—which allows contributions to an
investment account through private investment firms selected by the account
holder; however, as of July 2018, the plan was not operating as the Maryland 529
Board had not opted to offer this plan.
These plans are administered by the Maryland 529 Board which, by State law,
includes the Secretary of the Maryland Higher Education Commission, the
Secretary of the Maryland Department of Disabilities, the State Superintendent of
Schools, the State Treasurer, the State Comptroller, the Chancellor of the
University System of Maryland, and five members of the public appointed by the
Governor.
Individuals seeking to participate in a college savings plan may execute a prepaid
tuition contract through MPCT and/or establish an investment account in the
MCIP. Students may use their accounts at nearly any accredited college
nationwide. According to the State’s records, Maryland 529’s operating
expenditures totaled approximately $3.7 million during fiscal year 2018.
Maryland Prepaid College Trust
MPCT offers tuition contracts for the future payment of tuition and mandatory
fees at any eligible institution of higher education. Contracts, which require
scheduled payments, may be purchased by individuals on behalf of a designated
beneficiary. MPCT is operated directly by Maryland 529, which processes
enrollments, invests funds, and makes disbursements. State law requires that
either the account holder or the beneficiary be a resident of Maryland or the
District of Columbia at the time that a contract is purchased.
7

--- Page 10 ---
State law provides State income tax benefits for Maryland taxpayers who elect to
participate in the MPCT. Specifically, the Tax-General Article, Section 10-208 of
the Annotated Code of Maryland allows a Maryland taxpayer to deduct up to
$2,500 in annual contributions for any tax year, for each prepaid tuition contract,
for the purpose of calculating his or her Maryland adjusted gross income.
Maryland 529 does not guarantee that the assets of MPCT will be sufficient to pay
the tuition and fees estimated under the contracts. However, in the event that the
market value of Maryland 529’s assets is not sufficient to fund its contract
obligations, State law provides that State funds may be appropriated to fund the
related difference or the Board may adjust future contract payments to meet
MPCT’s contract obligations. Maryland 529 must repay any related authorized
appropriations during each of the two succeeding fiscal years. State law also
specifies that the debts and contract obligations of MPCT are not debts of the
State.
An actuarial study conducted in October 2018 indicated that MPCT had a surplus
of $432.5 million as of June 30, 2018 and was 155.3 percent funded. The
Education Article, Section 18-1906 of the Annotated Code of Maryland provides
that the Board may authorize a refund to MPCT account holders should the
funded status of MPCT exceed 130 percent and if certain other conditions are
met. The Maryland 529 Board has not authorized a refund at this time. The
Board attributes the current surplus to strong market performance and lower than
projected tuition increases at Maryland’s public colleges; however, the Board
believes there is a significant likelihood that these trends may not continue at the
same levels over the next few years.
Maryland College Investment Plan
MCIP was established to allow individuals to invest funds to help pay the cost of
providing a college education for designated beneficiaries. Maryland 529
executed a contract with a private investment company that is responsible for
managing MCIP by processing Plan enrollment applications, investing related
payments, and disbursing funds. The current contract will expire in June 2024.
Earnings on funds invested in MCIP and the future principal value of individual
accounts are not guaranteed. Payments into the investment plan will be accepted
provided the aggregate balance of all accounts for a designated beneficiary does
not exceed $350,000. Account holders and designated beneficiaries participating
in MCIP are not required to be residents of Maryland or the District of Columbia.
State law provides State income tax benefits for Maryland taxpayers who elect to
participate in MCIP based on their contributions. Specifically, the Tax-General
8

--- Page 11 ---
Article, Section 10-208 of the Annotated Code of Maryland allows a taxpayer to
deduct up to $2,500 in annual contributions for any tax year, for each qualified
beneficiary, for the purpose of calculating his or her Maryland adjusted gross
income.
Maryland Achieving a Better Life Experience
Chapter 39, Laws of Maryland 2016 established the Maryland Achieving a Better
Life Experience (ABLE) program, under Maryland 529’s oversight, to allow
individuals to invest funds to help individuals with disabilities to maintain health,
independence, and quality of life. Assets in an ABLE account in Maryland or in
any other state may not be considered for determining eligibility for assistance or
benefits from local or state means-tested programs. For social security benefits,
up to $100,000 held in an ABLE account is not counted toward the $2,000 asset
limit. Annual contributions may not exceed $15,000 and lifetime contributions
may not exceed $350,000.
Maryland 529 executed a contract, dated September 7, 2017, with a private
investment company that is responsible for managing ABLE by processing Plan
enrollment applications, investing related payments, and disbursing funds. ABLE
enrollment opened in November 2017, and the current contract will expire in
September 2020. Earnings on funds invested in ABLE and the future principal
value of individual accounts are not guaranteed. Account holders and designated
beneficiaries participating in ABLE are not required to be residents of Maryland
or the District of Columbia.
Financial Information
According to Maryland 529’s audited financial statements for the fiscal year
ended June 30, 2018, Maryland 529 was administering approximately 32,900
MPCT tuition contracts. The market value of the MPCT’s investments (including
cash) totaled approximately $1.2 billion as of June 30, 2018. Maryland 529’s
financial statements also indicated that Maryland 529 deposited contract
application fees and related payments totaling approximately $47.7 million into
MPCT during fiscal year 2018.
As of June 30, 2018, Maryland 529’s financial statements indicated that
approximately 199,200 beneficiaries had investment savings accounts in MCIP
with balances totaling approximately $5.8 billion.
As of June 30, 2018, Maryland 529’s financial statements for the ABLE program
indicated that there were 595 ABLE accounts totaling approximately $2.3 million.
9

--- Page 12 ---
Maryland 529 engages an independent accounting firm to audit its annual
financial statements for MPCT, MCIP, and ABLE (beginning with fiscal year
2018) programs. MPCT and MCIP statements are included in Maryland 529’s
annual reports. In the related audit reports for the fiscal years ended 2015, 2016,
2017 and 2018, the firm stated that the financial statements present fairly, in all
material respects, the financial positions of MPCT, MCIP, and ABLE (for 2018
only), and the changes in their financial positions and cash flows for the years
then ended, in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the
United States of America.
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report
Our audit included a review to determine the status of the two findings contained
in our preceding audit report dated June 23, 2015. As disclosed in Table 1, we
determined that Maryland 529 satisfactorily addressed one of these findings. The
remaining finding is repeated in this report.
Table 1
Status of Preceding Findings
Preceding Implementation
Finding Finding Description Status
The College Savings Plans of Maryland
(CSPM) did not determine the disposition
of uncashed checks nor did it take action to Repeated
Finding 1
transfer funds determined to be abandoned (Current Finding 5)
to the Comptroller of Maryland as
required.
CSPM lacked assurance that certain
security controls were addressed by the
Finding 2 Not repeated
service provider administering the
Maryland College Investment Plan.
10

--- Page 13 ---
Findings and Recommendations
Maryland 529 Conditions and Board Oversight
Maryland 529 is administered by the Maryland 529 Board which, by State law,
includes the Secretary of the Maryland Higher Education Commission, the
Secretary of the Maryland Department of Disabilities, the State Superintendent of
Schools, the State Treasurer, the State Comptroller, the Chancellor of the
University System of Maryland, and five members of the public appointed by the
Governor. We identified certain management-related issues and other unusual
events impacting the operation of Maryland 529 as detailed below.
Documentation and explanations regarding these issues and events were
significantly limited as described in Finding 1.
Management Turnover
In May 2015, the Maryland 529 Board took action to remove the agency’s Chief
Executive Officer (CEO) and Chief Financial Officer (CFO), who had served in
those positions since 1998 and 1997, respectively—essentially since the agency’s
creation. The CEO subsequently resigned, and the CFO was terminated. Since
May 2015, there has been significant turnover in these two positions.
Specifically, from May 2015 through March 2019 four individuals, including a
member of the Maryland 529 Board, have served as Maryland 529’s CEO or
acting CEO; the fourth CEO was appointed in March 2019, and subsequently
terminated September 2019. In September 2019, one of these four individuals
who had previously served in an acting capacity was again appointed as acting
CEO, and has subsequently been officially appointed as CEO.
Similarly, from May 2015 through March 2019, four individuals, including an
employee of the Maryland State Treasurer’s Office (STO), served as CFO or
acting CFO; the fourth and current CFO has served in this position since May
2018. In addition, during these years there were two periods in which the CFO
position was vacant, one for four months and one for eight months. We were
advised that, during the eight-month vacancy period, an individual who had
previously served on the Maryland 529 Board was onsite at Maryland 529 for
approximately two months to essentially serve as the CFO. However, this
individual was never formally appointed to the position in either an acting or
permanent capacity.
Discovery of Unopened and Unprocessed Documents
After the resignation and termination of the CEO and CFO in May 2015,
respectively, STO personnel discovered numerous old business documents in the
11

--- Page 14 ---
former CFO’s office and in the Maryland 529 mailroom, including unopened and
undelivered mail. STO personnel advised us that these old business documents
were subsequently provided to Maryland 529 personnel for investigation and
resolution. Around the same time, Maryland 529 personnel also found 187 boxes
of old business documents, some dating back 10 years or more, stored in the
Maryland 529 records room for which required action had never been taken. We
were advised that Maryland 529 personnel conducted an investigation of all of
these found documents, which lasted approximately three to four months. The
aforementioned participation of STO personnel in the discovery of old business
documents, as well as the provision of certain STO personnel during the period of
management turnover occurred because of the State Treasurer’s position on the
Maryland 529 Board.
STO and Maryland 529 management personnel presented information to the
Maryland 529 Board in May and August of 2015, respectively, as to documents
that STO and Maryland 529 personnel had discovered in the aforementioned
Maryland 529 locations. The following is a partial list describing documents
found either by STO or Maryland 529:
 Documentation of disbursement transactions, totaling approximately $4.3
million, that had never been recorded in or had been improperly recorded in
Maryland 529’s records
 Unopened and undelivered mail dating back at least 10 years
 Undeposited checks totaling $14,000 dating back to October 2007
 Disbursement checks for individual amounts up to $28,000 prepared but never
sent to account holders dating back to August 2008
 Unprocessed refund requests dating back to April 2014
 Unpaid invoices and delinquency notices from collection agencies
 Unresolved correspondence and other transactions, such as change in
beneficiary forms
 Incomplete reconciliations of critical records, such as reconciliations of
Maryland 529 records to the corresponding bank records
 Documentation of overpayments to account holders totaling approximately
$200,000
Discovery of Unknown Bank Account
The review of these discovered documents also uncovered the existence of a bank
account, which we were advised was previously unknown to Maryland 529
personnel and the Board. The account, which reflected a balance of
approximately $15 million as of June 2015, was determined to be used for the
deposit of certain administrative fees received from the private investment
company responsible for managing the Maryland College Investment Plan
12

--- Page 15 ---
(MCIP). Maryland 529 personnel closed the bank account in June 2015 and
transferred the funds to one of Maryland 529’s five active bank accounts.
Subsequent administrative fees received have been deposited into one of these
five accounts.
Former Employee Irregularities
Finally, subsequent to the discovery of these documents, Maryland 529
management personnel identified certain irregularities attributed to a former
Maryland 529 employee’s personal Maryland 529 accounts. In September 2015,
Maryland 529’s legal counsel referred these irregularities to the Office of the
Attorney General’s Criminal Division. A referral to the Criminal Division does
not mean that a criminal act has actually occurred or that criminal charges will be
filed.
Finding 1
There was an overwhelming lack of specific documentation supporting
whether effective oversight was provided by the Maryland 529 Board
regarding Maryland 529’s Maryland Prepaid College Trust (MPCT)
operations during the audit period, particularly in light of the recurring
management turnover, discovered unprocessed business documents, and
irregularities with a former employee’s accounts. In addition, there was a
significant lack of documentation supporting investigative steps taken,
findings, and conclusions reached.
Analysis
There was an overwhelming lack of specific documentation supporting whether
effective oversight was provided by the Maryland 529 Board regarding Maryland
529’s MPCT operations during the audit period, particularly in light of the
recurring management turnover, discovered unprocessed business documents, and
irregularities with a former employee’s accounts. In addition, there was a
significant lack of documentation supporting investigative steps taken, findings,
and conclusions reached.
In May 2015, STO management and Maryland 529 personnel discovered
unprocessed documents which included unopened and unprocessed mail, returned
checks, undeposited account holder checks, unmailed checks to account holders,
unprocessed account holder correspondence, and other business documents, some
dating back at least 10 years. However, STO and Maryland 529 personnel did not
retain listings of or detailed documentation of the documents discovered, and
Maryland 529 personnel did not maintain records of actions taken, if any, to
address the documents. The primary documentation of items found was a
bulleted email from STO management personnel to the Board, from May 2015,
13

--- Page 16 ---
and Executive Board minutes from August 2015, in which Maryland 529
personnel provided an oral report to the Board generally describing the documents
identified. Finally, there was no written report of the findings and conclusions
from any subsequent review or investigation of these documents nor could
Maryland 529 personnel provide any of the discovered documents at the time of
our audit.
For example, during the August 2015 Board meeting, the Board was advised by
Maryland 529 management of the discovery of $4.3 million in account holder
disbursement transactions that had not been recorded or had been incorrectly
recorded in Maryland 529’s account records. While Maryland 529 personnel
could not provide us with a detailed listing of these transactions, during the audit,
we located this listing in a former employee’s work records. STO and Maryland
529 management personnel advised us that these transactions were investigated
and that most had been resolved. However, there was no documentation
supporting this assertion and, accordingly, no assurance that these transactions
had been appropriately researched and properly resolved, such as through account
corrections.
Similarly, Maryland 529 lacked detailed documentation of the undeposited checks
received and unmailed disbursement checks reported to the Board and their
resolution. In addition, Maryland 529 management advised us that the Board had
authorized legal counsel to initiate recovery of overpayments to account holders
that were discovered during the investigation totaling approximately $200,000.
However, there was no documentation supporting how these amounts were
determined and, as of October 2019, we were advised that not all documents had
been found to initiate recovery of the identified $200,000 in overpayments.
The Board also advised us that it became aware of irregularities relating to the
personal Maryland 529 accounts of a former employee and that this situation had
been referred by Maryland 529 to the Office of the Attorney General’s Criminal
Division in September 2015. However, there is a lack of documentation that,
after the referral, the Board directed Maryland 529 to take specific action to
identify and address agency deficiencies that may have contributed to these
conditions, as well as any additional discrepancies.
Maryland 529 and STO management personnel have advised us that the Maryland
529 Board was consistently kept informed and was actively engaged in addressing
the aforementioned management turnover at Maryland 529, the irregularities
concerning the former employee, and the investigation of unprocessed business
documents. However, the overwhelming lack of specific written documentation
supporting these assertions creates a lack of assurance that Board oversight and
14

--- Page 17 ---
action was sufficient to resolve the found items specifically and to address the
situations in a more global manner.
For example, there is no documentation that the Board required any operational
corrective actions be taken to resolve conditions that may have contributed to
these situations, and the Board did not require a forensic audit or other
comprehensive examination to be conducted or take other actions to help identify
and address internal control deficiencies and any other discrepancies or
irregularities. A forensic audit is commonly conducted to review an entity’s
entire finances to determine accuracy and propriety, such as in situations in which
there could be a suspicion of impropriety or fraud.
Accordingly, the impact to Maryland 529 operations and financial transactions
resulting from this situation is unknown, and we were unable to substantiate that
any contributing factors have been addressed. The Maryland 529 Board and
management are responsible for ensuring that effective internal controls are in
place and functioning as intended.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that the Maryland 529 Board
a. take a proactive role in providing sufficient oversight of Maryland 529’s
MPCT operations given the absence of stable agency management;
b. take appropriate action to identify and address internal control
deficiencies;
c. require a forensic audit, to the extent feasible, of Maryland 529 activity
covering a period of time that takes into consideration the unprocessed
business documents, and the irregularities noted in a former employee’s
Maryland 529 accounts;
d. take appropriate action to address the results of the forensic audit,
including consulting with legal counsel regarding the recovery of any
overpayments; and
e. fully document the steps taken to address these recommendations and the
corresponding results.
Maryland Prepaid College Trust Disbursements and Adjustments
Background
Disbursements from MPCT typically consist of benefit payments made to plan
account holders and beneficiaries, or to colleges and universities attended by plan
beneficiaries. Specifically, benefit payments are made either to account holders
and beneficiaries to reimburse them for tuition and qualified expenses already
15

--- Page 18 ---
paid, or to colleges and universities for tuition and qualified expenses that are
currently due. MPCT also processes refund payments to account holders who
have requested termination of their tuition contracts. Account holders may also
request account funds to be transferred from the MPCT to the MCIP or to another
eligible 529 plan; these “rollover” disbursements also result in termination of
MPCT tuition contracts.
In addition, individuals who have purchased MPCT contracts may elect to revise
the terms of their contracts at any time. For example, an account holder may
request to modify the required payment terms from an annual payment plan to a
monthly payment plan, or may request to modify the contract to cover future
payment of tuition and fees for a two-year period rather than for a four-year
period.
Maryland 529 maintains five bank accounts for administering MPCT activities.
Disbursement checks are printed in-house from the disbursement account and are
manually signed.
Finding 2
Maryland 529’s procedures did not require that independent supervisory
reviews of calculations supporting disbursement transactions be
documented, and our testing of a limited number of disbursements disclosed
certain errors in the amounts paid.
Analysis
Maryland 529’s procedures did not require that independent supervisory reviews
of manual calculations to support disbursements processed be documented.
Although we were advised by Maryland 529 that such reviews were performed
for the manual calculations supporting all disbursements, we found no
documentation to substantiate that the reviews were conducted and our test
disclosed calculation errors in several disbursements tested. According to
Maryland 529’s records, during fiscal year 2018, the agency processed
disbursements totaling approximately $65.9 million, consisting of benefit
payments, refunds, and rollover payments.
Specifically, our test of 20 disbursements totaling approximately $1.1 million that
were made throughout the audit period disclosed a lack of documentation that any
of the supporting calculations had undergone an independent supervisory review.
In addition, we noted errors in the calculations supporting 3 of these 20
disbursements, consisting of one refund, one benefit payment, and one rollover
payment. Specifically, for 2 disbursements tested, totaling $32,405, the
16

--- Page 19 ---
disbursements included overpayments totaling $667 and, for one $77,526
disbursement, there was an underpayment of $511.
The reliance on manually prepared calculations, which include a number of
variables, creates a situation in which there is an increased susceptibility to error.
For example, the error in the rollover payment tested was the result of the use of
an incorrect principal amount (account holder payments to date). The benefit
payment error resulted from the use of an incorrect tuition rate and, for the
erroneous refund amount, the principal payment did not reflect the proper penalty
reduction.
Accordingly, it is critical that these manual calculations be independently
reviewed and that such reviews be documented. In addition, the authorized check
signers should ensure that the independent supervisory reviews were conducted
and documented prior to signing the related checks.
Recommendation 2
We recommend that Maryland 529 ensure that independent supervisory
reviews of disbursements processed are performed and adequately
documented, and that evidence of these independent reviews are reviewed by
the authorized signers of disbursement checks.
Finding 3
Adjustments to Maryland 529 MPCT accounts were unilaterally processed
and were not subject to independent supervisory review and approval. Such
transactions exceeded $32.1 million for fiscal year 2018.
Analysis
Adjustments to Maryland 529 MPCT accounts and account terms were
unilaterally processed and were not subject to independent supervisory review and
approval. These include monetary adjustments to accounts, such as to correct an
error in an account disbursement, as well as adjustments to contract terms
requested by account holders, such as the number of semesters for which tuition
will be prepaid under the contract. These changes in contract terms typically
require a manual calculation and result in adjustments to critical account
information, such as the amount of future account holder payments. However,
output reports of adjustments processed were not generated and provided to
independent supervisory personnel to review for propriety. According to
Maryland 529’s records, monetary adjustments for fiscal year 2018 totaled
approximately $32.1 million. A report of the changes in account holder contract
terms was not readily available.
17

--- Page 20 ---
 Our test of 13 monetary adjustments posted to accounts during the audit
period, totaling approximately $318,000, confirmed that supervisory approval
had not been obtained for any of the 13 adjustments. In addition, for 2 of the
13 adjustments, totaling approximately $24,000, documentation could not be
provided by Maryland 529 to support the validity of the transactions. When
we examined these 2 transactions in detail, we noted that, for one item totaling
$9,600, an employee had erroneously reversed a benefit payment transaction
and re-issued a check in September 2017 even though the beneficiary had
already cashed the initial check in June 2017. Maryland 529 eventually issued
a stop payment order in April 2018 for the re-issued check, which had not
been cashed. The other transaction reviewed related to the re-issuance of a
rollover payment check. The initial check was previously cancelled because
of a printing error. We confirmed that the funds for the re-issued check were
properly transferred to MCIP.
 Our test of 15 adjustments to contract terms during the audit period confirmed
that supervisory approval had not been obtained for any of the adjustments.
These 15 adjustments related to changes in payment plan options, tuition
plans, and payout years. For 4 of the 15 adjustments tested, the calculations
of the revised contract amounts were incorrect, resulting in Maryland 529
collectively undercharging the account holders by approximately $18,000.
For example, one adjustment tested changed a four-year plan to a two-year
plan, requiring a change in the corresponding contract amount. However, we
noted that the adjustment to the contract amount resulted in undercharging the
account holder by approximately $5,200. Supervisory reviews of adjustments
to contract terms are critical to ensure the underlying manual calculations
were accurately performed and recorded.
Recommendation 3
We recommend that Maryland 529
a. establish procedures to require that independent supervisory personnel
verify the propriety of MPCT account adjustments and underlying
calculations using available output reports and supporting
documentation, and
b. investigate and resolve the aforementioned adjustments resulting in
undercharges.
18

--- Page 21 ---
Bank Account Reconciliations
Finding 4
Maryland 529 did not prepare adequate bank reconciliations for three bank
accounts used to administer MPCT activities, and certain reconciliations we
reviewed lacked documentation of supervisory review.
Analysis
Maryland 529 did not prepare adequate bank reconciliations for three bank
accounts used to administer MPCT activities, and many reconciliations we
reviewed lacked documentation of supervisory review as required. A properly
prepared and reviewed bank reconciliation helps to ensure that transactions are
accurately recorded and accounted for, and that only valid transactions have been
recorded in the accounting records. Maryland 529 uses five bank accounts for
administering MPCT: a disbursement account, a depository account, an
administrative fees account, an investment account, and an operating expenses
account. We reviewed the reconciliations prepared for the disbursement,
depository, and administrative fees accounts for 11 months during the period from
May 2015 through June 2018.
Disbursement Account
Our review disclosed that, since at least October 2017, the amounts represented
on the reconciliations for the disbursement account as bank outstanding checks
were in fact, developed primarily from Maryland 529 records. As a result a true
reconciliation was not being performed. The account is used solely to issue
disbursements, such as for benefit payments, refunds, and rollovers, with funds
periodically transferred, as necessary, from the depository account. As such, the
disbursement account is a zero balance account. During the period between July
2016 and June 2018, checks issued from the disbursement account totaled $130.2
million.
For example, the June 2018 reconciliation reflected outstanding checks, according
to the bank, totaling $1,068,967. Based on our review, however, this amount
appears to have been developed primarily from Maryland 529 records, not from
the bank’s records. In this regard, additional detailed bank records available for
reconciliation purposes that agency personnel were not aware of reflected
outstanding checks totaling $9,426,433 as of June 30, 2018.
In addition, according to the bank reconciliation, checks issued for the month
according to the bank totaled $2,547,283; however, the related bank records
reflected that checks issued for that month totaled $2,844,346. Since Maryland
529 sends a listing of issued checks to the bank each day (positive pay), there
19

--- Page 22 ---
should be no difference in checks issued between Maryland 529’s records and the
bank’s records. Maryland 529 was unaware of and could not explain these
differences when we brought them to its attention.
Without an investigation and understanding of these discrepancies, the
reconciliation does not serve its intended purpose of ensuring that all activity has
been properly recorded and accounted for.
Depository Account
Our review disclosed that, since at least October 2017, Maryland 529’s
reconciliations of the depository account only considered credit (deposit) activity,
and did not include comparisons of disbursement activity or of the account
balances. Furthermore, our review of the February 2018 reconciliation of deposit
activity disclosed a $2 million reconciling item that Maryland 529 had recorded as
wire transfers without adequate investigation. Furthermore, there was no
documentation of the purpose and authorization for the transfers. The depository
account is used to receive collections for subsequent transfer to other Maryland
529 accounts, primarily the disbursement account, as needed. During fiscal year
2018, deposits into the account totaled $94.4 million.
Administrative Fees Account
Reconciliations for the administrative fees account were not performed during
fiscal year 2018. Maryland 529 management was not aware that the
reconciliations had not been performed until we brought this to its attention in
July 2018. This account is used to collect fees paid by the private investment
company contracted to administer the MCIP. The funds in this account are
available for transfer to other Maryland 529 bank accounts as necessary. Fiscal
year 2018 deposits into the administrative fees account totaled $2.8 million.
Supervisory Review of Reconciliations
Of the 22 reconciliations available for our review (11 disbursement account and
11 depository account), 10 lacked documentation of supervisory review. The
Comptroller of Maryland’s Internal Control Manual for Use by State
Departments and Independent Agencies requires bank reconciliations to be
performed by employees independent of the related disbursement process and to
be reviewed by supervisory personnel.
20

--- Page 23 ---
Recommendation 4
We recommend that Maryland 529 prepare adequate reconciliations for its
bank accounts. Specifically, we recommend that Maryland 529
a. ensure that all applicable account activity and the related account
balances are properly included in the reconciliations, and that all such
activity is adequately supported by appropriate documentation;
b. ensure that all reconciling amounts, including the discrepancies noted
above, have been fully investigated and resolved; and
c. ensure that all reconciliations are reviewed and approved by independent
supervisory personnel, and that these reviews are adequately
documented.
Abandoned Funds
Finding 5
Maryland 529 did not determine the disposition of uncashed checks from
2014, nor did it take action to determine the applicability of the Maryland
Abandoned Property Act to its trust accounts.
Analysis
Maryland 529 did not determine the proper disposition of uncashed checks from
2014 and whether any of the funds should be considered abandoned and, as
required by State law, transferred to the Comptroller of Maryland. These
uncashed checks were MPCT disbursements to account holders and beneficiaries,
and to the colleges and universities the plan beneficiaries attended. The Maryland
Uniform Disposition of Abandoned Property Act (Maryland Abandoned Property
Act) requires funds that are abandoned to be transferred to the Comptroller of
Maryland for safekeeping until claimed by the owner. Outstanding checks are
presumed to be abandoned if they have not been claimed by the owner within
three years. According to Maryland 529’s records, disbursements from the
MPCT disbursement account during fiscal year 2018 totaled approximately $65.9
million.
In our preceding audit report, we noted that, as of August 2014, there were 448
uncashed checks totaling approximately $1.7 million that were more than three
years old, and that Maryland 529 had not determined which of these checks
should be classified as abandoned and transferred to the Comptroller. Our report
also noted that Maryland 529 had expressed concerns about certain legal and tax
implications associated with transferring such funds from MPCT to the
Comptroller given the unique nature of 529 accounts for which account holder
funds are held in trust for a designated beneficiary. Accordingly, we
21

--- Page 24 ---
recommended that Maryland 529 transfer funds determined to be abandoned to
the Comptroller unless formal legal advice was obtained which authorized
Maryland 529 to retain the funds.
Maryland 529’s response to the prior finding stated that it had made significant
progress and that it had reduced the number of outstanding checks from 448 to
235 (reducing the value of outstanding checks from $1.7 million to $313,089). In
spite of that response, during the current audit, Maryland 529 personnel could not
provide documentation of the disposition of the $1.7 million in outstanding
checks prior to closing the associated bank account in November 2014.
Accordingly, determining the proper disposition of these funds has been greatly
complicated and may no longer be possible. Furthermore, Maryland 529 has not
obtained a formal legal opinion regarding the applicability of the Maryland
Abandoned Property Act to Maryland 529 trust account activity.
During fiscal year 2018, Maryland 529 implemented a practice to cancel all
outstanding checks after 90 days and credit the funds back to the associated
accounts. According to informal advice obtained from Maryland 529’s legal
counsel, therefore, Maryland 529 does not have any uncashed checks that meet
the criteria for presumption of abandonment under the Maryland Abandoned
Property Act. Maryland 529’s records indicated that, as of June 30, 2018,
uncashed checks totaled approximately $1.1 million, all of which were less than
three years old and, therefore, bear no relation to the aforementioned $1.7 million.
Furthermore, as described in Finding 4, total uncashed checks according to
Maryland 529’s records did not agree to the bank records.
Recommendation 5
We recommend that Maryland 529 obtain a formal legal opinion regarding
the applicability of the Maryland Abandoned Property Act to its accounts,
and establish processes to implement the Act consistent with that opinion
(repeat).
22

--- Page 25 ---
Rollover and Refund Payment Methodology
Finding 6 (Policy Issue)
Maryland 529’s methodology for calculating disbursement amounts for
MPCT account holder refunds and rollovers (transfers), in our opinion often
resulted in excessive payments.
Analysis
Maryland 529’s methodology for calculating the amounts of disbursements for
MPCT account holder refunds and rollovers to other 529 accounts, in our opinion,
often resulted in excessive payments. Although the methodology used was
consistent with current MPCT tuition contract language, we questioned the
reasonableness of this methodology and the resulting payments.1 At any time, a
MPCT account holder may request a transfer of MPCT account funds to a MCIP
account, to another 529 account (such as in another state), or to an ABLE account,
or may request a refund of the account. According to Maryland 529’s records,
during our audit period, rollovers and refunds totaled approximately $35.3 million
and $19.3 million, respectively.
MPCT account holders make agreed-upon payments, in accordance with the
tuition contract, for which the account holders’ beneficiaries receive future
payment of tuition and fees. While Maryland 529 collectively invests funds
received from account holders for contract payments, the individual accounts are
not credited with interest earnings. When a rollover or refund is requested,
Maryland 529’s determination of the amount to be transferred or refunded to the
account holder will include interest earnings as specified in the tuition contract.
Interest Calculation Methodology
The MPCT tuition contract language specifying the methodology for calculating
account holder refunds or rollover disbursements includes a provision for interest
earnings that appears excessive. In this regard, we identified two factors in the
methodology used that we believe contribute to these excessive interest payments:
 Factor 1: Maryland 529 did not calculate interest earnings based on the
account holder’s balance at the end of each year for which the account was
open; rather, Maryland 529 calculated interest earnings for each year
1 Under the Trust, generally the disbursement amount is determined as the total account holder
contract payments to date, less administrative expenses, plus a calculated interest earnings
amount. The interest earnings are based on the “Trust Return,” which is the rate of return since
Trust inception, as of the most recent quarter prior to the disbursement payment. The tuition
contract also provides for reducing the interest earnings amount by a specified penalty
percentage, in certain circumstances, based on the age of the account and whether payment is
for a refund or rollover.
23

--- Page 26 ---
based on the account holder’s final balance at the time of the refund or
rollover.
 Factor 2: Maryland 529 did not use the actual interest rate earned on
MPCT investments to calculate the account holder’s interest earnings for
each year; rather, Maryland 529 used the most recent rate of return on
MPCT investments since the Trust’s inception (hereinafter referred to as
the “since inception” rate) to calculate interest earnings for all years.
It is the application of these two factors that results in what we deem to be
excessively high interest earnings on account holder funds being disbursed for
refunds and rollovers. One possible alternative method, which we believe would
result in a more reasonable return, would be to calculate interest for each year of
an account’s existence based on the amount of funds in the account during that
year and that year’s rate of return.
To demonstrate the extent of excessively high interest earnings, we recalculated
the interest earnings for 5 rollovers and 12 refund disbursements made by
Maryland 529 during our audit period, totaling $1,027,278, which included
$325,372 in interest payments. For purposes of this demonstration and simplicity
of illustration, although we believe it is desirable, we did not vary the interest rate
of return in our recalculation, only the fund balances. Our comparison showed
that, for all 5 rollovers and for 9 refunds, Maryland 529’s methodology of
calculating interest using the account holder’s final balance at the time of the
refund or rollover, collectively resulted in $109,591 more being transferred or
paid than would have been if interest had been calculated based on the estimated
account balances at the end of each year in accordance with the tuition contract.
For the remaining 3 refunds, we noted either no difference or the difference was
not significant.
Maryland 529 Interest Calculation Illustration
We selected one of the aforementioned five rollovers for illustrative purposes and
presented two alternative methodologies, which we considered more reasonable,
for comparative purposes (See Table 2). This account was opened in 2005 and
was rolled over to MCIP in May 2018. After taking into consideration
administrative expenses as provided for in the tuition contract, in its initial year,
$3,454 was deposited into the account and periodic payments were made for 13
years until the account balance reached $44,902 at the time of the rollover. Under
the Maryland 529 methodology for calculating interest, the account was
considered to have a balance of $44,902 during each of its 13 years of existence,
without regard to the actual account balance at the end of each year. Interest
computed and paid by Maryland 529 for this account totaled $32,110 (Current
24

--- Page 27 ---
Method). We determined, however, that if interest had been calculated using the
estimated account balance at the end of each year, the interest calculation would
have totaled $17,290 (Scenario A).
Consistent with its methodology, Maryland 529 used a “since inception” rate of
5.5 percent for calculating each year’s interest, which was the current rate at the
time of the rollover. We determined that, if interest had been calculated using
each year’s MPCT annual rate of return on the estimated year-end balances in
accordance with the tuition contract, the interest calculation would have totaled
$22,649 (Scenario B).
In total, the amount of the rollover paid by Maryland 529 for this account was
$77,012 ($44,902 account balance and $32,110 interest).
25

--- Page 28 ---
Table 2
Schedule of Interest Earnings For 2018 Rollover Example
Comparing Different Interest Calculation Methodologies
Three Interest Earning Calculations
Current Method: Scenario A: Scenario B:
Cumulative
Fiscal Maryland 529 Office of Office of
Year Account
Year Actual Legislative Audits Legislative Audits
Balance
Calculation1 Calculation using Calculation using
“Since Inception” Actual Annual
Rate2 Rate of Return3
1 2006 $ 3,454 $ 2,470 $ 190 $ 276
2 2007 6,908 2,470 380 1,071
3 2008 10,362 2,470 570 (601)
4 2009 13,816 2,470 760 (2,818)
5 2010 17,270 2,470 950 2,418
6 2011 20,724 2,470 1,140 4,352
7 2012 24,178 2,470 1,330 387
8 2013 27,632 2,470 1,520 2,957
9 2014 31,086 2,470 1,710 5,751
10 2015 34,540 2,470 1,900 836
11 2016 37,994 2,470 2,090 (266)
12 2017 41,448 2,470 2,280 5,098
13 2018 44,902 2,470 2,470 3,188
Total $ 32,110 $ 17,290 $ 22,649
Source: Maryland 529 records and audited financial statements
Tickmark Key:
1 Under Maryland 529’s current methodology, interest earnings for each year were calculated by Maryland
529 based on the final account balance at the time of rollover ($44,902) using a “since inception” rate of
5.5 percent.
2 Under Scenario A, interest was calculated annually based on the estimated account balance for each fiscal
year-end using simple interest at a “since inception” rate of 5.5 percent.
3 Under Scenario B, interest was calculated annually based on the estimated account balance for each fiscal
year-end using simple interest at the MPCT annual rate of return for that year as stated in the annual
financial statements.
26

--- Page 29 ---
Rollover and Refund Methodology Used in Other States
We determined that there are currently nine other states that offer prepaid college
contracts. We contacted five of those states to compare their rollover and refund
methodologies to Maryland 529’s methodology. We were informed by officials
in four states that they generally limited rollover and refund payments to the
current value of the college benefits available to the account beneficiary at the
time of the account holder’s request for rollover or refund. We applied this
methodology to the MPCT account rollover to MCIP made in May 2018 that was
illustrated in Table 2. Using the maximum value of Maryland State university
and college benefits at the time of the rollover, we determined that the rollover
payment would have been $44,357 rather than the $77,012 ($44,902 account
balance and $32,110 interest) payment made as determined by Maryland 529’s
current methodology.
The fifth state contacted advised that it used a pre-defined market index, which,
for the period from April to June of 2018, was 2.16 percent. We did not attempt
to calculate interest for this account using a market index.
Recommendation 6
Since the purpose of MPCT is to contract for a guaranteed payment of State
university or college costs for a specified beneficiary, and not as an
investment vehicle, we recommend that the Maryland 529 Board
a. conduct a documented evaluation of the methodology it uses for
calculating refund and rollover payments, including consideration of
methodologies used by other states, to ensure that rollover and refund
payments are not excessive; and
b. ensure that future tuition contracts clearly reflect any changes Maryland
529 considers necessary as a result of this evaluation.
System Access and Security
Background
Maryland 529 contracted with third-party service providers to operate and
maintain the automated systems used to administer MCIP, and to host the system
for MPCT. The private investment company responsible for administering MCIP
served as its service provider; a separate hosting provider was used for MPCT.
These systems help carry out various critical functions relating to both programs,
such as processing and maintaining enrollment and contract data, processing and
investing payments from account holders, and disbursing funds, including
printing checks for MPCT. In addition, Maryland 529 also contracted with a
company to help provide certain system support services for MPCT.
27

--- Page 30 ---
Finding 7
Maryland 529 did not adequately monitor access granted to the automated
system used to administer MPCT. We identified improper access for 26
system users, including 11 former employees whose access had not been
disabled.
Analysis
Maryland 529 did not adequately monitor access granted to users of the
automated system which administers MPCT. Periodic reviews were not
performed to ensure that system access was granted only as appropriate, and our
review disclosed that several Maryland 529 employees had access which was
either unnecessary for them to perform their job duties or it created a weakness in
internal controls because the access allowed the employee to perform
incompatible functions. As of August 2018, there were 206 active system users,
according to Maryland 529’s records, including personnel from the
aforementioned company providing system support. According to Maryland 529
records during fiscal year 2018, cash receipts and disbursements totaling $47.7
million and $65.9 million respectively, were processed on the system.
Specifically, our review of 46 users with access to critical functions, such as the
capability to post tuition contract payments, disclosed 26 users with improper
access. Specifically, 10 employees had critical system access that was not
required for them to perform their duties. In addition, access for 11 former
employees had not been disabled even though the employees terminated
employment one month to three years earlier. Finally, 5 employees had system
access that, although required for their job duties, gave these employees the
capability to perform incompatible functions. For example, an employee who
processed cash receipts was granted the capability to unilaterally record account
holder collections in the respective MPCT accounts.
Furthermore, Maryland 529 could not readily explain why there were 206 active
system users as of August 2018 even though it had only 21 employees at that
time, and we were advised that only approximately 20 employees of the company
used for system support required this access. Based on the results of our review
of the aforementioned 46 system users that identified 11 former employees with
critical access, many of these 206 system users may be former employees.
Although not all of the access associated with these 206 users permitted access to
critical system functions, it is incumbent upon Maryland 529 to ensure that
system access is granted only as required.
28

--- Page 31 ---
The State of Maryland Information Technology Security Manual requires
agencies to monitor the controls over their information systems, including
periodic reviews of access for propriety.
Recommendation 7
We recommend that Maryland 529
a. perform an immediate documented review for propriety of user access to
its MPCT automated system, and perform periodic reviews thereafter, as
called for by the aforementioned Information Technology Security
Manual;
b. take any necessary corrective action as a result of these reviews, including
removing unnecessary user access and restricting access capabilities for
critical functions to those individuals who require such capabilities to
perform their assigned job duties and in a manner that ensures proper
segregation of duties; and
c. immediately remove access from former employees upon termination,
including the 11 noted in our finding.
Finding 8
Maryland 529 lacked assurance that the automated system used for
administration of MPCT was sufficiently protected against operational and
security risks.
Analysis
Maryland 529 lacked assurance that the automated system used to administer
MPCT was properly secured against operational and security risks. The system is
used to process and maintain all critical account information, including personally
identifiable information (PII), such as names, social security numbers, and dates
of birth for account holders and beneficiaries. According to the fiscal year 2018
annual report, there were approximately 32,900 MPCT accounts.
The third party providing hosting services for the MPCT system is responsible for
physical security controls, environmental controls, internet connectivity, and
disaster recovery services. Maryland 529’s contract with the service provider for
MPCT did not require an independent security assurance review be obtained.
Accordingly, Maryland 529 had not obtained a System and Organization Controls
(SOC) 2 Type 2 review or any other similar independent security assurances
review. This type of review is appropriate to ensure that
 network segments are separated by firewalls
29

--- Page 32 ---
 documented policies and procedures exist and have been implemented for
business continuity and/or disaster recovery
 data is backed up, stored offsite in an appropriate facility, and that such
backup and storage procedures are tested regularly
As a result of these conditions, significant operational and security risks could
exist and remain undetected, resulting in increased vulnerability of systems and
data to compromise or loss. The American Institute of Certified Public
Accountants has issued guidance concerning examinations of service
organizations. This guidance provides that customers may obtain from service
organizations (such as the aforementioned service provider) an independent
review of controls for which the resultant independent auditor’s report is referred
to as a SOC report. There are several types of SOC reports, with varying scope
and levels of review and auditor testing. One type of report, referred to as a SOC
2 Type 2 report, includes the results of the auditor’s review of controls placed in
operation and tests of operating effectiveness for the period under review and
could include an evaluation of system security, availability, confidentiality, and
privacy.
Considering the nature and sensitivity of information processed and maintained
by this system, we believe a SOC 2 Type 2 report, or equivalent security
assurance review, is required for this service provider.
Recommendation 8
We recommend that Maryland 529
a. seek to amend the existing agreement and ensure that future agreements
with this service provider include provisions requiring the provider to
regularly obtain SOC 2 Type 2 reviews or equivalent security assurance
reviews pertaining to its system operations, and
b. obtain and review copies of the resulting reports from the service
provider to ensure that the related independent reviews adequately
address critical security concerns over the provider’s system and that the
service provider implements all critical report recommendations.
30

--- Page 33 ---
Cash Receipts
Finding 9
Controls were not established to ensure that all mail collections for MPCT
were properly accounted for and deposited.
Analysis
Maryland 529 lacked sufficient controls over cash receipts received through the
mail for MPCT, resulting in a lack of assurance that all such collections were
properly accounted for and deposited. According to Maryland 529’s records,
during fiscal year 2018 its collections for MPCT totaled approximately $47.7
million, of which $13.0 million was received through the mail. The remainder
was received by other means, such as through a lockbox account or by wire
transfer.
 Employees who initially received checks through the mail did not restrictively
endorse them immediately upon receipt. Instead, the checks were restrictively
endorsed when the deposit was prepared later in the day or on the next
business day, after the checks had been handled by a second employee.
 Maryland 529 did not verify that all collections were deposited. Although
collections were recorded in a check log when initially received, the log was
not subsequently used to verify that all recorded collections were deposited.
Furthermore, the log was stored on a shared computer drive, which was
accessible to, and could be adjusted by all Maryland 529 employees.
As a result of these conditions, errors or other discrepancies could occur without
detection. The Comptroller of Maryland’s Accounting Procedures Manual
requires the establishment of sufficient internal controls over collections,
including immediate endorsing of checks and independent verification of
collections to deposit.
Recommendation 9
We recommend that Maryland 529
a. ensure that all checks are restrictively endorsed immediately upon
receipt; and
b. ensure that the initial record of all collections received and recorded in
the shared computer drive is secured, and provided directly to an
employee independent of the cash receipts function for agreement to
deposit documentation from the bank.
31

--- Page 34 ---
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of Maryland 529 for the period
beginning November 18, 2014 and ending June 30, 2018. The audit was
conducted in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards.
Those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient,
appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and
conclusions based on our audit objectives. We believe that the evidence obtained
provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit
objectives.
As prescribed by the State Government Article, Section 2-1221 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, the objectives of this audit were to examine Maryland 529’s
financial transactions, records, and internal control, and to evaluate its compliance
with applicable State laws, rules, and regulations.
In planning and conducting our audit, we focused on the major financial-related
areas of operations based on assessments of significance and risk. The areas
addressed by the audit included Maryland Prepaid College Trust (MPCT) cash
receipts, MPCT plan administration, information systems security and control,
accounts receivable, and disbursements. We also determined the status of the
findings included in our preceding audit report.
Maryland 529 engages an independent accounting firm to audit its annual
financial statements for MPCT, Maryland College Investment Plan (MCIP), and
the Maryland Achieving a Better Life Experience (ABLE) [beginning with fiscal
year 2018] programs. In the related audit reports for the fiscal years ended 2015,
2016, 2017, and 2018 the firm stated that the financial statements present fairly, in
all material respects, the financial positions of MPCT, MCIP, and ABLE (for
2018 only), the changes in their financial positions and cash flows for the years
then ended, in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the
United States of America. We have relied on the work of the independent
accounting firm to provide audit coverage of the investments of the MPCT. Our
audit procedures for investments were generally limited, therefore, to obtaining a
sufficient basis for that reliance.
To accomplish our audit objectives, our audit procedures included inquiries of
appropriate personnel, inspections of documents and records, observations of
Maryland 529’s operations, and tests of transactions. Generally, transactions
were selected for testing based on auditor judgment, which primarily considers
risk. Unless otherwise specifically indicated, neither statistical nor non-statistical
audit sampling was used to select the transactions tested. Therefore, the results of
32

--- Page 35 ---
the tests cannot be used to project those results to the entire population from
which the test items were selected.
We also performed various data extracts of pertinent information from the State’s
Financial Management Information System (such as revenue and expenditure
data). These extracts are performed as part of ongoing internal processes
established by the Office of Legislative Audits and were subject to various tests to
determine data reliability. We determined that the data extracted from this source
were sufficiently reliable for the purposes the data were used during this audit.
We also extracted data from Maryland 529’s financial system for the purpose of
testing certain areas, such as disbursements and accounts receivable transactions.
We performed various tests of the relevant data and determined that the data were
sufficiently reliable for the purposes the data were used during the audit. Finally,
we performed other auditing procedures that we considered necessary to achieve
our audits objectives. The reliability of data used in this report for background or
informational purposes was not assessed.
Maryland 529’s management is responsible for establishing and maintaining
effective internal control. Internal control is a process designed to provide
reasonable assurance that objectives pertaining to the reliability of financial
records; effectiveness and efficiency of operations, including safeguarding of
assets; and compliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations are achieved.
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate.
Our reports are designed to assist the Maryland General Assembly in exercising
its legislative oversight function and to provide constructive recommendations for
improving State operations. As a result, our reports generally do not address
activities we reviewed that are functioning properly.
This report includes findings relating to conditions that we consider to be
significant deficiencies in the design or operation of internal control that could
adversely affect Maryland 529’s ability to maintain reliable financial records,
operate effectively and efficiently, and/or comply with applicable laws, rules, and
regulations. Our report also includes findings regarding significant instances of
noncompliance with applicable laws, rules, or regulations. A less significant
finding was communicated to Maryland 529 that did not warrant inclusion in this
report.
33

--- Page 36 ---
Maryland 529’s response to our findings and recommendations is included as an
appendix to this report. As prescribed in the State Government Article, Section 2-
1224 of the Annotated Code of Maryland, we will advise Maryland 529 regarding
the results of our review of its response.
34

--- Page 38 ---
Maryland 529
Agency Response Form
Maryland 529 Conditions and Board Oversight
Finding 1
There was an overwhelming lack of specific documentation supporting whether effective
oversight was provided by the Maryland 529 Board regarding Maryland 529’s Maryland
Prepaid College Trust (MPCT) operations during the audit period, particularly in light of
the recurring management turnover, discovered unprocessed business documents, and
irregularities with a former employee’s accounts. In addition, there was a significant lack
of documentation supporting investigative steps taken, findings, and conclusions reached.
We recommend that the Maryland 529 Board
a. take a proactive role in providing sufficient oversight of Maryland 529’s MPCT
operations given the absence of stable agency management;
b. take appropriate action to identify and address internal control deficiencies;
c. require a forensic audit, to the extent feasible, of Maryland 529 activity covering a
period of time that takes into consideration the unprocessed business documents, and
the irregularities noted in a former employee’s Maryland 529 accounts;
d. take appropriate action to address the results of the forensic audit, including consulting
with legal counsel regarding the recovery of any overpayments; and
e. fully document the steps taken to address these recommendations and the
corresponding results.
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 1a Agree Estimated Completion Date: Continuous
Please provide details of MD 529 agrees with the auditors’ recommendations and is in compliance with
corrective action or almost all of them already; the remaining are in the process of completion. In
explain disagreement. the absence of accessible specific documentation from 2015, an audit of MPCT
is appropriate and the Board has initiated procurement of one.
However, the Board disagrees that it was not proactive in providing oversight
of Maryland 529 MPCT. In fact, it has taken significant action both to address
the specific issues of 2015 and to strengthen management and Board oversight
in general. The Board also both ensured that there was no time in which MD
529 was without a fully-empowered Executive Director to oversee its
operations and provided access to resources to strengthen the staff and fill in
temporary gaps in positions. The steps taken testify to serious Board
Page 1 of 18

--- Page 39 ---
Maryland 529
Agency Response Form
dedication to MD 529 programs, participants and staff. The MPCT Trust is
well invested and fully funded, our students can count on going to college with
reduced or no debt, and families have a safe investment for their future.
To respond to and clarify the 2015 transition and the actions taken it is useful to
review the events:
Before implementing the difficult decision to change long-standing
management in May 2015, the Board prospectively put together a strong
transition leadership team led by the Comptroller’s appointee to the Board and
including the CFO and CIO of the State Treasurer’s Office, and the long-
serving MD 529 Accounting Manager.
As soon as the team took office, three separate sets of material were
unexpectedly discovered:
1) Working papers and materials relating to account issues were
discovered in the CFO’s office, including a document, referred to by
the OLA that indicated work-in-progress on reconciliation of a $4.3
million book-to-bank disparity within the $900 million MCPT Trust
and, also, materials related to a number of MPCT accounts issues that
had accumulated unresolved pending proper reconciliation.
2) In the agency’s records room, management then found the 187 State
Archive boxes which OLA also notes; MD 529 staff had prepared these
for transmittal to or retrieved them from State Archives. These boxes
contained account files going back over several years; they had
presumably been retrieved from Archives in order to reconcile the
account issues. Because the MD 529 files are in boxes labeled by the
date of transmittal, the agency must retrieve an entire box sent on a
specific date in order to review one account file in that box. This does
not mean that the entire set of files in a box require processing of any
sort or that the material had not already been processed.
Separately and unrelated to the first two discoveries, a search of the agency
mailroom revealed a number of USPO mail bins containing, as OLA notes,
unopened or undeliverable returned mail, nearly all of which was marketing
materials, old Annual Reports, etc., The few envelopes containing documents
relating to individual accounts were retained for action and the rest discarded.
Upon these discoveries, the Board immediately authorized the acting Executive
Director and staff to work overtime to examine the files in the archive boxes,
compare them to files in the automated records system and the $4.3
reconciliation document in the CFO’s office, in order to resolve differences as
completely and expeditiously as possible. The Board also authorized the acting
Executive Director to recruit additional contractual staff as needed; two
accountants were brought in to assist 529 staff. This total project became
known as the “archive box project”.
Page 2 of 18

--- Page 40 ---
Maryland 529
Agency Response Form
Over the ensuing four months, this augmented staff, directed by the agency’s
Accounting Manager, examined the archived files and compared documents in
the archive boxes to entries in the agency’s automated account records. The
acting Executive Director and staff reported that the vast majority of records
matched those in the system, but that there were a number of disparities
reflecting, as OLA notes, transactions that were entered with an error into the
automated system or that had been incompletely entered. These disparities were
further investigated. At the end of the project, the acting Executive Director
reported to both the Board and the agency’s external auditor about the process
and that all of the records in question had been investigated and differences
resolved. There remained a small group of accounts with disparities.
Approximately 40 accounts, amounting to about $200,000 in overpayments met
the Board’s policy thresholds for potential recovery.
During the course of this project the Board received verbal progress reports
from the acting Executive Director and discussed with the Assistant Attorney
General the appropriate disposition of the remaining disparities. The Board and
acting Executive Director, with advice of the Assistant Attorney General, also
undertook a review of relevant Board policies, such as calculation of refunds,
roll-overs, etc. Based on this, the Board directed the Assistant Attorney General
to initiate recovery of the remaining $200,000, provided appropriate supporting
documentation could be found via further archive searches, to assure that the
recovery would be fully defensible. As OLA notes, to date the required
documents have not been found, but they will be included in the proposed audit
of accounts the Board agreed to commission.
Thus the Board proactively oversaw, empowered and augmented the staff; it
received and discussed progress reports, updated policies regarding payments
and payment recovery, determined a recovery process and continued to perform
its other responsibilities. It anticipated the findings of the project being
completed by September 2015 in order to present them to the agency’s
independent external auditing firm for its annual audit review and test of
control. That presentation was made by the acting Executive Director and
reviewed by the auditors, and a clean audit was delivered to the Board and
included in the 2015 Annual Report. The auditors noted no significant control
issues and found that the disparities and differences were not of material
significance to the Plan’s Trust. Prior and subsequent independent external
audits over the years also found no significant issues and the Board placed its
confidence in them.
The Board, in retrospect, agrees that it should have secured the project
paperwork, and required and retained formal detailed written reports and
updates in 2015 to document the work undertaken. Unfortunately, since 2015
Maryland 529, as the OLA notes, experienced further staff transitions and
office and file reorganizations that have further complicated location of
remaining notes and paperwork from the project. Despite the fact that the
Board did receive and discuss progress reports from the acting Executive
Page 3 of 18

--- Page 41 ---
Maryland 529
Agency Response Form
Director, had confidence that the augmented staff competently pursued the
project, and were reassured by the external auditor’s review and clean audit, the
lack of obtainable documentation accessible at this point is clearly a serious
omission. This is one of the reasons the Board agrees and supports the audit of
accounts as OLA recommends and is presently in the process of procuring this
audit.
Auditor’s Comment:
Maryland 529 agrees with the recommendations, but disagrees that the Maryland
529 Board was not proactive in providing oversight of Maryland 529 MPCT. The
response states that the Trust is well invested and fully funded, and that, before
implementing the May 2015 change in management, the Board put together a strong
transition leadership team.
The audit report does not dispute the financial position of MPCT and, in fact, notes
that MPCT had a $432.5 million surplus as of June 30, 2018. However, while a
transition leadership team may have been established, as stated in the report, during
the period between May 2015 and March 2019, four different individuals served as
CEO or acting CEO, and four different individuals served as CFO or acting CFO.
In addition, there were two periods, one for four months and one for eight months,
without an appointed CFO or acting CFO.
Regarding the discovery of unopened and unprocessed business documents noted
in the audit report, the response states that the 187 boxes found in the records room
were presumably retrieved from State Archives in an effort to reconcile the account
issues from other found documents and were not necessarily unprocessed.
Maryland 529 did not provide documentation that this occurred and, as explained
in the audit report, Maryland 529 personnel represented to the Board in August
2015 that its records had not been updated for the documents in these boxes.
The response further states that, upon the discovery of these unopened and
unprocessed business documents, the Board authorized staff overtime and the
recruitment of contractual staff to examine and investigate these documents. The
response indicates that the Board received verbal progress reports from the acting
Executive Director, and that it directed certain related actions to be taken. The
response references certain specific results of the investigation and states that, upon
completion of the investigation process, the acting Executive Director reported to
the Board that all records in question had been investigated and differences
resolved.
Page 4 of 18

--- Page 42 ---
Maryland 529
Agency Response Form
As stated in our report, there was an overwhelming lack of specific documentation
supporting whether effective oversight was provided by the Board during the audit
period, particularly in light of the recurring management turnover and discovered
unprocessed business documents, and there was little to no documentation of the
investigative steps taken, findings, and conclusions reached regarding the
discovered documents. Consequently, it was and still is not possible to confirm the
assertions made by Maryland 529 regarding Board oversight and the investigative
process and results.
Nevertheless, the response states that the Board agrees that it should have secured
the related paperwork, and required and retained formal detailed written reports and
updates to document the work undertaken.
In further response to the findings and recommendation (A), regarding its
oversight responsibilities in general beyond the specific issue of the 2015
project, the Board has taken and is taking many specific steps to enhance both
Agency management and Board oversight. For example, in 2016 the Board
approved a new management structure, including moving the investment-
related functions from the CFO to a newly-created CIO position so that the
CFO could focus on budget and finance, including accounting. In 2016 the
Board recruited the first separate CIO, who, after serving as acting Executive
Director in 2018, is now the permanent MD 529 Executive Director. With the
Board’s support the present CFO joined MD 529 in May, 2018 following
significant staff turnovers in 2017. She met with OLA auditors soon after when
they began this audit, and subsequently has restructured the accounting review
procedures, brought on new advanced accounting staff and directed reviews
and corrections going back to 2017. She has managed compliance with the
OLA accounting recommendations. At the same time, the Board initiated and
oversaw moving the automated accounts record-keeping into the State’s cloud-
based environment in coordination with DoIT and, recently, created an agency
internal audit and compliance function. The next priority issue is to move from
the legacy record-keeping system to a modern system with reduced dependence
on manually prepared calculations.
In addition to these actions to strengthen and stabilize agency management and
operations, the Board has strengthened its own oversight capacity — while
acknowledging that it is a policy-making, not a management body.
Restructured Board committees and procedures have enhanced and focused
responsibilities. Audit and governance-related responsibilities have been
concentrated in a new Audit & Governance Committee to focus on a
continuing basis on overseeing Agency audits, responses, and on-going
compliance with recommendations.
Page 5 of 18

--- Page 43 ---
Maryland 529
Agency Response Form
The Board is dedicated to strong, appropriate Board oversight. The enhanced
staff and stable leadership is prepared to continue to build the MD 529
programs, and with improved accounting procedures, new tools and the benefit
of the proposed audit, will be ready to move our MCPT confidently to the next
stage.
Recommendation 1b Agree Estimated Completion Date: Dec 2020
Please provide details of As noted above, the Board reasonably and appropriately relies on annual audits
corrective action or by external auditors to identify and address internal control issues. The newly
explain disagreement. restructured Audit & Governance Committee will be responsible for
overseeing audits, audit recommendations and compliance, as well as other
reviews of internal controls.
In line with the OLA recommendation, the Board is commissioning an audit of
accounts for the MPCT plan. One component of this audit will be review of
MD 529 internal controls, including policies, procedures and workflows,
identification of any current control deficiencies or gaps, and recommendations
for corrections. MD 529 will consider recommendations and implement
appropriate corrections; the Board’s Audit & Governance Committee will
oversee the report and compliance.
Recommendation 1c Agree Estimated Completion Date: Dec 2020
Please provide details of The agency, through the Department of Budget and Management, issued a Task
corrective action or Order RFP (TORFP) under DBM’s master contract for auditors on October 2,
explain disagreement. 2019 with no responses. MD 529 is now issuing an RFP which would solicit
from a larger pool of accounting firms than in the DBM master contract. MD
529 will procure an audit that will cover accounts throughout the history of MD
529, and include, but not be limited to the period of time that OLA
recommends and the irregularities noted in the former employee’s account.
The audit is intended to include three components : 1) A review of MPCT
Program and the record-keeping database, including accuracy of data and
transactions of different types, and tests to assure that procedures are consistent
and in compliance with MPCT Disclosure documents; 2) Development of an
up-to-date Procedures Manual including benefits processing, based on
documenting current procedures, creating current workflow process diagrams,
identifying risk areas and providing recommendations for improvement; and 3)
Development of an up-to-date Procedures Manual for operational areas of MD
529 accounting including payroll, invoice processing, budget, etc. This
component will also include workflow analysis, charting and documentation,
and appropriate recommendations which will be reviewed and incorporated as
appropriate.
Recommendation 1d Agree Estimated Completion Date: Dec 2020
Please provide details of MD 529 is developing a detailed plan for correcting any errors or discrepancies
corrective action or that are discovered during and through the independent audit. The plan, which
explain disagreement. will be implemented concurrently with the audit, includes consulting with the
Assistant Attorney General regarding legal issues and accounting disparities,
including appropriate action with respect to any potential overpayments.
Recommendation 1e Agree Estimated Completion Date: Dec 2020
Page 6 of 18

--- Page 44 ---
Maryland 529
Agency Response Form
Please provide details of In order to assure that appropriate action is taken to address findings and
corrective action or recommendations of the audit, the plan in (D) includes requirements for
explain disagreement. appropriately documenting and retaining documentation of steps taken
throughout the process and their results, including both management actions
and Board discussion, decisions and actions.
Page 7 of 18

--- Page 45 ---
Maryland 529
Agency Response Form
Maryland Prepaid College Trust Disbursements and Adjustments
Finding 2
Maryland 529’s procedures did not require that independent supervisory reviews of
calculations supporting disbursement transactions be documented, and our testing of a
limited number of disbursements disclosed certain errors in the amounts paid.
We recommend that Maryland 529 ensure that independent supervisory reviews of
disbursements processed are performed and adequately documented, and that evidence of
these independent reviews are reviewed by the authorized signers of disbursement checks.
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 2 Agree Estimated Completion Date: Sep 2018
Please provide details of Since September 2018, Maryland 529 has implemented procedures to
corrective action or ensure disbursements are reviewed by independent Advanced
explain disagreement.
Accountants within the Agency, that the reviews are adequately
documented, and that authorized signers are ensuring the proper review
has occurred prior to signing the disbursement checks.
Page 8 of 18

--- Page 46 ---
Maryland 529
Agency Response Form
Finding 3
Adjustments to Maryland 529 MPCT accounts were unilaterally processed and were not
subject to independent supervisory review and approval. Such transactions exceeded $32.1
million for fiscal year 2018.
We recommend that Maryland 529
a. establish procedures to require that independent supervisory personnel verify the
propriety of MPCT account adjustments and underlying calculations using available
output reports and supporting documentation, and
b. investigate and resolve the aforementioned adjustments resulting in undercharges.
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 3a Agree Estimated Completion Date: Sep 2018
Please provide details of All account adjustment transactions since July 2018 have been reviewed.
corrective action or Until September 2019, the reconciliation accountant reviewed monthly
explain disagreement.
the MPCT account adjustments and underlying calculations using
available output reports and supporting documentation. Subsequently, in
September 2019 the Benefits Manger began reviewing these same
transactions on a daily basis.
Recommendation 3b Agree Estimated Completion Date: December
2020
Please provide details of The four accounts noted by OLA were reviewed and any necessary
corrective action or corrective actions will be taken during the course of the independent
explain disagreement. auditor review.
Page 9 of 18

--- Page 47 ---
Maryland 529
Agency Response Form
Bank Account Reconciliations
Finding 4
Maryland 529 did not prepare adequate bank reconciliations for three bank accounts used
to administer MPCT activities, and certain reconciliations we reviewed lacked
documentation of supervisory review.
We recommend that Maryland 529 prepare adequate reconciliations for its bank accounts.
Specifically, we recommend that Maryland 529
a. ensure that all applicable account activity and the related account balances are
properly included in the reconciliations, and that all such activity is adequately
supported by appropriate documentation;
b. ensure that all reconciling amounts, including the discrepancies noted above, have been
fully investigated and resolved; and
c. ensure that all reconciliations are reviewed and approved by independent supervisory
personnel, and that these reviews are adequately documented.
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 4a Agree Estimated Completion Date: July 2018
Please provide details of All applicable activities for the accounts noted by OLA (including the
corrective action or depository, checking, treasury, ABLE and Investment accounts) in the
explain disagreement. internal record keeping and financial systems were reconciled to the
bank records for FY 2018 prior to the year-end close.
All applicable account activity for the disbursement account and its
transactions from the internal record keeping system were reconciled on
a monthly basis to the bank statement, beginning July 1, 2017 for FY
2018, and included the outstanding check balance. The determination of
the outstanding check balance was based on checks issued from the
record keeping system, cleared checks at the bank, and internally
cancelled and voided checks.
During August 2018, it was brought to our attention about the
availability of a bank report that captured the outstanding check
balances. At that time, the report available from the bank showed $9.4M
in outstanding checks while the balance as per our internal reconciliation
Page 10 of 18

--- Page 48 ---
Maryland 529
Agency Response Form
showed $1.07M. The discrepancies were researched and resolved
between September 2018 and April 2019. The majority of the
differences were checks that were voided or cancelled internally and had
not been mailed out; however, voided checks had not been cancelled
with the bank.
Starting April 2019, the reconciliation process for the disbursement
account has been modified to reconcile the account transactions not only
to the Bank Statements but also to the bank report that captures the
outstanding check balances. Additionally, within the monthly
reconciliation, a process has been established to cancel all outstanding
checks over 90 days on a monthly basis.
Recommendation 4b Agree Estimated Completion Date: April 2019
Please provide details of All reconciliations have been completed, discrepancies identified and
corrective action or resolved. Monthly reconciliations are being completed, reviewed and
explain disagreement. signed off for all 5 bank accounts. Reconciliations of all bank accounts
for FY 2018 were completed prior to the close of FY 2018. However, as
noted above, the review and reconciliation of the $9.4M outstanding
checks was completed by April 2019.
Recommendation 4c Agree Estimated Completion Date: July 2018
Please provide details of Starting FY 2019, all monthly reconciliations are reviewed and signed
corrective action or off by the Director of Finance. The reconciliations have been
explain disagreement. documented and saved. All reconciliations were prepared, reviewed and
corrected for errors for FY 2018 prior to the close.
Page 11 of 18

--- Page 49 ---
Maryland 529
Agency Response Form
Abandoned Funds
Finding 5
Maryland 529 did not determine the disposition of uncashed checks from 2014, nor did it
take action to determine the applicability of the Maryland Abandoned Property Act to its
trust accounts.
We recommend that Maryland 529 obtain a formal legal opinion regarding the
applicability of the Maryland Abandoned Property Act to its accounts, and establish
processes to implement the Act consistent with that opinion (repeat).
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 5 Agree Estimated Completion Date: April 2020
Please provide details of The agency did receive advice from the Assistant Attorneys General on
corrective action or the issue of the applicability of the Maryland Abandoned Property Act to
explain disagreement. Maryland 529 trust account activity.
Maryland 529 will seek legislative clarification with respect to the
handling of MD 529 accounts. If legislative clarification is not provided,
the agency will seek a formal legal opinion regarding the applicability of
the Maryland Abandoned Property Act to its accounts.
Page 12 of 18

--- Page 50 ---
Maryland 529
Agency Response Form
Rollover and Refund Payment Methodology
Finding 6 (Policy Issue)
Maryland 529’s methodology for calculating disbursement amounts for MPCT account
holder refunds and rollovers (transfers), in our opinion often resulted in excessive
payments.
Since the purpose of MPCT is to contract for a guaranteed payment of State university or
college costs for a specified beneficiary, and not as an investment vehicle, we recommend
that the Maryland 529 Board
a. conduct a documented evaluation of the methodology it uses for calculating refund and
rollover payments, including consideration of methodologies used by other states, to
ensure that rollover and refund payments are not excessive; and
b. ensure that future tuition contracts clearly reflect any changes Maryland 529 considers
necessary as a result of this evaluation.
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 6a Agree Estimated Completion Date: Jan 2021
Please provide details of MD 529 will document and review the current practice, consult with
corrective action or other prepaid plans to understand their methods and calculations, and
explain disagreement. then determine the appropriateness of the current method being used.
Recommendation 6b Agree Estimated Completion Date: Completed
Please provide details of As a matter of process, MD529 always ensures that the disclosure
corrective action or statement reflects any changes or updates to the Plan.
explain disagreement.
Page 13 of 18

--- Page 51 ---
Maryland 529
Agency Response Form
System Access and Security
Finding 7
Maryland 529 did not adequately monitor access granted to the automated system used to
administer MPCT. We identified improper access for 26 system users, including 11 former
employees whose access had not been disabled.
We recommend that Maryland 529
a. perform an immediate documented review for propriety of user access to its MPCT
automated system, and perform periodic reviews thereafter, as called for by the
aforementioned Information Technology Security Manual;
b. take any necessary corrective action as a result of these reviews, including removing
unnecessary user access and restricting access capabilities for critical functions to those
individuals who require such capabilities to perform their assigned job duties and in a
manner that ensures proper segregation of duties; and
c. immediately remove access from former employees upon termination, including the 11
noted in our finding.
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 7a Agree Estimated Completion Date:
Please provide details of At the time these issues were brought to the attention of MD529 staff,
corrective action or they were immediately investigated and MD529 determined that of the
explain disagreement. 206 users noted by OLA, 18% were MD529 employees and 82% were
users employed by the Program Manager of the College Investment
Plan.
None of the users employed by the Program Manager had improper
access at the time of investigation. Access of MD529 staff was reviewed
and appropriate access has been confirmed based on specific job
functions. It should also be noted that MD529 staff can only access the
internal record keeping system while physically in the office; no remote
access is possible to complete account holder processing or transactions
or to view account holder information; however, MD529 agrees that the
access should have been removed immediately.
Page 14 of 18

--- Page 52 ---
Maryland 529
Agency Response Form
As called for by the aforementioned Information Technology Security
Manual, MD529 will review and document access on a periodic basis
going forward.
Recommendation 7b Agree Estimated Completion Date: Sept 2019
Please provide details of At the time these issues were brought to the attention of MD529 staff,
corrective action or they were immediately investigated. MD529 has taken the applicable
explain disagreement. corrective action as a result of these reviews, including removing
unnecessary user access and restricting access capabilities for critical
functions to those individuals who require such capabilities to perform
their assigned job duties. MD529 continues to look for additional
application support to assist with further segregation of access (to the
extent possible).
Recommendation 7c Agree Estimated Completion Date: Dec 2019
Please provide details of OLA notes that 206 people had access to the record keeping system and
corrective action or that is accurate. Of the 206, approximately 82% (167 users) of those
explain disagreement. users were employed by the Program Manager of the College Investment
Plan who was using the same system and provided system support to
MD529. The remaining 18% (37 users) were MD529 employees or
additional support staff of MD529.
The Program Manager for the College Investment Plan had been
utilizing the same record keeping software since its inception in 2001
while also providing system support to MD529. Of the 167 employees
noted in the OLA list, 57 of those were already expired and disabled
users. The remaining users were verified and confirmed to be active and
have proper access. The Program Manager has only ever provisioned its
users of the record keeping system with “view only” access to MPCT
account holder information. As such, these users did not ever have the
ability to make changes to the data for an MPCT account holder. This
practice remains in place today.
OLA notes that 11 terminated MD529 employees maintained access and
MD529 has been working with DoIT to remove that access. A checklist
has been established to ensure that terminated MD529 employees
immediately have system access removed.
Auditor’s Comment:
Maryland 529 agrees with the recommendation but states that system access was
expired and disabled for 57 of the users employed by its system support services
provider (the Program Manager for the MCIP). The response also states that its
support services provider employee access is limited to “view only” with respect to
Page 15 of 18

--- Page 53 ---
Maryland 529
Agency Response Form
MPCT account holder information. However, documentation we obtained during
the audit contradicts Maryland 529’s claim, and shows that all 206 system users
had active (not disabled) access and that at least 18 support services provider
employees could modify account holder activity based on our test.
Page 16 of 18

--- Page 54 ---
Maryland 529
Agency Response Form
Finding 8
Maryland 529 lacked assurance that the automated system used for administration of
MPCT was sufficiently protected against operational and security risks.
We recommend that Maryland 529
a. seek to amend the existing agreement and ensure that future agreements with this
service provider include provisions requiring the provider to regularly obtain SOC 2
Type 2 reviews or equivalent security assurance reviews pertaining to its system
operations, and
b. obtain and review copies of the resulting reports from the service provider to ensure
that the related independent reviews adequately address critical security concerns over
the provider’s system and that the service provider implements all critical report
recommendations.
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 8a Agree Estimated Completion Date: February
2019
Please provide details of The contract with the noted vendor was terminated in February of 2019
corrective action or and there will be no future agreements with this vendor. The services
explain disagreement. from this vendor were migrated to a cloud platform managed by the
Maryland Department of Information Technology (“DoIT”). DoIT
requires the cloud platform provider to complete a SOC 2 Type 2
regularly.
If MD529 contracts with another record keeping provider, we will
ensure a SOC 2 Type 2 audit is required within the contract.
Recommendation 8b Agree Estimated Completion Date: February
2019
Please provide details of Since the contract was terminated in February of 2019 and was
corrective action or transferred to DoIT, they will obtain and review the SOC 2 Type 2
explain disagreement. report. Additionally, MD529 will request the annual external auditor to
review the reports.
Page 17 of 18

--- Page 55 ---
Maryland 529
Agency Response Form
Cash Receipts
Finding 9
Controls were not established to ensure that all mail collections for MPCT were properly
accounted for and deposited.
We recommend that Maryland 529
a. ensure that all checks are restrictively endorsed immediately upon receipt; and
b. ensure that the initial record of all collections received and recorded in the shared
computer drive is secured, and provided directly to an employee independent of the
cash receipts function for agreement to deposit documentation.
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 9a Agree Estimated Completion Date: August 2018
Please provide details of Beginning August 2018, a process was established to restrictively
corrective action or endorse all checks immediately upon receipt.
explain disagreement.
Recommendation 9b Agree Estimated Completion Date: August 2018
Please provide details of Beginning August 2018, a process was established to ensure that a
corrective action or record of collections received was recorded and reviewed by three
explain disagreement. independent employees. The first employee creates an electronic log
that is saved on shared drive in a secured folder. That person prints a
copy of that log to give to independent reviewers. The printed log is
used by each of the reviewers to verify against the checks deposited in
the bank. The printed log is signed by the each of the independent
reviewers. The printed and signed copies of the log is then scanned and
filed on shared drive in a secured folder.
In November 2019, MD529 added an additional step whereby by 2
copies of the log are printed by the first person and each reviewer
receives their own copy to complete the review.
Page 18 of 18

--- Page 56 ---
A T
UDIT EAM
Michael J. Murdzak, CPA
Audit Manager
Nathan H. Suffin, CPA
Senior Auditor
Dianne P. Ramirez
Syed M. A. Taqvi
Staff Auditors
OTHER STAFF WHO CONTRIBUTED TO THIS REPORT
Eric Alexander, CPA, CISA