Title: Maryland Economic Development Corporation
Date: 12/03/2019
Type: Fiscal Compliance
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5de93ccda1ce580fa05c91c0
Extracted: 2025-06-19T06:22:23.374002
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Audit Report
Maryland Economic Development Corporation
December 2019
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Senator Craig J. Zucker (Senate Chair) Delegate Shelly L. Hettleman (House Chair)
Senator Adelaide C. Eckardt Delegate Steven J. Arentz
Senator George C. Edwards Delegate Andrew P. Cassilly
Senator Guy J. Guzzone Delegate Mark S. Chang
Senator Katie Fry Hester Delegate Keith E. Haynes
Senator Cheryl C. Kagan Delegate Michael A. Jackson
Senator Benjamin F. Kramer Delegate David Moon
Senator Cory V. McCray Delegate April R. Rose
Senator Douglas J.J. Peters Delegate Geraldine Valentino-Smith
Senator Justin D. Ready Delegate Karen Lewis Young
To Obtain Further Information
Office of Legislative Audits
301 West Preston Street, Room 1202
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Phone: 410-946-5900 ꞏ 301-970-5900 ꞏ 1-877-486-9964 (Toll Free in Maryland)
Maryland Relay: 711
TTY: 410-946-5401 ꞏ 301-970-5401
E-mail: OLAWebmaster@ola.state.md.us
Website: www.ola.state.md.us
To Report Fraud
The Office of Legislative Audits operates a Fraud Hotline to report fraud, waste, or abuse involving State
of Maryland government resources. Reports of fraud, waste, or abuse may be communicated anonymously
by a toll-free call to 1-877-FRAUD-11, by mail to the Fraud Hotline, c/o Office of Legislative Audits, or
through the Office’s website.
Nondiscrimination Statement
The Department of Legislative Services does not discriminate on the basis of age, ancestry, color, creed,
marital status, national origin, race, religion, gender, gender identity, sexual orientation, or disability in the
admission or access to its programs, services, or activities. The Department’s Information Officer has been
designated to coordinate compliance with the nondiscrimination requirements contained in Section 35.107
of the United States Department of Justice Regulations. Requests for assistance should be directed to the
Information Officer at 410-946-5400 or 410-970-5400.

--- Page 4 ---
2

--- Page 5 ---
Background Information
Agency Responsibilities and Financial Activity
The Maryland Economic Development Corporation (MEDCO), which functions
under the provisions of Title 10, Subtitle 1 of the Economic Development Article
of the Annotated Code of Maryland, is constituted as a public instrumentality of
the State of Maryland. MEDCO’s goal is to assist in the expansion,
modernization, and retention of existing Maryland businesses and to attract new
businesses to the State. MEDCO also owns and manages certain properties and,
upon request, assists local jurisdiction projects and borrows money and issues
bonds for financing this assistance. Since its creation in 1984 through June 30,
2019, MEDCO has undertaken approximately 300 projects.
MEDCO is managed by a 12-member Board of Directors that consists of the
Secretary of Commerce, the Secretary of Transportation, and 10 other members
from local government, private industry, and the general public, appointed by the
Governor with the advice and consent of the Senate. The administrative affairs
and technical activities of MEDCO are directed and supervised by an executive
director who is appointed by the Board, subject to the approval of the Governor.
According to MEDCO’s audited financial statements, as of June 30, 2017 and
2018, MEDCO owned and managed 15 operating facilities and its non-recourse
debt totaled $622.5 million and $613.2 million, respectively. This debt represents
obligations related to the operating facilities of MEDCO and is to be retired solely
from the operating revenues of the respective facilities. MEDCO is not liable to
bondholders and lenders in the event of project/borrower default. The debt
consists primarily of revenue bonds issued by MEDCO (which are not obligations
of the State of Maryland) and loans from government agencies (such as the
Maryland Department of Commerce).
Non-Performing Project
Based on a review of MEDCO’s annual activities report for the fiscal year ending
June 30, 2018 (the most current report available at the time of our review) and
discussions with management personnel, we noted that 1 of its 15 operating
facilities was financially troubled. Specifically, a resort and conference center
was classified by MEDCO as a “non-performing” project. Our preceding audit
report also noted that this project had been classified as non-performing because
its debt service payment was only partially made and certain financial covenants
were not met.
3

--- Page 6 ---
Annually, this project is subject to a financial statement audit by an independent
accounting firm. In its report for fiscal year ended June 30, 2018, the firm noted
that the project, named as the Chesapeake Bay Conference Center, has suffered
recurring losses from operations, has a negative net position of $209.5 million,
and its current liabilities exceed its current assets by $141.7 million. According to
the firm, these conditions raise substantial doubt about the project’s ability to
continue as a going concern at June 30, 2018. MEDCO has worked with the
parties involved with this project and has engaged a management consultant to
identify and implement various improvement strategies.
Financial Statement Audits
MEDCO engaged an independent accounting firm to audit its financial statements
for the fiscal years ended June 30, 2016, 2017, and 2018. In the related audit
reports, the firm stated that MEDCO’s financial statements present fairly, in all
material respects, the financial position of MEDCO and the changes in its
financial position and cash flows for the years then ended in accordance with
accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America.
Findings and Recommendations
Our audit did not disclose any deficiencies in the design or operation of
MEDCO’s internal control. Our audit also did not disclose any instances of
noncompliance with applicable laws, rules, or regulations.
A draft copy of this report was provided to MEDCO. Since there are no
recommendations in this report, a written response was not necessary.
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the Maryland Economic
Development Corporation (MEDCO) for the period beginning July 1, 2015 and
ending May 29, 2019. The audit was conducted in accordance with generally
accepted government auditing standards. Those standards require that we plan
and perform the audit to obtain sufficient, appropriate evidence to provide a
reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives.
We believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings
and conclusions based on our audit objectives.
4

--- Page 7 ---
As prescribed by the State Government Article, Section 2-1221 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, the objectives of this audit were to examine MEDCO’s
financial transactions, records, and internal control, and to evaluate its compliance
with applicable State laws, rules, and regulations.
In planning and conducting our audit, we focused on the major financial-related
areas of operations based on assessments of significance and risk. The areas
addressed by the audit included cash receipts, cash disbursements, and a review of
MEDCO projects.
MEDCO engaged an independent accounting firm to audit its financial statements
for the fiscal years ended June 30, 2016, 2017, and 2018. In the related audit
reports, the firm stated that MEDCO’s financial statements present fairly, in all
material respects, the financial position of MEDCO and the changes in its
financial position and cash flows for the years then ended in accordance with
accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America. We
have relied on the work of the independent accounting firm to provide audit
coverage pertaining to MEDCO’s debt financing and payroll. Our audit
procedures in these areas were generally limited, therefore, to obtaining a
sufficient basis for that reliance.
To accomplish our audit objectives, our audit procedures included inquiries of
appropriate personnel, inspections of documents and records, observations of
MEDCO’s operations, and tests of transactions. Generally, transactions were
selected for testing based on auditor judgment, which primarily considers risk.
Unless otherwise specifically indicated, neither statistical nor non-statistical audit
sampling was used to select the transactions tested. Therefore, the results of the
tests cannot be used to project those results to the entire population from which
the test items were selected.
We also extracted data from MEDCO’s automated financial accounting system
for the purpose of testing and verifying certain related accounting transactions and
data. We performed various tests of the relevant data and determined that the data
were sufficiently reliable for the purposes the data were used during the audit.
Finally, we performed other auditing procedures that we considered necessary to
achieve our objectives. The reliability of data used in this report for background
or informational purposes was not assessed.
MEDCO’s management is responsible for establishing and maintaining effective
internal control. Internal control is a process designed to provide reasonable
assurance that objectives pertaining to the reliability of financial records;
5

--- Page 8 ---
effectiveness and efficiency of operations including safeguarding of assets; and
compliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations are achieved.
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate.
Our reports are designed to assist the Maryland General Assembly in exercising
its legislative oversight function and to provide constructive recommendations for
improving State operations. As a result, our reports generally do not address
activities we reviewed that are functioning properly.
6

--- Page 9 ---
A
UDIT
T
EAM
Adam J. Westover, CPA
Audit Manager
Edward J. Welsh, CFE
Senior Auditor
Samuel Hur, CPA
Staff Auditor