Title: Department of General Services - Office of Procurement and Logistics


NOTE: Effective October 1, 2019, the Office of Procurement and Logistics is now named Office of State Procurement.
Date: 12/05/2019
Type: Fiscal Compliance
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5df12211a1ce580c4898f836
Extracted: 2025-06-19T06:23:30.312977
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Audit Report
Department of General Services
Office of Procurement and Logistics
December 2019
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Senator Craig J. Zucker (Senate Chair) Delegate Shelly L. Hettleman (House Chair)
Senator Adelaide C. Eckardt Delegate Steven J. Arentz
Senator George C. Edwards Delegate Andrew P. Cassilly
Senator Guy J. Guzzone Delegate Mark S. Chang
Senator Katie Fry Hester Delegate Keith E. Haynes
Senator Cheryl C. Kagan Delegate Michael A. Jackson
Senator Benjamin F. Kramer Delegate David Moon
Senator Cory V. McCray Delegate April R. Rose
Senator Douglas J.J. Peters Delegate Geraldine Valentino-Smith
Senator Justin D. Ready Delegate Karen Lewis Young
To Obtain Further Information
Office of Legislative Audits
301 West Preston Street, Room 1202
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Phone: 410-946-5900 ꞏ 301-970-5900 ꞏ 1-877-486-9964 (Toll Free in Maryland)
Maryland Relay: 711
TTY: 410-946-5401 ꞏ 301-970-5401
E-mail: OLAWebmaster@ola.state.md.us
Website: www.ola.state.md.us
To Report Fraud
The Office of Legislative Audits operates a Fraud Hotline to report fraud, waste, or abuse involving State
of Maryland government resources. Reports of fraud, waste, or abuse may be communicated anonymously
by a toll-free call to 1-877-FRAUD-11, by mail to the Fraud Hotline, c/o Office of Legislative Audits, or
through the Office’s website.
Nondiscrimination Statement
The Department of Legislative Services does not discriminate on the basis of age, ancestry, color, creed,
marital status, national origin, race, religion, gender, gender identity, sexual orientation, or disability in the
admission or access to its programs, services, or activities. The Department’s Information Officer has been
designated to coordinate compliance with the nondiscrimination requirements contained in Section 35.107
of the United States Department of Justice Regulations. Requests for assistance should be directed to the
Information Officer at 410-946-5400 or 410-970-5400.

--- Page 5 ---
Table of Contents
Background Information 5
Agency Responsibilities 5
Organizational and Operational Changes 5
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report 6
Findings and Recommendations 8
State Agency Procurement Monitoring
* Finding 1 – The Office of Procurement and Logistics (OPL) did not 8
adequately monitor certain State agency procurements that were
specifically subject to its oversight.
Statewide Procurements
* Finding 2 – OPL did not publish contract awards totaling $37 million 9
on eMaryland Marketplace (eMM), as required.
* Finding 3 – OPL did not always provide prices for products available 10
from Intergovernmental Cooperative Purchasing Agreements to State
agencies.
Monitoring of Providers with Procurement Preferences
* Finding 4 – OPL did not establish comprehensive procedures for 11
determining the fair market prices of goods and services available
from Maryland Correctional Enterprises (MCE). Furthermore, OPL
did not publish fair market prices of items available for purchase from
MCE and the Blind Industries and Services of Maryland, as required.
* Finding 5 – OPL did not adequately monitor the coordinating entity for 13
the Employment Works Program to ensure that it met its
responsibilities under the law.
eMaryland Marketplace
Finding 6 – OPL did not periodically review system access to eMM and 14
did not require periodic reviews of the eMM vendor to ensure the
safeguarding and availability of the system.
* Denotes item repeated in full or part from preceding audit report
3

--- Page 6 ---
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology 16
Agency Response Appendix
4

--- Page 7 ---
Background Information
Agency Responsibilities
The Department of General Services (DGS) – Office of Procurement and
Logistics (OPL) manages the centralized procurement of certain commodities and
services for State agencies. Commodities include a wide range of items including
energy, fuel, vehicles, auto parts, office and cleaning supplies, medical supplies,
equipment, and food. Services include architectural and engineering,
construction, and facilities maintenance. According to the State’s records, during
fiscal year 2018, the value of Statewide procurements awarded by OPL totaled
approximately $374 million, and OPL’s expenditures totaled approximately $9
million.
Organizational and Operational Changes
Chapter 590, Laws of Maryland 2017, effective on various dates beginning
October 1, 2018 and culminating with the final implementation date of October 1,
2019, requires, among other changes, the consolidation of most state procurement
activities under DGS’s authority. In addition, the law establishes the position of a
Chief Procurement Officer to oversee newly centralized procurement activity
within the Executive Branch of the State. The consolidation will create the new
Office of State Procurement with procurement personnel from the Departments of
Budget and Management, Information Technology, and Public Safety and
Correctional Services (capital construction) being transferred to the new
procurement unit within DGS. Effective October 1, 2019, the Office of
Procurement and Logistics became the Office of State Procurement.
In accordance with the aforementioned law, DGS developed a work plan on
October 1, 2018 that impacted procurement at DGS. This plan included
acquisition and implementation of a new eProcurement system, a new State
Procurement web portal and procurement manual, new procurement employment
position class descriptions, a renewed focus on delegation of procurement
authority, and the oversight of that delegation by DGS through establishment of a
training and certification program known as the Maryland Procurement Academy.
In addition, effective July 1, 2018, DGS transferred the Inventory Standards and
Support Services Division (ISSSD) from OPL to its newly created Business
Enterprise Administration. ISSSD administers the State’s Automated Fuel
Management Program and manages inventories and surplus property.
Accordingly, those functions will be included in our audit of DGS – Office of the
Secretary.
5

--- Page 8 ---
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report
Our audit included a review to determine the status of five of the seven findings
contained in our preceding audit report dated December 7, 2016. As disclosed in
the following table, we determined that all five findings are repeated in this
report, although OPL took limited corrective action with certain elements of
several prior findings. We did not follow up on two findings in our preceding
audit report that related to the Statewide fuel contract and administrative fees due
from vendors providing goods and services to State agencies; the status of these
findings will be reviewed during our audit of DGS – Office of the Secretary.
6

--- Page 9 ---
Status of Preceding Findings
Preceding Implementation
Finding Finding Description Status
OPL did not verify the accuracy of periodic
fuel usage reconciliations, sufficiently Will be reviewed
Finding 1 address failed fuel quality tests, and ensure during audit of DGS –
State agencies were reviewing monthly fuel Office of the Secretary
variance reports
OPL did not adequately monitor certain State
agency procurements that were specifically
subject to its oversight and did not review Repeated
Finding 2
and update State procurement regulations (Current Finding 1)
and the DGS manual for commodity
procurements as needed.
OPL did not publish contract awards totaling
Repeated
Finding 3 $5.9 million on eMaryland Marketplace as
(Current Finding 2)
required.
OPL did not always provide prices for
products available from Intergovernmental Repeated
Finding 4
Cooperative Purchasing Agreements to State (Current Finding 3)
agencies.
OPL did not ensure that it received all
administrative fees due from vendors
Will be reviewed
providing goods and services to State
Finding 5 during audit of DGS –
agencies under Statewide contracts, and our
Office of the Secretary
review of selected contracts disclosed
uncollected fees of approximately $222,000.
OPL did not establish comprehensive
procedures for determining the fair market
prices of goods and services available from
Maryland Correctional Enterprises (MCE). Repeated
Finding 6
Furthermore, OPL did not publish fair (Current Finding 4)
market prices of items available for purchase
from MCE and Blind Industries and Services
of Maryland as required.
OPL did not adequately monitor the
coordinating entity for the Employment
Works Program (EWP) to ensure that it met Repeated
Finding 7
its responsibilities under the law and that (Current Finding 5)
fees it collected from EWP preferred
providers were reasonable.
7

--- Page 10 ---
Findings and Recommendations
State Agency Procurement Monitoring
Finding 1
The Office of Procurement and Logistics (OPL) did not adequately monitor
certain State agency procurements that were specifically subject to its
oversight.
Analysis
OPL did not adequately monitor certain State agency procurements that were
specifically subject to its oversight. In particular, OPL’s responsibility for
managing the centralized procurement of goods and services for the State includes
monitoring State agency procurements for which, as permitted by State
procurement regulations, OPL has delegated its authority for up to a specified
dollar amount.
As of November 30, 3018, OPL had only conducted audits of three State
agencies’ delegated procurement activity since fiscal year 2011. State regulations
and OPL procedures provide for these audits to ensure procurements are proper,
including the use of competitive procurement for which deficiencies are often
cited in our fiscal compliance audit reports of State agencies. Furthermore, our
review of the three audits that were performed disclosed that the scope did not
include all delegated procurements and that workpapers did not always support
the conclusions in the audit report. Specifically, the audits only included a review
of maintenance service contracts up to $50,000 when the respective agencies were
delegated procurements up to $200,000. In addition, one audit report disclosed
that there was no basis for a particular procurement, but the audit report
concluded that no exceptions were taken and included no recommended
corrective action.
According to State records, numerous State agencies made a total of 4,651
procurements over $5,000 for commodities and maintenance services totaling $97
million and $32 million, respectively, during fiscal year 2018 (generally
excluding purchases made with the State’s corporate purchasing card). A similar
condition regarding the lack of sufficient audits was commented upon in our two
preceding audit reports.
8

--- Page 11 ---
Recommendation 1
We recommend that OPL
a. monitor agency procurements by conducting audits of delegated
procurements in accordance with State regulations and its procedures
(repeat), and
b. ensure that the audits are sufficiently comprehensive and that
workpapers properly support the related conclusions.
Statewide Procurements
Finding 2
OPL did not publish contract awards totaling $37 million on eMaryland
Marketplace, as required.
Analysis
OPL did not publish contract awards on eMaryland Marketplace (eMM) as
required by State procurement laws and regulations. eMM is an Internet-based,
interactive procurement system managed by OPL. Our test of 24 commodity,
facility maintenance, architectural and engineering, and construction contract
awards made by OPL during the period from January 2016 through September
2018, totaling $131.7 million, disclosed that OPL did not comply with State
procurement laws and regulations with respect to the posting of eight of these
awards, valued at $37 million. Specifically, as of April 2019, OPL had not
published three awards totaling $25.4 million on eMM and five other awards
totaling $11.6 million were published between 60 and 932 days after the contracts
were awarded.
State procurement laws and regulations require awards for contracts greater than
$50,000 (greater than $25,000 prior to October 1, 2017) to be published on eMM
not more than 30 days after the execution and approval of the contract.
Publishing awards on eMM provides transparency over State procurements,
including information about winning bidders and the amount of the related
awards. A similar condition was commented upon in our preceding audit report
with respect to commodity and facility maintenance contract awards.
Recommendation 2
We recommend that OPL comply with State procurement laws and
regulations by publishing contract awards on eMM within 30 days of the
contract award (repeat).
9

--- Page 12 ---
Finding 3
OPL did not always provide prices for products available from
Intergovernmental Cooperative Purchasing Agreements to State agencies.
Analysis
OPL did not always provide State agencies with prices for products that were
available to them through Intergovernmental Cooperative Purchasing Agreements
(ICPAs) and, in these instances, agencies cannot be assured that they are paying
the agreed-upon prices. ICPAs are procured by one or more federal, state, or
local government agencies and consolidate the procurement of specified goods
and services on behalf of multiple users. State law allows agencies to participate
in ICPAs that are executed in a manner consistent with the purposes set forth in
State procurement law, including fostering effective broad-based competition.
For each ICPA, OPL created one or more Statewide blanket purchase orders
(BPO) for State agencies to use when making purchases. However, certain BPOs
did not provide pricing for the available items, and OPL did not obtain and
provide to the State agencies pricing from the agency that procured the ICPA.
We reviewed OPL’s participation in eight ICPAs, that included BPOs totaling
approximately $17 million, and found that for five ICPA contracts, totaling $4.5
million, OPL did not include contract pricing on the BPO nor did it refer agencies
to obtain the pricing from the lead ICPA agency. Agencies purchasing items from
ICPAs when the related BPO did not include contract pricing would be just as
likely to contact the vendor as the lead ICPA agency for pricing information when
preparing their purchase orders. As a result, State agencies could not be assured
that the prices paid for items obtained from these ICPAs were proper. State
agency purchases from three of these five contractors totaled approximately $1.5
million during calendar year 2018. No purchases were made from the other two
contractors. A similar condition was commented upon in our preceding audit
report.
State agencies research and identify existing ICPAs that offer goods or services
meeting their needs and forward the desired ICPA to OPL for review and
approval. OPL determines whether the ICPA meets the legal qualifications
imposed by State laws and regulations, such as whether it will provide cost
benefits to the State, and enters into a contract with the ICPA vendor. OPL then
issues one or more BPOs for State agencies to access the items available through
the ICPA. OPL participated in ICPA contracts with 38 entities during the period
from February 2016 through September 2018 from which OPL issued 39 BPOs
with a total estimated value of $39.2 million.
10

--- Page 13 ---
Recommendation 3
We recommend that OPL either independently publish contract prices or
refer agencies to pricing information from the agency that procured the
ICPA for items available from ICPAs for use by State agencies (repeat).
Monitoring of Providers with Procurement Preferences
Background
State laws and regulations provide for procurement preferences to benefit
disadvantaged individuals or representative organizations. Specifically, State law
provides that, when goods or services can be supplied at prices that do not exceed
the prevailing market prices, State aided or controlled entities shall give
procurement preferences to Maryland Correctional Enterprises (MCE), Blind
Industries and Services of Maryland (BISM), the Employment Works Program
(EWP), and individuals with disability-owned businesses (collectively referred to
as preferred providers). State regulations also place certain requirements on OPL
for determining and publishing fair market prices for products and services
offered by providers with procurement preferences.
Finding 4
OPL did not establish comprehensive procedures for determining the fair
market prices of goods and services available from MCE. Furthermore,
OPL did not publish fair market prices of items available for purchase from
MCE and BISM, as required.
Analysis
OPL did not establish comprehensive procedures for determining the fair market
prices of goods and services available from MCE. Furthermore, OPL did not
publish fair market prices of items available for purchase from MCE and BISM,
as required. According to DGS accounting records, during fiscal year 2018, State
agencies spent approximately $24.1 million on purchases from MCE and $4.9
million on purchases from BISM.
 OPL’s documented procedures for reviewing MCE prices required a
verification of the fair market prices of MCE products submitted for OPL’s
approval, but generally only included new items and existing items for which
MCE was requesting a price change. The procedures generally did not
otherwise require a review of catalog pricing for existing items. OPL has not
independently determined the fair market prices of all MCE products since
2003. OPL advised that price verifications for existing items were not
performed because of the lack of resources. However, we noted that OPL did
11

--- Page 14 ---
not perform such verifications, even on a test basis. Consequently, there is no
assurance that a fair market price verification has been conducted for all MCE
catalog items.
 OPL did not comply with its aforementioned procedures to determine the fair
market prices for new MCE items and existing items that had a price increase.
During our audit period, MCE submitted new price requests showing its
determination of comparative retail pricing for 42 separate items. OPL did
not have documentation that it verified the MCE identified comparative prices
or otherwise determined fair market prices for 22 of these items. For the
remaining 20 items, OPL had documentation that it had approved the price
request, but did not have any documentation showing the basis of its decision.
MCE’s procedures provide that the new prices are in effect after 30 days of
submission of a price request, even if OPL does not respond to its request for
approval.
 OPL did not independently publish the fair market prices of goods and
services available from MCE or BISM as required. Rather, agencies
purchasing items were required to use the MCE and BISM websites to obtain
the pricing information. However, OPL had not verified that the prices on the
websites were consistent with the approved prices.
State laws and/or regulations require OPL to independently determine the fair
market prices of MCE products, and to compile, publish, and distribute a listing of
those products and fair market prices, at least annually, for State agency personnel
to compare with MCE’s established prices when making procurement decisions.
OPL is also required to publish the fair market prices of items available from
BISM, as determined by the Pricing and Selection Committee for BISM and
EWP.
Similar conditions regarding the verification and publishing of MCE pricing have
been commented upon in our four preceding audit reports, and the failure to
publish fair market prices for BISM products have been commented upon in our
two preceding audit reports.
Recommendation 4
We recommend that OPL
a. establish comprehensive procedures to independently determine and
publish the fair market prices of MCE’s goods and services (repeat), and
ensure documented adherence to those procedures; and
12

--- Page 15 ---
b. publish or verify the fair market prices of BISM’s goods and services as
determined by the Pricing and Selection Committee for BISM and EWP
(repeat).
Finding 5
OPL did not adequately monitor the coordinating entity for EWP to ensure
that it met its responsibilities under the law.
Analysis
OPL did not monitor the coordinating entity (CE) for the EWP to ensure it was
appropriately fulfilling its duties under State law and did not adequately describe
those duties in the Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) with the CE. State
law established the EWP under DGS to facilitate the distribution of State agency
procurement contracts for goods and services among community service
providers1 and businesses owned by individuals with disabilities (collectively
referred to as preferred providers). The law further provides that DGS is to
designate a CE to identify potential contracts for State procurement, establish
procedures for the selection of preferred providers, provide training and assistance
to participating providers, and monitor EWP preferred providers.
Although provided for under the January 2014 MOU, OPL had not monitored or
performed any oversight of the CE to ensure that the CE was fulfilling all of its
responsibilities required under State law. Furthermore, the MOU did not specify
how the CE’s statutory responsibilities should be carried out. For example, the
MOU did not fully address the CE’s responsibilities to identify potential contracts
for procurement, establish procedures for the selection of preferred providers, and
provide training and assistance to participating providers. Similar conditions have
been commented upon in our two preceding audit reports.
Recommendation 5
We recommend that OPL
a. monitor the CE to ensure that it is providing the goods and services
required by State law and the MOU (repeat), and
b. specify in sufficient detail how the CE’s responsibilities should be carried
out (repeat).
1 Community service providers are not-for-profit entities accredited by the State Department of
Education’s Division of Rehabilitation Services for participation in the EWP and are operated in
the interest of individuals who have a mental or physical disability, including blindness.
13

--- Page 16 ---
eMaryland Marketplace
Finding 6
OPL did not periodically review system access to eMM and did not require
periodic reviews of the eMM vendor to ensure the safeguarding and
availability of the system.
Analysis
OPL did not review and monitor access to the eMM system by its employees or
by other agencies’ employees and did not require periodic reviews of the eMM
vendor to ensure the safeguarding and availability of the system.
 OPL did not perform periodic eMM system access reviews to determine
whether access provided to employees was appropriate for their job duties.
As a result, certain employees had improper or unnecessary access to eMM.
Specifically, our review of active eMM users at one State agency disclosed
that 26 of the 101 users were no longer employed by the agency but retained
system access. In addition, our review of system access as of April 2019
disclosed that 2,017 of the 2,092 Statewide eMM users had access to the
names of bidders before bids were opened. We could not readily determine
whether all of these eMM users needed this access. State procurement
regulations require bidder names to be confidential before bids are opened.
The State of Maryland Information Technology Security Manual requires that
agencies must ensure that access to confidential information is strictly
controlled and audited and that it supports the concept of least privilege. The
Manual also requires agencies to monitor the security controls over their
information systems at least annually to ensure that the access is strictly
controlled and restricted to appropriate personnel.
 OPL did not obtain independent control assessment reviews of the eMM
system vendor to ensure the processing integrity of the system and the security
over vendor bids was maintained. For example, the American Institute of
Certified Public Accountants has issued guidance for various reviews of
service organizations which includes an independent review of controls for
which the resultant independent auditor’s report is referred to as a System and
Organization Controls (SOC) review. There are several types of SOC
reviews, with varying scopes and levels of review and auditor testing. A SOC
2 Type 2 review includes a review of controls placed in operation and tests of
operating effectiveness for the period under review. This review would
provide OPL with assurance as to the propriety of the design and operation of
14

--- Page 17 ---
critical controls, including those related to the operability of the system and
the safeguarding of the confidential bids.
In response to our request for the reviews for calendar years 2015 through
2018, the eMM vendor provided OPL with a SOC 2 Type 1 report for calendar
year 2018. However, this review only covered one year and was limited in
scope in that it did not did not test the operating effectiveness of the eMM
vendor’s system security nor provide assurance that the eMM vendor’s system
security, availability, processing integrity, data confidentiality, and privacy
was adequate.
Recommendation 6
We recommend that OPL
a. periodically review eMM system access and remove any unnecessary or
improper access including those noted above;
b. require the eMM vendor to obtain annual control assessment reviews,
such as SOC 2 Type 2 reviews, to ensure the operability of the system and
that critical data is properly safeguarded; and
c. review the control assessment reports to ensure the eMM vendor takes
appropriate action to all recommendations.
15

--- Page 18 ---
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the Department of General
Services (DGS) – Office of Procurement and Logistics (OPL) for the period
beginning October 28, 2015 and ending October 15, 2018. The audit was
conducted in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards.
Those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient,
appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and
conclusions based on our audit objectives. We believe that the evidence obtained
provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit
objectives.
As prescribed by the State Government Article, Section 2-1221 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, the objectives of this audit were to examine OPL’s financial
transactions, records, and internal control, and to evaluate its compliance with
applicable State laws, rules, and regulations.
In planning and conducting our audit, we focused on the major financial-related
areas of operations based on assessments of significance and risk. The areas
addressed by the audit included procurement of commodities and maintenance,
construction, and architectural services, eMaryland Marketplace (eMM), OPL’s
use of the State’s Financial Management Information System for performing
Statewide procurement functions, Intergovernmental Cooperative Purchasing
Agreements, and preferred procurement providers. We also determined the status
of five of the seven findings contained in our preceding audit report. The
remaining two findings will be followed up in our audit of DGS – Office of the
Secretary.
Our audit did not include certain support services provided to OPL by DGS –
Office of the Secretary. These support services (such as payroll processing) are
included within the scope of our audit of the DGS – Office of the Secretary.
To accomplish our audit objectives, our audit procedures included inquiries of
appropriate personnel, inspections of documents and records, observations of
OPL’s operations, and tests of transactions. Generally, transactions were selected
for testing based on auditor judgment, which primarily considers risk. Unless
otherwise specifically indicated, neither statistical nor non-statistical audit
sampling was used to select the transactions tested. Therefore, the results of the
tests cannot be used to project those results to the entire population from which
the test items were selected.
16

--- Page 19 ---
We also performed various data extracts of pertinent information from the State’s
Financial Management Information System (such as revenue and expenditure
data). These extracts are performed as part of ongoing internal processes
established by the Office of Legislative Audits and were subject to various tests to
determine data reliability. We determined that the data extracted from these
sources were sufficiently reliable for the purposes the data were used during this
audit.
In addition, we extracted data from eMM for the purpose of assessing user access.
We performed various tests of the relevant data and determined that the data were
sufficiently reliable for the purposes the data were used during the audit. Finally,
we performed other auditing procedures that we considered necessary to achieve
our audit objectives. The reliability of data used in this report for background or
informational purposes was not assessed.
OPL’s management is responsible for establishing and maintaining effective
internal control. Internal control is a process designed to provide reasonable
assurance that objectives pertaining to the reliability of financial records;
effectiveness and efficiency of operations, including safeguarding of assets; and
compliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations are achieved.
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate.
Our reports are designed to assist the Maryland General Assembly in exercising
its legislative oversight function and to provide constructive recommendations for
improving State operations. As a result, our reports generally do not address
activities we reviewed that are functioning properly.
This report includes findings relating to conditions that we consider to be
significant deficiencies in the design or operation of internal control that could
adversely affect OPL’s ability to maintain reliable financial records, operate
effectively and efficiently, and/or comply with applicable laws, rules, and
regulations. Our report also includes findings regarding significant instances of
noncompliance with applicable laws, rules, or regulations.
The response from DGS, on behalf of OPL, to our findings and recommendations
is included as an appendix to this report. As prescribed in the State Government
Article, Section 2-1224 of the Annotated Code of Maryland, we will advise DGS
regarding the results of our review of its response.
17

--- Page 21 ---
Department of General Services
Office of Procurement and Logistics
Agency Response Form
State Agency Procurement Monitoring
Finding 1
The Office of Procurement and Logistics (OPL) did not adequately monitor certain State
agency procurements that were specifically subject to its oversight.
We recommend that OPL
a. monitor agency procurements by conducting audits of delegated procurements in
accordance with State regulations and its procedures (repeat), and
b. ensure that the audits are sufficiently comprehensive and that workpapers properly
support the related conclusions.
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide During the audit period, in response to the 2016 audit finding, DGS
additional comments as undertook the reconstitution of a program to conduct compliance
deemed necessary. reviews at agencies to whom certain procurement authority was
delegated for commodities and facilities maintenance contracts.
DGS continues its efforts to implement all changes required under the
procurement modernization effort under HB1021, and organizational
structure, policies and processes are designed to address this item.
Recommendation 1a Agree Estimated Completion Date: 12/31/2020
Please provide details of As part of the continuing procurement modernization effort, DGS-OSP
corrective action or is implementing new Account Executive positions to routinely monitor
explain disagreement. agencies for compliance with all requirements.
Recommendation 1b Agree Estimated Completion Date: 12/31/2020
Please provide details of DGS –OSP will ensure that procurement officers placed in the Account
corrective action or Executive positions will be properly trained, supervised and their work
explain disagreement. performed in accordance with established processes.
Page 1 of 8

--- Page 22 ---
Department of General Services
Office of Procurement and Logistics
Agency Response Form
Statewide Procurements
Finding 2
OPL did not publish contract awards totaling $37 million on eMaryland Marketplace, as
required.
We recommend that OPL comply with State procurement laws and regulations by
publishing contract awards on eMM within 30 days of the contract award (repeat).
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide As DGS continues its efforts to implement all the changes required
additional comments as under the procurement modernization effort made possible under
deemed necessary. HB1021, the organizational structure, policies and processes will be
designed and implemented to make certain that DGS is addressing the
items noted in this audit.
Recommendation 2 Agree Estimated Completion Date: 7/1/2021
Please provide details of DGS-OSP makes every effort to comply with all requirements to publish
corrective action or awards on the State’s e-procurement system. Implementation of the new
explain disagreement. eMaryland Marketplace Advantage (“eMMA”) will help all stakeholders
monitor compliance.
The estimated completion date reflects time needed to implement system
functionality and policies, and conduct training to begin our own
procurement reviews as noted in Finding 1.
Page 2 of 8

--- Page 23 ---
Department of General Services
Office of Procurement and Logistics
Agency Response Form
Finding 3
OPL did not always provide prices for products available from Intergovernmental
Cooperative Purchasing Agreements to State agencies.
We recommend that OPL either independently publish contract prices or refer agencies to
pricing information from the agency that procured the ICPA for items available from
ICPAs for use by State agencies (repeat).
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide DGS works to ensure that all ICPAs in scope to DGS, as the control
additional comments as agency, meet applicable laws and regulations. However, not all
deemed necessary.
contracts are set up as a list of items that we acquire at a stated price.
Some contracts are established to provide the states participating in the
ICPA to receive a negotiated discount off of the standard pricing of the
items offered by the company entering into the contract. Some ICPAs
have such a long list of items available that the list is not included on the
BPO due to the cumbersome nature of entering large quantities of data
into the State’s legacy Financial Management Information System, but is
made available to the procurement officers throughout the State via
DGS’ website.
As DGS continues efforts to implement all changes required under the
HB 1021 procurement modernization effort, the organizational structure,
policies and processes will be designed and implemented so that items
noted in this audit are addressed.
Recommendation 3 Agree Estimated Completion Date: Immediate
Please provide details of DGS agrees to continue referring agencies to the lead states on the
corrective action or ICPAs for pricing information when appropriate.
explain disagreement.
Page 3 of 8

--- Page 24 ---
Department of General Services
Office of Procurement and Logistics
Agency Response Form
Monitoring of Providers with Procurement Preferences
Finding 4
OPL did not establish comprehensive procedures for determining the fair market prices of
goods and services available from MCE. Furthermore, OPL did not publish fair market
prices of items available for purchase from MCE and BISM, as required.
We recommend that OPL
a. establish comprehensive procedures to independently determine and publish the fair
market prices of MCE’s goods and services (repeat), and ensure documented adherence
to those procedures; and
b. publish or verify the fair market prices of BISM’s goods and services as determined by
the Pricing and Selection Committee for BISM and EWP (repeat).
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide There were some recent changes to law where BISM is now under the
additional comments as Pricing and Selection Committee (PSC) along with MD Works (the
deemed necessary.
current EWP), and a great deal of the ownership of the pricing analysis
is now bourn by the PSC. Additionally, DGS has submitted a legislative
proposal to clearly delineate the roles and responsibilities it has in
regards to the pricing set by MCE. As DGS is now the central
procurement authority based on HB 1021, it seeks to remove itself as a
pricing authority.
Recommendation 4a Disagree Estimated Completion Date: 12/31/2020
Please provide details of Legislation has been proposed to remove DGS as a pricing authority
corrective action or over MCE, resolving the need for this recommendation. If legislative
explain disagreement. means is not successful, then DGS will seek to convene a working group
to discuss the feasibility of undertaking OLA recommendation.
Auditor’s Comment: OPL disagrees with the recommendation that it should establish
comprehensive procedures to independently determine and publish fair market prices of
MCE’s goods and services since legislation has been proposed to remove DGS as the
pricing authority over MCE. Nevertheless, DGS has agreed to convene a working group
to discuss the feasibility of undertaking this recommendation if the legislation is not
successful.
Page 4 of 8

--- Page 25 ---
Department of General Services
Office of Procurement and Logistics
Agency Response Form
Recommendation 4b Disagree Estimated Completion Date: 12/31/2020
Please provide details of This requirement is not expressed under current law and DGS believes
corrective action or the recommendation is cumbersome to implement. Therefore, OLA’s
explain disagreement. recommendation will be submitted to the Procurement Improvement
Council (PIC) in 2020 to discuss various aspects and challenges of
implementation, and review the PIC’s recommendations to proceed.
Auditor’s Comment: OPL disagrees that the requirement to publish or verify the fair
market prices of BISM’s goods and services, which are to be charged to State agencies, is
not expressed under current law. While State law does not address the BISM pricing,
State regulations do require the Pricing and Selection Committee for BISM and EWP to
send DGS any changes to the pricing which DGS shall make available to purchasing
agents in the State. Therefore, it is OLA’s position that OPL should either make the
prices available as stipulated in the regulations, or verify the prices published on the
BISM website to ensure consistency with the approved prices.
Page 5 of 8

--- Page 26 ---
Department of General Services
Office of Procurement and Logistics
Agency Response Form
Finding 5
OPL did not adequately monitor the coordinating entity for EWP to ensure that it met its
responsibilities under the law.
We recommend that OPL
a. monitor the CE to ensure that it is providing the goods and services required by State
law and the MOU (repeat), and
b. specify in sufficient detail how the CE’s responsibilities should be carried out (repeat).
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide As DGS continues its efforts to implement all the changes required
additional comments as under the procurement modernization effort made possible under
deemed necessary. HB1021, the organizational structure, policies and processes will be
designed and implemented to ensure DGS addresses items noted in this
audit.
Recommendation 5a Agree Estimated Completion Date: 6/30/21
Please provide details of The MOU between DGS and the CE is being modified from its current
corrective action or form to intentionally alleviate concerns raised in the OLA discussion
explain disagreement.
notes, and is to be executed before 12/31/2019. As part of the
organizational restructuring of DGS-OSP, as stated in the Administrative
Work Plan submitted Oct 1, 2018, Account Executives will assist to
monitor compliance as will a potential Internal Auditor with items such
as the MOU.
Recommendation 5b Disagree Estimated Completion Date: 6/30/20
Please provide details of DGS-OSP lacks experience in the area of identifying, recruiting and
corrective action or onboarding companies that employ populations in the purview of the
explain disagreement. EWP. DGS will direct the CE to form a work group comprised of the
relevant interested parties to discuss implementing the OLA
recommendation and provide a report to DGS on how they are to
accomplish this.
Auditor’s Comment: OPL disagrees with recommendation that it should specify in
sufficient detail how the CE’s responsibilities should be carried out since OPL lacks
experience in identifying, recruiting, and onboarding companies that employ populations
in the purview of the EWP. While OPL’s response indicates that it will direct the CE to
form a work group to discuss implementing the recommendation, we believe that since
OPL is required to designate a CE to identify potential contracts for State procurement,
Page 6 of 8

--- Page 27 ---
Department of General Services
Office of Procurement and Logistics
Agency Response Form
establish procedures for the selection of preferred providers, provide training and
assistance to participating providers, and monitor EWP preferred providers, it is
reasonable to expect OPL to independently specify how those responsibilities should be
carried out.
Page 7 of 8

--- Page 28 ---
Department of General Services
Office of Procurement and Logistics
Agency Response Form
eMaryland Marketplace
Finding 6
OPL did not periodically review system access to eMM and did not require periodic
reviews of the eMM vendor to ensure the safeguarding and availability of the system.
We recommend that OPL
a. periodically review eMM system access and remove any unnecessary or improper
access including those noted above;
b. require the eMM vendor to obtain annual control assessment reviews, such as SOC 2
Type 2 reviews, to ensure the operability of the system and that critical data is properly
safeguarded; and
c. review the control assessment reports to ensure the eMM vendor takes appropriate
action to all recommendations.
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide As DGS continues its efforts to implement all the changes required
additional comments as under the procurement modernization effort made possible under
deemed necessary. HB1021, the organizational structure, policies and processes will be
designed and implemented to make certain that DGS is addressing the
items noted in this audit.
Recommendation 6a Agree Estimated Completion Date: 12/31/2020
Please provide details of Agencies who use the NEW eMMA will have select administrative
corrective action or access to remove employees no longer with their agency, or who no
explain disagreement. longer require access to the system. DGS-OSP intends to implement
policy requiring those agencies to be responsible for the accuracy of
their roster of employees having access to the system.
Recommendation 6b Agree Estimated Completion Date: Immediate
Please provide details of The SOC 2 requirement is included in the State’s current RFP template,
corrective action or and therefore is applicable to any new IT-related contract. The contract
explain disagreement. covering the eMMA system currently being implemented does contain
the SOC 2 requirement.
Recommendation 6c Agree Estimated Completion Date: 12/31/2020
Please provide details of DGS-OSP will work with the technical experts at DOIT to ensure that
corrective action or when a security report, such as a SOC 2, is received, that we are able to
explain disagreement. understand the contents of the report and formulate a plan to ensure the
vendor remedies any issues or concerns highlighted in the report.
Page 8 of 8

--- Page 29 ---
A T
UDIT EAM
Joshua S. Adler, CPA, CFE
Audit Manager
Jonathan H. Finglass, CPA
Senior Auditor
Sporthi J. Carnelio
Stephanie A. Laciny
Ian T. Pontius
Monica G. Pressley
Timothy S. Rice
Staff Auditors