Title: Presentation to the Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee - Maryland 529


Related Report Dated (12/3/2019)
Date: 12/17/2019
Type: Presentations to the Legislature
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5df113b5a1ce580c4897c9ea
Extracted: 2025-06-19T06:22:50.494880
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Maryland 529
Report Dated December 3, 2019
Presentation to Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Gregory A. Hook, CPA
Michael J. Murdzak, CPA
Nathan H. Suffin, CPA
December 17, 2019

--- Page 2 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Audit Overview
 Maryland 529 offers two college savings plans, the
Maryland Prepaid College Trust (MPCT) and the
Maryland College Investment Plan (MCIP).
 MPCT offers tuition contracts for the future
payment of tuition and fees at eligible
institutions of higher education. As of June 30,
2018, Maryland 529 was administering 32,900
MPCT tuition contracts and had program
investments of $1.2 billion.
 MCIP was established to allow individuals to
invest funds to help pay college costs for
designated beneficiaries. As of June 30, 2018,
199,200 beneficiaries had investment savings
accounts in MCIP with balances totaling $5.8
billion. A private investment company has been
contracted for management of MCIP.
 Primarily as a result of certain audit planning
considerations the focus of our audit was on MPCT.
Our report included 9 findings, with Finding 5
repeated from our preceding audit report.
Maryland 529 Page 2

--- Page 3 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Key Findings
 Limited documentation and explanations regarding
certain unusual issues and events impacting
operations, and whether effective oversight was
provided. These events included:
 Agency discovery of numerous old unopened and
unprocessed business documents
 Certain irregularities attributed to a former
employee
 Insufficient procedures related to disbursements
from and adjustments to MPCT accounts, and for
performing effective and timely reconciliations of all
bank accounts.
 Methodology for calculating disbursement amounts
for MPCT account holder refunds and rollovers
(transfers), in our opinion, often resulted in
excessive payments.
 Inadequate monitoring of access to the automated
system used to administer MPCT, and a lack of
assurance that the system was properly secured
against operational and security risks.
Maryland 529 Page 3

--- Page 4 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
529 Conditions & Board Oversight - Finding 1
There was an overwhelming lack of specific
documentation supporting whether effective oversight
was provided by the Maryland 529 Board regarding
MPCT operations.
 After the May 2015 resignation and termination of
Maryland 529’s CEO and CFO, respectively,
numerous unprocessed documents, including old
unopened and undelivered mail, were discovered
within the agency’s offices. For example, Maryland
529 personnel found 187 boxes of old business
documents, some dating back 10 years or more, for
which required action had never been taken. In
August 2015 Maryland 529 management advised
the Board of $4.3 million in account holder
disbursements that had not been recorded or had
been incorrectly recorded in Maryland 529’s
records.
Maryland 529 Page 4

--- Page 5 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
529 Conditions & Board Oversight - Finding 1 (cont.)
 Other documents discovered included:
 undeposited checks totaling $14,000 dating
back to 2007
 disbursement checks for amounts of up to
$28,000 never sent to account holders dating
back to August 2008
 unprocessed refund requests dating back to April
2014
 unpaid invoices and delinquency notices from
collection agencies
 documentation of overpayments to account
holders totaling approximately $200,000
 Subsequent to discovery of these documents, certain
irregularities attributed to a former employee’s
personal Maryland 529 accounts were identified and
referred to the Office of the Attorney General’s
Criminal Division (CD).
 Detailed listings of documents discovered and
records of actions taken, if any, to address these
documents were not maintained.
Maryland 529 Page 5

--- Page 6 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
529 Conditions & Board Oversight - Finding 1 (cont.)
 There was no written report of findings and
conclusions from any subsequent review or
investigation of the discovered documents, nor
could Maryland 529 personnel provide any of the
discovered documents at the time of our audit.
 There is no documentation that, subsequent to
referral of the aforementioned irregularities to the
CD, the Board directed Maryland 529 to take
specific action, such as a forensic audit, to identify
and address process and documentation
deficiencies, including those that may have
contributed to these conditions.
 We were advised that the Board was kept informed
and was actively engaged in addressing these
events. However, the overwhelming lack of specific
documentation supporting these assertions creates
a lack of assurance that Board oversight and action
was sufficient to address these significant events.
Maryland 529 Page 6

--- Page 7 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
MPCT Disbursements & Adjustments - Findings 2 & 3
Supervisory reviews of MPCT disbursements and
account adjustments were either not documented or
not performed. MPCT disbursements and monetary
adjustments in fiscal year 2018 totaled $65.9 million
and $32.1 million, respectively.
 Finding 2 – Disbursements
Supervisory reviews of manual calculations
supporting MPCT disbursement transactions were
not documented and our test of 20 disbursements
disclosed certain calculation errors in 3 of the 20.
The reliance on manually prepared calculations,
which include a number of variables, creates an
increased susceptibility to error.
 Finding 3 –Adjustments
Adjustments to MPCT accounts and account terms
were unilaterally processed and were not subject to
independent supervisory review and approval. From
our test of 13 adjustments, we noted that an
employee had erroneously processed an
adjustment which effectively resulted in the
issuance of a duplicate check for $9,600.
Maryland 529 Page 7

--- Page 8 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Bank Account Reconciliations - Finding 4
 Maryland 529 did not prepare adequate bank
reconciliations for three bank accounts used to
administer MPCT activities, and many
reconciliations lacked documentation of
supervisory review.
 Reconciliations for the disbursement account
were developed primarily from internal records
instead of comparing to bank records. As a
result, the June 2018 reconciliation did not
identify an $8.4 million difference for
outstanding checks.
 Reconciliations for the depository account did
not include account balances or compare
transfer activity. Deposits during fiscal year
2018 totaled $94.4 million.
 Reconciliations for the administrative fees
account were not performed during fiscal year
2018, with deposits totaling $2.8 million for
that year.
Maryland 529
Page 8

--- Page 9 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Rollover/Refund Payment Methodology - Finding 6
Maryland 529’s methodology for calculating
disbursements for MPCT account holder refunds and
rollovers (transfers to other 529 accounts), in our
opinion, often resulted in excessive payments.
 Although the methodology used was consistent
with current MPCT tuition contract language, we
questioned the reasonableness of this
methodology and the resulting payments. The
factor contributing to this conclusion was the
method used to calculate interest to be paid as
part of these transactions.
 For example, when an account holder requested a
refund or rollover, as permitted by their tuition
contract, interest to be paid was calculated for
each year the account was open using the
account holder’s final balance at the time of
refund or rollover rather than the actual balance
at the end of each year.
Maryland 529 Page 9

--- Page 10 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Rollover/Refund Payment Methodology - Finding 6 (cont.)
 The methodology significantly impacted the
interest amount for account holders who
accumulated their final balance over several
years.
 Our review of 17 refunds and rollover
disbursements totaling $1,027,278, disclosed
that approximately $109,000 more in interest was
paid under Maryland 529’s method, than would
have been paid if the account balance at the end
of each year had been used to calculate interest
due.
 For example, for one of these 17 accounts, which
had been open for 13 years, interest paid totaled
$32,110, but would have totaled $17,290 if year
end balances had been used. (Refer to Table 2 on
audit report page 26)
Maryland 529 Page 10

--- Page 11 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
System Access & Security - Findings 7 & 8
 Finding 7
Maryland 529 did not adequately monitor access
granted to users of the automated system used to
administer MPCT. Our review of 46 users with
access to critical functions, such as the capability
to post tuition contract payments, disclosed:
 10 users who did not require the access for
their job duties
 11 former employees whose access had not
been disabled
 5 employees who required the access granted
to them, but this resulted in a control
weakness, such as an employee who had
access to record account holder collections
also processed cash receipts
 Finding 8
Maryland 529 lacked assurance that the MPCT
automated system was sufficiently protected
against operational and security risks, as an
independent security review was not required from
the third party that hosted the MPCT system.
Maryland 529 Page 11

--- Page 12 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Other Findings
 Finding 5 – Abandoned Funds
Maryland 529 did not determine the disposition
of uncashed checks totaling $1.7 million noted in
our preceding audit report as being more than 3
years old as of August 2014. Nor did it obtain a
formal legal opinion regarding the applicability of
the Maryland Abandoned Property Act to
Maryland 529 trust account activity.
 Finding 9 – Cash Receipts
Controls were not established to ensure that all
mail collections for MPCT were properly
accounted for and deposited.
Maryland 529
Page 12

--- Page 13 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Conclusions
Maryland 529 should:
 conduct a forensic audit of past activity that
includes the aforementioned unprocessed
business documents and irregularities noted in a
former employee’s accounts;
 ensure that disbursements from MPCT and
adjustments to MPCT accounts are reviewed for
propriety by independent supervisory personnel
and document these reviews;
 ensure that bank reconciliations are properly
performed for all bank accounts;
 obtain a formal legal opinion regarding the
applicability of the Maryland Abandoned Property
Act to its accounts;
 conduct a formal evaluation of the methodology it
uses for calculating refund and rollover payments;
 ensure the propriety of MPCT system user access
granted and take the necessary steps to obtain
assurance that the system is properly secured
against operational and security risks; and
 establish sufficient controls over mail collections.
Maryland 529 Page 13