Title: Presentation to the Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee - Maryland Department of Health - Medical Care Programs Administration


Related Report Dated (11/7/2019)
Date: 12/17/2019
Type: Presentations to the Legislature
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5df113b5a1ce580c4897c9e6
Extracted: 2025-06-19T06:22:41.273629
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Maryland Department of Health (MDH) -
Medical Care Programs Administration (MCPA)
Report Dated November 7, 2019
Presentation to Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Gregory A. Hook, CPA
Joshua S. Adler, CPA, CFE
Adam M. Auerback
Brian S. Han, CPA
December 17, 2019

--- Page 2 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Report Overview
 The audit report covers MCPA activity during the
period from July 1, 2015 and ending July 31,
2018.
 MCPA’s expenditures have mirrored the growth in
Medicaid enrollment since FY 2000.
 The audit report contained 11 findings, including
2 repeat findings from the prior audit report.
Medical Care Programs Administration Page 2

--- Page 3 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Report Overview (continued)
 During previous audit cycles, we conducted one
audit for all aspects of MCPA’s activities, whereas
during the current audit cycle we conducted four
separate audits of MCPA operations.
 This audit is the primary MCPA audit, accounting
for approximately $4 billion in expenditures in FY
2018.
 Separate audits are conducted of the Managed
Care Program, Behavioral Health Administration’s
Administrative Services Organization (a MCPA
responsibility), and the Maryland Pharmacy
Program.
 In our previous audit report, we reported that
MCPA’s accountability and compliance level was
unsatisfactory. During our current audit, we
concluded that MCPA’s accountability and
compliance level is no longer unsatisfactory.
Medical Care Programs Administration Page 3

--- Page 4 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Report Overview (continued)
MCPA
FY 2018
Expenditures
by OLA Audit
(in thousands)
MCPA
FY 2018
Expenditures
Subject to this
Audit
(in thousands)
Source: State accounting records, MMIS II
Medical Care Programs Administration Page 4

--- Page 5 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Key Findings
 MCPA did not provide sufficient oversight of
vendors responsible for conducting utilization
reviews and audits of hospitals and nursing
facility services.
 MCPA did not sufficiently document its review of
investigations of questionable recipient eligibility.
 MCPA did not ensure that all referrals of potential
third-party health insurance were timely and
properly investigated.
 MCPA had conducted virtually no audits of
hospital claim payments since 2007.
 MCPA lacked sufficient oversight to ensure that
elderly or disabled Community First Choice
program recipients received the required services
to assist with daily living activities.
 MCPA did not audit all Medical Day Care program
providers as required.
Medical Care Programs Administration Page 5

--- Page 6 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Vendor Oversight (Finding 1)
MCPA did not sufficiently address errors noted in
medical necessity hospitalization determinations
made by its utilization control agent (UCA) vendor
and did not ensure the UCA performed the required
continuing stay reviews (CSRs) of nursing facilities.
 During the period from June 2016 to October
2018, MCPA determined that 1,889 of the
11,435 hospital days (17%) deemed medically
necessary by the UCA were actually not medically
necessary, including 1,215 days from fiscal year
2018 that we estimated cost $4.6 million.
 Our analysis of 10,666 recipients residing in
nursing facilities as of September 2018
disclosed that 2,328 recipients (22%) had not
received the required CSRs.
According to the State’s records, the UCA was paid
approximately $15.1 million as of October 2018.
Medical Care Programs Administration Page 6

--- Page 7 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Vendor Oversight (Finding 2)
 MCPA did not monitor the vendor responsible for
conducting credit balance audits (intended to
identify amounts due the State for claims paid by
both MCPA and third parties) of hospitals and
nursing facilities to ensure audits were timely
and sufficiently comprehensive (Repeat Finding).
 29 of the 69 hospitals had not been audited
during FY 2018.
 41 of the 215 nursing facilities had not been
audited in FY 2017 or 2018 and the related
contract did not specify the frequency of such
audits.
 MCPA did not review the vendor’s audit
procedures to ensure comprehensiveness.
 MCPA management advised that it was generally
aware that the vendor was not conducting the
required audits, but it was unable to require
corrective action because the vendor’s contract
did not provide for penalties, or other corrective
actions to address vendor noncompliance.
Medical Care Programs Administration Page 7

--- Page 8 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Vendor Oversight (Finding 3)
MCPA did not require nor obtain comprehensive
reviews of the automated systems used by two
vendors to ensure the security of sensitive data
including personally identifiable information (PII)
and protected health information (PHI) for all MCPA
recipients.
 The American Institute of Certified Public
Accountants guidance for service organizations
(such as these vendors) includes an independent
review of controls for which the resultant
independent auditor’s report is referred to as a
System and Organization Controls (SOC) report.
 The vendors’ contracts did not require, and
MCPA did not obtain, any independent audit
reports from the vendors. Although we were
advised that the vendors had obtained an
independent review, the type of reviews obtained
would not provide sufficient assurances
regarding the security of MCPA data.
Medical Care Programs Administration Page 8

--- Page 9 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Recipient Enrollment (Finding 4)
 MCPA did not sufficiently document its review of
investigations of questionable recipient eligibility
that are performed by the Department of Human
Services (DHS) and others to ensure the proper
corrective action was taken. While our current
audit did not disclose any improper corrective
actions, a recent OLA audit of DHS disclosed that
appropriate corrective action was not taken for
29 of 31 system alerts that we tested.
 MCPA did not take adequate follow-up action
when its employees made incorrect changes to
critical recipient eligibility information, such as
date of birth and social security number. For
example, MCPA noted that between 20% and
33% of the changes reviewed for 7 employees
contained errors. MCPA did not expand its review
of transactions processed by these employees
and did not implement any additional training or
disciplinary action.
Medical Care Programs Administration Page 9

--- Page 10 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Third-Party Liability (Finding 5)
MCPA did not ensure that all referrals of potential
third-party health insurance for Medicaid recipients
were timely and properly investigated.
 As of September 2018, MCPA had not yet
investigated the 64,700 such referrals received
from Managed Care Organizations (MCOs)
between May 2017 and July 2018. Federal
regulations require MCPA to follow up on the
potential third-party insurance information
obtained within 60 days.
 MCPA did not adequately document supervisory
reviews of referral investigations to ensure
appropriate conclusions were reached and
insurance status was properly updated. Our
testing of 20 referrals disclosed that MCPA did
not properly resolve 3 referrals and did not have
sufficient documentation to support that 2 other
referrals had been properly investigated.
Medical Care Programs Administration Page 10

--- Page 11 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Hospital Services (Finding 6)
MCPA conducted virtually no audits of hospital
claims since calendar year 2007, which could result
in payments for hospital services that were never
provided or were not medically necessary (Repeat
Finding).
 MCPA payments for hospital services totaled
$777.5 million during FY 2018.
 In June 2019, MCPA procured a new vendor to
perform the audits. However, the scope of the
contract excluded claim payments made from
January 2008 through June 2015.
 MCPA has historically found these audits to be
beneficial. Specifically, the audits for claim
payments made in calendar years 2005 and
2006 identified overpayments totaling $10.7
million.
Medical Care Programs Administration Page 11

--- Page 12 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Community First Choice (Finding 7)
MCPA did not ensure that Community First Choice
(CFC) program recipients received quality services.
MCPA contracted with nurse monitors to evaluate
the quality of services, but did not have a process to
ensure that the nurse monitors were conducting the
evaluations.
 Our analysis of FY 2018 services disclosed that
2,019 of the 12,587 recipients (16%) were not
evaluated by the nurse monitors.
 For recipients that were evaluated by the nurse
monitors, MCPA did not review the sufficiency of
the evaluations. Our review disclosed that the
evaluations were not consistently performed, as
we identified instances of fewer hours being
provided than required by plans of service.
During fiscal year 2018, MCPA paid CFC providers
$305.1 million to help elderly or disabled individuals
live in their own homes, rather than a nursing
facility.
Medical Care Programs Administration Page 12

--- Page 13 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Other Findings
Finding 8 – Medical Day Care
MCPA did not audit all Medical Day Care program
providers as required and the related audit
procedures were not sufficiently comprehensive.
Finding 9 – Nursing Facility Services Program
MCPA did not ensure ventilator care claims
submitted by nursing facilities were valid.
Finding 10 – Claims Processing
Claims that were suspended by automated MCPA
payment edits and subsequently reviewed and paid
were not subject to sufficient supervisory review and
approval.
Finding 11 – Information Systems Security
MCPA did not have sufficient procedures and
controls to restrict access to its automated system
used to pay provider claims. For example, 727 users
could view personally identifiable information (PII)
such as names and social security numbers of 3.5
million active and inactive Medicaid recipients.
Medical Care Programs Administration Page 13

--- Page 14 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Conclusions
MCPA should:
• provide sufficient oversight of vendors
responsible for conducting utilization reviews
and audits of hospitals and nursing facility
services and take appropriate corrective action
to address any deficiencies;
• obtain comprehensive reviews of vendor
automated systems to ensure the security of
sensitive data;
• document its reviews of investigations of
questionable recipient eligibility and take
appropriate action when employees incorrectly
change critical eligibility data;
• ensure that referrals of potential third-party
health insurance are timely and properly
investigated;
• ensure hospital claims are audited timely;
• ensure that all CFC recipients receive quality
services; and
• take appropriate action to address the remaining
findings in our report.
Medical Care Programs Administration Page 14