Title: Presentation to the Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee - Personally Identifiable Information Audit Issues
Date: 12/17/2019
Type: Presentations to the Legislature
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5df113b5a1ce580c4897c9e7
Extracted: 2025-06-19T06:23:08.400357
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Personally Identifiable Information
(PII)
Audit Issues
Presentation to Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Gregory A. Hook, CPA
Stephen P. Jersey, CPA, CISA
December 17, 2019

--- Page 2 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Presentation Overview
Today’s presentation on PII issues identified in OLA
audit reports issued since fiscal year 2014 will focus
on the following information elements:
 Definition of PII Data
 State PII Security Requirements
 PII Within State IT Systems
 Volume of PII Records Within State Systems
 PII Data Security Risks
 OLA Audit PII Findings
 Conclusions
 Recommendations
State PII Data and Control Issues in OLA Audits
Page 2

--- Page 3 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Overview – PII Definition – Federal Government
The U.S. Department of Commerce’s National Institute
of Standards and Technology (NIST) defines PII as “any
information about an individual maintained by an
agency, including:
1) any information that can be used to distinguish or
trace an individual’s identity, such as name, social
security number, date and place of birth, mother’s
maiden name, or biometric records; and
2) any other information that is linked or linkable to
an individual, such as medical, educational,
financial, and employment information.”
Examples of PII data per NIST’s Guide to Protecting the
Confidentiality of Personally Identifiable Information
(PII) (SP 800-112) also include, but are not limited to:
 driver’s license number, taxpayer identification
number, or financial account or credit card number;
 street address or email address; and
 personal characteristics, including photographic
image, fingerprints, handwriting, or other biometric
data (such as retina scan, voice signature, or facial
geometric pattern).
State PII Data and Control Issues in OLA Audits Page 3

--- Page 4 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Overview – PII Definition – State of Maryland
Maryland PII definition found in two statutes:
State Government Article, Sections 10-1301 to 10-
1308 considers PII to be an individual's first name
or first initial and last name, personal mark, or
unique biometric or genetic print or image, in
combination with one or more of the following data
elements:
1. Social Security number;
2. Driver's license number, state identification
card number, or other individual identification
number issued by a unit;
3. Passport number or other identification number
issued by the United States government;
4. Individual Taxpayer Identification Number; or
5. Financial or other account number, a credit
card number, or a debit card number that, in
combination with any required security code,
access code, or password, that would permit
access to an individual's account.
State PII Data and Control Issues in OLA Audits
Page 4

--- Page 5 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Overview – PII Definition – State of Maryland (cont.)
In addition to the aforementioned State
Government Article, the Commercial Law Article,
Title 14, Subtitle 35 – (from the Maryland Personal
Information Protection Act) also defines PII. This
definition includes an individual’s name and the
same data elements as defined by State
Government Article 10-1301, with the additional
data combinations of:
1. health information, including information about
an individual's mental health; or
2. a health insurance policy or certificate number
or health insurance subscriber identification
number, in combination with a unique identifier
used by an insurer or an employer that is self-
insured, that permits access to an individual's
health information.
State PII Data and Control Issues in OLA Audits
Page 5

--- Page 6 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Background – PII - State Security Requirements
Multiple State IT Security Policies, depending upon the
governmental area, address PII data protection.
 State of Maryland Information Technology Security
Manual - published by DoIT – applies to State
Executive Department and independent agencies
 USM IT Security Standards (Section III –
Confidential Data)
 Administrative Office of the Courts – Judicial
Information Systems – Information Security Policy
(Sections 3.2 – Data Classification and 13 – Data
Loss Prevention Guidance)
The DoIT IT Security Manual focuses on the minimum
security requirements needed to adequately protect
the confidentiality, integrity, and availability of
Maryland Information Systems and State-owned data.
These security requirement responsibilities for State-
owned data extend to all agency information while it is
being processed, stored, or transmitted electronically.
State PII Data and Control Issues in OLA Audits Page 6

--- Page 7 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Background – PII - State Security Requirements (cont.)
For PII data protection, the DoIT IT Security Manual,
defines the following related key security
requirements:
 PII Identification - Manual Section – Configuration
Management, part CM-8, requires information
systems components be inventoried, including
components holding PII.
 PII Data Retention - Manual Section – Data
Minimization and Retention directs agencies to
collect, use, and retain only relevant PII necessary
for the original purpose for which it was collected.
 PII Data Protection - Manual Section – Asset
Management recommends using encryption
technologies and/or other substantial mitigating
controls (such as Data Loss Prevention, Network
Security Event Monitoring, and strict database
change monitoring).
 Encryption is the strongest, and preferred,
control, and is the defense of last resort for
critical PII data.
State PII Data and Control Issues in OLA Audits
Page 7

--- Page 8 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Overview – PII Within State IT Systems
Stored sensitive PII information is very prevalent
within the information systems of State and local
government agencies audited by OLA, shown by the
types of agencies listed below and their related
functions:
 State Universities and Colleges
 Comptroller Taxation Agencies
 Professional Licensing Agencies
 Transportation Related Agencies
 Benefit Related Agencies (Department of Human
Services, Maryland Department of Health –
Medicaid, Department of Labor) and their related
claims information systems
 Other Health Related Agencies
 Judicial / Courts Related Agencies
 Public Safety Agencies’ Information Systems
 Local Education Agencies (School Systems)
State PII Data and Control Issues in OLA Audits
Page 8

--- Page 9 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Overview – State IT Systems & Volume of PII Records
Total PII records within State agencies IT systems
is substantial. Later in this presentation, we
determined that for issued OLA audit reports from
FY 2014 to 2020 (to date), a total of
approximately 37,900,000 PII records existed,
which were not subject to having adequate PII
data security controls.
Notably, it is plausible that one Maryland citizen’s
PII data (just name and Social Security Number)
could be held within the IT Systems of multiple
state agencies. For example, an individual’s PII
could potentially exist within most or all of the IT
systems of the agencies listed on the preceding
slide.
State PII Data and Control Issues in OLA Audits
Page 9

--- Page 10 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Background – PII - Data Security Risks
Sensitive PII stored on State agencies information
systems presents the following potential data security
risks which include:
 PII data identification not being performed
 Improper PII data retention
 Unsecured Stored PII Data - which can lead to:
 Improper Disclosure / Data Breach
 Exfiltration (with associated unplanned dollar
costs)
Those risks can expose State agency maintained PII
to identity-theft crimes, the impact of which could be
costly.
 Financial Losses and remediation expenses
 Lost Confidence in State Information Systems
 Operational impact through the disruption of daily
State agency operations
State PII Data and Control Issues in OLA Audits
Page 10

--- Page 11 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Background – PII - Data Security Risks
Financial cost of PII data breach
Annually, the Ponemon Institute, in conjunction
with IBM, publishes a Report on the Costs of a
Data Breach. This Institute is an independent
research organization focused on data protection
and information technologies. Their 2019 report
(for 507 companies) noted that for US-based
organizations:
 Average data breach size – 25,575 records
 Average total data breach cost - $8,200,000
 Cost per lost record - $242
The cost elements above include detection and
escalation, notifications, response and lost
business.
In addition to the immediate costs, data breaches
have lifecycles (from occurrence to containment)
and long tails (costs extending for years after an
incident).
State PII Data and Control Issues in OLA Audits
Page 11

--- Page 12 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
PII Data – General OLA Audit History
 On Sept 27, 2012, OLA issued a Performance
Audit Report on the Department of Information
Technology and Selected State Agencies on
Information System Data Security.
 Finding 1 in the audit report disclosed that then
current State law (the Maryland Personal
Information Protection Act) regarding PII data
protection did not apply to State agencies, and,
that there was no applicable State law for the
protection of PII by governmental units.
 The aforementioned OLA audit report, coupled with
the efforts of the Commission on Maryland
Cybersecurity Innovation and Excellence, led to the
2013 enactment of SB676 (Governmental
Procedures – Security and Protection of
Information), which established PII data protection
requirements for units of State and local
government (effective July 1, 2014).
State PII Data and Control Issues in OLA Audits Page 12

--- Page 13 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
PII Data – Individual OLA Audits
 During the period from fiscal year 2014 through
November 2019, OLA issued 457 reports resulting
from audits and reviews of State and local
government units.
 77 of these 457 audit reports (16.8%), involving 69
units of State and local government, identified 84
findings concerning the lack of adequate controls
over the protection of PII.
 Across the above cited 77 audit reports,
approximately 37.9 million records were identified as
containing PII data elements (for example names
and SSNs) where the lack of controls left the records
susceptible to increased risk of improper disclosure.
 In response to these audit reports, the agencies
generally agreed with our findings and
recommendations. Notably, 12 of these 84 noted
findings were repeats of audit findings cited in prior
audit reports due to corrective actions not being
implemented.
State PII Data and Control Issues in OLA Audits Page 13

--- Page 14 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
PII – Control Issues Commonly Identified in Audits
 PII Data Protection - PII data, mainly in a recorded
at rest mode was stored in a plain text format,
without being either encrypted, or with alternative
substantial mitigating controls to safeguard the PII
data from improper disclosure. This issue was cited
in 49 of the 84 audit findings (33.1 million records
susceptible to increased risk).
 PII Data Access – Restricted access to stored PII
data did not always exist per the concept of least
privilege. Certain audits identified instances where
granted PII data access was unnecessary, because
the access was either not needed or was excessive
for the system users’ job responsibilities. This issue
was cited in 9 of the 84 audit findings.
 PII Data Policies - Agencies had not established
adequate policies over the protection of PII or had
relied on external service providers to process PII
without ensuring the information was adequately
safeguarded (such as by requiring independent
security assessments). This issue was cited in 26 of
the 84 audits findings.
State PII Data and Control Issues in OLA Audits Page 14

--- Page 15 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
PII Control Issues – Causes for Audit Findings
OLA believes the causes for unsecured PII within
audited State and local agencies IT systems,
include, but are not limited to, cases of:
 Agency management being unaware of the
need to inventory and secure PII data;
 Unexpected PII records;
 Outside service provider contracts not including
requirements for either independent security
reviews (e.g., SOC 2 Type 2) and/or PII data
encryption;
 Commercial off the shelf software that either
lacked an encryption capability or the capability
could not be implemented;
 Encryption usage causing system performance
issues: and/or
 IT staff technical knowledge limitations.
Agencies have generally not cited a lack of
budgetary resources as a cause for our PII
findings.
State PII Data and Control Issues in OLA Audits
Page 15

--- Page 16 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Conclusions - State of Maryland – PII Data Protection
 Clearly understood State law PII data definitions
exist
 Clear PII data security protection requirements have
been established and defined
 The existence of PII data in State government IT
systems is pervasive
 Agencies IT systems’ PII data carries inherent
security risks and State IT systems always have
protection features available
 OLA audit history shows that PII data protection
issues continue to be problematic. Between FYs
2014 and 2020, the count of reports containing PII-
related findings, by FY, were:
2014 – 6 2015 – 16 2016 – 7 2017 – 11
2018 – 16 2019 – 12 2020 - 9
 Some agencies are not establishing adequate
control over PII, which requires increased, diligent,
and focused efforts, with assistance provided by key
control agencies, such as DoIT.
State PII Data and Control Issues in OLA Audits Page 16

--- Page 17 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Recommendations - PII Data Protection
Adequate security protection over State IT information
systems PII requires a twofold approach by control
agencies and individual State agencies.
Control agencies, such as DoIT, the USM Office, and
the Judiciary Administrative Office of the Courts, for
agencies under their oversight, on an ongoing basis
should advise and reinforce to those agencies:
 the prevalent existence of PII data;
 the significance of PII data, as per the State
statutes;
 the financial risk to the State of Maryland arising
from unsecured PII data;
 reiterate the necessary PII data protection controls
(i.e., identification, encryption, and data access
limitations);
 monitor agencies’ progress in implementing PII data
protection controls; and
 offer general and technical assistance, as needed,
to individual agencies pursuing PII data protection.
State PII Data and Control Issues in OLA Audits Page 17

--- Page 18 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Recommendations - PII Data Protection (cont.)
For adequate security protection over State IT
information systems PII, individual agencies need to:
• implement either approved encryption methods to
encrypt PII both at rest and when transmitted, or
substantial mitigating controls (such as the use of
Data Loss Prevention solutions) to ensure that
confidentiality is protected;
• perform periodic reviews of system access to PII
to ensure that access is assigned/restricted
based on the concept of least privilege and is
removed when such access is no longer required
for legitimate business purposes; and
• establish agency specific policies and procedures
for protecting PII when a third-party service
organization is involved, including requiring that
independent security assessments, such as SOC
2 Type 2 reviews, are performed, reported to the
agency, and reviewed by the agency, with agency
verification that any necessary correction actions
are implemented.
State PII Data and Control Issues in OLA Audits
Page 18