Title: Presentation to the Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee - Department of Budget and Management - Office of the Secretary and Other Units


Related Report Dated (10/29/2019)
Date: 12/17/2019
Type: Presentations to the Legislature
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5df113b5a1ce580c4897c9eb
Extracted: 2025-06-19T06:22:32.443299
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Department of
Budget and Management (DBM)
Office of the Secretary and Other
Units
Report Dated October 29, 2019
Presentation to Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Gregory A. Hook, CPA
Michael J. Murdzak, CPA
Catherine E. Clarke, CPA, CIA, CFE
December 17, 2019

--- Page 2 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Audit Overview
 DBM is primarily responsible for assisting the
Governor in the preparation and monitoring of the
State’s annual operating and capital budgets.
The scope of our audit included the Office of the
Secretary, which includes the State’s Central
Collection Unit (CCU), the Office of Budget
Analysis, and the Office of Capital Budgeting.
 DBM’s expenditures for fiscal year 2018,
excluding DBM’s Office of Personnel Services and
Benefits, which we audit and report upon
separately, totaled $24.5 million.
 Eight of the 14 findings in this report relate to the
operations of CCU, which is primarily responsible
for the collection of delinquent debts owed to the
State. As of June 30, 2018, outstanding debts
referred to CCU totaled $2.6 billion, and CCU’s
collections in fiscal year 2018 totaled $131
million.
 Findings 4 and 10 in this report are repeated from
our preceding audit report.
Department of Budget and Management (DBM) Page 2

--- Page 3 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Key Findings
 CCU System Controls
 User access to CCU’s cash register system and
debt collection system, which includes
personally identifiable information, was not
adequately restricted.
 Collection fees of at least $17.8 million were
not assessed and certain valid debts were
improperly rejected for collection because of
deficiencies in the debt collection system.
 CCU Collection Efforts
 Potential wage garnishments were not
adequately pursued.
 Controls over account abatements, which
totaled $39.1 million during our audit period,
were inadequate.
 Deviations from CCU regulations granted to
State agencies were not periodically reviewed
for continued necessity.
Department of Budget and Management (DBM) Page 3

--- Page 4 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Key Findings (cont.)
 CCU Tax Refund Intercept Program (TRIP)
 Significant debt amounts were excluded from
TRIP because of system omissions and errors.
 CCU improperly collected TRIP revenues of
$11.6 million for a private entity.
 Other Key Findings
 Personally identifiable information recorded in
the State’s Financial Management Information
System was not adequately restricted.
 Network security risks existed as a result of
information technology contractors having
unnecessary network access.
Department of Budget and Management (DBM) Page 4

--- Page 5 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
CCU - System Controls – Findings 1 and 2
 Finding 1
Periodic reviews of employee access to CCU’s legacy
debt collection system, and to its cash register
system were not performed. As a result, CCU lacked
assurance that access to process transactions on
these critical systems was properly restricted.
 A review of 123 active debt collection system
users and 37 active cash register system users
disclosed 51 and 20 users, respectively, with
unnecessary or inappropriate access. For
example, of the 21 employees who had access to
change an account status to inactive on the debt
collection system and stop all collection activity
for the account, only 2 required the access for
their job duties.
 Finding 2
Access to personally identifiable information (PII),
such as names and social security numbers, for 5.8
million accounts in CCU’s debt collection system
was not adequately restricted. For example, 974
user accounts with access to view PII had not been
used since they were created, up to 6 years prior to
our review.
Department of Budget and Management (DBM) Page 5

--- Page 6 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
CCU - System Controls – Finding 3
Deficiencies in CCU’s debt collection system resulted
in the failure to assess collections fees of at least
$17.8 million, and the rejection of certain valid debts
submitted by State agencies for collection. These
system deficiencies occurred when agencies
submitted the principal and interest portion of
delinquent debts to CCU separately rather than as a
combined total. When this occurred:
 The collection system applied CCU’s standard 17%
collection fee to the principal portion of the debt,
but not the interest portion, as required. The
$17.8 million we noted relates only to debts
outstanding as January 2018.
 The collection system was programmed to
consider only the principal field when determining
whether the dollar value of the debt met CCU’s
$30 threshold for accepting a debt for collection.
Principal balances below the threshold were
incorrectly rejected even if principal and interest
combined exceed the $30 threshold.
Department of Budget and Management (DBM) Page 6

--- Page 7 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
CCU - Collection Efforts – Findings 4 and 5
 Finding 4
CCU did not always pursue wage garnishments
from debtors when viable wages were identified
through quarterly computer matches of its
accounts with wage data from the Maryland
Department of Labor.
 A review of 20 debtors appearing on the 2017
second quarter match, and who had debts of
$3.9 million as of September 2017, disclosed
16 debtors with wages of $798,800 for whom
no garnishment had been initiated as of
January 2018 and there was no documentation
as to why garnishment had not been pursued.
 Finding 5
CCU lacked procedures for ensuring that only
accounts authorized for abatement were moved to
abated status. Approximately 24,000 accounts
totaling $39.1 million were abated during our audit
period. Our test of 20 accounts totaling $8 million
disclosed 4 totaling $349,000 without evidence of
the required abatement committee approval.
Department of Budget and Management (DBM) Page 7

--- Page 8 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
CCU - Collection Efforts – Finding 6
CCU did not periodically review existing deviations
from State regulations granted to State agencies
regarding the submission of delinquent accounts to
CCU.
 Deviations include, for example, granting an
extension of time to submit to CCU certain types
of delinquent accounts receivable held by an
agency.
 At the time of our review, 35 agencies had 117
active deviations initially authorized by CCU
between December 1979 and October 2017,
with the majority (88) established prior to 1999.
Deviations are granted without expiration dates
or renewal requirements.
 OLA believes that a process for monitoring,
reevaluation, and renewal is necessary to
determine if existing deviations are still
warranted and effective.
Department of Budget and Management (DBM) Page 8

--- Page 9 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
CCU – Tax Refund Intercept Program (TRIP) – Finding 7
Certain significant debt amounts were excluded from
submission to the Comptroller of Maryland for TRIP
because of deficiencies in how CCU identified and
prepared the accounts for submission.
 Individual debts over $100,000 were submitted
for $99,999, excluding the remaining balance,
because CCU had not timely addressed a
longstanding account balance limitation in its
debt collection system.
 For tax year 2017, CCU used a new debt system
to combine for submission, multiple accounts due
from a single individual or entity. However, a
programming error in the system caused all
accounts to be rejected if one account in the
group was not eligible for TRIP.
 A test of 30 debtor accounts totaling
approximately $74.7 million that were eligible for
TRIP for the 2017 tax year, disclosed that debts
totaling only $1.6 million were submitted for TRIP
because of the two deficiencies.
Department of Budget and Management (DBM) Page 9

--- Page 10 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
CCU – Tax Refund Intercept Program – Finding 8
CCU improperly collected revenues totaling
approximately $11.6 million for a private entity
through TRIP after the law authorizing such
collections to be handled by CCU was repealed July 1,
2005. Of this amount, $1.8 million was collected
during our audit period.
 Under State law, defaulted loans guaranteed by
the Maryland Higher Education Loan Corporation
(MHELC), a State-recognized nonprofit, could be
submitted to CCU for collection through TRIP.
 When MHELC was dissolved in 1996 and its debts
and guarantees transferred to a private entity, the
law continued to allow defaulted MHELC loans
held by the private entity to be submitted to CCU
for TRIP. However, when that law was repealed in
2005, CCU continued to collect debts on behalf of
the private entity.
 DBM was not aware of this matter until we brought
the matter to its attention in January 2018.
Department of Budget and Management (DBM) Page 10

--- Page 11 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Other Findings
 Finding 9 – Financial Management Information
System
DBM, in conjunction with the Comptroller of
Maryland and the Department of Information
Technology did not ensure that access to vendor
PII, specifically social security numbers, on the
State’s Financial Management Information
System (FMIS) was adequately restricted.
 As of August 2018, approximately 5,200 State
employees had access to FMIS, and therefore,
depending on their access level, potentially
had access to this sensitive PII.
 Findings 10, 11 and 12 – Information Systems
Security and Control
 PII was stored without adequate safeguards.
 Network security risks existed because IT
contractors had certain unnecessary access to
the DBM network.
 A complete IT disaster recovery plan was
lacking.
Department of Budget and Management (DBM) Page 11

--- Page 12 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Other Findings (cont.)
 Finding 13 – Interagency Agreements
DBM did not require State agencies to include
their agreements with local community colleges
(other than the Baltimore City Community College)
in their annual reporting of interagency
agreements to the Department. Since 2005,
State budget law has required agencies to report
to DBM their interagency agreements with public
institutions of higher education that exceed
$100,000. Agreements with Maryland community
colleges are to be considered interagency
agreements according to BPW. Proper reporting is
essential since interagency agreements are
exempt from State procurement laws.
 Finding 14 – Motor Vehicle Fleet
DBM lacked documented justification for
excluding certain vehicle types from its annual
review of vehicle usage, and certain cost
assessments used in the evaluation of vehicle
usage were not properly calculated.
Department of Budget and Management (DBM) Page 12

--- Page 13 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Conclusions
DBM should:
 conduct documented periodic reviews of user
access to CCU’s debt collection and cash register
systems to ensure propriety;
 take the recommended steps to restrict and
safeguard personally identifiable information (PII)
in the debt collection system and in FMIS;
 correct the identified programming deficiencies in
the debt collection system;
 pursue potential wage garnishments;
 establish adequate controls over the abatement
of accounts;
 periodically review existing deviations from State
regulations for continued necessity;
 ensure that all eligible debt amounts, but only
eligible debt amounts, are submitted for inclusion
in TRIP;
 implement the recommendations to improve
information systems security and controls;
 require State agencies to report interagency
agreements with community colleges; and
 take the recommended steps to improves its
annual review of State vehicle usage.
Department of Budget and Management (DBM) Page 13