Title: Maryland Department of Health - Medical Care Programs Administration - Administrative Service Organization for Behavioral Health Services


NOTE: OLA conducts separate audits of Medical Care Programs Administration (MCPA) operations. The scope of this audit included MCPA’s fiscal activities with respect to monitoring the Behavioral Health Administration’s (BHA) Administrative Service Organization (ASO). The ASO is responsible for providing benefit management services for the Public Behavioral Health System operated by BHA.
Date: 01/13/2020
Type: Fiscal Compliance
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5e1e06aca1ce58135032e337
Extracted: 2025-06-19T06:24:15.800210
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Audit Report
Maryland Department of Health
Medical Care Programs Administration
Administrative Service Organization for
Behavioral Health Services
January 2020
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Senator Clarence K. Lam, M.D. (Senate Chair) Delegate Shelly L. Hettleman (House Chair)
Senator Malcolm L. Augustine Delegate Steven J. Arentz
Senator Adelaide C. Eckardt Delegate Mark S. Chang
Senator George C. Edwards Delegate Keith E. Haynes
Senator Katie Fry Hester Delegate Michael A. Jackson
Senator Cheryl C. Kagan Delegate David Moon
Senator Benjamin F. Kramer Delegate April R. Rose
Senator Cory V. McCray Delegate Geraldine Valentino-Smith
Senator Justin D. Ready Delegate Karen Lewis Young
Senator Craig J. Zucker One Vacancy
To Obtain Further Information
Office of Legislative Audits
301 West Preston Street, Room 1202
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Phone: 410-946-5900 ꞏ 301-970-5900 ꞏ 1-877-486-9964 (Toll Free in Maryland)
Maryland Relay: 711
TTY: 410-946-5401 ꞏ 301-970-5401
E-mail: OLAWebmaster@ola.state.md.us
Website: www.ola.state.md.us
To Report Fraud
The Office of Legislative Audits operates a Fraud Hotline to report fraud, waste, or abuse involving State
of Maryland government resources. Reports of fraud, waste, or abuse may be communicated anonymously
by a toll-free call to 1-877-FRAUD-11, by mail to the Fraud Hotline, c/o Office of Legislative Audits, or
through the Office’s website.
Nondiscrimination Statement
The Department of Legislative Services does not discriminate on the basis of age, ancestry, color, creed,
marital status, national origin, race, religion, gender, gender identity, sexual orientation, or disability in the
admission or access to its programs, services, or activities. The Department’s Information Officer has been
designated to coordinate compliance with the nondiscrimination requirements contained in Section 35.107
of the United States Department of Justice Regulations. Requests for assistance should be directed to the
Information Officer at 410-946-5400 or 410-970-5400.

--- Page 5 ---
Table of Contents
Background Information 4
Agency Responsibilities and Audit Scope 4
Administrative Service Organization (ASO) 4
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report 5
Findings and Recommendations 6
Behavioral Health Service Authorizations
Finding 1 – The Medical Care Programs Administration (MCPA) did 6
not ensure that the ASO properly authorized behavioral health
services and that the bases for the authorizations were adequately
documented.
Provider Audits
 Finding 2 – MCPA did not direct the ASO to recover certain provider 7
overpayments identified during audits, did not ensure the ASO
recovered overpayments once directed to do so, and did not ensure
that deficiencies identified by provider audits were corrected.
Provider Payments
Finding 3 – MCPA did not have a process to verify that adjustments to 8
provider payments processed by the ASO were proper.
Information Systems Security and Control
Finding 4 – Intrusion detection prevention system coverage did not exist 9
for encrypted traffic, and sensitive personally identifiable information
was stored without adequate safeguards.
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology 11
Agency Response Appendix
* Denotes item repeated in full or part from preceding audit report
3

--- Page 6 ---
Background Information
Agency Responsibilities and Audit Scope
The Medical Care Programs Administration (MCPA) of the Maryland
Department of Health (MDH) operates under both Title XIX of the federal Social
Security Act (Medicaid) and State law. Medicaid is a joint federal and state
entitlement program for low-income individuals. The program is administered by
the states, which are required to provide healthcare coverage to all applicants who
meet the program’s eligibility criteria.
MCPA and the Behavioral Health Administration (BHA) of MDH work together
to provide behavioral health services to the citizens of Maryland. Specifically,
BHA serves as the State’s behavioral health authority and operates the Public
Behavioral Health System to provide mental health and substance-related disorder
services. MCPA contracts with an Administrative Service Organization (ASO)
that is responsible for providing benefit management services for the System.
MCPA also monitors and accounts for the activities of the ASO.
The scope of this audit included MCPA’s monitoring of the ASO contract
deliverables, claims processing (including denied claims), provider audits, and
information systems security. Separate audits are conducted of MCPA’s primary
functions (such as recipient eligibility, long-term care, and hospital services),
Managed Care Organizations, and pharmacy programs.
Administrative Service Organization
The ASO is responsible for ensuring behavioral ASO Benefit Services Duties
health recipient eligibility, authorizing recipient
•Review service requests from providers
services, paying provider claims, and performing
and authorize services that are medically
oversight of providers to ensure the propriety and necessary.
accuracy of claims and related services. The •Receive, adjudicate, and approve
behavioral health claims submitted through
current ASO contract spans three years
its electronic claims processing system.
beginning on January 1, 2015, with two
•Pay providers using State-funded bank
additional one-year options, both of which were accounts.
exercised. The ASO contract’s cumulative value •Process claims eligible for federal
reimbursement in the Medicaid
(including option years) totals approximately
Management Information System.
$93.2 million. The contract value includes a
•Conduct provider audits to ensure services
monthly administrative fee for each recipient billed complied with applicable laws and
who is eligible to receive behavioral health regulations and recover any improper
payments.
services.
4

--- Page 7 ---
According to State records, during fiscal year 2018, behavioral health claims
disbursements made by the ASO from two State-funded bank accounts totaled
$1.4 billion. The vast majority of these claims were eligible for federal fund
participation (reimbursement) which is normally at least 50 percent of the amount
paid.
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report
Our audit included a review to determine the status of 3 of the 15 findings
contained in our preceding audit report of MCPA dated August 18, 2017. As
disclosed in the following table, we determined that MCPA satisfactorily
addressed 2 of these 3 findings. The remaining finding is repeated in this report.
Our audit did not include a review of 12 findings contained in our preceding
MCPA audit report that related to MCPA’s primary functions and managed care
organizations that are included in our separate MCPA audits.
Status of Preceding Findings
Preceding Implementation
Finding Description
Finding Status
MCPA did not monitor the ASO to ensure that deficiencies
Repeated
Finding 9 noted during provider audits conducted by the ASO were
(Current Finding 2)
corrected and related overpayments were recovered.
MCPA did not ensure the ASO resolved rejected behavioral
Finding 10 health claims timely, resulting in the payment of potentially Not repeated
improper claims and the loss of federal fund reimbursements.
Access controls over the ASO’s servers hosting the portal and
the web-server software were inadequate, intrusion detection
Finding 11 prevention system coverage did not exist for encrypted traffic, Not repeated
and sensitive personally identifiable information was stored
without adequate safeguards.
5

--- Page 8 ---
Findings and Recommendations
Behavioral Health Service Authorizations
Finding 1
The Medical Care Programs Administration (MCPA) did not ensure that the
Administrative Service Organization (ASO) properly authorized behavioral
health services and that the bases for the authorizations were adequately
documented.
Analysis
MCPA did not ensure that the ASO properly authorized behavioral health services
and that the bases for the authorizations were adequately documented. MCPA
management advised us that Behavioral Health Administration (BHA) personnel
conducted annual audits of the ASO as a means to verify the propriety of its
behavioral health services authorizations. However, our review disclosed that
these audits were not routinely performed.
Specifically, only one ASO audit was conducted since July 2015. This audit,
conducted in April 2017, reviewed authorizations made by the ASO during
calendar year 2016. While we were advised that BHA planned to conduct an
audit of calendar year 2018 authorizations, the audit had not been initiated as of
July 29, 2019, and there was no plan to audit the 2017 authorizations. According
to MCPA management, annual audits had not been conducted due to turnover of
the BHA personnel responsible for supervising the audits.
This failure to audit the ASO’s behavioral health services authorizations is
significant because the April 2017 audit identified certain authorized services that
were not appropriate for the clients’ diagnoses, resulting in clients being placed in
inappropriate levels of care. The audit also identified certain authorizations that
lacked appropriate documentation, such as that necessary to support client
symptoms and the reasons services were authorized. We could not readily
determine whether the improper service authorizations resulted in any
overpayments to providers.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that MCPA ensure that the ASO properly authorized
behavioral health services and that the bases for the authorizations were
adequately documented. Specifically, we recommend that MCPA ensure
that
a. BHA personnel conduct audits of the ASO at least annually, and
6

--- Page 9 ---
b. appropriate corrective action is taken to address deficiencies identified by
these audits.
Provider Audits
Finding 2
MCPA did not direct the ASO to recover certain provider overpayments
identified during audits, did not ensure the ASO recovered overpayments
once directed to do so, and did not ensure that deficiencies identified by
provider audits were corrected.
Analysis
MCPA did not direct the ASO to recover certain provider overpayments identified
during provider audits performed by the ASO, did not ensure that the ASO
recovered overpayments once directed to do so, and did not ensure that
deficiencies identified by the audits were corrected. In accordance with the
contract, the ASO conducted 300 provider audits each year, which is MCPA’s
primary means of validating the behavioral health claims. Provider audits
routinely identified deficiencies in claims submitted and overpayments to
providers.
 MCPA failed to follow its procedure to direct the ASO to recover certain
overpayments totaling approximately $35,000 identified during provider
audits that we tested. The ASO notified BHA of the results of the audits,
including any overpayments identified. BHA was responsible for reviewing
the audit results to determine if additional corrective action was warranted,
and to inform the providers that overpayments would be recovered by
reducing future payments. BHA then notified MCPA, which was responsible
for directing the ASO to recover the overpayments. However, our test of 10
provider audits conducted by the ASO disclosed that, for 5 audits completed
during the period between February and September 2018, MCPA did not
direct the ASO to recover approximately $35,000 in improper claims. After
our inquiries in February 2019, the overpayments were recovered between 4
and 11 months after the related provider audits were completed.
 When MCPA did direct the ASO to recover provider overpayments, it did not
obtain sufficient documentation from the ASO to verify that recoveries
actually occurred. Specifically, MCPA relied on emails from the ASO
confirming that it had processed the recoveries and did not obtain supporting
documentation to evidence the actual recovery of the funds.
7

--- Page 10 ---
 MCPA did not verify that deficiencies identified by the ASO during the
provider audits were resolved. Providers were required to submit corrective
action plans to BHA to address significant deficiencies (for example, failure to
maintain client records in accordance with State regulations) noted during the
audits. BHA relied on designated county or multi-county authorities, referred
to as Core Service Agencies and Local Addiction Authorities (generally local
health departments or private contractors), to review the plans and ensure the
providers implemented the necessary corrective actions. Neither MCPA nor
BHA performed any oversight of this process. As a result, there is a lack of
assurance that the deficiencies were properly resolved.
Similar conditions regarding MCPA’s failure to ensure provider overpayments
were recovered and corrective actions were taken were commented upon in
MCPA’s preceding audit report.
Recommendation 2
We recommend that MCPA
a. timely direct the ASO to recover overpayments identified during audits,
b. obtain documentation to verify that the ASO recovered the provider
overpayments (repeat), and
c. develop a process to monitor the implementation of provider corrective
action plans to ensure noted deficiencies are properly addressed (repeat).
Provider Payments
Finding 3
MCPA did not have a process to verify that adjustments to provider
payments processed by the ASO were proper.
Analysis
MCPA did not have a process to verify that adjustments to provider payments
processed by the ASO were proper. The ASO makes adjustments to provider
payments for a variety of reasons, including to recover overpayments identified
during the ASO’s audits of providers (as previously detailed in Finding 2) and to
account for changes in billing rates.
According to the ASO’s records, which we tested and found to be reliable in the
aggregate, during the period from July 2015 through December 2018, the ASO
processed approximately 13,000 adjustments, which resulted in either increasing
or decreasing the related provider payments, by approximately $35.0 million.
8

--- Page 11 ---
Recommendation 3
We recommend that MCPA establish a process to verify, at least on a test
basis, that adjustments to provider payments processed by the ASO are
valid.
Information Systems Security and Control
Finding 4
Intrusion detection prevention system coverage did not exist for encrypted
traffic, and sensitive personally identifiable information was stored without
adequate safeguards.
Analysis
Intrusion detection prevention system (IDPS) coverage did not exist for encrypted
traffic, and sensitive personally identifiable information (PII) was stored without
adequate safeguards.
 IDPS coverage did not exist for almost all untrusted encrypted traffic entering
the ASO’s network. Specifically, we determined that IDPS coverage did not
exist for 71 of 78 internal locations receiving encrypted traffic from untrusted
sources such as providers. Strong network security uses a layered approach,
relying on various resources structured according to assessed network security
risks. Complete IDPS coverage includes, when there is encrypted traffic, the
use of a network-based IDPS that is supplemented (where necessary) with
host-based intrusion prevention to aid significantly in the detection/prevention
of, and response to, potential network security breaches and attacks.
 The ASO stored sensitive PII, related to Medicaid recipients, without adequate
safeguards in place. We noted PII related to over 2.7 million and 2.85 million
unique individuals, stored in two separate storage areas, was at risk.
The State of Maryland Information Technology Security Manual requires that
agencies protect against malicious code by implementing solutions including the
use of IDPS to monitor system events, detect attacks and identify unauthorized
use of information systems and/or confidential information. The Manual also
requires agencies to protect confidential data using encryption technologies and/or
other substantial mitigating controls.
9

--- Page 12 ---
Recommendation 4
We recommend that MCPA require that the ASO
a. implement necessary IDPS coverage for encrypted traffic entering its
network, and
b. require that the ASO implement appropriate safeguards over Medicaid
recipients’ PII.
10

--- Page 13 ---
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the Maryland Department of
Health (MDH) - Medical Care Program Administration’s (MCPA) fiscal activities
with respect to monitoring the Behavioral Health Administration’s Administrative
Service Organization (ASO) for the period beginning July 1, 2015 and ending
December 31, 2018. The audit was conducted in accordance with generally
accepted government auditing standards. Those standards require that we plan
and perform the audit to obtain sufficient, appropriate evidence to provide a
reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives.
We believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings
and conclusions based on our audit objectives.
As prescribed by the State Government Article, Section 2-1221 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, the objectives of this audit were to examine MCPA’s financial
transactions, records and internal control, and to evaluate its compliance with
applicable State laws, rules, and regulations.
In planning and conducting our audit, we focused on the major financial-related
areas of operations based on assessments of significance and risk. The areas
addressed by the audit included MCPA’s monitoring of the ASO contract
deliverables, claims processing (including denied claims), provider audits, and
information systems security. We also determined the status of 3 of the 15
findings contained in our preceding audit report of MCPA.
Our audit did not include certain support services provided to MCPA by MDH.
These support services (such as payroll, purchasing, contract procurement,
maintenance of accounting records, and related fiscal functions) are included
within the scope of our audit of the MDH - Office of the Secretary and Other
Units. In addition, our audit did not include an evaluation of internal controls
over compliance with federal laws and regulations for federal financial assistance
programs and an assessment of MCPA’s compliance with those laws and
regulations because the State of Maryland engages an independent accounting
firm to annually audit such programs administered by State agencies, including
MCPA.
To accomplish our audit objectives, our audit procedures included inquiries of
appropriate personnel (including certain ASO employees), inspection of
documents and records, observations of MCPA’s operations, and tests of
transactions. Generally, transactions were selected for testing based on auditor
judgement, which primarily considers risk. Unless otherwise specifically
indicated, neither statistical nor non-statistical audit sampling was used to select
11

--- Page 14 ---
the transactions tested. Therefore, the results of the tests cannot be used to project
those results to the entire population from which the test items were selected.
We also performed various data extracts of pertinent information from the State’s
Financial Management Information System (such as revenue and expenditure
data). The extracts are performed as part of ongoing internal processes
established by the Office of Legislative Audits and were subject to various tests to
determine data reliability. We performed various tests of the relevant data and
determined that the data were sufficiently reliable for the purposes the data were
used during the audit. Finally, we performed other auditing procedures that we
considered necessary to achieve our objectives. The reliability of data used in this
report for background or informational purposes was not assessed.
MCPA’s management is responsible for establishing and maintaining effective
internal control. Internal control is a process designed to provide reasonable
assurance that objectives pertaining to the reliability of financial records;
effectiveness and efficiency of operations including safeguarding of assets; and
compliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations are achieved.
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate.
Our reports are designed to assist the Maryland General Assembly in exercising
its legislative oversight function and to provide constructive recommendations for
improving State operations. As a result, our reports generally do not address
activities we reviewed that are functioning properly.
This report includes findings relating to conditions that we consider to be
significant deficiencies in the design or operation of internal control that could
adversely affect MCPA’s ability to maintain reliable financial records, operate
effectively and efficiently, and/or comply with applicable laws, rules, and
regulations. Our report also includes a finding regarding a significant instance of
noncompliance with applicable laws, rules, or regulations. Other less significant
findings were communicated to MCPA that did not warrant inclusion in this
report.
The response from MDH, on behalf of MCPA, to our findings and
recommendations, is included as an appendix to this report. As prescribed in the
State Government Article, Section 2-1224 of the Annotated Code of Maryland,
we will advise MDH regarding our review of its response.
12

--- Page 16 ---
Maryland Department of Health
Medical Care Programs Administration
Administrative Service Organization for
Behavioral Health Services
Agency Response Form
Behavioral Health Service Authorizations
Finding 1
The Medical Care Programs Administration (MCPA) did not ensure that the
Administrative Service Organization (ASO) properly authorized behavioral health services
and that the bases for the authorizations were adequately documented.
We recommend that MCPA ensure that the ASO properly authorized behavioral health
services and that the bases for the authorizations were adequately documented.
Specifically, we recommend that MCPA ensure that
a. BHA personnel conduct audits of the ASO at least annually, and
b. appropriate corrective action is taken to address deficiencies identified by these audits.
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 1a Agree Estimated Completion Date: 04/30/20
Please provide details of MCPA has completed all the annual audits identified as incomplete
corrective action or in OLA’s report (CY 2015-2018) and has established written
explain disagreement. standard operating procedure to improve internal work flows and
ensure proper documentation justifying authorizations processed by
the ASO. BHA personnel will complete the 2019 ASO audit by April
30, 2020. MCPA has acquired a new ASO beginning services as of
January 1, 2020 and will begin conducting annual audits of this new
vendor’s authorizations by no later than Spring of 2021.
Additionally, MCPA will utilize the newly established standard
operating procedure to ensure authorizations are adequately
justified and appropriately documented moving forward.
Recommendation 1b Agree Estimated Completion Date: 4/30/20
Please provide details of MCPA’s completed annual audit reports (CY 2015 -2018) confirmed
corrective action or the ASO was appropriately authorizing services. In a few instances
explain disagreement. where medical necessity criteria were in question, MCPA expanded
the audit scope and ultimately confirmed that the approval of
services was justified. BHA personnel will complete the 2019 ASO
Page 1 of 6

--- Page 17 ---
Maryland Department of Health
Medical Care Programs Administration
Administrative Service Organization for
Behavioral Health Services
Agency Response Form
audit by April 30, 2020 and take any appropriate action to address
deficiencies. Moving forward MCPA will complete annual audits as
required and take appropriate action when deficiencies are
identified.
Page 2 of 6

--- Page 18 ---
Maryland Department of Health
Medical Care Programs Administration
Administrative Service Organization for
Behavioral Health Services
Agency Response Form
Provider Audits
Finding 2
MCPA did not direct the ASO to recover certain provider overpayments identified during
audits, did not ensure the ASO recovered overpayments once directed to do so, and did not
ensure that deficiencies identified by provider audits were corrected.
We recommend that MCPA
a. timely direct the ASO to recover overpayments identified during audits,
b. obtain documentation to verify that the ASO recovered the provider overpayments
(repeat), and
c. develop a process to monitor the implementation of provider corrective action plans to
ensure noted deficiencies are properly addressed (repeat).
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 2a Agree Estimated Completion Date: 3/31/20
Please provide details of Since the conclusion of OLA’s audit, MCPA has issued letters of
corrective action or determination to all providers identified with audit findings and
explain disagreement. overpayments; and directed the ASO to retract paid claims from
these providers. MCPA has also made significant staff
enhancements to monitor the ASO, including hiring a Compliance
Director specifically responsible for ensuring timely direction to the
ASO related to the recovery of overpayments. MCPA has confirmed
collection of all overpayments identified through CY2018 and will
do the same for CY2019.
Recommendation 2b Agree Estimated Completion Date: 3/31/2020
Please provide details of MCPA has confirmed collection of all overpayments identified
corrective action or through CY2018 and will do the same for CY2019.
explain disagreement. Based on the information provided during this audit, MDH is also
implementing a monthly review to confirm the ASO has performed
the requested retraction. The review includes obtaining payment
Page 3 of 6

--- Page 19 ---
Maryland Department of Health
Medical Care Programs Administration
Administrative Service Organization for
Behavioral Health Services
Agency Response Form
records and testing 5 retractions per month to verify provider
overpayments have been recovered.
Recommendation 2c Agree Estimated Completion Date: 03/31/20
Please provide details of MCPA has modified their audit tracker to include investigation
corrective action or status updates, authorizations for overpayment recovery from the
explain disagreement. MDH/OIG and MFCU, retraction request, and status of provider
appeals. The tracker is monitored and reviewed monthly by MCPA
and the ASO to provide updates and confirm accuracy.
Additionally, MCPA issues Performance Improvement Plans (PIPs)
through Local Behavioral Health Authorities (LBHAs) who have
direct responsibility for monitoring providers within their
jurisdictions. MCPA will provide training to LBHAs local systems
managers on PIPs and audit follow-up processes. The PIPs are
included in the audit tracker and reviewed monthly by MCPA and
the ASO. These PIPs include steps to increased audit scope for
repeated instances of non-compliance and criteria for referrals for
fraud investigation to the MDH/OIG and/or MFCU.
Provider Payments
Finding 3
MCPA did not have a process to verify that adjustments to provider payments processed
by the ASO were proper.
We recommend that MCPA establish a process to verify, at least on a test basis, that
adjustments to provider payments processed by the ASO are valid.
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 3 Agree Estimated Completion Date: 03/31/20
Page 4 of 6

--- Page 20 ---
Maryland Department of Health
Medical Care Programs Administration
Administrative Service Organization for
Behavioral Health Services
Agency Response Form
Please provide details of MCPA will develop a written standard operating procedure to
corrective action or verify and validate that adjustments to provider payments processed
explain disagreement. by the ASO are proper.
Page 5 of 6

--- Page 21 ---
Maryland Department of Health
Medical Care Programs Administration
Administrative Service Organization for
Behavioral Health Services
Agency Response Form
Information Systems Security and Control
Finding 4
Intrusion detection prevention system coverage did not exist for encrypted traffic, and
sensitive personally identifiable information was stored without adequate safeguards.
We recommend that MCPA require that the ASO
a. implement necessary IDPS coverage for encrypted traffic entering its network, and
b. require that the ASO implement appropriate safeguards over Medicaid recipients’ PII.
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 4a Agree Estimated Completion Date: 03/31/20
Please provide details of MCPA has selected a new ASO to begin services effective January 1,
corrective action or 2020. MCPA has required the new ASO to have IDPS coverage for
explain disagreement. encrypted traffic entering its network. Additionally, the prior ASO’s
system was upgraded to follow the level of security required through
CY 2019 until the new ASO begins.
Recommendation 4b Agree Estimated Completion Date: 03/31/20
Please provide details of The new ASO is contractually obligated to ensure appropriate
corrective action or safeguards are in place over Medicaid recipients PII, including
explain disagreement. ensuring data encryption levels meet requirements. MCPA will
conduct a review of the new vendor’s PII safeguards in the first 90
days of the new contract.
Page 6 of 6

--- Page 22 ---
A T
UDIT EAM
Edward A. Rubenstein, CPA
Audit Manager
R. Brendan Coffey, CPA, CISA
Information Systems Audit Manager
James M. Fowler
Senior Auditor
Eric Alexander, CPA, CISA
J. Gregory Busch, CISA
Information Systems Senior Auditors
Stephen R. Alexander
Jordan T. Duke
Staff Auditors