Title: University System of Maryland - University of Maryland, Baltimore County
Date: 01/17/2020
Type: Fiscal Compliance
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5e2afba3a1ce580b2c549738
Extracted: 2025-06-19T06:24:34.997599
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Audit Report
University System of Maryland
University of Maryland, Baltimore County
October 2024
Public Notice
In compliance with the requirements of the State Government Article Section
2-1224(i), of the Annotated Code of Maryland, the Office of Legislative Audits
has redacted cybersecurity findings and related auditee responses
from this public report.
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Senator Clarence K. Lam, M.D. (Senate Chair) Delegate Jared Solomon (House Chair)
Senator Joanne C. Benson Delegate Steven J. Arentz
Senator Paul D. Corderman Delegate Andrea Fletcher Harrison
Senator Katie Fry Hester Delegate Steven C. Johnson
Senator Shelly L. Hettleman Delegate Mary A. Lehman
Senator Cheryl C. Kagan Delegate David H. Moon
Senator Cory V. McCray Delegate Julie Palakovich Carr
Senator Justin D. Ready Delegate Emily K. Shetty
Senator Bryan W. Simonaire Delegate Stephanie M. Smith
Senator Craig J. Zucker Delegate M. Courtney Watson
To Obtain Further Information
Office of Legislative Audits
The Warehouse at Camden Yards
351 West Camden Street, Suite 400
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Phone: 410-946-5900
Maryland Relay: 711
TTY: 410-946-5401 ꞏ 301-970-5401
E-mail: webmaster@ola.state.md.us
Website: www.ola.state.md.us
To Report Fraud
The Office of Legislative Audits operates a Fraud Hotline to report fraud, waste, or abuse involving State
of Maryland government resources. Reports of fraud, waste, or abuse may be communicated anonymously
by a toll-free call to 1-877-FRAUD-11, by mail to the Fraud Hotline, c/o Office of Legislative Audits, or
through the Office’s website.
Nondiscrimination Statement
The Department of Legislative Services does not discriminate on the basis of age, ancestry, color, creed,
marital status, national origin, race, religion, gender, gender identity, sexual orientation, or disability in the
admission or access to its programs, services, or activities. The Department’s Information Officer has been
designated to coordinate compliance with the nondiscrimination requirements contained in Section 35.107
of the United States Department of Justice Regulations. Requests for assistance should be directed to the
Information Officer at 410-946-5400 or 410-970-5400.

--- Page 3 ---
October 11, 2024
Senator Clarence K. Lam, M.D., Senate Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Delegate Jared Solomon, House Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Members of Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Annapolis, Maryland
Ladies and Gentlemen:
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the University System of
Maryland (USM) – University of Maryland, Baltimore County (UMBC) for the
period beginning October 31, 2018 and ending July 15, 2023. UMBC is a
comprehensive public research institution of USM and provides a broad range of
baccalaureate, graduate, and doctoral programs in the liberal arts and sciences and
engineering disciplines.
Our audit disclosed a cybersecurity-related finding. However, in accordance with
the State Government Article, Section 2-1224(i) of the Annotated Code of
Maryland, we have redacted the finding from this audit report. Specifically, State
law requires the Office of Legislative Audits to redact cybersecurity findings in a
manner consistent with auditing best practices before the report is made available
to the public. The term “cybersecurity” is defined in the State Finance and
Procurement Article, Section 3.5-301(b), and using our professional judgment we
have determined that the redacted finding falls under the referenced definition.
The specifics of the cybersecurity finding were previously communicated to those
parties responsible for acting on our recommendations.
Our audit also disclosed that UMBC did not ensure that employee time worked
was always recorded and approved in a timely manner. For example, we noted
numerous instances in which timesheets were submitted and/or approved months
after the applicable pay period had ended, including one employee who submitted
no timesheets for over six years. The timesheets enable recording of the work
time (days worked and leave used) on the system. The employee was paid
approximately $328,000 during this period.

--- Page 4 ---
Finally, our audit included a review to determine the status of the four findings
contained in our preceding audit report. We call your attention to our
determination that UMBC satisfactorily addressed all four prior findings.
USM’s response to our findings and recommendations, on behalf of UMBC, is
included as an appendix to this report. We reviewed the response and noted
general agreement to our findings and related recommendations. Subsequent to
the response receipt, but prior to the issuance of the final report, we contacted
USM and UMBC and obtained additional clarification that satisfactorily resolved
all outstanding questions and issues. Consequently, we have concluded that the
written responses and additional clarification together indicate that the corrective
actions identified are sufficient to address all audit issues. Consistent with State
law, we have redacted the elements of USM’s response related to the
cybersecurity audit finding.
We wish to acknowledge the cooperation extended to us during the audit by
UMBC. We also wish to acknowledge USM’s and UMBC’s willingness to
address the audit issues and implement appropriate corrective actions.
Respectfully submitted,
Brian S. Tanen
Brian S. Tanen, CPA, CFE
Legislative Auditor
2

--- Page 5 ---
Background Information
Agency Responsibilities
The University of Maryland, Baltimore County (UMBC) is a comprehensive
public research institution of the University System of Maryland and operates
under the jurisdiction of the System’s Board of Regents. UMBC offers a broad
range of baccalaureate, graduate, and doctoral programs in the liberal arts,
sciences, and engineering disciplines. Based on UMBC’s records, student
enrollment for the Fall 2023 semester totaled 14,148 including 10,490
undergraduate students and 3,658 graduate students.
UMBC’s budget is funded by unrestricted revenues, such as tuition and fees and a
State general fund appropriation, and restricted revenues, such as federal grants
and contracts. According to the State’s accounting records, UMBC’s revenues for
fiscal year 2023 totaled approximately $582.2 million, which included a State
general fund appropriation of approximately $180.6 million (see Figure 1 on the
following page).
3

--- Page 6 ---
Figure 1
UMBC Positions, Expenditures, and Funding Sources
Full-Time Equivalent Positions as of June 30, 2023
Positions Percent
Filled 2,030 91.3%
Vacant 194 8.7%
Total 2,224
Fiscal Year 2023 Expenditures
Expenditures Percent
Salaries, Wages, and Fringe Benefits $326,243,638 56.1%
Technical and Special Fees 3,064,630 0.5%
Operating Expenses 252,845,841 43.4%
Total $582,154,109
Fiscal Year 2023 Funding Sources
Funding Percent
Unrestricted
General Fund $180,623,643 31.0%
Tuition and Fees 162,184,837 27.9%
Other University Revenues1 118,809,027 20.4%
461,617,507 79.3%
Restricted
Federal Grants and Contracts 67,639,673 11.6%
Other Gifts, Grants and Contracts 52,896,929 9.1%
120,536,602 20.7%
Total $582,154,109
Source: State financial records and UMBC personnel records
1 Includes revenues from Auxiliary Services ($81.3M) and from the Higher Education Investment
Fund ($10.3M).
4

--- Page 7 ---
Purchasing System
In November 2019, UMBC implemented a new cloud-based purchasing system.
The system is used to perform critical functions such as requisitioning,
purchasing, and invoice processing.
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report
Our audit included a review to determine the status of the four findings contained
in our preceding audit report dated January 17, 2020. We determined that UMBC
satisfactorily addressed each of these findings.
Findings and Recommendations
Information Systems Security and Control
We determined that Finding 1 related to “cybersecurity,” as defined by the State
Finance and Procurement Article, Section 3.5-301(b) of the Annotated Code of
Maryland, and therefore is subject to redaction from the publicly available audit
report in accordance with the State Government Article 2-1224(i). Consequently,
the specifics of the following finding, including the analysis, related
recommendations, along with USM’s responses, have been redacted from this
report copy.
Finding 1
Redacted cybersecurity-related finding.
Employee Time Records
Finding 2
UMBC did not ensure that employee work time was recorded and approved
in a timely manner. We noted several significant recording and approval
delays, including one employee who did not submit timesheets to enable
recording of the work time (days worked and leave used) for over six years.
Analysis
UMBC did not ensure that employee work time was recorded and approved in a
timely manner. UMBC uses an electronic timesheet system for recording,
processing, and submitting employee payroll data to the State’s Central Payroll
5

--- Page 8 ---
Bureau. We reviewed fiscal year 2023 payroll activity totaling approximately
$244.2 million. Our review disclosed that timesheets were not submitted and
approved timely or at all for certain employees. For example, 71 timesheets for
16 employees with related payroll payments totaling $354,000, were submitted
and/or approved more than 3 months after the applicable pay period had ended.
In addition, as of October 2023, 35 timesheets for 4 employees had still not been
submitted and/or approved for periods up to one year.
We also noted a faculty member, who did not submit any timesheets between
May 2015 and December 2021, and was paid approximately $328,000 during the
period. As a result, this employee’s work time (days worked and leave used) was
not recorded in the system during this period. We were advised by UMBC that
numerous attempts were made to get the employee to submit timesheets, and in
December 2021 the employee submitted approximately 135 overdue timesheets.
The department chair in consultation with UMBC’s Human Resources
Department approved the past due timesheets but could not attest to the validity of
the days worked. UMBC subsequently approved and processed the timesheets in
its system.
The aforementioned delays are contrary to UMBC’s policy requiring timely
submission and approval of employee time and restrict the ability of supervisory
personnel to ensure that time recorded by employees is accurate and valid. In all
of these cases, the employee was paid in accordance with UMBC’s regular
payroll payment schedule. The untimely submission of the timesheets raises
questions as to the validity of the time recorded and resulting payroll payments
and leave balances.
Recommendation 2
We recommend that UMBC
a. develop procedures to ensure that all employee time is submitted and
approved in accordance with its policy, and
b. take appropriate corrective action for employees and departments that
continually fail to comply with its policy for the timely submission and
approval of employee time.
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the University System of
Maryland (USM) – University of Maryland, Baltimore County (UMBC) for the
period beginning October 31, 2018 and ending July 15, 2023. The audit was
conducted in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards.
6

--- Page 9 ---
Those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient,
appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and
conclusions based on our audit objectives. We believe that the evidence obtained
provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit
objectives.
As prescribed by the State Government Article, Section 2-1221 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, the objectives of this audit were to examine UMBC’s financial
transactions, records, and internal control, and to evaluate its compliance with
applicable State laws, rules, and regulations.
In planning and conducting our audit, we focused on the major financial-related
areas of operations based on assessments of significance and risk. The areas
addressed by the audit included procurements and disbursements, student
accounts receivable, cash receipts, student financial aid, payroll, corporate
purchasing cards, working funds, information systems security and control, and
equipment. We also determined the status of the findings contained in our
preceding audit report.
Our audit did not include certain support services provided to UMBC by the USM
Office, such as bond financing, and by the University of Maryland, Baltimore
(UMB) such as processing certain vendor payment transmittals and capital project
management. These support services are included within the scope of our audits
of the USM Office and UMB, respectively. In addition, our audit did not include
an evaluation of internal controls over compliance with federal laws and
regulations for federal financial assistance programs and an assessment of
UMBC’s compliance with those laws and regulations because the State of
Maryland engages an independent accounting firm to annually audit such
programs administered by State agencies, including the components of the USM.
Our assessment of internal controls was based on agency procedures and controls
in place at the time of our fieldwork. Our tests of transactions and other auditing
procedures were generally focused on the transactions occurring during our audit
period of October 31, 2018 to July 15, 2023, but may include transactions before
or after this period as we considered necessary to achieve our audit objectives.
To accomplish our audit objectives, our audit procedures included inquiries of
appropriate personnel, inspections of documents and records, tests of transactions,
and to the extent practicable, observations of UMBC’s operations. Generally,
transactions were selected for testing based on auditor judgment, which primarily
considers risk, the timing or dollar amount of the transaction, or the significance
of the transaction to the area of operation reviewed. As a matter of course, we do
7

--- Page 10 ---
not normally use sampling in our tests, so unless otherwise specifically indicated,
neither statistical nor non-statistical audit sampling was used to select the
transactions tested. Therefore, unless sampling is specifically indicated in a
finding, the results from any tests conducted or disclosed by us cannot be used to
project those results to the entire population from which the test items were
selected.
We also performed various data extracts of pertinent information from the State’s
Financial Management Information System (such as revenue and expenditure
data) and the State’s Central Payroll Bureau (payroll data), as well as from the
contractor administering the State’s Corporate Purchasing Card Program (credit
card activity). The extracts are performed as part of ongoing internal processes
established by the Office of Legislative Audits and were subject to various tests to
determine data reliability. We determined that the data extracted from these
sources were sufficiently reliable for the purposes the data were used during this
audit.
We also extracted data from UMBC’s financial systems for the purpose of testing
certain areas, such as financial aid and student accounts receivable. We
performed various tests of the relevant data and determined that the data were
sufficiently reliable for the purposes the data were used during the audit. Finally,
we performed other auditing procedures that we considered necessary to achieve
our audit objectives. The reliability of data used in this report for background or
informational purposes was not assessed.
UMBC’s management is responsible for establishing and maintaining effective
internal control. Internal control is a process designed to provide reasonable
assurance that objectives pertaining to the reliability of financial records;
effectiveness and efficiency of operations, including safeguarding of assets; and
compliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations are achieved. As
provided in Government Auditing Standards, there are five components of
internal control: control environment, risk assessment, control activities,
information and communication, and monitoring. Each of the five components,
when significant to the audit objectives, and as applicable to UMBC, were
considered by us during the course of this audit.
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate.
8

--- Page 11 ---
Our reports are designed to assist the Maryland General Assembly in exercising
its legislative oversight function and to provide constructive recommendations for
improving State operations. As a result, our reports generally do not address
activities we reviewed that are functioning properly.
This report includes findings relating to conditions that we consider to be
significant deficiencies in the design or operation of internal control that could
adversely affect UMBC’s ability to maintain reliable financial records, operate
effectively and efficiently, and/or comply with applicable laws, rules, and
regulations. Our report also includes findings regarding significant instances of
noncompliance with applicable laws, rules, or regulations. Other less significant
findings were communicated to UMBC that did not warrant inclusion in this
report.
State Government Article Section 2-1224(i) requires that we redact in a manner
consistent with auditing best practices any cybersecurity findings before a report
is made available to the public. This results in the issuance of two different
versions of an audit report that contains cybersecurity findings – a redacted
version for the public and an unredacted version for government officials
responsible for acting on our audit recommendations.
The State Finance and Procurement Article, Section 3.5-301(b), states that
cybersecurity is defined as “processes or capabilities wherein systems,
communications, and information are protected and defended against damage,
unauthorized use or modification, and exploitation”. Based on that definition, and
in our professional judgment, we concluded that a finding in this report falls under
that definition. Consequently, for the publicly available audit report all specifics
as to the nature of the cybersecurity finding and required corrective actions have
been redacted. We have determined that such aforementioned practices, and
government auditing standards, support the redaction of this information from the
public audit report. The specifics of this cybersecurity finding have been
communicated to the USM Office and those parties responsible for acting on our
recommendations in an unredacted audit report.
The response from the USM Office, on behalf of UMBC, to our findings and
recommendations is included as an appendix to this report. Depending on the
version of the audit report, responses to any cybersecurity findings may be
redacted in accordance with State law. As prescribed in the State Government
Article, Section 2-1224 of the Annotated Code of Maryland, we will advise the
USM Office regarding the results of our review of its response.
9

--- Page 12 ---
APPENDIX
3300 METZEROTT ROAD // ADELPHI, MD 20783
WWW.USMD.EDU // 301.445.1923
OFFICE OF ADMINISTRATION AND FINANCE
October 7, 2024
Mr. Brian S. Tanen, CPA, CFE
Legislative Auditor
Office of Legislative Audits
The Warehouse at Camden Yards
351 West Camden Street, Suite 400
Baltimore, MD 21201
Re: University System of Maryland – University of Maryland, Baltimore County
Period of Audit: October 31, 2018 through July 15, 2023
Dear Mr. Tanen,
Thank you for the work of your team and the recommendations you provided. I have enclosed the University
System of Maryland’s responses to your draft report covering the examination of the accounts and records of the
University System of Maryland – University of Maryland, Baltimore County. Our comments refer to the individual
items in the report.
Sincerely,
Ellen Herbst
Senior Vice Chancellor for Administration and Finance
Enclosures
cc: Dr. Valerie Sheares Ashby, President, UMBC
Ms. Linda R. Gooden, Chair, University System of Maryland Board of Regents
Mr. Louis M. Pope, University System of Maryland Board of Regents
Dr. Jay A. Perman, Chancellor, University System of Maryland
Ms. Celeste Denson, Associate Vice Chancellor for Financial Affairs, USM Office
Mr. David Mosca, Vice Chancellor for Accountability, USM Office
Mr. Michael C. Eismeier, Associate Vice Chancellor and CIO, USM Office
Ms. Samantha Norris, Director, Financial Planning and Analysis, USM Office
Ms. Kathy L. Dettloff, Vice President, Administration and Finance, UMBC
Ms. Megan Cherry, Director, Management Advisory Services, UMBC
Ms. Michele Conner, Executive Assistant to the President, UMBC
Mr. Lenn Caron, Senior Associate Vice President, Administrative Services, UMBC

--- Page 13 ---
University System of Maryland
University of Maryland, Baltimore County
Agency Response Form
Information Systems Security and Control
The Office of Legislative Audits (OLA) has determined that Finding 1 related to
“cybersecurity,” as defined by the State Finance and Procurement Article, Section
3.5-301(b) of the Annotated Code of Maryland, and therefore is subject to
redaction from the publicly available audit report in accordance with the State
Government Article 2-1224(i). Although the specifics of the finding, including the
analysis, related recommendation(s), along with USM’s responses, have been
redacted from this report copy, USM’s responses indicated agreement with the
finding and related recommendations.
Finding 1
Redacted cybersecurity-related finding.
Agency Response has been redacted by OLA.
Page 1 of 3

--- Page 14 ---
University System of Maryland
University of Maryland, Baltimore County
Agency Response Form
Employee Time Records
Finding 2
UMBC did not ensure that employee work time was recorded and approved
in a timely manner. We noted several significant recording and approval
delays, including one employee who did not submit timesheets to enable
recording of the work time (days worked and leave used) for over six years.
We recommend that UMBC
a. develop procedures to ensure that all employee time is submitted and
approved in accordance with its policy, and
b. take appropriate corrective action for employees and departments that
continually fail to comply with its policy for the timely submission and
approval of employee time.
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide In the above-mentioned example, the department chair consulted with
additional comments as Human Resources and Strategic Talent Management (HRSTM) and
deemed necessary. approved the 135 timesheets solely to render the system operable for
future submissions.
Recommendation 2a Agree Estimated Completion Date: June 2025
Please provide details of UMBC’s HRSTM department has strengthened timesheet language and
corrective action or instructions in the employee handbook for FY25. In addition, HRSTM’s
explain disagreement. Human Resources Information Technology and Payroll team has
partnered with the Department of Information Technology to construct a
summary page in the accounting system where timesheet reviewers and
approvers can more readily see timesheet statuses for employees in their
assigned departments. This will allow approvers and reviewers to more
quickly identify and work with employees to ensure more timely
submission of timesheets.
HRSTM has presented and has available on-demand training records for
timesheet approvers on timesheet management and policies.
Recommendation 2b Agree Estimated Completion Date: June 2025
Page 2 of 3

--- Page 15 ---
University System of Maryland
University of Maryland, Baltimore County
Agency Response Form
Please provide details of UMBC’s HRSTM department is working with DoIT to build a
corrective action or report/query which will capture late timesheet submission cumulatively
explain disagreement. by employee and department. This report will be available to
departmental leadership so that trends may be identified and employee
coaching around timesheet policies and procedures may occur. We plan
to identify future system updates that will assist us in programmatic
controls that are currently unavailable in our current system.
The HRSTM Employee and Labor Relations team along with the Payroll
team will support departmental employees and leaders in best practices
around timesheet management and the management and corrective
action of employees who remain out of compliance with timesheet
submission policies.
Page 3 of 3

--- Page 16 ---
A T
UDIT EAM
Robert A. Wells, Jr., CPA
Audit Manager
R. Brendan Coffey, CPA, CISA
Edwin L. Paul, CPA, CISA
Information Systems Audit Managers
Robert J. Smith, CPA
Amanda M. Jones
Senior Auditors
Eric Alexander, CPA, CISA
Peter W. Chong, CISA
Information Systems Senior Auditors
Charlotte M.S. Chamberlin
Jonathan D. Souders
Stacey D. Streett
Staff Auditors
Joshua A. Nicodemus, CISA
Charles O. Price
Information Systems Staff Auditors