Title: Property Tax Assessment Appeals Boards
Date: 01/31/2020
Type: Fiscal Compliance
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5e386e4da1ce580a00418070
Extracted: 2025-06-19T06:25:03.628743
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Audit Report
Property Tax Assessment Appeals Boards
October 2023
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Senator Clarence K. Lam, M.D. (Senate Chair) Delegate Jared Solomon (House Chair)
Senator Joanne C. Benson Delegate Steven J. Arentz
Senator Paul D. Corderman Delegate Nicholas P. Charles II
Senator Katie Fry Hester Delegate Andrea Fletcher Harrison
Senator Shelly L. Hettleman Delegate Steven C. Johnson
Senator Cheryl C. Kagan Delegate Mary A. Lehman
Senator Cory V. McCray Delegate David Moon
Senator Justin D. Ready Delegate Julie Palakovich Carr
Senator Bryan W. Simonaire Delegate Stephanie M. Smith
Senator Craig J. Zucker Delegate M. Courtney Watson
To Obtain Further Information
Office of Legislative Audits
The Warehouse at Camden Yards
351 West Camden Street, Suite 400
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Phone: 410-946-5900
Maryland Relay: 711
TTY: 410-946-5401 ꞏ 301-970-5401
E-mail: webmaster@ola.state.md.us
Website: www.ola.state.md.us
To Report Fraud
The Office of Legislative Audits operates a Fraud Hotline to report fraud, waste, or abuse involving State
of Maryland government resources. Reports of fraud, waste, or abuse may be communicated anonymously
by a toll-free call to 1-877-FRAUD-11, by mail to the Fraud Hotline, c/o Office of Legislative Audits, or
through the Office’s website.
Nondiscrimination Statement
The Department of Legislative Services does not discriminate on the basis of age, ancestry, color, creed,
marital status, national origin, race, religion, gender, gender identity, sexual orientation, or disability in the
admission or access to its programs, services, or activities. The Department’s Information Officer has been
designated to coordinate compliance with the nondiscrimination requirements contained in Section 35.107
of the United States Department of Justice Regulations. Requests for assistance should be directed to the
Information Officer at 410-946-5400 or 410-970-5400.

--- Page 3 ---
October 4, 2023
Senator Clarence K. Lam, M.D., Senate Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Delegate Jared Solomon, House Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Members of Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Annapolis, Maryland
Ladies and Gentlemen:
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the Property Tax Assessment
Appeals Boards for the period beginning March 25, 2019 and ending June 30,
2023. The Boards consist of the local boards established in each of the State’s 24
local jurisdictions to hear appeals of property tax assessments.
Our audit did not disclose any findings that warrant mention in this report.
We wish to acknowledge the Boards’ efforts to satisfactorily address the finding
contained in our preceding audit report. We also wish to acknowledge the
cooperation extended to us during the audit by the Boards.
Respectfully submitted,
Gregory A. Hook, CPA
Legislative Auditor

--- Page 4 ---
2

--- Page 5 ---
Background Information
Agency Responsibilities
The Property Tax Assessment Appeals Boards consist of the local boards, which
have been established in the 24 local jurisdictions to hear appeals of property tax
assessments, and an administrative office located in Hagerstown. Each local
board consists of three members, and in most jurisdictions one alternate member,
who are appointed by the Governor for five-year terms. According to the State’s
records, the Boards’ fiscal year 2022 operating expenditures totaled $983,482 (see
Figure 1 below).
Figure 1
Property Tax Assessment Appeals Boards
Positions, Expenditures, and Funding Sources
Full-Time Equivalent Positions as of June 30, 2022
Positions Percent
Filled 8 100.0%
Vacant 0 0.0%
Total 8
Fiscal Year 2022 Expenditures
Expenditures Percent
Salaries, Wages, and Fringe Benefits $816,235 83.0%
Technical and Special Fees 195 0.0%
Operating Expenses 167,052 17.0%
Total $983,482
Fiscal Year 2022 Funding Sources
Funding Percent
General Fund $983,482 100.0%
Total $983,482
Source: State financial and personnel records
3

--- Page 6 ---
Status of Finding From Preceding Audit Report
Our audit included a review to determine the status of the finding contained in our
preceding audit report dated January 31, 2020. We determined that the Boards
satisfactorily addressed this finding.
Findings and Recommendations
Our audit did not disclose any significant deficiencies in the design or operation
of the Boards’ internal control. Our audit also did not disclose any significant
instances of noncompliance with applicable laws, rules, or regulations. A finding
that did not warrant inclusion in this report was separately communicated to the
Boards.
A draft copy of this report was provided to the Boards. Since there are no
recommendation in this report, a written response was no necessary.
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the Property Tax Assessment
Appeals Boards for the period beginning March 25, 2019 and ending June 30,
2023. The audit was conducted in accordance with generally accepted
government auditing standards. Those standards require that we plan and perform
the audit to obtain sufficient, appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis
for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives. We believe that
the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and
conclusions based on our audit objectives.
As prescribed by the State Government Article, Section 2-1221 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, the objectives of this audit were to examine the Boards’
financial transactions, records, and internal control, and to evaluate its compliance
with applicable State laws, rules, and regulations.
In planning and conducting our audit, we focused on the major financial-related
areas of operations based on assessments of significance and risk. The areas
addressed by the audit included maintenance of payroll records and appeals case
management. We also determined the status of the finding contained in our
preceding audit report.
4

--- Page 7 ---
Our audit did not include certain support services provided to the Boards by the
State Department of Assessments and Taxation. These support services (such as
purchasing, maintenance of accounting records, and related fiscal functions) are
included within the scope of our audit of the Department.
Our assessment of internal controls was based on agency procedures and controls
in place at the time of our fieldwork. Our tests of transactions and other auditing
procedures were generally focused on the transactions occurring during our audit
period of March 25, 2019 to June 30, 2023, but may include transactions before or
after this period as considered necessary to achieve our audit objectives.
To accomplish our audit objectives, our audit procedures included inquiries of
appropriate personnel, inspections of documents and records, tests of transactions,
and to the extent practicable, observations of the Boards’ operations. Generally,
transactions were selected for testing based on auditor judgment, which primarily
considers risk, the timing or dollar amount of the transaction, or the significance
of the transaction to the area of operation reviewed. As a matter of course, we do
not normally use sampling in our tests, so unless otherwise specifically indicated,
neither statistical nor non-statistical audit sampling was used to select the
transactions tested. Therefore, unless sampling is specifically indicated in a
finding, the results from any tests conducted or disclosed by us cannot be used to
project those results to the entire population from which the test items were
selected.
We also performed various data extracts of pertinent information from the State’s
Financial Management Information System (such as revenue and expenditure
data) and the State’s Central Payroll Bureau (payroll data). These extracts are
performed as part of ongoing internal processes established by the Office of
Legislative Audits and were subject to various tests to determine data reliability.
We determined that the data extracted from these sources were sufficiently
reliable for the purposes the data were used during this audit. Finally, we
performed other auditing procedures that we considered necessary to achieve our
audit objectives. The reliability of data used in this report for background or
informational purposes was not assessed.
The Boards’ management is responsible for establishing and maintaining effective
internal control. Internal control is a process designed to provide reasonable
assurance that objectives pertaining to the reliability of financial records;
effectiveness and efficiency of operations, including safeguarding of assets; and
compliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations are achieved. As
provided in Government Auditing Standards, there are five components of
internal control: control environment, risk assessment, control activities,
5

--- Page 8 ---
information and communication, and monitoring. Each of the five components,
when significant to the audit objectives, and as applicable to the Boards, were
considered by us during the course of this audit.
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate.
Our reports are designed to assist the Maryland General Assembly in exercising
its legislative oversight function and to provide constructive recommendations for
improving State operations. As a result, our reports generally do not address
activities we reviewed that are functioning properly.
6

--- Page 9 ---
A T
UDIT EAM
Adam J. Westover, CPA
Audit Manager
Oluwafemi E. Ogundolie
Senior Auditor