Title: Legislative Audit Bulletin - Winter 2020


The reports referenced in this bulletin are listed below.

Maryland Department of Transportation - Maryland Aviation Administration (12/12/19)

Department of General Services - Office of Procurement and Logistics (12/5/19)

Maryland 529 (12/3/19)

Maryland Department of Health - Medical Care Programs Administration (11/7/19)

Department of Budget and Management (10/29/19)

Department of Commerce (9/4/19)

Maryland Department of Health - Developmental Disabilities Administration (7/8/19)

Maryland Department of Transportation - Maryland Port Administration (Special Review) (6/26/19)

Department of Human Services - Local Department Operations (6/7/19)

Department of Human Services - Family Investment Administration (3/21/19)

Maryland Technology Development Corporation (2/5/19)

Maryland Department of Transportation - Maryland Transit Administration (Special Review) (1/7/19)
Date: 02/04/2020
Type: Legislative Audit Bulletins
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5e389407a1ce580a0041caaf
Extracted: 2025-06-19T06:24:55.150584
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Legislative Audit Bulletin
Publication for Members of the Maryland General Assembly
Maryland Department of Health
(MDH) – Developmental Disabilities
Administration (DDA)
This audit report included 11 findings and we
determined that DDA’s accountability and compliance
level was unsatisfactory. The primary factors contributing
to the unsatisfactory rating were the significance of the
current audit findings and the number of repeat findings
(5 of the 10 findings from the preceding audit report
As a result, DDA failed to recover $4.9 million in federal
were repeated).
reimbursements. DDA also did not take sufficient action
Our audit disclosed a number of significant issues related to identify and return improper
to DDA’s process for providing needed services to its contribution to care collections
consumers. For example, DDA did not verify that the identified during our preceding audit. Inside this issue:
budgets for consumers’ services were properly assigned Although DDA determined that $3.6
according to established criteria and that the budgets million was improperly collected Department of Commerce
were properly recorded in its Provider Consumer from 2,194 consumers during Department of Budget and
Information System II (PCIS2). In addition, DDA did calendar year 2013, as of July 2018, Management
not conduct audits of providers to ensure that payments DDA had not taken action to return
MDH - Medical Care
were consistent with actual services delivered and in the funds to affected consumers nor
Programs Administration
accordance with consumers’ approved individual plans. had it attempted to determine the
amounts improperly collected during Selected Audit Report
DDA also did not identify recurring overpayments
Findings
prior periods.
totaling at least $1.7 million that had occurred over a
OLA News
period of several years until they were self- In addition, federal fund
DDA’s
reported by a provider. Although DDA reimbursements were not always Reports Issued Since
accountability recovered these overpayments, it did not recovered timely, resulting in lost the Last Bulletin
and compliance subsequently determine the full extent of interest income to the State of
level was overpayments to this provider or whether approximately $126,000. Finally, we
similar overpayments were made to other noted a number of information technology issues,
unsatisfactory
providers. DDA did not have an adequate including the lack of a process to detect PCIS2 processing
primarily due to
process to ensure that amounts billed by its errors and the failure to properly restrict access to critical
the significance
Coordination of Community Services capabilities in PCIS2.
of current audit agencies properly reflected the consumer
findings and the services provided. Department of Human Services (DHS)
number of repeat
DDA did not always comply with State – Family Investment Administration (FIA)
findings. procurement regulations to obtain certain
contracts and did not adequately monitor FIA improperly allowed recipients to continue receiving
the related services to ensure that the required services Temporary Cash Assistance (TCA) benefits beyond the
were provided, that payments were proper and accounted allowable lifetime maximum of five years. According to
for, and that federal fund reimbursements were obtained. FIA records, during fiscal year 2016 an average of 1,900
Winter 2020 Issue

--- Page 2 ---
Legislative Audit Bulletin
recipients each month had been receiving benefits for more DOC did not establish a sufficient process to verify whether
than five years at an estimated cost of at least $6.6 million. loan recipients met employment requirements before
Federal and State regulations limit TCA benefits to five years forgiving conditional loans and paid certain loan guarantees
unless a recipient was granted a hardship exemption; to lenders without obtaining, reviewing, and verifying
however, for our test of 10 recipients that had received TCA adequate documentation to support lender claims filed.
benefits beyond the five-year limit, there was no These guarantees allow the lender to recoup from DOC any
documented exemption on file for any of these recipients. guaranteed portion of the loan that cannot be recouped
through other means.
FIA did not ensure that local
FIA improperly
departments of social services (LDSS)
DOC did not establish a process to ensure that recipients
allowed recipients
conducted timely and appropriate
receiving funds through the Maryland E-Nnovation
to receive Temporary follow-up on certain computer match
Initiative Fund secured and deposited required private
Cash Assistance alerts, including attempts to recover
funding (donations), and that the related
benefits beyond the improper payments. These computer expenditures were made for qualified DOC failed to
matches are designed to help ensure
allowed five-year purposes. An annual $8.5 million
establish a process
recipient eligibility and to detect
maximum. appropriation is available for these
potential fraud. Our review disclosed to verify that State
research funds. Similarly, DOC did not
that LDSSs did not take appropriate funds were used for
establish effective procedures and controls
action for 29 of the 31 alerts tested. In addition, FIA did not
over the Maryland State Arts Council’s allowable purposes.
ensure that all social security number alerts were recorded in
Grants for Organizations program, such
the Clients’ Automated Resource and Eligibility System
as to verify that required matching funds were obtained and
(CARES), and for those alerts that were recorded, LDSSs
that State funds were used for allowable purposes.
did not investigate and resolve these alerts for extended
periods. FIA also did not take adequate follow-up action
For the Small, Minority, and Women-Owned Businesses
when LDSSs failed to conduct the required number of
Account program, DOC did not have processes to ensure
quality assurance reviews designed to help ensure
that fund manager agreements included critical details
compliance with legal and regulatory requirements,
related to loan underwriting processes and to verify fund
including eligibility of various assistance programs.
manager compensation. Our review of four of the eight fund
FIA also did not periodically review and adequately restrict manager agreements revealed that three of them lacked
user access to its Office of Home Energy Programs (OHEP) critical details of loan underwriting standards and practices,
computer system, resulting in several hundred employees such as the requirement for collateral and a conflict of
with unnecessary access to recipients’ personally identifiable interest policy. Furthermore, DOC did not verify data
information (PII). As of January 2018, OHEP’s system reported by fund managers relating to their efforts to meet
contained PII for 563,495 unique recipients. certain program lending goals.
Department of Budget and Management
Department of Commerce (DOC)
(DBM)
DOC had not established effective procedures to ensure that
One Maryland Tax Credit applicants accurately reported Our audit of DBM’s Office of the Secretary,
CCU failed to
their compliance with required new job which included the Central Collection Unit
assess required
DOC did not have creation numbers and had issued a tax (CCU), disclosed several deficiencies relating
collection fees
credit to one applicant for project costs to procedures and controls at CCU. With
effective procedures
that were not eligible for the credit regard to CCU’s automated debt collection and of at least
to verify if loan
according to State regulations. cash register systems, we found that 51 of the $17.8 million.
recipients met
Furthermore, for the Biotechnology 123 active users at CCU’s headquarters had
employment Investment Tax Credit program, DOC access that was either unnecessary for their job
requirements did not have procedures to ensure that duties, or resulted in an inadequate segregation of duties. We
before forgiving biotechnology companies accurately also found certain deficiencies within the debt collection
reported employment information prior system that resulted in CCU’s failure to assess required
conditional loans.
to being certified and ownership collection fees of at least $17.8 million and the rejection of
information prior to issuance of tax certain valid debts submitted by State agencies for
credits to investors, nor did DOC have procedures to collection. Furthermore, we noted that potential wage
identify tax credits subject to recapture. garnishments were not always pursued as a means to collect
2

--- Page 3 ---
Winter 2020 Issue
outstanding debts and that there was a lack of controls virtually no audits of hospital claims since calendar year
over the abatement of accounts. From July 2014 to 2007 to determine whether billed services were appropriate
October 2017, CCU abated 24,000 accounts valued and actually provided. According to MCPA records, hospital
at $39.1 million. services totaled approximately $777.5 million during fiscal
year 2018. Similarly, MCPA had Since 2007, MCPA
Our audit also disclosed that the ability to view PII stored
not established a process to ensure
within CCU’s debt collection system was not adequately conducted virtually
the validity of nursing facility ventilator
restricted. As of January 2018, PII for approximately 5.8 no audits of hospital
care claims, which totaled approximately
million debtor accounts was visible to system users, $41.1 million in fiscal year 2018. claims to determine
including CCU employees, other State agency employees,
whether billed
and CCU’s external collection firm. In addition, vendor PII
Furthermore, MCPA did not require services were
was not adequately restricted in the State’s Financial
Management Information System (FMIS). PII for 398,000 nor obtain comprehensive, independent appropriate and
Statewide vendors was displayed in plain text and depending reviews of the automated systems used actually provided.
by two vendors to ensure that the
on their access level, was potentially visible to 5,204 State
sensitive data, including PII and protected health
employees with access to FMIS. Responsibility for
information (PHI), of Medicaid recipients were adequately
restricting access to PII in FMIS is shared by DBM, the
safeguarded. MCPA also did not have sufficient controls to
Comptroller of Maryland, and the State’s Department of
restrict access to PII stored within the Medicaid
Information Technology.
Management Information System. For example, we
identified 727 employees that had access to a screen
containing PII of 3.5 million Medicaid recipients, and we
MDH – Medical Care Programs were advised by MCPA management that the vast majority
of these users did not require this access.
Administration (MCPA)
Selected Audit Report Findings
MCPA did not adequately monitor
MCPA identified
vendors that assisted in administering the
1,215 hospital
Medicaid program. For example, MCPA
days, with an did not sufficiently address errors made Maryland Technology Development
estimated $4.6 by the vendor responsible for determining
Corporation (TEDCO)
whether Medicaid recipients required
million cost, which
hospitalization. Although the vendor,
were not medically
routinely incorrectly determined that The Maryland Venture Fund (MVF) and the MVF
necessary.
hospital services were medically necessary, Authority were transferred to TEDCO in October 2015.
MCPA could only provide limited Our audit disclosed that, since the transfer, TEDCO had
documentation of follow-up on these errors or required not adopted regulations over direct equity investments
corrective action plans. During fiscal year 2018, MCPA had through the MVF, as required by State law, and did not
identified 1,215 hospital days, with an estimated cost of always document how investments met eligibility
$4.6 million, which were not medically necessary. In requirements or the expected economic benefits the
addition, MCPA did not monitor the vendor responsible for investments would bring to the State.
conducting credit balance audits of hospitals to identify
Our test of 10 direct equity investments, totaling $8.5
potential reimbursements from third-party insurers.
million, disclosed that 6 of the investments, totaling $4.7
MCPA also did not sufficiently document its review of million, were made to 4 companies, which did not maintain
investigations of questionable recipient eligibility performed their principal place of business in Maryland as required.
by the Department of Human Services, local health Furthermore, TEDCO did not adequately document why
departments, and MCPA employees. Consequently, there these companies were considered qualified investments. In
was a lack of assurance that MCPA’s oversight of these addition, TEDCO’s monitoring of venture firms that
investigations was sufficiently comprehensive. We also noted received funding through the MVF’s Invest Maryland
that MCPA did not take certain actions or establish Program was not sufficient to ensure that fees paid by
adequate processes over certain services provided, such as TEDCO were proper and that venture firms reported all
those provided in a hospital, community-based setting, or required investment information, such as the number of jobs
nursing facility. For example, MCPA had conducted established and average employee compensation.
3

--- Page 4 ---
Legislative Audit Bulletin
DHS – Local Department Operations (LDO) In addition, we questioned the appropriateness of the
method used by the Maryland 529 to credit MPCT
accounts with interest when an account holder requested a
Under State law, the DHS Office of the Inspector General
refund or rollover of funds into another 529 account, such
(OIG) is responsible for conducting financial and
as with the Maryland College Investment Plan. Although in
compliance audits of the 24 local
accordance with account holder contract terms, we believe
Audit reports for departments of social services (LDSS). To
that the method used to calculate interest earnings resulted
the LDSSs avoid duplication of work, we relied in excessive payments.
primarily on the audit work performed by
included 259 audit
the OIG. Our review of the most recent
Department of General Services (DGS) –
findings, 73 of
audit reports for each of the 24 LDSSs
which the OIG disclosed that the reports collectively
Office of Procurement and Logistics (OPL)
deemed to be included 259 audit findings, including 73 This report contained six audit findings, with five repeated
repeat findings. deemed by the OIG to be repeat findings. from our preceding audit report,
The OIG audit findings were related to including OPL not adequately As of November 30,
deficiencies with respect to bank accounts, procurements, monitoring certain State agency 2018, OPL had not
prepaid gift cards, and employee access to critical systems. procurements that were specifically sufficiently audited
subject to its oversight. As of November
State agencies’
Our audit also disclosed that the OIG did not include
30, 2018, OPL had not sufficiently
certain critical procurement and disbursements processes procurement activity
audited State agencies’ delegated
within the scope of its audit of the LDSSs. As a result, we procurement activity as required by as required by State
conducted an on-site review of these processes at two
State regulations and OPL procedures. regulations and OPL
LDSSs. Our review disclosed monitoring deficiencies and
Specifically, OPL only conducted three procedures.
instances of non-compliance with certain procurement
delegated procurement audits dating
requirements at one of these LDSSs. Specifically, this LDSS
back to fiscal year 2011, and our review of these audits
did not effectively monitor a $15.3 million contract for
disclosed that the scope of the audits did not include all
medical care management of children in out-of-home
delegated procurements and that the workpapers did not
placements, did not prepare adequate sole source
always support the conclusions in the audit report.
justifications for a number of procurements tested,
and intentionally split two procurements into smaller Our audit also disclosed deficiencies relating to OPL’s
amounts to avoid review by the central DHS Contract Statewide procurement responsibilities, including the failure
Processing Unit. to publish all contract awards on eMaryland Marketplace as
required and to provide State agencies with agreed-upon
prices for products that were available to them through
Maryland 529
intergovernmental cooperative purchasing agreements.
Additionally, OPL did not properly monitor providers that,
Our audit found significant management and Board
by State law, receive procurement preferences for State
oversight issues at Maryland 529,
Maryland 529 agency purchases. For example, OPL did not establish
contributing to numerous Maryland
found $4.3 million Prepaid College Trust (MPCT) comprehensive procedures for determining the fair market
prices of goods and services available from Maryland
in account holder operational and internal control
Correctional Enterprises.
deficiencies and unresolved circumstances
disbursements that
that existed during the audit period.
were recorded Maryland Department of Transportation (MDOT)
Maryland 529 had significant
incorrectly or not – Maryland Aviation Administration (MAA)
management turnover beginning in May
at all. 2015, at which time, volumes of MAA circumvented the advertising and competitive bidding
unopened and unprocessed business requirements of State procurement regulations by using a
documents were discovered. Maryland 529 did notify its revenue contract with its parking facilities management
Board of the contents of the discovered documents, which vendor to make $1.7 million in procurements, which
included $4.3 million in account holder disbursements that included construction work for valet services and six mobile
had not been recorded or that had been incorrectly recorded. customer service robots. For example, the MAA directed its
However, insufficient documentation was maintained of parking facilities management vendor to purchase six
these found documents or the actions taken, if any, to customer service robots at a cost of $588,000 from a
investigate these documents, and there was no formal report specified vendor. MAA received the robots in November
of the findings and conclusions reached. 2018 but, as of June 2019 they were still not functional due
4

--- Page 5 ---
Winter 2020 Issue
to network issues and integration issues with other MAA In addition, as in past years, during calendar year 2019 OLA
systems. MAA management advised that an unknown presented the findings from a number of other reports to the
amount of additional costs would be Senate Budget and Taxation Committee and the House
Marketing fund incurred in order for the robots to Appropriations Committee (and their subcommittees), and
expenses over a become functional. MAA also did not the Joint Committee on the Management of Public Funds.
three-year period review marketing fund expenses made
totaled $2.1 million,
by its concessions management vendor
to ensure that the fund was used for its Presentation to the Maryland State Internal
$552,000 of which
intended purpose. Our review of the
Audit Forum
did not meet the vendor’s reported marketing fund
In October 2019, a number of management and senior staff
stated purpose of the expenses totaling $2.1 million over a
from OLA made a comprehensive presentation to the
fund or appeared to three-year period disclosed payments
Maryland State Internal Audit Forum on common findings
from the fund totaling $552,000 that
be of a questionable
in OLA audit reports on the State’s
did not meet the stated purpose of the
nature. fund or that appeared to be of a universities and colleges, including all OLA presented 24
University System of Maryland
questionable nature. For example, the audit reports
Institutions, Morgan State University,
vendor used the marketing fund to make contributions to containing 151
St. Mary’s College, and the Baltimore
local and State politicians and campaign fundraising events
findings for all State
City Community College. The Forum
totaling $110,000, as well as to make payments to a lobbyist
is a platform coordinated by the universities and
totaling $50,000.
Department of Budget and colleges between
OLA News Management to periodically provide fiscal year 2015 and
presentations on topics of interest to
Appointment of Deputy Legislative Auditor
internal auditors, inspectors general,
September 2019.
Effective January 2, 2020, OLA welcomed Gina M. Smith, and other interested personnel from
CPA, as the new Deputy Legislative Auditor, a position within State government.
established in the State Government Article of the
Annotated Code of Maryland. Her appointment represents
a return to OLA by Ms. Smith, who began her State career
OLA’s presentation took information from the 24 audit
with OLA 30 years ago. After spending 11 years with OLA,
reports (that contained 151 findings) issued for all State
Ms. Smith transferred to the Maryland Lottery and Gaming
universities and colleges between fiscal year 2015 and
Control Agency, where she had served as Deputy Director
September 2019. It included findings relating to student
and Chief Financial Officer, including two separate terms as
accounts receivable and financial aid, procurements and
Interim Lottery Director. Ms. Smith will report directly to
disbursements including interagency agreements, grants
the Legislative Auditor and is a welcome addition to OLA in
received, and information systems security and controls
its ongoing mission of supporting the Maryland General
including access to critical financial records and security over
Assembly in providing accountability and oversight of State
sensitive student information.
agencies’ operations.
Audits Presented to the JAEC
This OLA presentation to assist State Universities and
During the interim, two meetings of the Joint Audit and
Colleges improve fiscal operations and compliance with laws
Evaluation Committee were held during which OLA
and regulations was coordinated under the auspices of the
presented the results of six audit reports issued during calendar
Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee.
year 2019, along with updates of certain statistical data.
Hearing Dates Audit Report Report Date
Maryland Technology OLA Data Analytics Unit
February 5, 2019
Development Corporation
OLA established a Data Analytics Unit (DAU) in May
October 29, 2019 MDH – Developmental Disabilities
Administration July 8, 2019 2019, staffed by employees with specialized knowledge to
Deparment of Commerce September 4, 2019 identify, design, and integrate advance technologies and data
DBM – Office of the Secretary and analytics into OLA’s audit processes. DAU is tasked
October 29, 2019
Other Units
primarily with developing audit databases, analytical tools,
December 17, 2019 MDH – Medical Care Programs
Administration November 7, 2019 and data matches that empower OLA’s audit teams to
Maryland 529 December 3, 2019 maximize the use of technology in their work. DAU
5

--- Page 6 ---
Legislative Audit Bulletin
increases the productivity and efficiency of OLA audit through OLA’s toll-free fraud hotline (1-877-FRAUD11),
work by quickly gaining an understanding of complex through referrals via OLA’s website, and identified during
data and providing insightful results to audit teams to meet routine audits. FIU consists of certified fraud examiners who
their objectives. handle hotline allegations in accordance with established
procedures. FIU conducts special reviews, and works
collaboratively with OLA field audit teams during mandated
Since its establishment, DAU has provided technical agency audits when questionable activities are identified.
assistance to numerous audit teams and is developing an When allegations are substantiated, FIU works in
enhanced automated tool to improve the effectiveness of conjunction with the Office of the Attorney General –
data extract reports from the State’s Financial Management Criminal Division; the Office of the State
Information System that OLA uses to audit agency payroll, Prosecutor; the State Ethics Commission; The FIU received
revenue, expenditure, and procurement transactions. Finally, and other State, federal, and local and assessed 423
DAU represents OLA within the newly formed National investigatory entities.
allegations and
State Auditors Association’s Data Analytics Workgroup.
issued special
reports on the MTA
During calendar year 2019, FIU received
Presentation on Personally Identifiable and assessed 423 allegations and issued and the MPA.
Information (PII) Audit Issues special reports on the Maryland Transit
Administration (MTA) and the Maryland Port
At the December 17, 2019 Joint Audit and Evaluation
Administration (MPA). These reports involved allegations of
Committee Hearing, OLA provided a presentation on PII
possible violations of State laws, regulations, and policies
issues identified in OLA audit reports
involving State employees and certain contractors. FIU also
Audit reports from since fiscal year 2014. The presentation
assisted 18 audits by analyzing records and researching
was prepared by OLA’s Information
July 2013 to
questionable activities and other high-risk transactions,
Systems Audit Division, and provided an
November 2019 which contributed to various findings in those audit reports.
overview of PII definitions (both federal
found 37.9 million
and State of Maryland), the existence of
records containing PII within State IT Systems, security
PII data, but lacked requirements and risks, audit report In the MTA special report, which included several
adequate PII data findings, and recommendations to significant findings, we commented that MTA included
security controls. mitigate the risks to improper disclosure language in certain contracts that allowed its employees to
of PII. circumvent State procurement regulations by directing the
contractors to use specific vendors as subcontractors. An
MTA management employee used this capability to direct
OLA disclosed that the total number of PII records within work to specific vendors as subcontractors including one
State agencies IT systems was substantial. It was determined vendor with which the management
that, for OLA audit reports issued from July 2013 through employee had a less than arm’s-length MTA included
November 2019, a total of approximately 37.9 million relationship. This vendor was paid $3 language in
records were identified as containing PII data elements, but million for the subcontracted work, certain
contracts that
were not subject to having adequate PII data security of which we found to be questionable.
allowed employees
controls. During that period, OLA issued 457 reports
to circumvent
resulting from audits and reviews of State and local
government units, and 77 of those reports (16.8%), State procurement
The MTA management employee also
identified 84 findings concerning the lack of adequate regulations.
directed and monitored four snow and ice
controls over the protection of PII, making it susceptible to
removal contracts totaling $6.2 million
increased risk of improper disclosure. In response to these
involving the vendor. As of August 2018, MTA had made
audit reports, the agencies generally agreed with OLA’s
payments totaling $3.6 million under the four contracts, of
findings and recommendations.
which $1.5 million was paid to the vendor either as a
subcontractor or as a prime contractor. Consequently, based
on the nature and entirety of the matters identified, we
Fraud Investigation Unit referred these matters to the Office of the Attorney General
OLA’s Fraud Investigation Unit (FIU) is responsible for – Criminal Division. We also identified possible violations
investigating allegations of fraud, waste, and abuse received of State ethics law.
6

--- Page 7 ---
Winter 2020 Issue
Reports Issuedby
The Office of Legislative Audits
January 1, 2019 to December 31, 2019
Agency Report Date Number of Pages
Developmental Disabilities Administration – Monitoring of Coordination of Community Services Agencies,
1/02/19 23
(Performance)
University System of Maryland – University of Maryland Eastern Shore 1/04/19 22
Maryland Department of Transportation – Maryland Transit Administration – Allegations Related to Possible
1/07/19 19
Violations of State Laws, Regulations, and Policies Involving an MTA Management Employee (Special)
Department of Human Services – Social Services Administration – Follow-up Review (Special) 1/09/19 14
Morgan State University 1/11/19 36
Statewide Review of Budget Closeout Transactions for Fiscal Year 2018 (Special) 1/15/19 15
Maryland Department of Transportation – State Highway Administration 1/30/19 21
Maryland Technology Development Corporation 2/05/19 15
Department of Labor, Licensing and Regulation – Division of Unemployment Insurance 2/05/19 19
Office of Administrative Hearings 2/11/19 6
Maryland Department of Health – Holly Center 2/12/19 5
Maryland State Department of Education – Interagency Commission on School Construction 3/06/19 8
Statewide Personnel System – Review of the Design and Implementation of Automated Controls (Special) 3/07/19 17
Office of the Attorney General 3/08/19 8
Prince George’s County Public Schools (Financial Management Practices Audit) 3/11/19 45
Maryland Department of Health – Deer’s Head Hospital Center 3/14/19 8
Department of Information Technology as a Service Provider 3/21/19 15
Department of Human Services – Family Investment Administration 3/21/19 23
Maryland Department of Health – Thomas B. Finan Hospital Center 3/26/19 6
Board of License Commissioners for Prince George’s County (Performance) 3/29/19 60
Ma ryland Department of Transportation – Office of Transportation Technology Services 4/01/19 7
Review of the Actions Taken by the Maryland Department of Health – Medical Care Programs Administration
4/01/19 14
to Resolve Repeat Audit Findings in Response to the April 2018 Joint Chairmen’s Report (Special)
Review of the Actions Taken by the Maryland Department of Health – Office of the Secretary to Resolve
4/01/19 10
Repeat Audit Findings in Response to the April 2018 Joint Chairmen’s Report (Special)
Review of the Actions Taken by the Department of Human Services – Office of the Secretary to Resolve
4/01/19 6
Repeat Audit Findings in Response to the April 2018 Joint Chairmen’s Report (Special)
Review of the Actions Taken by the Department of Human Services – Family Investment Administration to
4/01/19 10
Resolve Repeat Audit Findings in Response to the April 2018 Joint Chairmen’s Report (Special)
Review of the Actions Taken by the State Department of Assessments and Taxation to Resolve Repeat
4/01/19 16
Audit Findings in Response to the April 2018 Joint Chairmen’s Report (Special)
Review of the Actions Taken by the Uninsured Employers’ Fund to Resolve Repeat Audit Findings in
4/01/19 12
Response to the April 2018 Joint Chairmen’s Report (Special)
Workers’ Compensation Commission 4/02/19 11
Maryland Department of Health – Health Regulatory Commissions 4/05/19 8
Maryland Department of Transportation – The Secretary’s Office 4/18/19 8
Washington County Public Schools (Financial Management Practices Audit) 5/14/19 35
Department of Budget and Management – Office of Personnel Services and Benefits 5/14/19 18
Maryland Longitudinal Data System Center 5/14/19 5
Department of Human Services – Child Support Administration 5/15/19 17
Department of Human Services – Local Department Operations 6/07/19 24
University System of Maryland – University of Maryland Center for Environmental Science 6/14/19 7
Maryland Department of Health – Western Maryland Hospital Center 6/20/19 8
Maryland Commission on Civil Rights 6/25/19 5
7

--- Page 8 ---
Legislative Audit Bulletin Winter 2020 Issue
Agency Report Date Number of Pages
Office of the State Treasurer 6/25/19 13
Department of Disabilities 6/26/19 6
Maryland Department of Transportation – Maryland Port Administration (Special) 6/26/19 8
Maryland State Department of Education 7/02/19 22
Maryland Department of Health – Developmental Disabilities Administration 7/08/19 33
Maryland Department of Health – Behavioral Health Administration 7/09/19 16
University System of Maryland – University of Maryland, Baltimore 7/10/19 9
Allegany County Public Schools (Financial Management Practices Audit) 7/12/19 33
Dorchester County – Office of the Register of Wills 7/22/19 5
Dorchester County – Office of the Clerk of Circuit Court 7/22/19 5
Maryland Department of Transportation – Financial Management Information System – Centralized Operations 7/26/19 6
Kent County – Office of the Clerk of Circuit Court 8/14/19 5
Office of the State Prosecutor 8/16/19 5
Comptroller of Maryland – Office of the Comptroller and Bureau of Revenue Estimates 8/29/19 5
Comptroller of Maryland – Central Payroll Bureau 9/03/19 5
Department of Commerce 9/04/19 27
Maryland School for the Deaf 9/04/19 6
Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services – Regional Operations 9/05/19 17
Maryland State Department of Education – Division of Early Childhood 9/06/19 17
Kent County – Office of the Register of Wills 9/09/19 5
Potomac River Fisheries Commission – Report for the Year Ended June 30, 2019 (Examination) 9/20/19 12
Review of Local Government Audit Reports – Fiscal Year Ending June 30, 2018 (Special) 9/23/19 14
University System of Maryland – Coppin State University 9/23/19 16
Department of State Police 9/23/19 25
University System of Maryland Office 9/30/19 14
University System of Maryland – Salisbury University 10/22/19 13
Anne Arundel County Public Schools (Financial Management Practices Audit) 10/24/19 32
Review of Community College Audit Reports – Fiscal Year Ending June 30, 2018 (Special) 10/28/19 7
Department of Budget and Management – Office of the Secretary and Other Units 10/29/19 31
Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services – Maryland Correctional Enterprises 10/31/19 7
University System of Maryland – University of Maryland University College 11/06/19 15
Maryland Department of Health – Medical Care Programs Administration 11/07/19 29
Executive Department – Office of the Governor – Boards, Commissions, and Offices – Governor’s Office
11/12/19 14
for Children – Office of the Deaf and Hard of Hearing
Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services – Central Operations 11/20/19 21
Maryland 529 12/03/19 34
Maryland Economic Development Corporation 12/03/19 6
Frederick County Public Schools (Financial Management Practices Audit) 12/05/19 22
Department of General Services – Office of Procurement and Logistics 12/05/19 17
Montgomery County – Office of the Clerk of Circuit Court 12/11/19 5
State Board of Elections 12/12/19 14
Maryland Department of Transportation – Maryland Aviation Administration 12/12/19 11
Department of Legislative Services
The Legislative Audit Bulletin is issued by the Office of Legislative Audits (OLA) to inform the General Assembly of audits or
Office of Legislative Audits
reviews completed and to provide a summary of significant findings from selected reports. Generally, the agencies agreed with
State Office Building
the audit findings and recommendations, although some follow-up of the report response may have been necessary. In those
301 West Preston Street, Room 1202
infrequent cases of disagreement, we believe that satisfactory resolution has been obtained through subsequent communication Baltimore, Maryland 21201
between OLA and the applicable agency. Copies of individual reports can be obtained from the OLA website or by contacting Phone: 410-946-5900 · 301-970-5900
either OLA or the Department of Legislative Services, 90 State Circle, Annapolis, Maryland 21401, 410-946-5400 - 301-970- Toll Free: 1-877-486-9964
5400. For further details about any report or finding, please contact OLA at the listed numbers. Fraud Hotline: 1-877-FRAUD-11
Fax: 410-946-5999 · 301-970-5999
Gregory A. Hook, Legislative Auditor E-mail: Bulletin@ola.state.md.us
8 Web site: http://www.ola.state.md.us