Title: Opioid Operational Command Center - Allegations Related to a Questionable Grant Awarded to a Nonprofit Organization
Date: 02/07/2020
Type: Fraud, Waste, and Abuse
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5e4319f0a1ce58083057e121
Extracted: 2025-06-19T06:25:30.540039
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Special Review
Opioid Operational Command Center
Allegations Related to a Questionable Grant
Awarded to a Nonprofit Organization
February 2020
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Senator Clarence K. Lam, M.D. (Senate Chair) Vacant (House Chair)
Senator Malcolm L. Augustine Delegate Steven J. Arentz
Senator Adelaide C. Eckardt Delegate Mark S. Chang
Senator George C. Edwards Delegate Keith E. Haynes
Senator Katie Fry Hester Delegate Michael A. Jackson
Senator Cheryl C. Kagan Delegate David Moon
Senator Benjamin F. Kramer Delegate April R. Rose
Senator Cory V. McCray Delegate Geraldine Valentino-Smith
Senator Justin D. Ready Delegate Karen Lewis Young
Senator Craig J. Zucker One Vacancy
To Obtain Further Information
Office of Legislative Audits
301 West Preston Street, Room 1202
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Phone: 410-946-5900 ꞏ 301-970-5900 ꞏ 1-877-486-9964 (Toll Free in Maryland)
Maryland Relay: 711
TTY: 410-946-5401 ꞏ 301-970-5401
E-mail: OLAWebmaster@ola.state.md.us
Website: www.ola.state.md.us
To Report Fraud
The Office of Legislative Audits operates a Fraud Hotline to report fraud, waste, or abuse involving State
of Maryland government resources. Reports of fraud, waste, or abuse may be communicated anonymously
by a toll-free call to 1-877-FRAUD-11, by mail to the Fraud Hotline, c/o Office of Legislative Audits, or
through the Office’s website.
Nondiscrimination Statement
The Department of Legislative Services does not discriminate on the basis of age, ancestry, color, creed,
marital status, national origin, race, religion, gender, gender identity, sexual orientation, or disability in the
admission or access to its programs, services, or activities. The Department’s Information Officer has been
designated to coordinate compliance with the nondiscrimination requirements contained in Section 35.107
of the United States Department of Justice Regulations. Requests for assistance should be directed to the
Information Officer at 410-946-5400 or 410-970-5400.

--- Page 6 ---
4

--- Page 7 ---
Table of Contents
Scope, Objectives, and Methodology 7
Background Information 8
Agency Establishment and Responsibilities 8
Opioid Overdoses and Deaths 9
Overview 9
Findings and Recommendations 11
Grant Award and Monitoring
Finding 1 – The Opioid Operational Command Center (OOCC) did not 12
have written policies and procedures for the selection of grantees,
amounts awarded, and the monitoring of grantees. We noted
numerous deficiencies with the grant process that raised questions
about the overall integrity of grant awards and related payments.
Questionable Grant
Finding 2 – OOCC did not have adequate justification for a $750,000 15
grant awarded to a nonprofit organization for the purchase of a
former country club and golf course.
Questionable Grant Activity
Finding 3 – OOCC awarded a $100,000 grant to an out-of-state nonprofit 16
organization that transferred almost all the funds to a for-profit
company owned by senior management of the nonprofit; neither of
which were registered to conduct business in the State of Maryland. In
addition, the payment rate paid to the nonprofit was higher than the rate
included in the grant proposal and more than half of the required services
were not provided.
Finding 4 – OOCC awarded a $40,959 grant to a nonprofit organization 19
that was not consistent with the related grant proposal. In addition,
purchases specified in the grant agreement appeared to have no
correlation to the related performance measures, and certain grant
expenditures appeared questionable.
5

--- Page 8 ---
Budgetary Closeout
Finding 5 – During the June 30, 2019 fiscal year closing process, the 21
Maryland Department of Health and the Behavioral Health
Administration improperly recorded certain expenditures on behalf
of OOCC retaining general fund appropriation for future years.
Agency Response Appendix
6

--- Page 9 ---
Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We conducted a review of an allegation received through our fraud, waste, and
abuse hotline regarding the Opioid Operational Command Center (OOCC), which
was established by Executive Order in January 2017. The allegation related to a
questionable grant awarded to a nonprofit organization. The purpose of our
review was to determine whether the allegation we received was valid and to
determine if the related activities violated State laws, regulations, and policies.
This review was performed in accordance with State Government Article, Section
2-1220 of the Annotated Code of Maryland.
The scope of our review included the grant award referenced in the allegation. In
addition, considering the results of our review regarding this grant award and our
review of OOCC’s grant award procedures, we expanded the scope to include 18
grants with awards totaling $6.1 million that were awarded during fiscal years
2018 and 2019.
Our review consisted of tests, analyses, observations, and discussions with
personnel at OOCC as we deemed necessary to achieve our objectives. We also
reviewed documentation and held discussions with personnel from the Maryland
Department of Health – Office of the Secretary, the Behavioral Health
Administration, and the Maryland Emergency Management Agency, which
processed financial transactions on behalf of OOCC during the period covered by
our review.
The results of our review, which found the original allegation to be generally
valid, are identified in Finding 2. Our review also identified issues with OOCC’s
procedures for awarding, monitoring, and accounting for grants which are
identified in findings 1 and 5, and questionable activities relating to grant awards
to other nonprofit organizations, which are identified in Findings 3 and 4.
Our review did not constitute an audit conducted in accordance with generally
accepted government auditing standards. Our review was conducted during the
period from May 2019 through September 2019.
OOCC’s response to our findings and recommendations, as confirmed by the
Military Department, is included as an appendix to this report. As prescribed in
State Government Article, Section 2-1224 of the Annotated Code of Maryland,
we will advise the OOCC regarding the results of our review of its response.
7

--- Page 10 ---
Background Information
Agency Establishment and Responsibilities
In response to the rise in the number of heroin and opioid deaths in the State, the
Governor issued Executive Order 01.01.2015.13, effective February 24, 2015,
establishing the Governor’s Inter-Agency Heroin and Opioid Coordinating
Council. Subsequently, Executive Order 01.01.2017.01, effective January 24,
2017, established the Opioid Operational Command Center (OOCC) within the
Council to address the opioid epidemic. The Executive Order provides that the
OOCC is responsible for
 collecting, analyzing, and facilitating the sharing of data relevant to the
epidemic from State and local sources;
 developing a memorandum of understanding among State and local agencies
that provides for the sharing and collection of health and public safety
information and data relating to the heroin and opioid epidemic;
 assisting and supporting local agencies in the creation of Opioid Intervention
Teams that will share such data; and
 coordinating the training and providing resources (including grants) to State
and local agencies addressing the threat to the public health, security, and
economic well-being of the State.
The OOCC was initially budgeted within the Maryland Department of Health’s
(MDH) Behavioral Health Administration. Executive Order 01.01.2018.30,
effective December 12, 2018, transferred OOCC to the Maryland Emergency
Management Agency.
According to the State’s Table 1
OOCC Operating Expenditures
records, OOCC’s operating
Expenditure Fiscal Year
expenditures for fiscal years
Type 2017 2018 2019
for 2017 through 2019
Grants $0 $9,948,601 $10,124,145
totaled approximately $22
Salary and Other 500,000 565,111 807,896
million (excluding
Total $500,000 $10,513,712 $10,932,040
approximately $5.3 million
Source: State Records
that was initially budgeted
to the OOCC and transferred to the Medical Care Programs Administration). As
depicted in Table 1, the majority of OOCC’s expenditures related to grant
disbursements that were approximately $10 million annually during fiscal years
2018 and 2019.
8

--- Page 11 ---
Opioid Overdoses and Deaths
During calendar years 2016 through 2018, opioid overdoses and deaths continued
to affect the lives of thousands of Maryland residents. As noted in Chart A,
during calendar year 2018 there were 13,776 reported opioid overdoses and 2,143
reported opioid deaths in the State. Three jurisdictions (Baltimore City,
Baltimore County, and Anne Arundel County) accounted for approximately 65
percent of the total opioid related deaths in 2018.
Chart A
Maryland Opioid Overdoses and Deaths
Source: Maryland Vital Statistics, Maryland Institute for Emergency Medical Services Systems
As a result of the ongoing opioid epidemic, the Governor declared a state of
emergency, effective March 1, 2017. The state of emergency continued to be
renewed until its expiration on January 21, 2019.
Overview
The hotline allegation we received related to a questionable grant awarded to a
nonprofit organization during fiscal year 2019, totaling $750,000 that included the
purchase of a former country club and golf course. This matter was also referred
to the MDH – Office of Inspector General (OIG). The OIG reviewed this grant
and, because of concerns with the method in which the grant was awarded and the
intended use of the funds, referred the matter to the Governor’s Chief of Legal
Counsel and the Office of Attorney General – Criminal Division.
9

--- Page 12 ---
Our preliminary review of the allegation determined that the OOCC lacked
comprehensive procedures and controls over its grant process. Accordingly, we
expanded the scope of our review to include 18 grants awarded by the OOCC,
totaling $6.1 million during fiscal years 2018 and 2019, including the grant
referenced in our allegation.
Our review identified significant deficiencies with OOCC’s controls and
procedures for awarding and monitoring grants as described in Finding 1. Our
review also found the allegation to be generally valid and identified certain other
questionable matters that we referred to the Office of the Attorney General –
Criminal Division. Consequently, certain recommendations reference OOCC
consulting with the Criminal Division before taking any actions regarding the
findings contained in this report. A referral to the Criminal Division does not
mean that a criminal act has actually occurred or that criminal charges will be
filed.
10

--- Page 13 ---
Findings and Recommendations
Grant Award and Monitoring
Background
During fiscal years 2018 and 2019, the Opioid Operational Command Center
(OOCC) awarded and disbursed approximately $10 million in grants to
government agencies and nonprofit organizations (Table 2). According to OOCC
management, grant funds are divided into formula-based grants to local Opioid
Intervention Teams throughout the State and
Table 2
discretionary grants to government and
Grant Expenditures by Fiscal Year
nonprofit organizations.
Grant 2018 2019
Formula $3,949,977 $4,000,720
Formula Grants
Discretionary 5,998,624 6,123,425
The OOCC awards annual formula-based
Total $9,948,601 $10,124,145
grants to local health departments (LHDs)
which work within the Opioid Intervention Source: State Records
Teams (OITs) operating in each of the State’s
24 jurisdictions. The OITs are comprised of personnel from the LHDs and other
local government and private entities that coordinate with the community to
implement the Statewide opioid response effort.
Each LHD submits an annual grant proposal to OOCC outlining how it will use
grant funds for opioid-related projects. Grant funds are budgeted to each LHD
using a formula that includes a base amount to each jurisdiction ($66,667 in fiscal
year 2019) and additional funding based on the number of opioid deaths in the
jurisdiction relative to Statewide opioid deaths. The LHDs either record their
grant expenditures directly in the State’s accounting system or submit periodic
invoices to the Maryland Department of Health (MDH) to request reimbursement
of the funds.
Discretionary Grants
The OOCC awards annual discretionary grants to both State and local government
agencies and nonprofit entities. Grants are generally awarded based on grant
proposals submitted by government organizations and nonprofit organizations.
To obtain the grant funds awarded, grantees either record their expenditures
directly in the State’s accounting system, or submit invoices for reimbursement
processing to MDH, the Behavioral Health Administration (BHA), or the
Maryland Emergency Management Agency.
11

--- Page 14 ---
Finding 1
OOCC did not have written policies and procedures for the selection of
grantees, amounts awarded, and the monitoring of grantees. We noted
numerous deficiencies with the grant process that raised questions about the
overall integrity of grant awards and related payments.
Analysis
OOCC did not have written policies and procedures for the selection of grantees,
amounts awarded, and monitoring of grantees. As a result, we noted numerous
deficiencies with the grant process, which raised questions about the overall
integrity of the awards and related payments. We reviewed OOCC’s grant
process, and tested 12 discretionary grants totaling $4.4 million and 6 formula
grants totaling $1.7 million awarded during fiscal years 2018 and 2019. Our
review disclosed numerous issues, including a lack of documentation or formal
policies, impacting all grants in varying degrees and certain grants specifically.
Grant Selection and Award
 OOCC did not sufficiently notify the public of the availability of discretionary
grant funds. Rather, we were advised that OOCC met with certain
stakeholders it selected, such as OITs, and verbally informed them of the
availability of funding. In February 2019, OOCC began to document this
process using written notifications to the stakeholders, but still did not
publicly solicit grant proposals.
 For all formula-based and discretionary grants tested, OOCC lacked sufficient
documentation of the grant proposal review and evaluation processes. In
addition, for the discretionary grants, OOCC lacked sufficient documentation
for the basis for which the grantees received funding, and the methodology for
determining the amounts of the awards.
In February 2019, OOCC began using a committee, consisting of OOCC and
representatives from three State agencies, to evaluate and rate the
discretionary grant proposals; however, the evaluations and ratings were not
sufficiently documented and there did not appear to be a correlation between
the ratings and the amounts awarded. For example, for one $62,000
discretionary grant award tested, there was no documentation of each
committee member’s rating, nor justification for a noted change in the
grantee’s initial rating of “high priority” to “very high priority.” In addition,
both this grantee and another grantee, that was rated as “low priority”, were
awarded the full amount requested in their grant proposals.
12

--- Page 15 ---
 OOCC had no process to verify assertions made in the grant proposals,
including a grantee’s past performance, and did not ensure that nonprofit
organizations were authorized to do business in the State. In addition, the
OOCC did not ensure that grantees were in good standing with the Internal
Revenue Service (IRS). This is significant because, as noted in Finding 3, we
identified a nonprofit grantee that was not registered to do business in the
State. OOCC was not aware of this issue and had not verified the assertions
of past performance made by the grantee, such as the “evidence based”
approach being used and the “proven record of success” claimed by the
grantee, which are discussed further in Finding 3 and Finding 2, respectively.
 For one $550,000 discretionary grant award tested, OOCC could not provide
either the grant proposal from the LHD or the related grant agreement. While
we were advised that the grant funds were used to purchase Naloxone (a drug
used to reverse the effects of an opioid overdose) in Baltimore City, which
would appear a reasonable use of grant funds, there was no assurance that, in
fact, this was the purpose of the grant, nor was there a record of the quantity to
be purchased and the related costs.
 OOCC did not have a process to independently review the formula-based
grant calculations to ensure they were calculated properly. One employee was
responsible for obtaining information on opioid deaths from the MDH Vital
Statistics Administration and calculating the amounts allocated to each
jurisdiction. OOCC did not have any process for an independent employee to
review the calculations and the related award amounts to ensure they were
proper. Our review disclosed that the calculations for the fiscal year 2019
grants were calculated in accordance with OOCC’s formula and the related
award amounts were consistent with those calculations.
Grant Monitoring
 OOCC did not have a process to ensure grant expenditures were valid and
were consistent with the related grant agreements. For both the formula-based
and discretionary grants, the grantees reported expenditures by category such
as salaries, contractual services, and medication purchases. OOCC did not
obtain details of the amounts reported or documentation to support the
reported expenditures. For example, during fiscal year 2018, OOCC paid
approximately $2 million to Baltimore City for both formula and discretionary
grants, of which $1.3 million was reported as medicine costs and $622,000
was reported as contractual services. OOCC did not obtain documentation of
these expenditures such as copies of the contracts and related invoices. As a
result, there is a lack of assurance that the amounts reported were valid and
that grant funds were used in accordance with the grant agreements.
13

--- Page 16 ---
 OOCC did not have a process to ensure grant deliverables were received. For
example, for a $1.5 million discretionary grant to Anne Arundel County,
which included expenses such as salaries associated with mentoring
individuals recovering from opioid addiction, OOCC did not obtain
documentation or conduct site visits to verify that the mentoring services of
that value were actually provided. In addition, OOCC could not provide us
with any documentation to support that the aforementioned $550,000 in
Naloxone purchased by Baltimore City was received and distributed as
intended.
 Although OOCC established performance measures (such as the number of
individuals trained to administer Naloxone) for both formula and discretionary
grants, it did not obtain any performance data from grantees for discretionary
grants awarded prior to May 2019. In addition, OOCC did not obtain any
documentation to support performance data reported by grantees for the
formula grants and, after May 2019, for discretionary grants.
In our opinion, these procedural deficiencies contributed to certain questionable
grant awards and related activities as detailed in Findings 2, 3, and 4 of this
report.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that OOCC establish comprehensive policies and procedures
for
a. awarding grants, including publicly soliciting grant proposals, formally
evaluating grant proposals, and verifying related assertions, and a
methodology for determining the amount of funds awarded and for
maintaining related documentation;
b. independently verifying that formula grants were properly calculated and
consistent with the related funding;
c. monitoring grant awards to ensure reported expenditures are properly
supported, grant funds were used in accordance with grant agreements,
and grant deliverables were received; and
d. ensuring grantee performance was consistent with the intended use of the
funds by reviewing support for performance data reported by grantees,
and conducting periodic site visits.
14

--- Page 17 ---
Questionable Grant
Finding 2
OOCC did not have adequate justification for a $750,000 grant awarded to a
nonprofit organization for the purchase of a former country club and golf
course.
Analysis
OOCC did not have adequate justification for a $750,000 discretionary grant
awarded in February 2019 to a nonprofit organization for the purchase of a former
country club and golf course in Caroline County. According to the grant
proposal, the intended purpose of the grant was to establish a program that uses
agriculture and food to provide rehabilitation and healing to inmates on work
release, students, and the broader community as part of the fight against opioids
and addiction. As part of the program, the grantee stated its intent to develop a
food center that included food processing, a farm-to-table restaurant, an event
venue, and potentially a nine-hole golf course.
OOCC had no documentation to support its evaluation of the proposal and
determination that the grantee’s program would be effective, nor could OOCC
justify the award amount. Specifically, the grant proposal made various
assertions regarding the success of the program, including that the program used
“a proven model that is already operating with phenomenal results in Charles
County” and “has helped reduce recidivism and new addiction rates.” However,
the nonprofit provided no evidence to support these claims, which OOCC
appeared to accept without questioning. In addition, although the proposal
indicated that it would serve individuals from undefined “regional schools,” the
jurisdiction in which the grant program was proposed (Caroline County) had
opioid deaths representing less than one percent of the total opioid deaths in the
State in calendar year 2018. Furthermore, the award amount was significantly
higher than any other award made to a nonprofit during that year, which were all
$100,000 or less.
Concerns with the propriety of the grant award were raised by the local health
department that was to execute the grant agreement and process the grant
disbursement, and similar concerns were included in the allegation submitted to
our fraud, waste, and abuse hotline. The MDH Office of Inspector General also
investigated an allegation regarding this grant and, due to concerns with the
method in which the grant was awarded and the intended use of the funds,
referred the matter to the Governor’s Chief Counsel and the Attorney General’s
Criminal Division.
15

--- Page 18 ---
We discussed our concerns regarding the lack of justification for the grant with
MDH senior management which was responsible for distributing the grant and
were advised that, although the grant had been approved by the OOCC, the funds
would not be distributed. OOCC management advised us that due to the
complexity of executing a grant agreement that included the purchase of real
estate, the award could not be funded by the end of fiscal year 2019.
Recommendation 2
We recommend that OOCC ensure that future grant awards are adequately
justified, grantee assertions are verified, and that consideration be given to
awarding funds to programs commensurate with the related needs in the
respective jurisdictions similar to the methodology used to award the
formula grants.
Questionable Grant Activity
Finding 3
OOCC awarded a $100,000 grant to an out-of-state nonprofit organization
that transferred almost all the funds to a for-profit company owned by senior
management of the nonprofit; neither of which were registered to conduct
business in the State of Maryland. In addition, the payment rate paid to the
nonprofit was higher than the rate included in the grant proposal, without a
reasonable explanation, and more than half of the required services were not
provided.
Analysis
OOCC awarded a $100,000 discretionary grant to an out-of-state nonprofit
organization that then transferred almost all the funds to a for-profit company
owned by senior management of the nonprofit, neither of
which were registered to do business in the State. In
addition, the payment rate paid to the nonprofit was
higher than the rate included in the grant proposal and
OOCC
more than half of the required services were not
provided. In March 2019, this out-of-state nonprofit
organization submitted a grant proposal to OOCC to Out‐of‐State
provide multisensory educational programs on drug Nonprofit
prevention to middle schools and high schools
throughout Maryland. OOCC awarded and ultimately
Private
disbursed $100,000 in grant funds to the nonprofit to Companies
provide the educational programs during May and June
2019. Our review identified several concerns with the
16

--- Page 19 ---
out-of-state nonprofit and its senior management, which had not been identified
by OOCC.
All Grant Funds Were Transferred to Private Companies
The out-of-state nonprofit organization transferred all $100,000 of the OOCC
grant funds to two private companies to perform the work required under the
grant agreement. One of these companies, which accounted for $96,100 of the
grant expenditures, was owned by senior management of the nonprofit. The
remaining $3,900 was transferred to a company located in the Middle East.
The transfer of these funds to private companies was inconsistent with OOCCs
normal practice of awarding grants to government entities and nonprofit
organizations.
OOCC was unaware that the nonprofit was not directly performing any of the
services or of the use of the private company owned by senior management of
the nonprofit. Furthermore, the use of the two private companies, neither of
which OOCC had approved, violated the terms of the grant agreement which
required the nonprofit to directly perform at least fifty percent of the services
and obtain prior approval from OOCC before using any contractors. No prior
or retroactive OOCC approval for the use of private contractors was sought or
obtained by the nonprofit grantee.
In addition, the transfer of 96 percent of the grant funds to a private company
owned by the nonprofit’s senior management raises questions as to whether the
nonprofit’s activities were intended for the benefit of its senior management.
In this regard, the Internal Revenue Code provides that a nonprofit
organization must not be organized or operated for the benefit of private
interests, and that no part of the organization's net earnings may inure to the
benefit of any private shareholder or individual. The nonprofit organization’s
use of the private companies does not appear to be isolated to the OOCC grant.
Our review of documentation from the IRS disclosed that during calendar years
2016 and 2017 the nonprofit paid 88 percent and 86 percent of its revenues,
respectively, to a company owned by senior management of the nonprofit
organization.
Nonprofit Legal Status was Questionable
At the time of the grant award, the out-of-state nonprofit organization and the
two private companies to which the funds were transferred were not registered
to do business in the State of Maryland as required by State law. In addition,
our review of publicly available records from the IRS website indicated that,
previously, the IRS had revoked the nonprofit organization’s federal tax
exemption status during calendar years 2010 through 2014 for failing to file the
17

--- Page 20 ---
required annual IRS Form 990 nonprofit tax return. These same records
indicate that the IRS later retroactively reinstated the federal tax exemption
status prior to the award of the grant once the nonprofit organization filed the
required tax returns.
Payment Rate was Not Consistent with Grant Proposal
The payment rate specified in the grant agreement and on what the subsequent
payments were based was not consistent with the nonprofit’s grant proposal.
Specifically, the grant proposal stated that the nonprofit would provide
multisensory education programs at a cost of $5,000 per day; however, the
grant agreement provided for and the payments were based on a rate of $6,667
per day. There was no documentation supporting the differing rates nor could
OOCC provide a reasonable explanation to justify the rate increase, which
resulted in OOCC paying the grantee $25,000 more than the $75,000 stipulated
in the grant proposal for the same theoretical level of service.
Grant Deliverables were Not Received
The nonprofit provided fewer than half of the required services identified in the
grant agreement even though it received the full grant award. The grant
agreement provided that the out-of-state nonprofit organization was to provide
two opioid educational programs at 15 schools. However, based on the
documentation we obtained for all 15 schools, we noted that one of the 15
schools did not receive either of the programs and the other 14 schools
received only one of the required two programs. As noted above, the nonprofit
was paid a rate per day and was not paid per program; therefore, we could not
readily determine the value of the programs that were not provided.
In addition, during the course of this review, we became aware of another grant
provided to the nonprofit organization by the State. Specifically, State law,
unrelated to the opioid crisis, provides that this nonprofit shall receive funding of
$1 million ($250,000 per year in fiscal years 2020 through 2023), which is
currently being administered as a grant by the Governor’s Office of Crime
Control and Prevention (GOCCP). We obtained the fiscal year 2020 grant
agreement between the nonprofit organization and GOCCP and noted that the
agreement required the nonprofit to provide similar multisensory drug prevention
educational programs, and that 90 percent of the funding was budgeted for work
by contractors. Since this was a non-OOCC grant, we did not review or assess the
propriety of the GOCCP grants.
18

--- Page 21 ---
Recommendation 3
We recommend that OOCC
a. only award grants to entities registered to do business in the State of
Maryland,
b. ensure that grantees adhere to formal requirements regarding directly
providing services and the use of OOCC-approved contractors,
c. refrain from awarding grants to nonprofit entities that transfer a
substantial portion of grant funds to third parties unless there is adequate
justification for the value being added by the nonprofit,
d. ensure that payment rates specified in grant agreements are consistent
with the related grant proposals and monitor grantees to ensure that all
required services are provided and terms of the agreements are followed,
and
e. consult with the Office of the Attorney General – Criminal Division
regarding recovery of any amounts determined to be overpaid to the
nonprofit.
Finding 4
OOCC awarded a $40,959 grant to a nonprofit organization that was not
consistent with the related grant proposal. In addition, purchases specified
in the grant agreement appeared to have no correlation to the related
performance measures, and certain grant expenditures appeared
questionable.
Analysis
OOCC awarded a $40,959 grant to a nonprofit
organization to be used in a manner that was not Items Purchased with
consistent with the related grant proposal. In Grant Funds
addition, purchases specified in the grant Item Cost
agreement appeared to have no correlation to the Box Truck $17,500
related performance measures and certain grant Lawn Mower $10,600
expenditures appeared questionable. OOCC Gas Grill $2,199
contracted with a local health department to Propane $10,660
execute a grant agreement with a nonprofit Source: OOCC Records
organization operating a transitional sober living
residence. The nonprofit’s grant proposal specified that the funds were to be used
primarily for staffing and for costs related directly to the treatment of the
individuals living at the residence, such as medical services and transportation.
However, the grant agreement provided that the full amount of the grant funds
were to be used to purchase a box truck, a commercial lawn mower, a gas grill,
and propane.
19

--- Page 22 ---
The purchases specified in the grant agreement had no obvious correlation to
performance measures included in the grant agreement. For example, one
performance measure was the number of clergy and lay spiritual leaders who
would be trained to minister to their home-church membership. OOCC could not
adequately explain the discrepancy between the grant proposal and the related
grant agreement nor explain how the purchases would impact the performance
measures.
Finally, while OOCC had copies of the related invoices on file, the local health
department did not verify that any of the items to be purchased with the grant
funds were actually received by the grantee and were being used for opioid
related programs before making the related payment. In addition, we question the
legitimacy of one of these invoices. Specifically, the $10,660 invoice for propane
did not contain the vendor’s company logo, website, and phone number, and
omitted critical information regarding the date, quantity, and rate of the propane
delivered. Furthermore, the format and appearance of the invoice and the lack of
details were not consistent with copies of invoices submitted by this vendor to
other State agencies that we sighted. We were advised that OOCC subsequently
contacted the vendor appearing on the invoice, and obtained a transaction printout
dated December 17, 2019. The document obtained showed a $9,488 credit
balance on the grantee’s account that was not consistent with the invoice on file at
OOCC.
Recommendation 4
We recommend that OOCC
a. ensure that future grant agreements are consistent with related grant
proposals, and document the justification for any changes;
b. ensure that purchases specified in grant agreements have a demonstrable
direct correlation with the related performance measures; and
c. after consulting with the Office of the Attorney General – Criminal
Division, determine whether the grantee received the items reported to
have been purchased with grant funds and was using them for opioid
related programs and recover any grant funds that cannot be supported.
20

--- Page 23 ---
Budgetary Closeout
Finding 5
During the June 30, 2019 fiscal year closing process, MDH and BHA
improperly recorded certain expenditures on behalf of OOCC retaining
general fund appropriations for future years.
Analysis
MDH’s Office of the Secretary and BHA improperly recorded certain
expenditures at the end of fiscal year 2019, on behalf of OOCC, to retain general
fund appropriations for future years. This practice violated the Comptroller of
Maryland – General Accounting Division’s (GAD) annual closing instructions
since the expenditure accruals did not represent actual expenditures for goods or
services received during fiscal year 2019 that remained outstanding (or unpaid) as
of fiscal year-end. During the course of our review of the aforementioned grants,
we identified three transactions totaling $489,740 processed at the end of fiscal
year 2019, and noted the following conditions related to two of the transactions:
 BHA recorded expenditures on behalf of OOCC totaling $400,000 at the end
of fiscal year 2019 that could not be supported. The expenditures related to a
grant executed between OOCC and the Maryland Higher Education
Commission (MHEC) on June 25, 2019. BHA did not have any support for
the recorded expenditures, and based on our review, no services were
provided by MHEC during fiscal year 2019 to support this transaction.
Accordingly, the funds should have been reverted to the State’s General Fund.
 MDH Office of the Secretary recorded expenditures on behalf of OOCC
totaling $20,436 that could not be supported. The expenditures related to a
grant awarded to a nonprofit organization, for mentoring services for at-risk
youth that expired on June 30, 2019. There was no support on file for the
recorded expenditures. OOCC subsequently spent $10,506 of these funds for
services performed in fiscal year 2020 after the grant had expired and, as of
September 11, 2019, had not reverted the remaining $9,930 to the State’s
General Fund.
GAD’s annual closing instructions state that all fund balances carried into the next
fiscal year be done so in accordance with State statute, regulation, or policy. The
State Policy on Accounts Payable, Accrued Expenditures, and Encumbrances,
which is included in these closing instructions, states that expenditures should be
accrued only when goods or services have been received prior to fiscal year-end,
but not invoiced.
21

--- Page 24 ---
Recommendation 5
We recommend that OOCC
a. record fiscal year-end transactions in accordance with the
aforementioned GAD instructions and Policy, and
b. revert any funds improperly retained to the State’s General Fund.
22

--- Page 28 ---
Opioid Operational Command Center
Special Review
Agency Response Form
Grant Award and Monitoring
Finding 1
OOCC did not have written policies and procedures for the selection of grantees, amounts
awarded, and the monitoring of grantees. We noted numerous deficiencies with the grant
process that raised questions about the overall integrity of grant awards and related
payments.
We recommend that OOCC establish comprehensive policies and procedures for
a. awarding grants, including publicly soliciting grant proposals, formally evaluating
grant proposals, and verifying related assertions, and a methodology for determining
the amount of funds awarded and for maintaining related documentation;
b. independently verifying that formula grants were properly calculated and consistent
with the related funding;
c. monitoring grant awards to ensure reported expenditures are properly supported,
grant funds were used in accordance with grant agreements, and grant deliverables
were received; and
d. ensuring grantee performance was consistent with the intended use of the funds by
reviewing support for performance data reported by grantees, and conducting periodic
site visits.
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide The OOCC agrees with the contents of this section with the following
additional comments as exceptions:
deemed necessary.
 On pg. 14, in the Grant Selection and Award subsection, there is
a reference to the OOCC’s grant-proposal evaluation and rating
practices. OOCC supports the recommendation related to
providing additional documentation on the scoring process.
However, it must be noted that the initial ratings of the OOCC
scoring committee members are preliminary in nature and for
individual scorers’ use only. Only final, committee scores are
relevant to the scoring process, and these final scores are
assigned by the full committee only after the completion of
collaborative deliberations. In the example of a grant for
$62,000, the auditors have failed to acknowledge that
preliminary ratings given by individual scoring committee
Page 1 of 13

--- Page 29 ---
Opioid Operational Command Center
Special Review
Agency Response Form
members are immaterial to the committee’s consensus scores, nor
that a final score of “high priority” was awarded in this case.
 On page 15, in the Grant Selection and Award subsection, there
is an indication that the OOCC does not have processes to verify
nonprofit organizations’ authorizations to do business in the State
of Maryland or standing with the Internal Revenue Service (IRS).
The OOCC now has documented procedures in place to review
both nonprofit organizations’ business registrations and statuses
with the IRS.
Auditor’s Comment: OOCC maintains that the individual committee member scores
are immaterial to the committee’s consensus scores and that a final score of “high
priority” was awarded in this case. However, OLA believes that the individual member
scores by their very nature are significant in this circumstance and discrepancies between
the individual member scores and the overall scores should be explained in writing to
ensure the integrity of the evaluation process. Documentation provided by OOCC does
not support a final score of “high priority”.
OOCC also indicates that it now has procedures to verify nonprofit organizations.
However, as noted in this finding, these procedures were not in place at the time of our
review.
Recommendation 1a Agree Estimated Completion Date: ASAP
Please provide details of The OOCC agrees with this recommendation. In February 2019, the
corrective action or OOCC began taking measures to address concerns related to earlier
explain disagreement. OOCC appropriations policies and procedures. Such issues had already
been identified by the OOCC’s leadership and senior administration staff
and were being rectified prior to the initiation of this audit. The OOCC
began public solicitation for competitive grants beginning in summer of
2019 for the FY2020 award cycle.
Recommendation 1b Agree Estimated Completion Date: ASAP
Please provide details of The OOCC agrees with this recommendation, and we will modify our
corrective action or procedures to include a second review of any calculations used to
explain disagreement. determine formula-based grant funding.
Recommendation 1c Agree Estimated Completion Date: ASAP
Please provide details of The OOCC agrees with this recommendation. In February 2019, the
corrective action or OOCC began taking measures to address concerns related to earlier
explain disagreement.
OOCC appropriations policies and procedures. Such issues had already
Page 2 of 13

--- Page 30 ---
Opioid Operational Command Center
Special Review
Agency Response Form
been identified by the OOCC’s leadership and senior administration staff
and were being rectified prior to the initiation of this audit. Additionally,
in July of 2019, acting in part on OLA recommendations, the OOCC
hired a full-time grants program administrator to monitor grant awards
and grantee performance.
Recommendation 1d Agree Estimated Completion Date: ASAP
Please provide details of The OOCC agrees with this recommendation. In February 2019, the
corrective action or OOCC began taking measures to address concerns related to earlier
explain disagreement.
OOCC appropriations policies and procedures. Such issues had already
been identified by the OOCC’s leadership and senior administration staff
and were being rectified prior to the initiation of this audit. Additionally,
in July of 2019, acting in part on OLA recommendations, the OOCC
hired a full-time grants program administrator to monitor grant awards
and grantee performance.
Page 3 of 13

--- Page 31 ---
Opioid Operational Command Center
Special Review
Agency Response Form
Questionable Grant
Finding 2
OOCC did not have adequate justification for a $750,000 grant awarded to a nonprofit
organization for the purchase of a former country club and golf course.
We recommend that OOCC ensure that future grant awards are adequately justified,
grantee assertions are verified, and that consideration be given to awarding funds to
programs commensurate with the related needs in the respective jurisdictions similar to the
methodology used to award the formula grants.
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide The OOCC agrees with the contents of this section with the following
additional comments as exceptions:
deemed necessary.
 On pg. 18, the Analysis subsection states that, “OOCC did not
have adequate justification for a $750,000 discretionary grant
awarded in February 2019 to a nonprofit organization for the
purchase of a former country club and golf course in Caroline
County.” The planned $750,000 grant award was intended to
support development of an agricultural-based treatment program.
The fact that the site chosen for this treatment program was used
many years ago as a country club and golf course is irrelevant,
and the inclusion of this information in the audit report is not
only unnecessary but also a mischaracterization. The property is
now undeveloped agricultural land.
 On pg. 18, the Analysis subsection states that, “... the nonprofit
provided no evidence to support these claims, which OOCC
appeared to accept without questioning.” The OOCC did not
accept such claims without question. In fact, OOCC staff visited
the site of the proposed agricultural-based treatment program on
multiple occasions, visited the sites of existing agricultural-based
treatment programs (including one affiliated with the proposed
program), listened to testimony from former clients, and
conducted several telephone conferences with officials of both
the existing and proposed agricultural-based treatment programs,
all with the purpose of verifying details of the program and
related claims.
 On pg. 18, the Analysis subsection states that, “Concerns with the
propriety of the grant award were raised by the local health
department that was to execute the grant agreement and process
Page 4 of 13

--- Page 32 ---
Opioid Operational Command Center
Special Review
Agency Response Form
the grant disbursement …” Despite ongoing, regular, and cordial
communications with the local health department, no
reservations about fraud, waste, abuse, or the overall propriety of
this grant were raised to the OOCC. The only concerns shared
with the OOCC about this grant were general in nature and were
related to the management of, and legal issues associated with,
any grant involving a real estate transaction.
Auditor’s Comment: OOCC’s response indicates that the reference to the former
country club and golf course is irrelevant. However, we continue to believe that this
information is relevant because, as stated in our report, the grant proposal includes the
use of the property for a potential nine-hole golf course.
OOCC’s response also disagrees with our statement that it accepted the nonprofit
organization’s claims without questioning and indicates that it had taken several steps to
verify the claims including site visits, phone calls and testimony from former clients to
support the claims. These new assertions were never mentioned in the course of our
work or subsequent to the OLA review during which we held numerous meetings with
OOCC management, and there was no documentation to support any of these efforts.
Furthermore, OOCC’s response indicates that no reservations about fraud, waste, abuse
or the overall propriety of this grant were raised to the OOCC and that the only concerns
were general in nature. However, our review identified that OOCC had been notified in
writing about specific irregularities in this grant award process by the MDH Office of
Inspector General in April 2019.
Recommendation 2 Agree Estimated Completion Date: ASAP
Please provide details of The OOCC agrees with this recommendation. The express purpose of
corrective action or the OOCC’s Competitive Grant Program is to provide opportunities for
explain disagreement. organizations to compete for grants meeting certain needs and priorities
that may not be addressed through our formula-based Block Grant
Program. The OOCC employs a two-program structure specifically to
ensure that our grant awards are available to benefit areas of greatest
need throughout the state.
Page 5 of 13

--- Page 33 ---
Opioid Operational Command Center
Special Review
Agency Response Form
Questionable Grant Activity
Finding 3
OOCC awarded a $100,000 grant to an out-of-state nonprofit organization that transferred
almost all the funds to a for-profit company owned by senior management of the nonprofit;
neither of which were registered to conduct business in the State of Maryland. In addition,
the payment rate paid to the nonprofit was higher than the rate included in the grant
proposal, without a reasonable explanation, and more than half of the required services
were not provided.
We recommend that OOCC
a. only award grants to entities registered to do business in the State of Maryland,
b. ensure that grantees adhere to formal requirements regarding directly providing
services and the use of OOCC-approved contractors,
c. refrain from awarding grants to nonprofit entities that transfer a substantial portion of
grant funds to third parties unless there is adequate justification for the value being
added by the nonprofit,
d. ensure that payment rates specified in grant agreements are consistent with the related
grant proposals and monitor grantees to ensure that all required services are provided
and terms of the agreements are followed, and
e. consult with the Office of the Attorney General – Criminal Division regarding recovery
of any amounts determined to be overpaid to the nonprofit.
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide The OOCC agrees with the contents of this section with limited
additional comments as exceptions (as noted in our response below to recommendations C and
deemed necessary. E). In response to the findings referenced in the subsection Grant
Deliverables Were Not Received on pg. 21, we do not agree with the
statement that, “the nonprofit provided fewer than half of the required
services identified in the grant agreement.” However, we do agree
that all of the required services should have been performed in all 20
schools by the grantee or else the associated funds should have been
returned. In furtherance thereof, the OOCC has verified that each of the
20 schools slated to receive services under the grant proposal has
received the full amount of services originally intended. Despite the
issue of a contract that lacked detail sufficient to clearly define the
project’s scope, the OOCC is confident that: the grant proposal was
satisfied; the nonprofit organization does not owe money to the State of
Maryland; the nonprofit organization’s contract for this grant has been
Page 6 of 13

--- Page 34 ---
Opioid Operational Command Center
Special Review
Agency Response Form
fulfilled; and the students at the subject schools benefited from the
services.
Auditor’s Comment: OOCC’s response indicates that it disagrees that the nonprofit
organization provided fewer than half of the required services identified in the agreement
and had confirmed that all 20 schools had received all the required services. OOCC also
indicates that despite the ambiguities in the grant agreement, no money was owed by the
nonprofit. However, as noted in the finding, the grant agreement clearly stipulated the
required services and we confirmed with documentation from the related schools that the
services were not provided. Therefore, the assertions made in OOCC’s response are not
valid.
Recommendation 3a Agree Estimated Completion Date:
Please provide details of The OOCC agrees with the spirit of the recommendation: Business
corrective action or should only be conducted with entities legally permitted to do business
explain disagreement. in the state of Maryland. However, the OOCC believes that opioid-
related services can be provided by entities headquartered in any
location and that doing business with entities headquartered in other
jurisdictions should remain an option so long as those entities are legally
permitted to do business in the State of Maryland.
Auditor’s Comment: OOCC’s response indicates that it desires to use the services of
entities located outside of the State. Our report does not take issue with using out-of-state
entities provided they are appropriately registered to do business in the State of
Maryland.
Recommendation 3b Agree Estimated Completion Date:
Please provide details of The OOCC agrees with this recommendation. In February 2019, the
corrective action or OOCC began taking measures to address concerns related to earlier
explain disagreement. OOCC appropriations policies and procedures. Such issues had already
been identified by the OOCC’s leadership and senior administration staff
and were being rectified prior to the initiation of this audit.
Auditor’s Comment: OOCC’s response indicates that it took action to address the
issues included in our report in February 2019, prior to the commencement of the OLA
review. However, the concerns identified in our finding occurred after February 2019
and accordingly OOCC needs to ensure its policies are sufficient to address these
concerns.
Page 7 of 13

--- Page 35 ---
Opioid Operational Command Center
Special Review
Agency Response Form
Recommendation 3c Agree Estimated Completion Date:
Please provide details of The OOCC agrees with this recommendation. There are circumstances
corrective action or where it is not only appropriate, but also standard practice, for non-profit
explain disagreement. organizations to procure substantial portions of their services through
contractors and the value in doing so is adequately justified. This is
common in the case of specialized and/or skilled service offerings.
Recommendation 3d Agree Estimated Completion Date:
Please provide details of The OOCC agrees with this recommendation. In February 2019, the
corrective action or OOCC began taking measures to address concerns related to earlier
explain disagreement. OOCC appropriations policies and procedures. Such issues had already
been identified by the OOCC’s leadership and senior administration staff
and were being rectified prior to the initiation of this audit.
Auditor’s Comment: OOCC’s response indicates that it took action to address the
issues included in our report in February 2019, prior to the commencement of the OLA
review. However, the concerns identified in our finding occurred after February 2019
and accordingly OOCC needs to ensure its policies are sufficient to address these
concerns.
Recommendation 3e Agree Estimated Completion Date:
Please provide details of The OOCC has verified that each of the 20 schools slated to receive
corrective action or services under the grant proposal has received the full amount of
explain disagreement. services originally intended. The nonprofit organization in question does
not owe any money to the State of Maryland, and its contract for this
grant has been fulfilled.
As a result of the audit, the OOCC became aware of the need for the
grantee to fulfill its obligation to provide services to six schools (five of
which had not yet received services and one of which had received the
wrong services) and commenced immediate action. While OOCC staff
did attend one of these five programs, we requested written confirmation
from the grantee that all five were completed, and we verified that the
required services were completed. Furthermore, the OOCC has now
confirmed that each of the 20 schools has received appropriate, intended
programming.
Note that neither the OOCC nor the grantee intended that the grantee
would deliver two educational programs at each school, nor did the
contract require the grantee to do so. Our original expectation, and that
of the grantee, was that the grantee would deliver only one program per
school. We acknowledge that the contract is ambiguous and that it could
be interpreted to mean that two programs were required, even though
Page 8 of 13

--- Page 36 ---
Opioid Operational Command Center
Special Review
Agency Response Form
that was not the intention of the parties. Additionally, the OOCC has
worked with the Office of the Attorney General - Criminal Division to
confirm that there are no outstanding issues related to overpayment
and/or service delivery.
Auditor’s Comment: OOCC’s response indicates that the grant agreement did not
require two education programs at each school. However, as noted in the finding, the
grant agreement categorically provided for two programs at each school, but more than
half of the required services were not provided.
Page 9 of 13

--- Page 37 ---
Opioid Operational Command Center
Special Review
Agency Response Form
Finding 4
OOCC awarded a $40,959 grant to a nonprofit organization that was not consistent with
the related grant proposal. In addition, purchases specified in the grant agreement
appeared to have no correlation to the related performance measures, and certain grant
expenditures appeared questionable.
We recommend that OOCC
a. ensure that future grant agreements are consistent with related grant proposals, and
document the justification for any changes;
b. ensure that purchases specified in grant agreements have a demonstrable direct
correlation with the related performance measures; and
c. after consulting with the Office of the Attorney General – Criminal Division, determine
whether the grantee received the items reported to have been purchased with grant
funds and was using them for opioid related programs and recover any grant funds
that cannot be supported.
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide The OOCC agrees with the contents of this section. Please refer to our
additional comments as response to recommendation C below in this subsection.
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 4a Agree Estimated Completion Date: ASAP
Please provide details of The OOCC agrees with this recommendation. In February 2019, the
corrective action or OOCC began taking measures to address concerns related to earlier
explain disagreement. OOCC appropriations policies and procedures. Such issues had already
been identified by the OOCC’s leadership and senior administration staff
and were being rectified prior to the initiation of this audit.
Auditor’s Comment: OOCC’s response indicates that it took action to address the
issues included in our report in February 2019, prior to the commencement of the OLA
review. However, the concerns identified in our finding occurred after February 2019
and accordingly OOCC needs to ensure its policies are sufficient to address these
concerns.
Page 10 of 13

--- Page 38 ---
Opioid Operational Command Center
Special Review
Agency Response Form
Recommendation 4b Agree Estimated Completion Date: ASAP
Please provide details of The OOCC agrees with this recommendation. All future contracts will
corrective action or be approved by our agency’s designated Assistant Attorney General.
explain disagreement.
Recommendation 4c Agree Estimated Completion Date: ASAP
Please provide details of The OOCC agrees with this recommendation, and we have consulted
corrective action or with the Office of the Attorney General – Criminal Division regarding
explain disagreement. our intent to verify the legitimacy of the grantee’s purchases and their
use as they pertain to the conditions of the grant award. It was with the
OOCC’s full knowledge and understanding – and it was reflected in the
final associated grant agreement – that grant funds were used for a truck,
gas grill, propane, and lawnmower, all of which were required to meet
the organization’s needs as a startup. On 1/30/2020, the OOCC
performed a site visit to review the grantee’s operations. The OOCC has
1) confirmed that the grantee’s purchases were legitimate and 2)
reviewed documentation from the appropriate vendors that supports the
legitimacy of the purchases.
Page 11 of 13

--- Page 39 ---
Opioid Operational Command Center
Special Review
Agency Response Form
Budgetary Closeout
Finding 5
During the June 30, 2019 fiscal year closing process, MDH and BHA improperly recorded
certain expenditures on behalf of OOCC retaining general fund appropriations for future
years.
We recommend that OOCC
a. record fiscal year-end transactions in accordance with the aforementioned GAD
instructions and Policy, and
b. revert any funds improperly retained to the State’s General Fund.
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide The OOCC agrees that any funds improperly retained should be reverted
additional comments as to the State's General Fund, and the OOCC will work with the Maryland
deemed necessary. Department of Health (MDH) to revert any such funds.
Regarding the $400,000 grant that could not be supported, our
understanding was that the agreement between the OOCC and MHEC
prior to the close of FY2019 was sufficient for the accrual. This
understanding was based upon The State Policy on Accounts Payable,
Accrued Expenditures, and Encumbrances, which was provided by
the Comptroller of Maryland – General Accounting Division (GAD).
This policy reads in part, "In the event there is any appropriation balance
remaining after recording all accounts payable and accrued expenditures,
such balance may be used to record allowable encumbrances.
Encumbrances are defined as approved purchase orders, contracts, or
other commitments for goods that have not been provided or for services
that have not yet been rendered to the state." (Italics added)
Additionally, the OOCC has confirmed with the Behavioral Health
Administration (BHA) that unused grant funds will be reverted to the
State General Fund.
Auditor’s Comment: OOCC’s response indicates that the grant agreement was
sufficient for the accrual. However, the GAD closing instructions and the referenced
State Policy do not permit an accrual in this situation and accordingly the funds should be
reverted unless approval is received from GAD and the Department of Budget and
Management to retain the funds.
Page 12 of 13

--- Page 40 ---
Opioid Operational Command Center
Special Review
Agency Response Form
Recommendation 5a Agree Estimated Completion Date: ASAP
Please provide details of The OOCC agrees with this recommendation. The OOCC will ensure
corrective action or that future fiscal year-end transactions are recorded in accordance with
explain disagreement. Comptroller of Maryland – GAD guidance.
Recommendation 5b Agree Estimated Completion Date: ASAP
Please provide details of The OOCC agrees with this recommendation. The OOCC agrees that
corrective action or any funds improperly retained should be reverted to the State's General
explain disagreement. Fund and has confirmed with BHA that unused grant funds will be
reverted to the State General Fund.
Page 13 of 13