Title: Presentation to the House Appropriations Full Committee - Opioid Operational Command Center - Allegations Related to a Questionable Grant Awarded to a Nonprofit Organization


Related Report Dated (2/7/2020)
Date: 02/14/2020
Type: Presentations to the Legislature
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5e45b60ba1ce581228418a70
Extracted: 2025-06-19T06:25:49.045103
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Opioid Operational Command Center
Allegations Related to a Questionable Grant Awarded
to a Nonprofit Organization
Special Review
Report dated February 7, 2020

--- Page 2 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Background
 In response to the rise in the number of heroin and
opioid deaths in the State, the Governor issued an
Executive Order, effective January 24, 2017, which
established the Opioid Operational Command Center
(OOCC).
 OOCC was initially budgeted within the Maryland
Department of Health’s (MDH) Behavioral Health
Administration. Through an Executive Order effective
December 12, 2018, OOCC was transferred to the
Maryland Emergency Management Agency (MEMA) -
a unit within the Military Department.
 According to State records, the majority of OOCC’s
expenditures were for grant disbursements which
totaled approximately $10 million annually during
fiscal years 2018 and 2019. OOCC grants were
either formula based to the local health departments
or discretionary based to government agencies and
nonprofit organizations.
Opioid Operational Command Center Page 2
Special Review

--- Page 3 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Overview
 We conducted a review of an allegation received
through our fraud, waste, and abuse hotline
regarding a questionable grant awarded to a
nonprofit organization during fiscal year 2019,
totaling $750,000 that included the purchase of a
former country club and golf course.
 Our preliminary review of the allegation determined
that OOCC lacked comprehensive procedures and
controls over its grant process. Accordingly, we
expanded the scope of our review to include 18
grants awarded by the OOCC totaling $6.1 million
during fiscal years 2018 and 2019.
 Based on our review we found the allegation to be
generally valid and identified certain other
questionable matters that we referred to the Office
of the Attorney General – Criminal Division. A
referral to the Criminal Division does not mean that a
criminal act has actually occurred or that criminal
charges will be filed.
Opioid Operational Command Center Page 3
Special Review

--- Page 4 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Key Issues
 OOCC did not have written policies and procedures
for the selection of grantees, determination of
amounts awarded, and the monitoring of grantees,
which raised questions about the integrity of the
grant awards and related payments.
 OOCC could not justify a $750,000 grant awarded
to a nonprofit for the purchase of a former country
club and golf course.
 OOCC awarded a $100,000 grant to an out-of-
state nonprofit organization that transferred
almost all of the funds to a for-profit company
owned by the senior management of the nonprofit.
State law unrelated to OOCC, provides that this
nonprofit shall receive $1 million in grant funds
from another State agency over 4 years.
 OOCC awarded a $40,959 grant to a nonprofit
organization for purposes that were not consistent
with the grant proposal.
Opioid Operational Command Center Page 4
Special Review

--- Page 5 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Grant Award and Monitoring (Finding 1)
OOCC did not have written policies and procedures for
the selection of grantees, determination of the
amounts awarded, and monitoring of grantees.
Consequently, we noted that OOCC could not support
the propriety of certain grants tested.
• OOCC did not sufficiently notify the public of the
availability of discretionary grant funds.
• OOCC lacked sufficient documentation of the grant
proposal and evaluation processes and had no
process to verify assertions made in the grant
proposals.
• OOCC did not have a process to ensure grant
expenditures were valid and were consistent with
the related grant agreements.
These conditions raised questions about the integrity of
the awards and related payments, and we believe
contributed to activities detailed in Findings 2, 3 and 4.
Opioid Operational Command Center Page 5
Special Review

--- Page 6 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Questionable Grant (Finding 2)
OOCC did not have adequate justification for a
$750,000 discretionary grant award to a nonprofit
organization for the purchase of a former country
club and golf course in Caroline County.
• OOCC had no documentation to support its
evaluation of the proposal and determination that
the grantee’s program would be effective, nor
could OOCC justify the award amount. The
jurisdiction in which the grant program was
proposed had less than one percent of the State’s
opioid deaths in 2018, but the award was higher
than the amounts awarded to nonprofits in other
jurisdictions.
• OOCC advised us that due to the timing of the
grant and the complexity of executing a grant
agreement that included the purchase of real
estate, the grant funds were not distributed.
Opioid Operational Command Center Page 6
Special Review

--- Page 7 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Questionable Grant Activity (Finding 3)
OOCC awarded a $100,000 grant to an out-of-state
nonprofit organization that transferred most of the
funds to a for-profit company owned by senior
management of the nonprofit.
• The transfer of the grant funds to the private
company raises questions as to the legality of the
nonprofit organization’s actions. The Internal
Revenue Code provides that a nonprofit
organization must not be organized or operated
for the benefit of private interests.
• OOCC paid the nonprofit $25,000 more than the
amount stipulated in the grant proposal and we
confirmed that the nonprofit provided less than
half of the required services.
• State law unrelated to the OOCC, provides that
this nonprofit shall receive $1 million in State
grants from 2020 to 2023. We obtained the
related FY 2020 grant agreement and found that
it was for similar services as those in the OOCC
grant agreement that we found questionable.
Opioid Operational Command Center Page 7
Special Review

--- Page 8 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Questionable Grant Activity (Finding 4)
OOCC awarded a $40,959 grant to a nonprofit
organization that was for a purpose that was not
consistent with the grant proposal, and certain
expenditures appeared questionable.
• The nonprofit organization was to operate a
transitional sober living residence and its grant
proposal specified that the grant funds were to be
used for staffing. However, the grant agreement
stated that all of the funds were to be used for the
purchase of a box truck, lawn mower, gas grill, and
propane.
• The purchases in the grant agreement (noted
above) were unrelated to the performance
measures contained in the grant agreement. For
example, one performance measure was the
number of clergy and lay spiritual leaders to be
trained by the grantee.
• We reviewed the grantee’s documentation of
purchases made and we questioned the legitimacy
of the propane invoice.
Opioid Operational Command Center Page 8
Special Review

--- Page 9 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Conclusion
OOCC should
• establish comprehensive policies and
procedures for awarding grants, evaluating grant
proposals, and monitoring grants;
• ensure that grant awards are adequately
justified, grantee assertions are verified, and
that consideration be given to awarding funds
commensurate with the related treatment needs
or levels of addiction of the respective local
jurisdictions;
• refrain from awarding grants to nonprofit entities
that transfer a substantial portion of grant funds
to third parties;
• ensure that payment rates in grant agreements
are consistent with grant proposals and monitor
grantees to ensure that all required services are
provided; and
• ensure that grant agreements are consistent
with the related proposals.
Opioid Operational Command Center Page 9
Special Review