Title: Presentation to the Senate Budget and Taxation Subcommittee - Department of Human Services - Family Investment Administration


Related Report Dated (3/21/2019)
Date: 02/13/2020
Type: Presentations to the Legislature
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5e45b60ca1ce581228418a73
Extracted: 2025-06-19T06:25:39.658148
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Department of Human Services (DHS) -
Family Investment Administration (FIA)
Report Dated March 21, 2019

--- Page 2 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Report Overview
 The audit report covers FIA activity during the
period from November 25, 2013 and ending April
30, 2017. The audit report contained 8 findings,
including 4 repeat findings from the prior audit
report.
 FIA oversees a number of public assistance
programs administered by the 24 local
department of social services (LDSSs) including
the Temporary Cash Assistance (TCA) Program,
Home Energy Assistance Program, and the
Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program
(SNAP).
 According to DHS’ records, payments made for
programs under FIA’s oversight totaled
approximately $1.3 billion during fiscal year 2017.
Family Investment Administration Page 2

--- Page 3 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Key Findings
 FIA allowed certain recipients to continue to
receive TCA benefits beyond the allowable 5-year
federal and State lifetime limit at an estimated
annual cost of at least $6.6 million.
 FIA did not ensure that the LDSSs conducted
timely and appropriate follow-up on certain
computer match alerts designed to help ensure
recipient eligibility and to detect potential fraud.
 FIA did not ensure that all social security number
alerts of numbers that could not be verified to
federal records were recorded in its computer
system, and did not adequately follow-up when
LDSSs did not conduct quality assurance reviews
designed to help ensure compliance with legal
and regulatory requirements.
 FIA did not adequately monitor costs and
deliverables for contracts and agreements.
Family Investment Administration Page 3

--- Page 4 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Temporary Cash Assistance (Finding 1)
FIA routinely extend TCA benefits to recipients
beyond the time allowed by federal and State
regulations. These regulations limit the benefits to a
recipient to five years, unless a hardship exemption
was granted.
• FIA’s computer system automatically extended
the benefits beyond the five years. Management
at two LDSSs informed us that no procedures
were in place to limit benefits to recipients with
documented hardships.
• According to FIA records, during fiscal year 2016,
there was an average of 1,900 recipients each
month receiving benefits beyond the five-year
period. Our test of 10 recipients who received
benefits for 5.5 to 14 years beyond the five years
disclosed that none had exemptions on file.
• Based on the lowest valued TCA benefit, the cost
of benefits to the aforementioned 1,900
recipients totaled at least $6.6 million annually.
Family Investment Administration Page 4

--- Page 5 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Computer Matches (Findings 2 & 3)
FIA did not ensure appropriate follow-up was taken
for computer alerts of possible ineligible recipients.
 Our test of 31 alerts disclosed that the LDSSs did
not take appropriate action for 29 alerts (Finding
2).
• LDSS did not sufficiently pursue 22 alerts of
10 recipients receiving concurrent benefits
in Maryland and another state.
• LDSSs did not record in its computer system
the federal income identified in 7 alerts to
determine whether the income would have
affected the related benefits.
 Our review of the results of social security
number matches for the period from July 2015
to December 2016, disclosed that only 1,762 of
the 76,526 match results were recorded in FIA’s
computer system for subsequent review. FIA had
no documentation showing the disposition of the
remaining match results (Finding 3).
Family Investment Administration Page 5

--- Page 6 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Quality Assurance Programs (Finding 4)
• FIA did not take adequate follow-up action when
LDSSs failed to conduct the required number of
quality assurance reviews related to FIA programs
(Repeat Finding). For example, during fiscal year
2016, 12 of the 24 LDSSs failed to conduct the
required number of reviews. While FIA initiated
follow-up with the LDSSs regarding the missing
reviews, it did not ensure that the reviews were
subsequently completed.
• FIA did not ensure that errors identified during its
own quality assurance reviews were corrected.
For example, our test of 15 Temporary Disability
Assistance Program cases for which FIA
conducted quality assurance reviews disclosed
that for 13 cases, FIA did not take timely
corrective action or follow-up with the LDSSs.
• These quality assurance programs, when properly
conducted, are an aid in identifying and reducing
payments to ineligible recipients.
Family Investment Administration Page 6

--- Page 7 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Contract Monitoring (Finding 6)
FIA did not adequately monitor costs and deliverables
for certain contracts and agreements related to its
public assistance programs (Repeat Finding). During
our audit period, FIA was responsible for procuring
and administering 198 centralized contracts and
agreements valued at $199.6 million and the LDSSs
had 62 contracts and agreements totaling $45.7
million (directly related to FIA’s public assistance
programs).
• For centralized contracts and agreements, FIA did
not obtain documentation that deliverables were
received and amounts invoiced were proper for 12
of the 15 invoices tested totaling $14.6 million.
• FIA did not have a process to oversee and approve
LDSS contracts and agreements. All five LDSS
contracts and agreements tested valued at $29.9
million were not monitored or approved by FIA, nor
were the LDSSs effectively administering the
agreements, certain of which were used to
circumvent the State budgetary process.
Family Investment Administration Page 7

--- Page 8 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Other Findings
Finding 5 - Temporary Disability Assistance Program
FIA did not always obtain required documentation from
Temporary Disability Assistance Program recipients
and did not close certain cases timely, allowing
improper payments to be used (Repeat Finding).
Finding 7 – Grants Management
FIA did not verify that grant funds were spent as
intended (Repeat Finding). FIA provides grants to a
network of community and faith-based organizations,
LDSSs, and other State and local agencies. In fiscal
year 2017, FIA made grant payments totaling
approximately $12.8 million to 369 grantees.
Finding 8 – System Access
FIA did not periodically review and adequately restrict
user access to its Office of Home Energy Programs
computer system, resulting in several hundred
employees with unnecessary access to recipients’
personally identifiable information.
Family Investment Administration Page 8

--- Page 9 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Conclusions
FIA should:
• terminate TCA benefits to all recipients after five
years unless there is a documented hardship
exemption;
• conduct timely and appropriate follow-up of
computer matches and alerts;
• ensure appropriate follow-up action is taken on
quality assurance reviews;
• establish procedures to ensure that all contract
and agreement deliverables are received; and to
oversee and approve LDSS public assistance
contracts and agreements; and
• take appropriate action to address the remaining
findings in our report.
Family Investment Administration Page 9