Title: Presentation to the House Appropriations Subcommittee - Maryland Department of Health - Developmental Disabilities Administration


Related Report Dated (7/8/2019)
Date: 02/26/2020
Type: Presentations to the Legislature
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5e45b60ca1ce581228418a71
Extracted: 2025-06-19T06:26:08.981332
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Maryland Department of Health (MDH) -
Developmental Disabilities
Administration (DDA)
Report Dated July 8, 2019

--- Page 2 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Report Overview
 The audit report covers DDA activity during the
period from April 13, 2015 and ending April 30,
2018.
 DDA’s annual expenditures exceeded $1 billion,
with the majority related to providers payments on
behalf of consumers.
 The audit report contained 11 findings, including
5 repeat findings from the prior audit report (see
table on next slide). Certain of these findings
have been repeated in several prior audit reports.
 We determined that DDA’s accountability and
compliance level was unsatisfactory, in
accordance with the rating system we established
in conformity with State law. The primary factors
contributing to the unsatisfactory rating were the
significance of our audit findings and the number
of repeat findings.
Developmental Disabilities Administration Page 2

--- Page 3 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Status of Preceding Findings
Preceding Implementation
Finding Description
Finding Status
DDA incorrectly directed providers to collect an estimated $4.2 million
annually from consumers for services that should have been paid for with Repeated
Finding 1
State and federal funds. DDA believes its costs to remedy this situation (Current Finding 7)
outweigh the potential benefits to the affected consumers.
DDA did not adequately monitor the resource/service coordinators’ efforts to
Repeated
Finding 2 determine whether they were ensuring that consumers received the required
(Current Finding 8)
services and that Medicaid eligibility reassessments were conducted timely.
DDA did not compare hours billed by the resource/service coordinators with
Finding 3 Not repeated
hours worked as recorded in its PCIS2 to ensure payments were proper.
DDA did not negotiate the rates for its financial restructuringcontracts and
procured one of thecontracts as an emergency procurement even though
Finding 4 Not repeated
certain services ultimately provided under the contract did not appear to be
emergencies as defined by regulation.
DDA lacked an effective means to monitor payments for its financial
Finding 5 restructuringcontract and similar deliverables were noted in both contracts Not repeated
and in certain contract modifications.
DDA did not effectively monitor the contracts and the related payments.
Certain deliverables were not received, vendor invoices were not effectively
Finding 6 Not repeated
reviewed, and DDA authorized the contractor to perform work outside the
scope of the contracts.
Federal fund reimbursement requests were not made timely, resulting in lost Repeated
Finding 7
interest income totaling approximately $210,000. (Current Finding 8)
DDA did not conduct audits of Community Supported Living Arrangement Repeated
Finding 8
providers to identify and recover overpayments. (Current Finding 3)
DDA did not verify critical adjustments processed in PCIS2, resulting in errors
Repeated
Finding 9 such as overpayments going undetected, and did not adequately restrict
(Current Finding 9)
access to the system.
PCIS2 contained 58,022 unique social security numbers with associated
Finding 10 Not repeated
names, dates of birth, and addresses without adequate safeguards.
Developmental Disabilities Administration Page 3

--- Page 4 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Key Findings
Provider Payments – DDA did not identify $1.7
million in overpayments to one service provider and
did not conduct audits of service providers to ensure
payments were consistent with services delivered
and consumers’ individual plans.
Contracts – Fiscal management services contracts
did not receive control agency approvals and were
not comprehensive. In addition, DDA did not monitor
the vendors and payments related to those contracts.
DDA also did not adequately justify a $2.7 million
sole source contract to an incumbent vendor.
Contribution to Care (CTC) –DDA had not taken
action to return $3.6 million improperly collected
from consumers during calendar year 2013, nor
determined the extent of improper CTC collections in
prior years.
Provider Consumer Information System II (PCIS2) –
DDA did not have sufficient controls to ensure the
propriety of system adjustments, did not restrict
system access, and did not update critical software.
Developmental Disabilities Administration Page 4

--- Page 5 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Provider Payments (Finding 2)
DDA made recurring overpayments to one provider
between December 2014 and February 2017
totaling at least $1.7 million.
 The overpayments were not detected until they
were self-reported by the provider in April 2017.
 The overpayments resulted from improper
consumer service information in PCIS2 for 36
consumers.
 DDA had not determined whether overpayments
occurred prior to December 2014, or whether
similar overpayments were made to other
providers.
 Using a similar process as the provider in
question, we estimated that additional
overpayments totaling $2.4 million were made to
the provider between July 2011 and November
2014 that have not been recovered.
Developmental Disabilities Administration Page 5

--- Page 6 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Provider Payments (Finding 3)
DDA did not conduct audits of service providers to
ensure consumers actually received services billed
by providers and that services were consistent with
the consumers’ approved individual plans.
 DDA relied on its Coordination of Community
Services (CCS) agencies to monitor consumer
services provided. However, CCS monitoring
efforts were limited to ensuring consumers’
satisfaction with their services rather than
verifying the amounts and types of services
actually received.
 Although DDA historically contracted with a
vendor to conduct audits of certain providers, no
contract has been in place since January 2014.
Although a new contract procurement process
was initiated in June 2018, as of February 2019,
the procurement of a new vendor to conduct
provider audits was still in progress.
Developmental Disabilities Administration Page 6

--- Page 7 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Fiscal Management Services (Finding 4)
A number of issues were identified related to DDA
contracting with two fiscal management services
(FMS) vendors to administer fiscal activities of
consumers electing to self-direct their care. These
vendors’ responsibilities included monitoring
consumer budgets, paying for provider services, and
recovering any applicable federal funds.
 The FMS vendor contracts did not receive control
agency approval and lacked critical provisions.
 DDA did not monitor the FMS vendors to ensure
the required services were provided, and that
related payments were proper.
• FMS vendors did not return $7.1 million in
unspent funds to DDA timely, resulting in lost
interest of $92,000.
• Certain service providers were paid at higher
rates than were approved by DDA.
 Due to vendor actions, DDA failed to recover
$4.9 million in federal reimbursements.
Developmental Disabilities Administration Page 7

--- Page 8 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Financial Restructuring Contract (Finding 5)
DDA did not adequately justify a $2.7 million sole
source contract awarded to an incumbent vendor to
continue assisting in the financial restructuring of
DDA operations, and could not support a contract
modification to a certain billing rate.
 DDA cited the need to avoid delays and the cost
of transitioning to a new vendor as its
justification for not competitively procuring the
services. This position appears to set a lower
threshold for sole source procurement
justifications and could provide undue
preference to incumbent vendors.
 In March 2018, DDA competitively procured
another contract for financial restructuring
services, which received bids from 5 vendors.
 DDA could not support a contract modification
for approximately $110,000 that increased one
vendor employee’s hourly billing rate from $250
to $375.
Developmental Disabilities Administration Page 8

--- Page 9 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Contribution to Care (Finding 7)
DDA had not fully determined the amount of
contribution to care (CTC) improperly collected from
consumers, and had not taken any action to return
such funds to the affected consumers.
 The improper CTC was identified during our prior
audit. DDA advised the Joint Audit Committee in
January 2017 that it would develop repayment
plans to return funds to affected consumers.
 DDA determined that providers improperly
collected $3.6 million from 2,194 consumers in
CY 2013. As of July 2018, DDA had not taken
any action to return the funds to these
consumers.
 DDA does not intend to determine the amounts
improperly collected prior to CY 2013. According
to its records, 80 percent of the 2,194 affected
consumers received DDA-funded services for at
least 5 years prior to CY 2013.
Developmental Disabilities Administration Page 9

--- Page 10 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Provider Consumer Information System II (PCIS2)
PCIS2 provides a mechanism for provider payment
and includes provider and consumer activity,
services, and related payment rates. As of April
2018, there were 2,133 system users and FY2017
expenditures processed through PCIS2 totaled
$903 million.
Critical Adjustments Were Not Verified (Finding 9)
• Controls had not been established over critical
adjustments to provider accounts. We identified
errors in three of eight payment adjustments
tested totaling $24,800.
• Access to PCIS2 was not reviewed to ensure it
was limited to appropriate users. Our test of 15
DDA users disclosed that 13 had unnecessary
access, including 8 that had been identified
during our preceding audit and were not
corrected by DDA.
Developmental Disabilities Administration Page 10

--- Page 11 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Provider Consumer Information System II (PCIS2)
PCIS2 Running on Outdated Software (Finding 10)
• The PCIS2 database software version in use by
DDA as of July 2018 had not been supported by
the database software vendor since August
2015.
• The operating system software for the PCIS2
database server had not been updated for the
most current software patches. We identified 48
security-related software updates that had been
released since June 22, 2017 that not been
installed as of August 2018.
The out-of-date database software and uninstalled
operating system updates exposed DDA to
increased security risks.
Developmental Disabilities Administration Page 11

--- Page 12 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Other Findings
Finding 1 – Consumer Budgets
DDA did not ensure that budgets for consumers’
services, based on 3rd party vendor assessments,
were in accordance with its established criteria and
that the budgets were properly recorded in PCIS2.
Finding 6 – Coordination of Community Services
(CCS) Agency Billings
DDA did not ensure that amounts invoiced by CCS
agencies properly reflected consumer services
provided.
Finding 8 – Federal Funds
Federal fund reimbursement requests were not
always timely, resulting in lost interest income
totaling approximately $126,000 for expenditures
incurred from May 2015 through February 2018.
Finding 11 – PCIS2
PCIS2 backup files were not stored offsite and DDA
did not have a complete information technology
disaster recovery plan.
Developmental Disabilities Administration Page 12

--- Page 13 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
DDA Performance Audit
Due to concerns identified during our past 3 fiscal
compliance audits, we conducted a performance audit
of DDA’s monitoring of its Coordination of Community
Services (CCS) agencies. Our audit report was issued
on January 2, 2019.
 Although based on documentation that we
received directly from service provider, there
appeared to be support for the delivery of services
to DDA consumers we selected for testing, we
found that DDA did not adequately monitor CCS
agencies’ efforts to ensure consumers received
those services. Our test of quarterly monitoring
visits performed by CCS agencies for 15,000
consumers for a 2-year period disclosed:
 The CCS could not document all 8 required
monitoring visits for 97% of consumers.
 Less than half the 8 monitoring visits could be
documented for over 50% of consumers.
 DDA did not provide CCS agencies with appropriate
guidance on their monitoring responsibilities.
Developmental Disabilities Administration Page 13

--- Page 14 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Conclusions
DDA should:
• ensure consumer budgets are properly assigned
and recorded in PCIS2;
• determine the extent of provider overpayments
and conduct provider audits to verify that services
were provided and in accordance with consumers’
individual plans;
• comply with State procurement regulations,
including obtaining control agency approval and
justifying sole source procurements;
• monitor vendors to ensure deliverables are
received;
• return improperly collected CTC to consumers and
determine the extent of additional improper
collections;
• ensure requests for federal fund reimbursements
are submitted timely; and
• implement the recommended actions to improve
controls over critical PCIS2 adjustments and
system security, and implement a comprehensive
disaster recovery plan.
Developmental Disabilities Administration Page 14