Title: Office of the Clerk of Circuit Court - Caroline County
Date: 03/09/2020
Type: Fiscal Compliance
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5e6930aea1ce581270204b51
Extracted: 2025-06-19T06:27:07.909860
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Audit Report
Office of the Clerk of Circuit Court
Caroline County, Maryland
October 2023
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Senator Clarence K. Lam, M.D. (Senate Chair) Delegate Jared Solomon (House Chair)
Senator Joanne C. Benson Delegate Steven J. Arentz
Senator Paul D. Corderman Delegate Nicholas P. Charles II
Senator Katie Fry Hester Delegate Andrea Fletcher Harrison
Senator Shelly L. Hettleman Delegate Steven C. Johnson
Senator Cheryl C. Kagan Delegate Mary A. Lehman
Senator Cory V. McCray Delegate David Moon
Senator Justin D. Ready Delegate Julie Palakovich Carr
Senator Bryan W. Simonaire Delegate Stephanie M. Smith
Senator Craig J. Zucker Delegate M. Courtney Watson
To Obtain Further Information
Office of Legislative Audits
The Warehouse at Camden Yards
351 West Camden Street, Suite 400
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Phone: 410-946-5900
Maryland Relay: 711
TTY: 410-946-5401 ꞏ 301-970-5401
E-mail: webmaster@ola.state.md.us
Website: www.ola.state.md.us
To Report Fraud
The Office of Legislative Audits operates a Fraud Hotline to report fraud, waste, or abuse involving State
of Maryland government resources. Reports of fraud, waste, or abuse may be communicated anonymously
by a toll-free call to 1-877-FRAUD-11, by mail to the Fraud Hotline, c/o Office of Legislative Audits, or
through the Office’s website.
Nondiscrimination Statement
The Department of Legislative Services does not discriminate on the basis of age, ancestry, color, creed,
marital status, national origin, race, religion, gender, gender identity, sexual orientation, or disability in the
admission or access to its programs, services, or activities. The Department’s Information Officer has been
designated to coordinate compliance with the nondiscrimination requirements contained in Section 35.107
of the United States Department of Justice Regulations. Requests for assistance should be directed to the
Information Officer at 410-946-5400 or 410-970-5400.

--- Page 3 ---
October 5, 2023
Senator Clarence K. Lam, M.D., Senate Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Delegate Jared Solomon, House Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Members of Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Annapolis, Maryland
Ladies and Gentlemen:
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the Office of the Clerk of Circuit
Court for Caroline County, Maryland for the period beginning November 5, 2019
and ending May 15, 2023. The Office performs various functions for the public,
including maintaining various legal records, recording certain real estate
documents, collecting related fees and taxes, and issuing certain licenses.
Our audit disclosed that the Office did not perform documented independent
verifications to ensure collections received were deposited.
Our audit also included a review to determine the status of the finding contained
in our preceding audit report. We determined that the Office satisfactorily
addressed this finding.
The Judiciary’s response to this audit, on behalf of the Office, is included as an
appendix to this report. We reviewed the response to our finding and related
recommendation, and have concluded that the corrective actions identified are
sufficient to address all audit issues. In accordance with our policy, we have
edited any vendor names or products mentioned by the Judiciary in this
document.

--- Page 4 ---
We wish to acknowledge the cooperation extended to us during the audit by the
Office. We also wish to acknowledge the Judiciary’s and the Office’s willingness
to address the audit issues and implement appropriate corrective actions.
Respectfully submitted,
Gregory A. Hook, CPA
Legislative Auditor
2

--- Page 5 ---
Background Information
Agency Responsibilities
The Office performs a variety of functions for the public such as filing, docketing,
and maintaining various legal records; recording documents involving title to real
estate; collecting the related fees, commissions, and taxes; and issuing certain
licenses. In performing these functions, the Office collects funds on behalf of the
State, Caroline County and its incorporated municipalities, and subsequently
distributes the funds collected to the applicable entities.
Financial Information
According to the State’s accounting records, the Office’s fiscal year 2022
revenues totaled $3,293,429. These revenues were distributed in the following
manner:
 $1,095,594 was distributed to Caroline County and its incorporated
municipalities, and
 $2,197,835 (the remaining amount) represented revenues available to the State
for purposes specified in various provisions of State law.
The majority of the Office’s fiscal year 2022 expenditures, which totaled
$1,181,248 (see Figure 1 on the following page), were salaries and wages that
were paid primarily from a general fund appropriation.
The Office also maintained custody of certain trust funds that, according to its
records, had balances totaling $89,854 as of April 30, 2023.
3

--- Page 6 ---
Figure 1
Office of the Clerk of Circuit Court for Caroline County
Positions, Expenditures, and Funding Sources
Full-Time Equivalent Positions as of June 30, 2022
Positions Percent
Filled 11 100.0%
Vacant 0 0.0%
Total 11
Fiscal Year 2022 Expenditures
Expenditures Percent
Salaries, Wages, and Fringe Benefits $1,131,886 95.8%
Operating Expenses 49,362 4.2%
Total $1,181,248
Fiscal Year 2022 Funding Sources
Funding Percent
General Fund $ 994,196 84.2%
Special Fund 128,269 10.8%
Reimbursable Fund 58,783 5.0%
Total $1,181,248
Source: State financial and personnel records
Status of Finding From Preceding Audit Report
Our audit included a review to determine the status of the finding contained in our
preceding audit report dated March 9, 2020. We determined that the Office
satisfactorily addressed this finding.
4

--- Page 7 ---
Findings and Recommendations
Cash Receipts
Finding 1
The Office did not perform documented independent verifications to ensure
collections received were deposited.
Analysis
The Office did not perform documented independent verifications to ensure
collections received were deposited. While we were advised that independent
deposit verifications were performed, our testing found that the process was not
documented. Specifically, we judgmentally selected 20 daily collections totaling
approximately $180,000 during the period January 2022 through March 2023 and
found that there was no documentation that the Office had performed independent
verifications to ensure the monies were subsequently deposited. In addition, we
determined that one of the two employees, who we were advised was responsible
for performing the verifications, was not independent of the collection function.
The Comptroller of Maryland’s Accounting Procedures Manual requires
independent verification of collections to deposit.
As a result, there was a lack of assurance that all Office collections were
deposited. According to the Office’s records, it collected $1.3 million in checks
and cash, primarily for land transactions, during the period July 1, 2022 through
April 30, 2023.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that the Office ensure that an independent and documented
verification of collections received to amounts deposited is performed. We
advised the Office how to achieve the necessary separation of duties using
existing personnel.
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the Office of the Clerk of Circuit
Court for Caroline County, Maryland for the period beginning November 5, 2019
and ending May 15, 2023. The audit was conducted in accordance with generally
accepted government auditing standards. Those standards require that we plan
and perform the audit to obtain sufficient, appropriate evidence to provide a
reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives.
5

--- Page 8 ---
We believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings
and conclusions based on our audit objectives.
As prescribed by the State Government Article, Section 2-1221 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, the objectives of this audit were to examine the Office’s
financial transactions, records, and internal control, and to evaluate its compliance
with applicable State laws, rules, and regulations.
In planning and conducting our audit, we focused on the major financial-related
areas of operations based on assessments of significance and risk. The areas
addressed by the audit included cash receipts (including taxes and fees collected
for real estate transactions), certain payroll activities, and bank accounts. We also
determined the status of the finding contained in our preceding audit report.
Our audit did not include a review of certain support services provided to the
Office by the Administrative Office of the Courts. These support services (such
as human resources and payroll activities, invoice processing, and maintenance of
budgetary accounting records) are included within the scope of our audits of the
Judiciary.
Our assessment of internal controls was based on agency procedures and controls
in place at the time of our fieldwork. Our tests of transactions and other auditing
procedures were generally focused on the transactions occurring during our audit
period of November 5, 2019 to May 15, 2023, but may include transactions before
or after this period as we considered necessary to achieve our audit objectives.
To accomplish our audit objectives, our audit procedures included inquiries of
appropriate personnel, inspections of documents and records, tests of transactions,
and to the extent practicable, observations of the Office’s operations. Generally,
transactions were selected for testing based on auditor judgment, which primarily
considers risk, the timing or dollar amount of the transaction, or the significance
of the transaction to the area of operation reviewed. As a matter of course, we do
not normally use sampling in our tests, so unless otherwise specifically indicated,
neither statistical nor non-statistical audit sampling was used to select the
transactions tested. Therefore, unless sampling is specifically indicated in a
finding, the results from any tests conducted or disclosed by us cannot be used to
project those results to the entire population from which the test items were
selected. We also performed other auditing procedures that we considered
necessary to achieve our audit objectives. The reliability of data used in this
report for background or informational purposes was not assessed.
6

--- Page 9 ---
The Office’s management is responsible for establishing and maintaining
effective internal control. Internal control is a process designed to provide
reasonable assurance that objectives pertaining to the reliability of financial
records; effectiveness and efficiency of operations, including safeguarding of
assets; and compliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations are achieved.
As provided in Government Auditing Standards, there are five components of
internal control: control environment, risk assessment, control activities,
information and communication, and monitoring. Each of the five components,
when significant to the audit objectives, and as applicable to the Office, were
considered by us during the course of this audit.
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate.
Our reports are designed to assist the Maryland General Assembly in exercising
its legislative oversight function and to provide constructive recommendations for
improving State operations. As a result, our reports generally do not address
activities we reviewed that are functioning properly.
This report includes a finding relating to a condition that we consider to be a
significant deficiency in the design or operation of internal control that could
adversely affect the Office’s ability to maintain reliable financial records, operate
effectively and efficiently, and/or comply with applicable laws, rules, and
regulations. This finding is also regarded as a significant instance of
noncompliance with applicable laws, rules, or regulations. A less significant
finding was communicated to the Office that did not warrant inclusion in this
report.
The response from the Judiciary, on behalf of the Office, to our finding and
recommendation is included as an appendix to this report. As prescribed in the
State Government Article, Section 2-1224 of the Annotated Code of Maryland,
we will advise the Judiciary regarding the results of our review of its response.
7

--- Page 10 ---
APPENDIX
OFFICE OF
TERRY B. LORD
CLERK OF THE CIRCUIT COURT FOR
CAROLINE COUNTY
P.O. BOX 458
DENTON, MARYLAND 21629
TELEPHONE: 410-479-1811
BETSY L. BLOUGH
CHIEF DEPUTY
September 29, 2023
Mr. Gregory A. Hook, CPA
Legislative Auditor
Office of Legislative Audits
The Warehouse at Camden Yards
351 West Camden Street, Suite 400
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Dear Mr. Hook:
We have received the draft audit report pertaining to the Caroline County Circuit Court Clerk's
Office for the period November 5, 2019 and ending May 15, 2023. The attached document
contains our response to the finding and recommendation in the audit report.
We believe we have responded in full to the finding and recommendation.
Sincerely,
Clerk of the Circuit Court for
Caroline County
Cc: Hon. Matthew J. Fader, Chief Justice
Hon. Heather Lynne Price, Administrative Judge, Caroline County Circuit Court
Nancy Faulkner, Deputy State Court Administrator
Stephane J. Latour, Managing Legal Counsel, Internal Affairs
Solomon Ayele, Director, Internal Audit

--- Page 11 ---
Office of the Clerk of Circuit Court
Caroline County, Maryland
Agency Response Form
Cash Receipts
Finding 1
The Office did not perform documented independent verifications to ensure collections
received were deposited.
We recommend that the Office ensure that an independent and documented verification of
collections received to amounts deposited is performed. We advised the Office how to
achieve the necessary separation of duties using existing personnel.
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide Agree
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 1 Agree Estimated Completion Date: 06/08/2023
Please provide details of In response to the audit review finding regarding “no independent
corrective action or verification of the deposit”, we acknowledge that previously the
explain disagreement. person who prepared the deposit was also the person who would
verify that the deposit was received from the bank. This occurred
due to short staffing within the Clerk’s office, as our office had no
dedicated Fiscal Clerk and limited staff who had conflicting duties.
However, it has since been remedied by hiring a new employee who
has knowledge of the Fiscal processes.
The procedure which occurs now, effective as of June 8th, 2023, is
that the Clerk of Court, or Chief Deputy Clerk are responsible for
receipt of funds and preparing the bank deposit, which is then
picked up by an armored courier. The Fiscal Clerk performs the
verification of deposit and the reconciliation of funds both daily and
monthly, which is all documented and initialed as per audit
requirements. In addition, the deposits are logged in on an excel
spreadsheet and this includes the verification date. This spreadsheet
is maintained and updated by the Fiscal Clerk. A copy of the
deposit validation is printed and attached with the daily work, and
again is dated and initialed by the Fiscal Clerk, and an independent
reviewer. Therefore, creating both a physical and electronic record
of the validation. These are all reconciled at the end of the month as
well with the Judiciary’s financial system, which is performed by the
Fiscal Clerk. The deposit spreadsheet is printed and maintained
Page 1 of 2

--- Page 12 ---
Office of the Clerk of Circuit Court
Caroline County, Maryland
Agency Response Form
with the monthly work for audit purposes. An electronic record is
also maintained in the shared drive for the month.
We believe we have met all requirements so that one sole person is
not handling all aspects, and an independent verification is
occurring.
Page 2 of 2

--- Page 13 ---
A T
UDIT EAM
Mark S. Hagenbuch, CPA
Audit Manager
Dianne P. Ramirez
Senior Auditor
Marcus J. Cheese
Staff Auditor