Title: Maryland Department of Health - Clifton T. Perkins Hospital Center
Date: 03/17/2020
Type: Fiscal Compliance
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5e713718a1ce5814081f6299
Extracted: 2025-06-19T06:27:29.480515
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Audit Report
Maryland Department of Health
Clifton T. Perkins Hospital Center
March 2020
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Senator Clarence K. Lam, M.D. (Senate Chair) Delegate Carol L. Krimm (House Chair)
Senator Malcolm L. Augustine Delegate Steven J. Arentz
Senator Adelaide C. Eckardt Delegate Mark S. Chang
Senator George C. Edwards Delegate Keith E. Haynes
Senator Katie Fry Hester Delegate Michael A. Jackson
Senator Cheryl C. Kagan Delegate David Moon
Senator Benjamin F. Kramer Delegate April R. Rose
Senator Cory V. McCray Delegate Geraldine Valentino-Smith
Senator Justin D. Ready Delegate Karen Lewis Young
Senator Craig J. Zucker One Vacancy
To Obtain Further Information
Office of Legislative Audits
301 West Preston Street, Room 1202
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Phone: 410-946-5900 ꞏ 301-970-5900 ꞏ 1-877-486-9964 (Toll Free in Maryland)
Maryland Relay: 711
TTY: 410-946-5401 ꞏ 301-970-5401
E-mail: OLAWebmaster@ola.state.md.us
Website: www.ola.state.md.us
To Report Fraud
The Office of Legislative Audits operates a Fraud Hotline to report fraud, waste, or abuse involving State
of Maryland government resources. Reports of fraud, waste, or abuse may be communicated anonymously
by a toll-free call to 1-877-FRAUD-11, by mail to the Fraud Hotline, c/o Office of Legislative Audits, or
through the Office’s website.
Nondiscrimination Statement
The Department of Legislative Services does not discriminate on the basis of age, ancestry, color, creed,
marital status, national origin, race, religion, gender, gender identity, sexual orientation, or disability in the
admission or access to its programs, services, or activities. The Department’s Information Officer has been
designated to coordinate compliance with the nondiscrimination requirements contained in Section 35.107
of the United States Department of Justice Regulations. Requests for assistance should be directed to the
Information Officer at 410-946-5400 or 410-970-5400.

--- Page 3 ---
March 17, 2020
Senator Clarence K. Lam, M.D., Senate Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Delegate Carol L. Krimm, House Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Members of Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Annapolis, Maryland
Ladies and Gentlemen:
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the Clifton T. Perkins Hospital
Center of the Maryland Department of Health (MDH) for the period beginning
April 29, 2015 and ending May 14, 2019. The Center provides comprehensive
psychiatric evaluation and treatment services to individuals in a maximum
security environment.
Our audit disclosed that the Center did not adequately monitor its $4.2 million
housekeeping contract to ensure the required level of services were performed. In
addition, the Center lacked sufficient controls over certain patient fund accounts.
Our audit also included a review to determine the status of the finding contained
in our preceding audit report. We determined that the Center satisfactorily
addressed this finding.
MDH’s response to this audit, on behalf of the Center, is included as an appendix
to this report. We reviewed the response and noted general agreement to our
findings and related recommendations, and while there are other aspects of
MDH’s response which will require further clarification, we do not anticipate that
these will require the Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee’s attention to resolve.

--- Page 4 ---
We wish to acknowledge the cooperation extended to us during the audit by the
Center. We also wish to acknowledge MDH’s and the Center’s willingness to
address the audit issues and implement appropriate corrective actions.
Respectfully submitted,
Gregory A. Hook, CPA
Legislative Auditor
2

--- Page 5 ---
Background Information
Agency Responsibilities
The Clifton T. Perkins Hospital Center, located in Jessup, Maryland, provides
comprehensive psychiatric evaluation and treatment services to individuals in a
maximum security environment. The Center has a licensed capacity of 298
resident patients and, during fiscal year 2019, had a budgeted average daily
population of 284 residents and an actual average daily population of 269
residents. The Center is accredited by The Joint Commission, which evaluates
and monitors health care organizations nationwide to promote safe, high-quality
care, treatment, and services. According to the State’s records, Center
expenditures totaled approximately $73.4 million during fiscal year 2019.
Status of Finding From Preceding Audit Report
Our audit included a review to determine the status of the finding contained in our
preceding audit report dated September 18, 2015. We determined that the Center
satisfactorily addressed this finding.
Findings and Recommendations
Contractual Services
Finding 1
The Clifton T. Perkins Hospital Center did not adequately monitor its
housekeeping vendor to ensure that services totaling approximately $4.2
million were performed in accordance with the contract.
Analysis
The Center did not adequately monitor its housekeeping vendor to ensure that
services were performed in accordance with the contract. The Center entered into
the contract on May 16, 2013, which was extended through renewal options and
contract modifications through July 31, 2019 for a total contract amount of $4.2
million. As of June 30, 2019, expenditures on the contract totaled $4.17 million.
Our review disclosed that the Center did not perform documented monthly
inspections to ensure the vendor was providing the required services in
accordance with its contract. Rather, the Center relied on periodic inspections it
performed that were primarily intended to monitor overall environmental and
3

--- Page 6 ---
safety conditions. In addition, Center management advised us that none of its
inspections were performed in the presence of the vendor as required by the
contract and that any problems identified during the inspections were not
communicated in writing to the vendor.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that the Center
a. perform documented monthly inspections of the housekeeping vendor in
accordance with the contract to ensure all required services were
provided, and
b. report any deficiencies noted during the inspections to the vendor.
Patient Funds
Finding 2
The Center did not reconcile the balance of its patient fund accounts with the
corresponding records maintained by the Comptroller of Maryland.
Analysis
The Center did not reconcile the aggregate balance of its patient fund accounts
with the corresponding records maintained by the Comptroller of Maryland. The
Center records its patient fund activity in an automated system. Although the
Center compared the account balances in its automated records to the
corresponding amounts in the Comptroller’s records each month, it did not
investigate differences between the two account balances. Consequently,
assurance was lacking that the Center’s patient fund records were accurate.
Our review disclosed that, as of June 30, 2019, the aggregate patient fund account
balance, according to the Center’s automated records ($70,296), exceeded the
corresponding balance in the Comptroller’s records ($66,896) by $3,400.
Conversely, for the month ending March 31, 2019, the balance in the
Comptroller's records ($81,792) exceeded the corresponding account balance in
the Center’s automated records ($71,449) by $10,343. The Center could not
readily explain these differences.
Patient funds include amounts earned by or received on behalf of the Center’s
patients. Patients may use these funds for certain discretionary purchases or may
direct the Center to pay the funds to third parties. It is the Center’s responsibility
to maintain accurate records on behalf of its patients.
4

--- Page 7 ---
Recommendation 2
We recommend that the Center reconcile the aggregate balance of its patient
fund accounts with the corresponding records maintained by the
Comptroller of Maryland and investigate any differences, including those
noted above.
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the Clifton T. Perkins Hospital
Center of the Maryland Department of Health (MDH) for the period beginning
April 29, 2015 and ending May 14, 2019. The audit was conducted in accordance
with generally accepted government auditing standards. Those standards require
that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient, appropriate evidence to
provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit
objectives. We believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for
our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives.
As prescribed by the State Government Article, Section 2-1221 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, the objectives of this audit were to examine the Center’s
financial transactions, records, and internal control, and to evaluate its compliance
with applicable State laws, rules, and regulations.
In planning and conducting our audit, we focused on the major financial-related
areas of operations based on assessments of significance and risk. The areas
addressed by the audit included cash receipts, patient funds, payroll, procurements
and disbursements, and materials and supplies. We also determined the status of
the finding contained in our preceding audit report.
Our audit did not include certain support services provided to the Center by
MDH’s Office of the Secretary. These support services (such as certain payroll
and purchasing functions, maintenance of accounting records, and related fiscal
functions) are included within the scope of our audits of MDH’s Office of the
Secretary and Other Units.
To accomplish our audit objectives, our audit procedures included inquiries of
appropriate personnel, inspections of documents and records, observations of the
Center’s operations, and tests of transactions. Generally, transactions were
selected for testing based on auditor judgment, which primarily considers risk.
Unless otherwise specifically indicated, neither statistical nor non-statistical audit
sampling was used to select the transactions tested. Therefore, the results of the
5

--- Page 8 ---
tests cannot be used to project those results to the entire population from which
the test items were selected.
We also performed various data extracts of pertinent information from the State’s
Financial Management Information System (such as expenditure data) and the
State’s Central Payroll Bureau (payroll data), as well as from the contractor
administering the State’s Corporate Purchasing Card Program (credit card
activity). The extracts are performed as part of ongoing internal processes
established by the Office of Legislative Audits and were subject to various tests to
determine data reliability. We determined that the data extracted from these
sources were sufficiently reliable for the purposes the data were used during this
audit. Finally, we performed other auditing procedures that we considered
necessary to achieve our audit objectives. The reliability of data used in this
report for background or informational purposes was not assessed.
The Center’s management is responsible for establishing and maintaining
effective internal control. Internal control is a process designed to provide
reasonable assurance that objectives pertaining to the reliability of financial
records; effectiveness and efficiency of operations, including safeguarding of
assets; and compliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations are achieved.
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate.
Our reports are designed to assist the Maryland General Assembly in exercising
its legislative oversight function and to provide constructive recommendations for
improving State operations. As a result, our reports generally do not address
activities we reviewed that are functioning properly.
This report includes findings relating to conditions that we consider to be
significant deficiencies in the design or operation of internal control that could
adversely affect the Center’s ability to maintain reliable financial records, operate
effectively and efficiently, and/or comply with applicable laws, rules, and
regulations. Our audit did not disclose any significant instances of
noncompliance with applicable laws, rules, or regulations. Other less significant
findings were communicated to the Center that did not warrant inclusion in this
report.
The response from MDH, on behalf of the Center, to our findings and
recommendations is included as an appendix to this report. As prescribed in the
6

--- Page 9 ---
State Government Article, Section 2-1224 of the Annotated Code of Maryland,
we will advise MDH regarding the results of our review of its response.
7

--- Page 10 ---
APPENDIX

--- Page 11 ---
Maryland Department of Health
Clifton T. Perkins Hospital Center
Agency Response Form
Contractual Services
Finding 1
The Clifton T. Perkins Hospital Center did not adequately monitor its housekeeping
vendor to ensure that services totaling approximately $4.2 million were performed in
accordance with the contract.
We recommend that the Center
a. perform documented monthly inspections of the housekeeping vendor in accordance
with the contract to ensure all required services were provided, and
b. report any deficiencies noted during the inspections to the vendor.
Agency Response
Analysis Factually Accurate
Please provide While the hospital did make periodic inspections of the housekeeping
additional comments as vendor’s performance, it was not fully documented. Deficiencies with
deemed necessary. the vendor were communicated verbally as needed.
Recommendation 1a Agree Estimated Completion Date: 12/1/2019
Please provide details of The current contract states that “inspections may be conducted at any
corrective action or time and as frequently as determined necessary by the Hospital to ensure
explain disagreement. compliance with the terms and conditions set forth in this contract”. The
hospital does agree that documented monthly inspections in the presence
of the vendor are a good idea and is implementing them effective
December 2019. We are also developing a checklist to ensure the vendor
performs all tasks as per the contract.
Recommendation 1b Agree Estimated Completion Date: 12/1/2019
Please provide details of We are communicating with our current housekeeping vendor via a
corrective action or dedicated email address for documentation.
explain disagreement.
Page 1 of 2

--- Page 12 ---
Maryland Department of Health
Clifton T. Perkins Hospital Center
Agency Response Form
Patient Funds
Finding 2
The Center did not reconcile the balance of its patient fund accounts with the
corresponding records maintained by the Comptroller of Maryland.
We recommend that the Center reconcile the aggregate balance of its patient fund accounts
with the corresponding records maintained by the Comptroller of Maryland and
investigate any differences, including those noted above.
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide While the hospital has reconciled our patient fund accounts balance with
additional comments as the Patients’ Account Cash balance on the monthly DAFRG110 report
deemed necessary. since 2012, we have been unable to discover the difference between the
hospital balance and FMIS balance.
Recommendation 2 Agree Estimated Completion Date: Ongoing
Please provide details of The hospital agrees and is continuing to reconcile our patient fund
corrective action or accounts balance with the Comptroller of Maryland’s records monthly
explain disagreement. by working with MDH General Accounting staff to determine the
correct monthly transactions using the DAFRA220 report. The hospital
will continue to investigate any differences.
Page 2 of 2

--- Page 13 ---
A T
UDIT EAM
Heather A. Warriner, CPA
Audit Manager
Jonathan H. Finglass, CPA
Senior Auditor
Thomas J. Kraemer
Staff Auditor