Title: Frederick County Public Schools
Date: 12/05/2019
Type: Local School Systems
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5e74ec13a1ce5815586b171e
Extracted: 2025-06-19T06:22:14.433695
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Financial Management Practices Audit Report
Frederick County Public Schools
May 2025
Public Notice
In compliance with the requirements of the State Government Article Section
2-1224(i), of the Annotated Code of Maryland, the Office of Legislative Audits
has redacted cybersecurity findings and related auditee responses
from this public report.
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Senator Shelly L. Hettleman (Senate Chair) Delegate Jared Solomon (House Chair)
Senator Joanne C. Benson Delegate Steven J. Arentz
Senator Benjamin T. Brooks, Sr. Delegate Andrea Fletcher Harrison
Senator Paul D. Corderman Delegate Steven C. Johnson
Senator Katie Fry Hester Delegate Mary A. Lehman
Senator Cheryl C. Kagan Delegate David H. Moon
Senator Clarence K. Lam, M.D. Delegate Julie Palakovich Carr
Senator Cory V. McCray Delegate Emily K. Shetty
Senator Justin D. Ready Delegate Stephanie M. Smith
Senator Bryan W. Simonaire Delegate M. Courtney Watson
To Obtain Further Information
Office of Legislative Audits
The Warehouse at Camden Yards
351 West Camden Street, Suite 400
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Phone: 410-946-5900
Maryland Relay: 711
TTY: 410-946-5401 ꞏ 301-970-5401
E-mail: webmaster@ola.state.md.us
Website: www.ola.state.md.us
To Report Fraud
The Office of Legislative Audits operates a Fraud Hotline to report fraud, waste, or abuse involving State
of Maryland government resources. Reports of fraud, waste, or abuse may be communicated anonymously
by a toll-free call to 1-877-FRAUD-11, by mail to the Fraud Hotline, c/o Office of Legislative Audits, or
through the Office’s website.
Nondiscrimination Statement
The Department of Legislative Services does not discriminate on the basis of age, ancestry, color, creed,
marital status, national origin, race, religion, gender, gender identity, sexual orientation, or disability in the
admission or access to its programs, services, or activities. The Department’s Information Officer has been
designated to coordinate compliance with the nondiscrimination requirements contained in Section 35.107
of the United States Department of Justice Regulations. Requests for assistance should be directed to the
Information Officer at 410-946-5400 or 410-970-5400.

--- Page 3 ---
May 13, 2025
Senator Shelly L. Hettleman, Senate Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Delegate Jared Solomon, House Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Members of Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Annapolis, Maryland
Ladies and Gentlemen:
We conducted an audit of the financial management practices of the Frederick
County Public Schools (FCPS) in accordance with the requirements of the State
Government Article, Section 2-1220(e) of the Annotated Code of Maryland. The
objectives of this audit were to evaluate whether FCPS’ procedures and controls
were effective in accounting for and safeguarding its assets and whether its
policies provided for the efficient use of financial resources.
Our audit disclosed that certain requirements FCPS’ procurement policies were
not being consistently used when obtaining goods and services under
intergovernmental cooperative purchasing agreements and the policies were not
sufficiently comprehensive. In addition, FCPS did not publish certain contracts
on eMaryland Marketplace Advantage as required by State law and did not
execute formal written contracts for special education services received from 32
non-public schools.
Furthermore, our audit disclosed a cybersecurity-related finding. However, in
accordance with the State Government Article, Section 2-1224(i) of the
Annotated Code of Maryland, we have redacted the finding from this audit report.
Specifically, State law requires the Office of Legislative Audits to redact
cybersecurity findings in a manner consistent with auditing best practices before
the report is made available to the public. The term “cybersecurity” is defined in
the State Finance and Procurement Article, Section 3.5-301(b), and using our
professional judgment we have determined that the redacted finding falls under
the referenced definition. The specifics of the cybersecurity finding were
previously communicated to those parties responsible for acting on our
recommendations.

--- Page 4 ---
FCPS’ response to this audit is included as an appendix to this report. Consistent
with State law, we have redacted the elements of FCPS’ response related to the
cybersecurity audit finding. We reviewed the response to our findings and related
recommendations, and while FCPS generally agrees with the recommendations in
this report, we identified certain instances in which statements in the response
conflict with or disagree with the report findings. In each instance, we reviewed
and reassessed our audit documentation, and reaffirmed the validity of our
finding. In accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards,
we have included “auditor comments” within FCPS’ response to explain our
position. We will advise the Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee of any
outstanding issues that we cannot resolve with FCPS. Finally, there are other
aspects of FCPS’ response which will require further clarification, but we do not
anticipate that these will require the Committee’s attention to resolve.
We wish to acknowledge the cooperation extended to us during the course of this
audit by FCPS.
Respectfully submitted,
Brian S. Tanen
Brian S. Tanen, CPA, CFE
Legislative Auditor
2

--- Page 5 ---
Table of Contents
Background Information 5
Statistical Overview 5
Oversight 9
External Audits 10
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report 10
Findings and Recommendations 12
Revenue and Billing Cycle 12
Federal Funds 12
Procurement and Disbursement Cycle
Finding 1 – Certain requirements of State law and recognized best 15
practices were not incorporated into Frederick County Public Schools’
(FCPS) Purchasing Regulations and were not consistently used when
participating in intergovernmental cooperative purchasing agreements.
Finding 2 – FCPS did not always publish contract awards on 16
eMaryland Marketplace Advantage as required by State
procurement law.
Finding 3 – FCPS did not execute formal written contracts for certain 17
special education services.
Human Resources and Payroll 17
Equipment Control and Accountability 18
Information Technology
Finding 4 – Redacted cybersecurity-related finding. 19
Facilities Construction, Renovation, and Maintenance 19
Transportation Services 20
Food Services 20
School Board Oversight 21
3

--- Page 6 ---
Management of Other Risks 21
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology 23
Agency Response Appendix
4

--- Page 7 ---
Background Information
Statistical Overview
Enrollment
According to student enrollment records compiled by the Maryland State
Department of Education (MSDE), Frederick County Public Schools (FCPS)
ranks 7th in student enrollment among the 24 public school systems in Maryland.
Fiscal year 2023 full-time student enrollment was 46,899 students. FCPS had 69
schools, consisting of 38 elementary, 13 middle schools, 10 high schools, and 8
other types of schools (including vocational, charter, alternative, and special
education).
Funding
FCPS revenues consist primarily of funds received from the State, Frederick
County, and federal government. According to the FCPS’ audited financial
statements, revenues from all sources totaled approximately $920.3 million in
fiscal year 2023; including $433.8 million from the State. See Figure 1 for FCPS’
enrollment and funding by source for the six-year period from fiscal year 2018
through fiscal year 2023. See Figure 2 for revenue sources per enrolled student in
fiscal year 2023 according to its audited financial statements.
5

--- Page 8 ---
Figure 1
FCPS Enrollment and Funding by Source
Fiscal Years 2018 through 2023
(dollar amounts in millions)
45,220 46,899
43,221
42,140 42,713 43,828
$434
$401 $412
$355 $354 $373
$294 $306 $296 $324 $334 $332
$100
$32 $38 $43 $51 $74
2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023
Enrollment Local State Federal and Other
State funding for fiscal year 2023 included:
 $321 million for Foundation Formula Grants
 $68.8 million for Capital Projects
 $32 million for the State-share of employee pension costs
 $12 million for Other State funding
Source: FCPS’ Fiscal Year 2023 Audited Financial Statements and MSDE Data
6

--- Page 9 ---
Figure 2
FCPS’ Revenue Sources Per Enrolled Student
Fiscal Year 2023
Federal
$1,139
Other
6%
$439
2%
State
$9,250
47%
Local
$8,794
45%
Source: FCPS’ Fiscal Year 2023 Audited Financial Statements and MSDE Data
Blueprint for Maryland’s Future (Blueprint)
Blueprint is a State-funded grant program based on recommendations of the
Maryland Commission on Innovation and Excellence in Education.1 Chapter 771,
Laws of Maryland, 2019, effective June 1, 2019, established principles of the
Blueprint that are intended to transform Maryland's early childhood, primary, and
secondary education systems to the levels of the highest-performing systems.
Blueprint specifies how funding is calculated to support programs and initiatives
from prekindergarten through college and career.
Blueprint allocates funding to schools based on a weighted-student formula. The
funding formula provides resources to local education agencies based on the
number of students enrolled at each school (known as Foundation Aid) and the
characteristics of those students (such as, Special Education Aid, Concentration of
Poverty Aid, and Compensatory Education Aid). Blueprint also provides
1 The Maryland Commission on Innovation and Excellence in Education was established by
Chapters 701 and 702, Laws of Maryland 2016, effective June 1, 2016 to review the adequacy of
funding for education.
7

--- Page 10 ---
additional funding for specific programs that schools offer (such as
Prekindergarten Aid).
Expenditures
According to FCPS’ audited financial statements, fiscal year 2023 expenditures
were approximately $920.1 million. The largest expenditure category was
salaries and wages, including benefits, which accounted for approximately 73
percent of total expenditures during fiscal year 2023. According to MSDE
records, during the 2022-2023 school year, FCPS had 6,616 full-time equivalent
positions, which consisted of 4,716 instructional and 1,900 non-instructional
positions. Instruction accounted for 55 percent of FCPS’ expenditures on a
categorical basis (see Figure 3).
Figure 3
FCPS Expenditures by Category and Selected Statistical Data
Fiscal Year 2023
(dollar amounts in millions)
Instruction
$508.1
55%
Facilities and Capital Projects $1 87.1
21% Enrollment
Special Education $ 90.2 46,899
10%
Admin istration and Support $8 5. 4 Employees
9%
6,616
Transportation $29.0
3% Cost Per Pupil
Food Service $20.3 $19,622
2%
Source: FCPS' Fiscal Year 2023 Audited Financial Statements and MSDE Data
8

--- Page 11 ---
Oversight
FCPS is governed by a local school board, consisting of seven elected voting
members and one non-voting student member. MSDE exercises considerable
oversight of FCPS through the establishment and monitoring of various financial
and academic policies and regulations, in accordance with certain provisions of
the Annotated Code of Maryland. MSDE also works with FCPS to comply with
the requirements and mandates of federal law. The Frederick County government
also exercises authority over FCPS primarily through the review and approval of
FCPS’ annual operating and capital budgets.
Accountability and Implementation Board (AIB)
The AIB was authorized by State law as an independent unit of State government
in February 2021 and is responsible for holding State and local governments,
including local education agencies, accountable for implementing the Blueprint
State-funded grant program and for evaluating the outcomes. Specifically, the
AIB reviews the use of school-level expenditures and monitors school system
compliance with Blueprint requirements. The AIB consists of a seven-member
Board appointed by the Governor, with the advice and consent of the Senate. The
Board Chair is designated by the Governor, the Senate President, and the Speaker
of the House.
Office of the Inspector General for Education (OIGE)
The OIGE was established by State law as an independent unit of State
government effective June 2019. The OIGE is responsible for examining and
investigating complaints or information regarding the management and affairs of
local boards of education, local school systems, public schools, nonpublic schools
that receive State funds, MSDE, and the Interagency Commission on School
Construction. Specifically, the law provides that the OIGE may receive and
investigate information and complaints concerning potential fraud, waste, and
abuse of public funds and property; civil rights violations involving students or
employees; whether policies and procedures governing the prevention and
reporting of child abuse and neglect comply with applicable federal and State
laws; and compliance with other applicable federal and State laws.
The OIGE initiates examinations and investigations based on its assessment of
complaints and information it receives from various sources, including State and
outside agencies and through its fraud, waste, and abuse hotline. The OIGE also
conducts an annual review of local school systems to ensure policies and
procedures governing the prevention and reporting of child abuse and neglect
comply with applicable federal and State laws. During the period covered by our
9

--- Page 12 ---
review the OIGE did not issue any reports related to FCPS reviews and
investigations.
External Audits
As required by State law, FCPS engages a certified public accounting firm to
independently audit its annual financial statements. The firm performs
procedures to verify the amounts and disclosures in the financial statements. The
firm also evaluates the appropriateness of accounting policies used and the
reasonableness of significant accounting estimates made by management. In the
related audit reports, the firm stated that the financial statements presented fairly,
in all material respects, the financial position of FCPS as of June 30, 2018, 2019,
2020, 2021, 2022 and 2023, and the respective changes in its financial position
and, where applicable, its cash flows for the years then ended in accordance with
accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America.
Additionally, in accordance with Government Auditing Standards, as part of the
audited financial statements the accounting firm also issued separate reports on
FCPS’ control over financial reporting and its tests of FCPS’ compliance with
certain provisions of laws, regulations, contracts, grant agreements and other
matters. These reports are an integral part of the annual independent audited
financial statements. The accounting firm also conducts the Single Audit of
FCPS’ federal grant programs. The Single Audit is intended to provide assurance
to the federal government that adequate internal controls are in place, and the
entity is generally in compliance with program requirements.
We reviewed the aforementioned financial statement audits and Single Audit
reports for fiscal years 2018 through 2023 and examined the related work papers
for the fiscal year 2023 audits, which were the latest available during our audit
fieldwork. Our review did not note any deficiencies that warranted inclusion in
this report. In addition, certain work of the independent certified public
accounting firm, which we determined was reliable, covered areas included in the
scope of our audit. As a result, we did not conduct any audit work related to
Federal grant activity.
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report
Our audit included a review to determine the current status of the three findings
contained in our preceding audit report dated December 5, 2019. See Figure 4 for
the results of our review.
10

--- Page 13 ---
Figure 4
Status of Preceding Findings
Preceding Implementation
Finding Description
Finding Status
Intrusion detection prevention system coverage for the
Finding 1 FCPS network included a protection gap, and FCPS did not Status Redacted 2
remove inactive domain user accounts on a timely basis.
FCPS operated buses that had exceeded the maximum 15
years of service or had not been approved for operation
Finding 2 Not Repeated
beyond 12 years of services as required by State law and
regulations.
Modifications to bus route manifests were not subject to an
independent supervisory review to ensure that changes
Finding 3 Not Repeated
agreed to approved route verification forms and to ensure
the accuracy of related payroll payments.
2 Specific information on the current status of this cybersecurity-related finding has been redacted
from this publicly available report in accordance with State Government Article, Section 2-
1224(i) of the Annotated Code of Maryland.
11

--- Page 14 ---
Findings and Recommendations
Revenue and Billing Cycle
Background
Frederick County Public Schools (FCPS) revenues consist primarily of funds
received from Frederick County, the State, and the federal government.
According to FCPS’ audited financial statements, revenues from all sources
totaled approximately $920.3 million in fiscal year 2023 including $433.8 million
from the State.
School Activity Funds
Schools collect funds for other purposes such as student activities, clubs, and
school publications. Because they are not considered school revenue, these
school activity funds are accounted for separately by each school and reported in
summary in the audited financial statements. During fiscal year 2023, school
activity collections totaled $6.7 million and the June 30, 2023 fund balance was
$3.9 million. Based on our assessment of the relative significance of this activity,
we did not review the procedures and controls over these funds.
Conclusion
Based on our current assessment of significance and risk relative to our audit
objectives, our audit did not include a review of policies, procedures, and controls
with respect to the revenue and billing area of operations. For state and local
revenues, we performed analytical reviews and limited verifications with
independent sources (such as the Maryland State Department of Education) to
confirm that FCPS properly received and recorded the revenue in its records.
Federal Funds
Background
FCPS receives funds pertaining to federal government programs that are generally
restricted for use for a specific program (such as the School Lunch Program or
Special Education). According to FCPS’ Single Audit, fiscal year 2023 (latest
available at the time of our audit) federal expenditures totaled $51.4 million, not
including federally funded fee-for-service programs such as Medicaid
reimbursement for special education services.
According to the audited financial statements, federal fund revenues (excluding
Medicaid) increased, from $22 million in fiscal year 2018 to $51.4 million in
fiscal year 2023 (133 percent) due to COVID-19 pandemic grant funding.
12

--- Page 15 ---
According to FCPS’ records, as of June 30, 2024, FCPS was awarded federal
COVID-19 pandemic grant funds totaling $102.2 million to be distributed over
fiscal years 2020 to 2024 under the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic
Security Act, the Coronavirus Response and Relief Supplemental Appropriations
Act, and the American Rescue Plan.
As of June 30, 2024, according to FCPS records, expenditures related to these
COVID-19 grants from January 2020 to June 2024, totaled approximately $94.5
million, and were primarily comprised of staffing, technology infrastructure to
facilitate virtual learning, and air filtration systems. On March 28, 2025, the
United States Department of Education (DOE) notified every State that it was
ending the liquidation period for COVID-19 grants effective immediately. The
DOE notification indicated that it would consider an extension to the liquidation
period on an individual project specific basis. FCPS advised us that it had
approximately $272,500 in COVID-19 grants that had not been liquidated as of
March 28, 2025. As of April 2, 2025, FCPS, in conjunction with MSDE, was
determining what options it had to request an extension.
Single Audit Reports
There were similarities in the work performed by the independent CPA that
conducted the Single Audit of FCPS’ federal grants and the objectives of our
audit in this area. In addition to expressing an opinion on FCPS compliance with
the terms of several grant programs, the auditor also considered the existing
internal control structure’s impact on compliance and audited the required
Schedule of Expenditures of Federal Awards (which includes claimed and
reported grant expenditures) for fiscal years 2018 through 2023. Our
review of the Single Audits did not identify any issues that warranted inclusion in
this report.
Medicaid Funds for Eligible Services
FCPS has established a procedure to identify children eligible for Medicaid-
subsidized services and the services rendered. Medicaid is an entitlement
program for which certain service costs can be reimbursed to FCPS. Medicaid
activity is not covered by the Single Audit of federal grants.
MSDE’s Interagency Medicaid Monitoring Team issued a report in May 2023 of
the results of its review of 40 student case files for 63 criteria. The report did not
specifically address the propriety of Medicaid billing but overall concluded that
FCPS was generally compliant with most criteria. For example, FCPS was 100
percent compliant with 49 criteria and between 85 and 99 percent compliant with
8 criteria.
13

--- Page 16 ---
According to FCPS records, fiscal year 2023 state and federal reimbursements for
Medicaid-subsidized services totaled approximately $3.5 million, which was
generally consistent with the previous fiscal year. Based on our current
assessment of significance and risk relative to our audit objectives, our audit did
not include a review of Medicaid-subsidized services.
Conclusion
We relied on the work of the independent CPA that conducted the Single Audits
for the work in the federal fund area, including policies, procedures, and controls
with respect to federal grants and expenditures.
Procurement and Disbursement Cycle
Background
According to the audited financial statements and FCPS’ records, disbursements
(excluding payroll) totaled $248.6 million during fiscal year 2023. FCPS uses a
financial management system for purchases and disbursements. Requisitions are
created in the system by departments are subject to on-line departmental
approvals. Purchase orders are prepared in the system by the purchasing
department based on approved requisitions. The purchasing department also
generally handles the solicitation, bid evaluation, and establishment of contracts.
Invoices are submitted by vendors directly to the accounts payable department
before being forwarded to the requesting school or department for approval as
necessary. Once approved, the accounts payable department enters the invoice
into the financial management system. The system matches the invoice to the
related purchase order then prints the vendor checks, which are manually matched
to appropriate purchasing and receiving documents before mailing, and then posts
the payment to the financial records.
Section 5-112 of the Education Article of the Annotated Code of Maryland
requires that procurements equal to or exceeding $100,000 (prior to October 1,
2023 the amount was $50,000) be competitively bid and FCPS Purchasing
Regulations requires that procurements of contracts and agreements valued at
$100,000 or more, be approved by the Frederick County Board of Education (the
Board).
14

--- Page 17 ---
Finding 1
Certain requirements of State law and recognized best practices were not
incorporated into FCPS Purchasing Regulations and were not consistently
used when participating in intergovernmental cooperative purchasing
agreements (ICPAs).
Analysis
Certain requirements of State law and recognized best practices were not
incorporated into FCPS Purchasing Regulations and were not consistently used
by FCPS when participating in an ICPA3. State law, which legal counsel to the
Maryland General Assembly advised us is applicable to local education agencies,
provides for the participation in an existing State or local contract, if the
governing body of the entity determines that (a) participation would provide a
cost savings in purchase price or administrative burden; or (b) further other policy
goals including operational and energy–efficiency goals related to the purchase,
operation, or maintenance of the supply or service.
Our review of FCPS purchasing policies disclosed that the above statutory
requirements as well as the following critical best practices were not included.
 Analyze all costs of conducting competitive solicitations;
 Research, compare, and evaluate available ICPAs; and
 Execute an addendum of participation with lead agency and remove or
incorporate necessary local terms and conditions
We tested FCPS’ participation in four ICPAs (selected based on risk and
significance) during fiscal years 2021 through 2023. Two of these ICPAs had
contract award amounts totaling $148 million and two did not have a contract
award amount since they were contracts to purchase equipment at discounted
prices with indefinite quantities. According to FCPS records, payments on these
four contracts totaled approximately $11.9 million during fiscal year 2024. Our
test disclosed that for the four ICPAs tested, FCPS could not document that it
adhered to the statutory requirements and did not adhere to two of the best
3 Section 13-110 of the State Finance and Procurement Article of the Annotated Code of
Maryland, in part, defines an ICPA as a contract that is entered into by at least one governmental
entity in a certain manner, that is available for use by the governmental entity entering the
contract and at least one additional governmental entity, and that is intended to promote
efficiency and savings that can result from intergovernmental cooperative purchasing. The
aforementioned law applies to all ICPAs regardless of the services, goods, or commodities
purchased. In addition, Section 5- 112(a)(3) of the Education Article, of the Code provides that
local education agencies do not need to conduct competitive procurements for goods and
commodities if they use a contract awarded by public agencies or intergovernmental purchasing
organizations and the originating procuring agency followed public bidding procedures.
15

--- Page 18 ---
practices (analyzing the costs of conducting competitive solicitations and
executing an addendum of participation with the lead agency).
We did find that other best practices were performed despite not being included in
FCPS’ policies. For example, FCPS researched, compared, and evaluated
available ICPAs for two of the four ICPAs noted above. Incorporating ICPA best
practices into FCPS Purchasing Regulations could help ensure they are
consistently used.
The Institute for Public Procurement, formerly known as the National Institute of
Government Purchasing, as well as other public and educational organizations
have published ICPA best practices. These practices include comprehensive
multi-step checklists that require, among other things (as per the list above), that
prospective ICPA users verify that the contract allows other entities to participate.
In addition, the practices also require that ICPA users should ensure that the
contract was awarded through a competitive procurement process, that
addendums documenting their participation, and that all local required terms and
conditions are incorporated.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that FCPS incorporate the aforementioned statutory
requirement and other identified and acknowledged best practices, into its
Purchasing Regulations and ensure that the performance of the requirement
and best practices are documented when evaluating and participating in
ICPAs.
Finding 2
FCPS did not always publish contract awards on eMaryland Marketplace
Advantage (eMMA) as required by State procurement law.
Analysis
FCPS did not always publish contract awards on eMMA4 as required by State
procurement law. State law requires the solicitation and award of contracts of
$100,000 or more (prior to October 1, 2023 the amount was $50,000) procured by
public schools after July 1, 2022 to be published on eMMA.
Our test of four contracts procured during fiscal years 2023 and 2024 totaling
$38.1 million (selected based on materiality) disclosed that FCPS did not publish
4 eMMA is an Internet-based, interactive procurement system managed by the State of Maryland’s
Department of General Services.
16

--- Page 19 ---
awards for any of the four contracts on eMMA as required. Publishing awards on
eMMA provides transparency over State procurements, including information
about winning bidders and the amount of the related awards.
Recommendation 2
We recommend that FCPS publish contract awards on eMMA as required,
including those noted above.
Finding 3
FCPS did not execute formal written contracts for certain special education
services.
Analysis
FCPS did not execute formal written contracts for certain special education
services. FCPS provides special education services in accordance with the
individualized education program (IEP) developed for each student. According to
FCPS’ records, it paid 32 MSDE certified non-public schools a total of $26.6
million for special education services during fiscal years 2022 through 2024.
Our review disclosed that FCPS did not have a contract with the 32 non-public
schools. Although not specifically required by its Purchasing Regulations,
written contracts set forth all financial terms and conditions, define the duties and
responsibilities of the parties, protect each party in the event of default, and
provide other critical terms for items such as resolution of disputes, termination
for convenience, and retention of records.
Recommendation 3
We recommend that FCPS
a. modify its Purchasing Regulations to require formal written contracts
for special education services, and
b. comply with the modified Purchasing Regulations for future special
education services.
Human Resources and Payroll
Background
Payroll expense represents the largest single cost component in the FCPS budget.
According to FCPS’ records, fiscal year 2023 salary, wage, and benefit costs
totaled approximately $671.5 million, representing 73 percent of the total
expenditures. According to MSDE reports, during the 2022-2023 school year,
17

--- Page 20 ---
FCPS had 6,616 full-time equivalent positions, which consisted of 4,716
instructional and 1,900 non-instructional positions.
FCPS uses automated systems to maintain human resources information, record
employee time, track employee leave usage, and process and record payroll
transactions. The system generates payroll checks and direct deposit advices.
Payroll processing involves both automated processes (such as compiling leave
and running edit reports) and manual processes (such as data entry of new
employee information).
Conclusion
Our audit did not disclose any significant deficiencies in the design or operation
of FCPS’ internal control over the human resources and payroll areas of
operations reviewed. Our audit also did not disclose any significant instances of
noncompliance with applicable laws, rules, or regulations.
Equipment Control and Accountability
Background
According to FCPS’ audited financial statements, the undepreciated value of its
capital equipment inventory (furniture, fixtures, and equipment) totaled $71.8
million as of June 30, 2023. FCPS maintains centralized automated records for
all equipment including assets with a cost of $5,000 or more that are capitalized
for financial statement purposes. Control and recordkeeping of laptop computers
assigned to schools, students, and employees was maintained in a database
maintained by the Department of Technology Infrastructure (DTI). FCPS has
established comprehensive written equipment policies and performs inventories at
each school annually.
Conclusion
Our audit did not disclose any significant deficiencies in the design or operation
of FCPS’ internal control over financial-related areas of operations for equipment.
Our audit also did not disclose any significant instances of noncompliance with
applicable laws, rules, or regulations.
Information Technology
We determined that the Information Technology section, including Finding 4
related to “cybersecurity,” as defined by the State Finance and Procurement
Article, Section 3.5-301(b) of the Annotated Code of Maryland, and therefore is
18

--- Page 21 ---
subject to redaction from the publicly available audit report in accordance with
the State Government Article 2-1224(i). Consequently, the specifics of the
following finding, including the analysis, related recommendations, along with
FCPS’ responses, have been redacted from this report copy.
Finding 4
Redacted cybersecurity-related finding.
Facilities Construction, Renovation, and Maintenance
Background
FCPS employs a staff of 542 employees to maintain 65 of its 69 schools
(including vocational and special education) and a number of other facilities (such
as administrative and support offices). The maintenance for FCPS’ 4 charter
schools is the responsibility of the operators of those schools. According to
FCPS’ fiscal year 2024 Capital Improvement Plan, necessary construction, major
renovations, and systemic improvements to FCPS’ facilities over the next six
years are estimated to cost $484.9 million.
Our review of four construction-related procurements (selected based on
materiality) awarded during fiscal years 2022 to 2023 totaling approximately
$155.8 million, disclosed that the contracts were competitively solicited and
approved by the Board. In addition, our test of 8 invoices totaling $12.4 million
for these contracts, disclosed that the invoices were properly reviewed and
approved, and the amounts invoiced were in accordance with the related contract
terms.
Processes are in Place to Promote Ongoing Facility Maintenance and to
Minimize Energy Costs
FCPS is part of the Frederick Area Cooperative Team (FACT) portfolio which
aids in purchasing energy at the best possible terms for its members.5 FCPS also
has processes in place to promote ongoing facility maintenance. For example,
FCPS provides scheduled maintenance of its buildings and equipment with the
goal of preventing emergency repairs. In addition, FCPS reviews utility billings
to monitor energy usage and related costs.
Conclusion
Our audit did not disclose any significant deficiencies in the design or operation
of FCPS’ internal control over financial-related areas of operations for facilities
5 Members include the Frederick County government, Frederick Community College, and FCPS.
19

--- Page 22 ---
construction, renovation, and maintenance. Our audit also did not disclose any
significant instances of noncompliance with applicable laws, rules, or regulations.
Transportation Services
Background
According to statistics compiled by the MSDE, FCPS has approximately 30,900
students eligible to receive student transportation services. These students were
transported using 342 system-owned buses. FCPS reported that 7.6 million route
miles were traveled to transport students for the 2022-2023 school year.
According to FCPS’ financial records, fiscal year 2023 transportation costs
totaled $29 million.
Conclusion
Our audit did not disclose any significant deficiencies in the design or operation
of FCPS’ internal control over financial-related areas of operations for
transportation services. Our audit also did not disclose any significant instances
of noncompliance with applicable laws, rules, or regulations.
Food Services
Background
According to FCPS’ audited financial statements, food services operating
expenditures totaled approximately $20.3 million in fiscal year 2023, and were
primarily funded with federal funds totaling $12.5 million and food sales totaling
$6.5 million. The federal funds are received from the United States Department
of Agriculture (USDA) based on an established rate per meals served. FCPS is
allowed to retain federal funds it receives in excess of its annual food service
operating costs to be used to offset future food service operating costs. According
to FCPS’ audited financial statements, the balance in FCPS’ Food and Nutrition
Services Fund totaled $12.4 million as of June 30, 2023.
Conclusion
Based on our current assessment of significance and risk relative to our audit
objectives, our audit did not include a review of policies, procedures, and controls
related to Food Services financial area of operations.
20

--- Page 23 ---
School Board Oversight
Background
The Frederick County Board of Education (the Board) is composed of seven
elected members and one non-voting student representative. The Board
contracted with a certified public accounting firm to conduct independent audits
of the FCPS financial statements and federal programs. To assist in its oversight
of various areas of FCPS operation and governance, the Board has established
several committees, such as a Citizens Advisory Council and an Ethics Panel.
FCPS Adopted an Ethics Policy
The Board has adopted a detailed ethics policy that conforms to State law and was
approved by the State Ethics Commission. The policy is applicable to both Board
members and FCPS employees and includes provisions for conflicts of interest
and financial disclosures by Board members and certain employees. Specifically,
annual financial disclosure statements are required to be filed by Board members,
candidates for the Board, appointed officials (such as the Superintendent), and
other administrators (such as supervisors, school principals, and agency buyers)
by April 30th of each year.
In accordance with the policy, FCPS established an Ethics Panel consisting of
seven members appointed by the Board to interpret ethics policies and provide
advice on policy implementation. The Panel also reviews and rules on any
reported complaints of ethics violations. Our review of the records for Board
members and FCPS employees required to submit financial disclosure forms for
calendar year 2023 disclosed that all forms were submitted as required.
Conclusion
Our audit did not disclose any reportable conditions in the school board oversight
area.
Management of Other Risks
Healthcare Background
FCPS is self-insured and contracts with three third-party administrator firms
(TPAs) for health care claims processing services for employee and retiree
medical, prescription, dental, and vision costs. Medical providers submit claims
to the TPA who pays on behalf of FCPS. FCPS reimburses the TPA for the
claims it reports as paid on behalf of FCPS and also pays an administrative fee for
these services. According to FCPS’ records, healthcare expenditures totaled
21

--- Page 24 ---
approximately $137.6 million in fiscal year 2023, including administrative fees
totaling $7.7 million.
FCPS contracts with a consultant to help manage the health plans. The consultant
performs data analysis of health services utilization and costs, provides
recommendations on potential rate changes, and evaluates the merits of health
plan proposals. As of June 30, 2023, FCPS provided health insurance benefits to
8,291 enrolled employees, dependents, and retirees.
Conclusion
Our audit did not disclose any reportable conditions in the management of other
risks area.
22

--- Page 25 ---
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We have conducted a performance audit of the Frederick County Public Schools
(FCPS). We conducted this audit under the authority of the State Government
Article, Section 2-1220(e) of the Annotated Code of Maryland, which generally
requires that every 6 years we audit each of the 24 local school systems to
evaluate the effectiveness and efficiency of financial management practices. This
performance audit was performed in accordance with generally accepted
government auditing standards. Those standards require that we plan and perform
the audit to obtain sufficient, appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis
for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives. We believe that
the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and
conclusions based on our audit objectives.
We had two broad audit objectives:
1. Evaluate whether the FCPS procedures and controls were effective in
accounting for and safeguarding its assets.
2. Evaluate whether the FCPS policies provided for the efficient use of
financial resources.
In planning and conducting our audit of FCPS, we focused on 11 major financial-
related areas of operations as approved on December 6, 2016 by the Joint Audit
and Evaluation Committee of the Maryland General Assembly in accordance with
the enabling legislation. The 11 major financial-related areas included revenue
and billing, federal funds, procurement and disbursements, human resources and
payroll, equipment control, information technology security and control, facilities,
transportation, food service, school board oversight, and the management of other
risks (such as health care).
The scope of the work performed in each of these areas was based on our
assessments of significance and risk. Therefore, our follow-up on the status of
findings included in our preceding audit report on FCPS dated December 5, 2019,
was limited to those findings that were applicable to the current audit scope for
each of the 11 areas.
The audit objectives excluded reviewing and assessing student achievement,
curriculum, teacher performance, and other academic-related areas and functions.
Also, we did not evaluate the FCPS Comprehensive Education Master Plan or
related updates, and we did not review the activities, financial or other, of any
23

--- Page 26 ---
parent teacher association, group, or funds not under the local board of
education’s direct control or management.
To accomplish our objectives, we reviewed applicable State laws and regulations
pertaining to public elementary and secondary education, as well as policies and
procedures issued and established by FCPS. We also interviewed personnel at
FCPS and the Maryland State Department of Education (MSDE), and staff at
other local school systems in Maryland (as appropriate). Our audit procedures
included inspections of documents and records, and to the extent practicable,
observations of FCPS operations. We also tested transactions and performed
other auditing procedures that we considered necessary to achieve our objectives,
generally for the period from July 1, 2022 to June 30, 2024.
Generally, transactions were selected for testing based on auditor judgment,
which primarily considers risk, the timing or dollar amount of the transaction, or
the significance of the transaction to the area of operation reviewed. As a matter
of course, we do not normally use sampling in our tests, so unless otherwise
specifically indicated, neither statistical nor non-statistical audit sampling was
used to select the transactions tested. Therefore, unless sampling is specifically
indicated in a finding, the results from any tests conducted or disclosed by us
cannot be used to project those results to the entire population from which the test
items were selected. For certain areas within the scope of the audit, we relied on
the work performed by the independent accounting firm that annually audits
FCPS’ financial statements and conducts the federal Single Audit.
We used certain statistical data—including financial and operational—compiled
by MSDE from various informational reports submitted by the Maryland local
school systems. This information was used in this audit report for background or
informational purposes, and was deemed reasonable.
We also extracted data from the FCPS automated financial management system
for the purpose of testing expenditure and payroll transactions. We performed
various audit procedures on the relevant data and determined the data were
sufficiently reliable for the purposes the data were used during the audit.
FCPS’ management is responsible for establishing and maintaining effective
internal control. Internal control is a process designed to provide reasonable
assurance that objectives pertaining to the reliability of financial records;
effectiveness and efficiency of operations including safeguarding of assets; and
compliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations are achieved. As
provided in Government Auditing Standards, there are five components of
internal control: control environment, risk assessment, control activities,
24

--- Page 27 ---
information and communication, and monitoring. Each of the five components,
when significant to the audit objectives, and as applicable to FCPS, were
considered by us during the course of this audit.
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate. In addition
to the conditions included in this report, other findings were communicated to
FCPS that were not deemed significant and, consequently, did not warrant
inclusion in this report.
State Government Article Section 2-1224(i) requires that we redact in a manner
consistent with auditing best practices any cybersecurity findings before a report
is made available to the public. This results in the issuance of two different
versions of an audit report that contains cybersecurity findings – a redacted
version for the public and an unredacted version for government officials
responsible for acting on our audit recommendations.
The State Finance and Procurement Article, Section 3.5-301(b), states that
cybersecurity is defined as “processes or capabilities wherein systems,
communications, and information are protected and defended against damage,
unauthorized use or modification, and exploitation.” Based on that definition, and
in our professional judgment, we concluded that certain findings in this report fall
under that definition. Consequently, for the publicly available audit report all
specifics as to the nature of cybersecurity findings and required corrective actions
have been redacted. We have determined that such aforementioned practices, and
government auditing standards, support the redaction of this information from the
public audit report. The specifics of these cybersecurity findings have been
communicated to FCPS and those parties responsible for acting on our
recommendations in an unredacted audit report.
We conducted our fieldwork from June 2024 to February 2025. FCPS’ response
to our findings and recommendations is included as an appendix to this report.
Depending on the version of the audit report, responses to any cybersecurity
findings may be redacted in accordance with State law. As prescribed in the State
Government Article, Section 2-1224 of the Annotated Code of Maryland, we will
advise FCPS regarding the results of our review of its response.
25

--- Page 28 ---
APPENDIX
FISCAL SERVICES DIVISION Heather Jo Clabaugh, MBA
191 South East Street Associate Superintendent of Fiscal Services
Frederick, MD 21701 heather.clabaugh@fcps.org
240-586-7403 phone
240-586-7401 fax
Lynne M. McKay
www.fcps.org Executive Assistant I
lynne.mckay@fcps.org
May 7, 2025
Mr. Brian S. Tanen, CPA, CFE
Legislative Auditor
Office of Legislative Audits
The Warehouse of Camden Yards
351 West Camden Street, Suite 400
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Dear Mr. Tanen:
Enclosed are the agency responses to the draft legislative audit as it relates to the Financial Management
Practices of Frederick County Public Schools (FCPS). As directed, agency responses have been populated in the
Agency Response Form provided by the Office of Legislative Audits. Submission was/is due to your office by
today, May 7, 2025.
Please feel free to reach out should you have questions regarding the agency responses provided.
On behalf of FCPS we appreciate the engagement, collaboration, and thoroughness of the Office of Legislative
team.
_____________________________________ 05/08/2025
Dr. Cheryl L. Dyson Date
Superintendent
_____________________________________ 05/08/2025
Heather Jo Clabaugh Date
Associate Superintendent of Fiscal Services
____________________________________ 05/08/2025
Melissa Rollison Date
Financial Reporting Manager

--- Page 29 ---
Frederick County Public Schools
Agency Response Form
Procurement and Disbursement Cycle
Finding 1
Certain requirements of State law and recognized best practices were not
incorporated into FCPS Purchasing Regulations and were not consistently
used when participating in intergovernmental cooperative purchasing
agreements (ICPAs).
We recommend that FCPS incorporate the aforementioned statutory
requirement and other identified and acknowledged best practices, into its
Purchasing Regulations and ensure that the performance of the requirement
and best practices are documented when evaluating and participating in
ICPAs.
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide Finding 1 rests on the application of section 13-110 of the State Finance
additional comments as and Procurement Article of the Annotated Code of Maryland (“SFP §
deemed necessary. 13-110”), which governs the use of intergovernmental cooperative
purchasing agreements (ICPA), to a Local Education Agency (LEA).
The auditors analysis, while well meaning, is flawed.
The Analysis in support of Finding 1 states that
State law, which legal counsel to the Maryland General Assembly
advised us is applicable to local education agencies, allows the use of
ICPAs only after the using entity has met the statutory requirement
of determining (or assessing) that the use of such arrangements will
provide cost benefits, promote administrative efficiencies, or
promote intergovernmental cooperation.
See Financial Management Practices Audit Report, Frederick County
Public Schools, April 2025 at p. 15. This is incorrect as it misstates the
requirements that are applicable to a Local Entity, such as an LEA. The
requirements articulated in the Analysis and adopted in the Finding – to
determine that an ICPA has a cost benefit to the state, promotes
administrative efficiency or promotes intergovernmental cooperation –
apply pursuant SFP § 13-110(b)(1)-(3) to the “primary procurement unit
procurement officer” (PPUPO). The PPUPO is responsible for the initial
purchase agreement that other state and local entities piggyback upon.
The only instance where these requirements would apply to a Local
Page 1 of 10

--- Page 30 ---
Frederick County Public Schools
Agency Response Form
Entity is if it is also the PPUPO, which is not the case in the contracts
reviewed for the audit.
To be clear, the Maryland General Assembly legal counsel is correct that
SFP § 13-110 applies to a Local Entity, just not in the manner indicated
in the Analysis and Finding. Paragraph (e) sets a different set of
requirements on a Local Entity when piggybacking on an ICPA, namely
requiring the Local Entity to “determine[] that participation would (1)
provide a cost savings in purchase price or administrative burden; or (2)
further other policy goals including operational and energy-efficiency
goals related to the purchase, operation, or maintenance of the supply or
service.” Although these appear to be similar, they are in fact very
different as will become evident through the comparison of the ICPA
requirements in the Table below.
PPUPO Local Entity
SFP 13-110(b) SFP 13-110(e)
Cost benefits to the State Cost savings in purchase
price
Promote administrative Cost savings in
efficiencies administrative burden
Promote Further operational and
intergovernmental efficiency goals
cooperation
Statement of best interests
Statement that not
intended to circumvent
procurement laws
As the Table indicates, the PPUPO is required to assess whether there
is a cost benefit to the State; the Local Entity is required to determine
if there is a cost savings in the purchase price. Consideration of the
broader impact on the State is manifestly different than the more
straight forward determination that the ICPA provides a cost savings
on the purchase price.
The requirement imposed upon the PPUPO to assess whether the
ICPA will promote administrative efficiencies is similar to the
administrative burden cost savings assessment done by the Local
Entity but it is not the same. Administrative efficiencies may be found
in ways not reflected as a cost savings. Accordingly, the PPUPO has
a wider analysis to conduct than does the Local Entity.
Page 2 of 10

--- Page 31 ---
Frederick County Public Schools
Agency Response Form
The PPUPO must assess whether the ICPA promotes
intergovernmental efficiencies; the Local Entity must only consider
whether the ICPA furthers operational and efficiency goals. There is
no expectation that the Local Entity consider, as the subordinate user
of the master agreement entered into by the PPUPO, the broader
promotion of intergovernmental efficiencies. This is a clear
articulation of a differentiated policy position by the Legislature that
the auditor’s Analysis and Findings do not take into account.
Unstated by the Analysis and Finding, but significant, are the last two
items in the above Table – the PPUPO’s requirements to provide a
statement of best interests and a statement that the ICPA is not intended
to circumvent procurement laws, which does not have a corresponding
Local Entity requirement. The omission is significant because it further
highlights the Legislature’s intentional establishment of different sets of
requirements for the PPUPO entering into the ICPA and the Local Entity
that is purchasing through an ICPA.
A careful reading of the statute demonstrates that the Analysis and
Finding misstates the law as it is applicable to a Local Entity and
ultimately imposes a burden on the Local Entity – in this case, FCPS –
that is not expected of it by the law as written.
The Analysis and Finding is further flawed as it demands that FCPS
adopt “critical best practices” in its policy for ICPA participation.
Specifically, the Analysis states
Our review of FCPS purchasing policies disclosed that … the
following critical best practices were not included.
 Analyze all costs of conducting competitive solicitations;
 Research, compare, and evaluate available ICPAs; and
 Execute an addendum of participation with lead agency and
remove or incorporate necessary local terms and conditions
It is unsurprising that FCPS’ purchasing policies do not include these
purported “best practices” as they are not required by the law. SFP § 13-
110 does not specifically require these “best practices” or require the
Local Entity to identify and adhere to industry best practices. Had that
been the intent of the Legislature, they would have included it in the
statute. Instead the statute is silent and FCPS designed its purchasing
policies to align with the expressly stated expectations of the governing
law. To find that FCPS somehow has fallen short in its procurement
Page 3 of 10

--- Page 32 ---
Frederick County Public Schools
Agency Response Form
practices by applying an unwritten and unstated standard is tantamount
to moving the goal post in the middle of the game.
Furthermore, even were these so-called “best practices” required of
FCPS, the application of those “best practices” is contrary to the
operational efficiency goal expressly stated in SFP § 13-110(e). Indeed,
implementing these “best practices” would be particularly burdensome
on the Local Entity and would undermine the very purpose for
piggybacking on an ICPA. Requiring an analysis of “all costs of
conducting competitive solicitations” and requiring the execution of an
addendum (i.e., an entirely new agreement with the lead agency likely in
the form of a Memorandum of Agreement) runs contrary to the statutory
expectation that entering into a subordinate agreement to an ICPA would
enhance operational efficiency. Indeed, the additional burden placed by
these “best practices” would effectively make it more efficient for the
Local Entity to directly procure the goods or services than it would to
enter into an ICPA. As the Legislature saw fit to enact a statute that
allows the use of an ICPA, this cannot be the intention of the law.
While FCPS will continue to comply with all statutory requirements
applicable to Local Entities, seek out opportunities to strengthen our
guiding regulations, and conform with nationally established best
practices, it will only do so within the confines of those requirements
and not a more expansive set of expectations imposed without the
benefit of the system of checks and balances in place through the
legislative process.
Recommendation 1 Disagree Estimated Completion Date: 7/1/2025
Please provide details of Although FPCS disagrees with the Analysis and Finding, it is committed
corrective action or to operational excellence, sound fiscal governance and responsible use
explain disagreement.
of public funds. Accordingly, FCPS will consider ways to strengthen its
purchasing framework by weighing procurement best practices against
operational efficiencies. In that spirit, FCPS will review and revise the
current intergovernmental cooperative purchasing agreement (ICPA)
checklist to ensure that the statutory requirements are documented when
evaluating and participating in ICPAs. The ICPA checklist and
supporting documentation will continue to be maintained within the
contract file.
Auditor’s Comment: FCPS’ response states that we misstate the law regarding a
local entity using an ICPA. We reevaluated the law and modified the law
reference to the correct statute. However, FCPS policy also did not include the
statutory requirements of the law cited in their response and as noted in the
Page 4 of 10

--- Page 33 ---
Frederick County Public Schools
Agency Response Form
finding, compliance with these laws was not documented for the ICPAs tested.
Accordingly, we stand by our finding and the related recommendation.
In addition, FCPS’ response states the best practices we identified are not required
by the law. Our finding does not indicate that these best practices were required
by law. However, we continue to believe that FCPS should implement
established best practices to the extent possible to help ensure the use of an ICPA
maximizes the use of State and local funds and to enhance integrity of the
procurement process.
Page 5 of 10

--- Page 34 ---
Frederick County Public Schools
Agency Response Form
Finding 2
FCPS did not always publish contract awards on eMaryland Marketplace
Advantage (eMMA) as required by State procurement law.
We recommend that FCPS publish contract awards on eMMA as required,
including those noted above.
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 2 Agree Estimated Completion Date: 07/01/2025
Please provide details of Although FCPS believes the current practice of posting the notice of
corrective action or awarded contracts in the Public Solicitations section of eMaryland
explain disagreement. Marketplace Advantage (eMMA) meets compliance requirements, FCPS
will revise its procedure. Beginning July 1, 2025, notification of all
awarded contracts will be posted in the Public Contracts section of
eMMA to better align with the Office of Legislative Audits’
interpretation of State procurement law and related expectations.
Page 6 of 10

--- Page 35 ---
Frederick County Public Schools
Agency Response Form
Finding 3
FCPS did not execute formal written contracts for certain special education
services.
We recommend that FCPS
a. modify its Purchasing Regulations to require formal written contracts
for special education services, and
b. comply with the modified Purchasing Regulations for future special
education services.
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide The expectation that FCPS will enter into an agreement with non-public
additional comments as schools (NPS) for the provision of services to students is unrealistic and
deemed necessary. demonstrates a lack of understanding of the process for referring a
student for special education services at an NPS.
First, a contract negotiation assumes that both parties to the contract
have an interest in entering into an agreement. In this instance, there is
little incentive for an NPS to enter into an agreement with FCPS. The
placement of a student at an NPS results in one of three ways – by a
collaborative decision made by an IEP team, by unilateral placement by
the student’s parent(s) with resulting litigation to compel FCPS to pay
for the cost, or by a settlement between the parties. Once any of those
three events happens, FCPS has no option but to seek a placement for a
student and, in some cases, place the student at a designated school. At
that point, the NPS has no reason to agree with any terms proposed by
FCPS because it knows that FCPS has no choice but to place the student
there, especially if the NPS is the only one that is able to meet that
particular student’s needs.
Even the cost of the placement is outside of FCPS’ control, removing yet
another point to be negotiated. When the IEP team recommends a non-
public placement, the associated cost is set by the State. The Maryland
State Department of Education (MSDE) provides all LEAs with a list of
approved NPS and negotiates yearly with the NPS on the cost for
placing a student at the school. FCPS then pays the rate and is
reimbursed by the State for a portion of the cost incurred. When the
placement is unilateral by the parent(s) with reimbursement after a due
process hearing, the up-front cost is borne by the parent and
reimbursement is made to the parent and not to the school for some or all
of the student’s tuition. When the placement is through a settlement, the
Page 7 of 10

--- Page 36 ---
Frederick County Public Schools
Agency Response Form
settlement agreement may include a similar reimbursement model. As
cost is the primary driver of any negotiation, the pre-set costs reduce the
NPS’ incentive to agree to other terms.
Second, negotiating contracts with every MSDE-approved NPS in
Maryland, of which there are 70, is an administratively burdensome task.
To enter into separate agreements with each school, assuming that a base
contract could be established, would take a significant amount of time
and resources at the outset. Then, if and once such an agreement was in
place, the system and the NPS would have to negotiate specific
addendums for each student that is placed that is consistent with the
terms of that student’s IEP. While either negotiation is ongoing, the
student would not be attending the designated least restrictive
environment (LRE). This would constitute a denial of the right to a free
appropriate public education (FAPE) for that duration and would (1)
expose the system to additional legal liability and (2) jeopardize the
placement of the student (i.e., why would the NPS take on a student
from a system that requires a contract when it could accept a student
from another system that does not).
Third, the requirement to negotiate with each NPS, which presumably
will be expected of every LEA, will result in vastly inconsistent
agreements both between one LEA and the various NPS and as between
one NPS and the various LEAs. This will create an administrative
burden on school system staff and may result in inconsistent treatment of
students at the NPS. A more prudent course of action would be for
MSDE, in addition to negotiating the cost rate, to establish a standard set
of terms and conditions that will apply to all approved NPS and to all
LEAs, similar to the standard teacher contract.
Recommendation 3a Disagree Estimated Completion Date: 07/01/25
Please provide details of While FCPS disagrees with the recommendation that it enter into formal
corrective action or written contracts for special education services, namely, non-public
explain disagreement. placement of students, it will prepare an annual “Expectations Letter” for
any MSDE-approved non-public school at which FCPS students receive
special education services outlining the system’s expectations with
respect to attendance, progress reports, compliance with the IEP,
participation in meetings, the use of restraint and seclusion, etc.
Recommendation 3b Disagree Estimated Completion Date: 07/01/25
Page 8 of 10

--- Page 37 ---
Frederick County Public Schools
Agency Response Form
Please provide details of See response to Recommendation 3a.
corrective action or
explain disagreement.
Auditor’s Comment: FCPS disagrees with the findings and recommendations for
various reasons (such as, it believes non-public schools have little incentive to
execute contracts and there is an administrative burden). We reviewed FCPS’
reasons and continue to believe that it is in the best interest of both FCPS and its
students to execute formal written contracts with non-public schools providing
special education services.
Page 9 of 10

--- Page 38 ---
Frederick County Public Schools
Agency Response Form
Information Technology
The Office of Legislative Audits (OLA) has determined that the Information
Technology section, including Finding 4 related to “cybersecurity,” as defined by
the State Finance and Procurement Article, Section 3.5-301(b) of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, and therefore is subject to redaction from the publicly
available audit report in accordance with the State Government Article 2-1224(i).
Although the specifics of the finding, including the analysis, related
recommendation(s), along with FCPS’ responses, have been redacted from this
report copy, FCPS’ responses indicated agreement with the finding and related
recommendations.
Finding 4
Redacted cybersecurity-related finding.
Agency Response has been redacted by OLA.
Page 10 of 10

--- Page 39 ---
A T
UDIT EAM
Adam J. Westover, CPA
Audit Manager
Michael K. Bliss, CISA
R. Brendan Coffey, CPA, CISA
Edwin L. Paul, CPA, CISA
Information Systems Audit Managers
Sandra C. Medeiros
Dorian A. Fournier, CIA
Senior Auditors
Vickey K. Micah
Malcom J. Woodard
Information Systems Senior Auditors
Daniel G. Johnson, CFE
Jacob M. Kasten
Alexandra M. Resney
Staff Auditors