Title: Maryland Department of Labor - Office of the Commissioner of Financial Regulation
Date: 04/16/2020
Type: Fiscal Compliance
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5e9ef5a5a1ce5817f4b8e14e
Extracted: 2025-06-19T11:39:48.167634
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Audit Report
Maryland Department of Labor
Office of the Commissioner of Financial Regulation
April 2020
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Senator Clarence K. Lam, M.D. (Senate Chair) Delegate Carol L. Krimm (House Chair)
Senator Malcolm L. Augustine Delegate Steven J. Arentz
Senator Adelaide C. Eckardt Delegate Mark S. Chang
Senator George C. Edwards Delegate Keith E. Haynes
Senator Katie Fry Hester Delegate Michael A. Jackson
Senator Cheryl C. Kagan Delegate David Moon
Senator Benjamin F. Kramer Delegate April R. Rose
Senator Cory V. McCray Delegate Geraldine Valentino-Smith
Senator Justin D. Ready Delegate Karen Lewis Young
Senator Craig J. Zucker One Vacancy
To Obtain Further Information
Office of Legislative Audits
301 West Preston Street, Room 1202
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Phone: 410-946-5900 ꞏ 301-970-5900 ꞏ 1-877-486-9964 (Toll Free in Maryland)
Maryland Relay: 711
TTY: 410-946-5401 ꞏ 301-970-5401
E-mail: OLAWebmaster@ola.state.md.us
Website: www.ola.state.md.us
To Report Fraud
The Office of Legislative Audits operates a Fraud Hotline to report fraud, waste, or abuse involving State
of Maryland government resources. Reports of fraud, waste, or abuse may be communicated anonymously
by a toll-free call to 1-877-FRAUD-11, by mail to the Fraud Hotline, c/o Office of Legislative Audits, or
through the Office’s website.
Nondiscrimination Statement
The Department of Legislative Services does not discriminate on the basis of age, ancestry, color, creed,
marital status, national origin, race, religion, gender, gender identity, sexual orientation, or disability in the
admission or access to its programs, services, or activities. The Department’s Information Officer has been
designated to coordinate compliance with the nondiscrimination requirements contained in Section 35.107
of the United States Department of Justice Regulations. Requests for assistance should be directed to the
Information Officer at 410-946-5400 or 410-970-5400.

--- Page 3 ---
April 16, 2020
Senator Clarence K. Lam, M.D., Senate Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Delegate Carol L. Krimm, House Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Members of Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Annapolis, Maryland
Ladies and Gentlemen:
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the Maryland Department of
Labor (MDL) – Office of the Commissioner of Financial Regulation (OCFR)
for the period beginning July 20, 2015 and ending January 2, 2020. OCFR is
the primary regulator for financial institutions chartered in Maryland,
including banks, credit unions, and State-licensed financial entities, including
mortgage lenders. OCFR is responsible for licensing and supervising these
businesses to ensure compliance with the laws and regulations of Maryland.
Our audit disclosed that license issuances, such as for mortgage lenders and
collection agencies, were not being reviewed by OCFR supervisory personnel to
ensure that licenses were issued only to qualified applicants.
Our audit also included a review to determine the status of the finding
contained in our preceding audit report. We determined that OCFR
satisfactorily addressed this finding.
MDL’s response to this audit, on behalf of OCFR, is included as an appendix
to this report. We reviewed the response to our finding and related
recommendation, and have concluded that the corrective actions identified are
sufficient to address all audit issues.

--- Page 4 ---
We wish to acknowledge the cooperation extended to us during the audit by
the OCFR. We also wish to acknowledge MDL’s and OCFR’s willingness to
address the audit issues and to implement appropriate corrective actions.
Respectfully submitted,
Gregory A. Hook, CPA
Legislative Auditor
2

--- Page 5 ---
Background Information
Name Change and Agency Responsibilities
The Maryland Department of Labor1– Office of the Commissioner of Financial
Regulation (OCFR) is responsible for chartering and supervising Maryland state-
chartered banks, credit unions, and trust companies; licensing and supervising
state-licensed financial institutions including mortgage lenders, mortgage brokers,
mortgage servicers, mortgage loan originators, affiliated insurance producer-
originators, check cashers, money transmitters, consumer debt collection
agencies, consumer lenders, installment lenders, sales finance businesses, credit
services businesses, debt management companies; and registering and supervising
credit reporting agencies and debt settlement companies, to ensure compliance
with the laws and regulations of Maryland.
OCFR issues licenses for non-depository institutions after investigation of each
applicant and approves charters for banking institutions and credit unions to form
new institutions, open branches, make stock acquisitions, form affiliates, and
merge with other financial institutions. OCFR also serves as a resource to
consumers and to the entities and individuals that it supervises and regulates by,
for example, investigating consumer complaints, providing guidance to regulated
entities and individuals as to their responsibilities under the law, and connecting
citizens to effective financial education. According to the State’s records, during
fiscal year 2019, OCFR’s operating expenditures totaled approximately $9.6
million.
Status of Finding from Preceding Audit Report
Our audit included a review to determine the status of the finding contained in our
preceding audit report dated December 22, 2015. We determined that the OCFR
satisfactorily addressed this finding.
1 Chapter 91, Laws of Maryland 2019 effective July 1, 2019, changed the name of the Department
of Labor, Licensing, and Regulation to the Maryland Department of Labor.
3

--- Page 6 ---
Findings and Recommendations
License Issuances
Finding 1
Business license issuances were not reviewed and approved by supervisory
personnel to ensure that licenses were issued only to qualified applicants.
Analysis
Business license issuances (initial and renewals) were not reviewed and approved
by supervisory personnel to ensure that licenses were issued only to qualified
applicants. According to OCFR’s records, 16,759 business licenses were issued
in fiscal year 2019 to various institutions and entities, such as mortgage lenders,
collections agencies, check cashing outlets, and credit service businesses.
Applicants must submit documentation, such as surety bonds, financial
statements, and volume of business statements showing that they have met the
qualifying criteria for the license for which they are applying. The applications
are processed by OCFR employees who review the documentation submitted by
the applicant and issue the related license via an automated system.
Our review disclosed that OCFR did not have procedures for supervisory
personnel to review the licenses issued to ensure that applicants submitted all the
required documentation and were qualified for the license. Although supervisory
personnel review certain select applications during the application process, such
as those that have been pending for 60 days, this review process would not
provide assurance that the license issuance process was functioning as intended or
that other licenses issued were valid.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that OCFR establish procedures to require supervisory
review and approval of business license issuances, at least on a test basis, to
help ensure that all required documentation is provided and that licenses are
issued only to qualified applicants.
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the Maryland Department of
Labor (MDL) – Office of the Commissioner of Financial Regulation (OCFR) for
the period beginning July 20, 2015 and ending January 2, 2020. The audit was
4

--- Page 7 ---
conducted in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards.
Those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient,
appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and
conclusions based on our audit objectives. We believe that the evidence obtained
provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit
objectives.
As prescribed by the State Government Article, Section 2-1221 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, the objectives of this audit were to examine OCFR’s financial
transactions, records, and internal control, and to evaluate its compliance with
applicable State laws, rules, and regulations.
In planning and conducting our audit, we focused on the major financial-related
areas of operations based on assessments of significance and risk. The areas
addressed by the audit included consumer credit and oversight of financial
institutions, including examinations and licensing. We also determined the status
of the finding contained in our preceding audit report.
Our audit did not include certain support services provided to OCFR by the MDL
– Office of the Secretary. These support services (such as payroll, purchasing,
maintenance of accounting records, and related fiscal functions) are included
within the scope of our audits of the Office of the Secretary.
To accomplish our audit objectives, our audit procedures included inquiries of
appropriate personnel, inspections of documents and records, observations of
OCFR’s operations, and tests of transactions. Generally, transactions were
selected for testing based on auditor judgment, which primarily considers risk.
Unless otherwise specifically indicated, neither statistical nor non-statistical audit
sampling was used to select the transactions tested. Therefore, the results of the
tests cannot be used to project those results to the entire population from which
the test items were selected.
We also performed various data extracts of pertinent information from the State’s
Financial Management Information System (such as revenue data). The extracts
are performed as part of ongoing internal processes established by the Office of
Legislative Audits and were subject to various tests to determine data reliability.
We determined that the data extracted from this source were sufficiently reliable
for the purposes the data were used during this audit. Finally, we performed other
auditing procedures that we considered necessary to achieve our objectives. The
reliability of data used in this report for background or informational purposes
was not assessed.
5

--- Page 8 ---
OCFR’s management is responsible for establishing and maintaining effective
internal control. Internal control is a process designed to provide reasonable
assurance that objectives pertaining to the reliability of financial records,
effectiveness and efficiency of operations including safeguarding of assets, and
compliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations are achieved. As
provided in Government Auditing Standards, there are five components of
internal control: control environment, risk assessment, control activities,
information and communication, and monitoring. Each of the five components,
when significant to the audit objectives, and as applicable to OCFR, were
considered by us during the course of this audit.
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate.
Our reports are designed to assist the Maryland General Assembly in exercising
its legislative oversight function and to provide constructive recommendations for
improving State operations. As a result, our reports generally do not address
activities we reviewed that are functioning properly.
This report includes a finding relating to a condition that we consider to be a
significant deficiency in the design or operation of internal control that could
adversely affect OCFR’s ability to maintain reliable financial records, operate
effectively and efficiently, and/or comply with applicable laws, rules, and
regulations. Our audit did not disclose any instances of noncompliance with
applicable laws, rules, or regulations.
The response from MDL, on behalf of OCFR, to our findings and
recommendations is included as an appendix to this report. As prescribed in the
State Government Article, Section 2-1224 of the Annotated Code of Maryland,
we will advise MDL regarding the results of our review of its response.
6

--- Page 9 ---
APPENDIX
OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY
500 N. Calvert Street, 4th Floor
Baltimore, MD 21202
April 13, 2020
Mr. Gregory A. Hook, CPA
Legislative Auditor
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Maryland General Assembly
301 West Preston Street, Room 1202
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Re: Legislative Audit Report for Department of Labor – Office of the Commissioner of
Financial Regulation – Audit Period July 20, 2015 to January 2, 2020
Dear Mr. Hook:
I would like to acknowledge receipt of your most recent Legislative Audit of the Office of the
Commissioner of Financial Regulation dated March, 2020. This Audit contained one Finding
for which the Agency anticipates having a procedure in place to resolve the Finding by July 1,
2020. Note that at the end of the Auditors’ on-site Field Work, we anticipated an earlier
resolution date, but the date was pushed back due in part to the response to the coronavirus
pandemic. Our Agency performs a critical role ensuring the stability and viability of the State’s
financial institutions and protecting Maryland’s consumers. The Agency is particularly eager to
ensure that our internal systems and processes are sound. We strongly believe that the audit
process is a very useful tool in making these assessments.
I want to thank Audit Manager Adam J. Westover, CPA, Senior Auditor Lauren Franchak,
CPA, and Staff Auditor Steven A. Crocker, CFE for their professionalism, cooperation and
assistance during this Audit. Your team provided us with valuable advice and suggestions.
Please express our gratitude to your audit team for their hard work during our audit.
Sincerely,
Tiffany P. Robinson
Secretary
Maryland Department of Labor
LARRY HOGAN, GOVERNOR | BOYD K. RUTHERFORD, LT. GOVERNOR | TIFFANY P. ROBINSON, SECRETARY

--- Page 10 ---
Maryland Department of Labor
Office of the Commissioner of Financial Regulation
Audit Period- 7/20/2015 – 1/2/2020
Agency Response Form
Finding 1
Business license issuances (initial and renewals) were not reviewed and approved by
supervisory personnel to ensure that licenses were issued only to qualified applicants.
We recommend that OCFR establish procedures to require supervisory review and
approval of business license issuances, at least on a test basis, to help ensure that all
required documentation is provided, and that licenses are issued only to qualified
applicants.
Agency Response
Background / Factually Accurate
Analysis
Please explain any OCFR agrees that best business practices, though not required by law,
concerns with factual include the implementation of quality control protocols to ensure
accuracy. compliance with statutory mandates and office policies and
procedures. To that end, although reviews of licensing applications by
OCFR’s managers have been completed on a de facto basis since the
previous audit, OCFR has been developing a formal quality review
process (similar to that which has been established in the mortgage
supervision program) as part of its planned updates to the licensing
program and will soon implement measures by which Licensing
supervisors will regularly review (and appropriately document results
of) business license applications on a test basis to ensure that licenses are
being issued to qualified applicants.
Recommendation Agree Estimated Completion Date: 7/1/2020
Please provide details of Implement a documented standalone quarterly quality control
corrective action or function in the Licensing Unit.
explain disagreement.
Page 1 of 1

--- Page 11 ---
A T
UDIT EAM
Adam J. Westover, CPA
Audit Manager
Lauren E. Franchak, CPA
Senior Auditor
Steven A. Crocker, CFE
Staff Auditor