Title: Maryland Department of Health - Spring Grove Hospital Center
Date: 04/22/2020
Type: Fiscal Compliance
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5ea072d1a1ce5805b0f1ddad
Extracted: 2025-06-19T11:39:59.066833
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Audit Report
Maryland Department of Health
Spring Grove Hospital Center
April 2020
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Senator Clarence K. Lam, M.D. (Senate Chair) Delegate Carol L. Krimm (House Chair)
Senator Malcolm L. Augustine Delegate Steven J. Arentz
Senator Adelaide C. Eckardt Delegate Mark S. Chang
Senator George C. Edwards Delegate Keith E. Haynes
Senator Katie Fry Hester Delegate Michael A. Jackson
Senator Cheryl C. Kagan Delegate David Moon
Senator Benjamin F. Kramer Delegate April R. Rose
Senator Cory V. McCray Delegate Geraldine Valentino-Smith
Senator Justin D. Ready Delegate Karen Lewis Young
Senator Craig J. Zucker One Vacancy
To Obtain Further Information
Office of Legislative Audits
301 West Preston Street, Room 1202
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Phone: 410-946-5900 ꞏ 301-970-5900 ꞏ 1-877-486-9964 (Toll Free in Maryland)
Maryland Relay: 711
TTY: 410-946-5401 ꞏ 301-970-5401
E-mail: OLAWebmaster@ola.state.md.us
Website: www.ola.state.md.us
To Report Fraud
The Office of Legislative Audits operates a Fraud Hotline to report fraud, waste, or abuse involving State
of Maryland government resources. Reports of fraud, waste, or abuse may be communicated anonymously
by a toll-free call to 1-877-FRAUD-11, by mail to the Fraud Hotline, c/o Office of Legislative Audits, or
through the Office’s website.
Nondiscrimination Statement
The Department of Legislative Services does not discriminate on the basis of age, ancestry, color, creed,
marital status, national origin, race, religion, gender, gender identity, sexual orientation, or disability in the
admission or access to its programs, services, or activities. The Department’s Information Officer has been
designated to coordinate compliance with the nondiscrimination requirements contained in Section 35.107
of the United States Department of Justice Regulations. Requests for assistance should be directed to the
Information Officer at 410-946-5400 or 410-970-5400.

--- Page 3 ---
April 22, 2020
Senator Clarence K. Lam, M.D., Senate Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Delegate Carol L. Krimm, House Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Members of Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Annapolis, Maryland
Ladies and Gentlemen:
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the Spring Grove Hospital Center
(SGHC) of the Maryland Department of Health (MDH) for the period beginning
February 17, 2015 and ending February 18, 2019. SGHC is a State-operated
psychiatric facility within MDH’s Behavioral Health Administration and provides
mental health services to adults in Baltimore City, and Baltimore and Harford
Counties.
Our audit disclosed that SGHC had not established proper controls over its
procurement process, resulting in questionable activity. Similar findings were
previously noted in our 2008 special review of SGHC, which also noted
involvement from several of the same management employees identified during
the current audit. Specifically, specifications prepared for one invitation for bid
appeared to be tailored to the dietary equipment provided by the winning vendor
and one SGHC management employee communicated directly with this vendor
regarding the related solicitation. Although three bids were received in response
to the solicitation, this vendor was the only one who met the specifications and
was awarded the $800,000 contract.
In addition, significant deficiencies were identified relating to SGHC’s delegated
procurement activity, resulting in routine circumvention of State procurement
regulations. SGHC employees directly solicited, received, and evaluated bids and
selected vendors to supply maintenance goods and services. Many of these
purchases were artificially divided to avoid competitive public solicitations and
the involvement of the MDH Office of Procurement and Support Services. In

--- Page 4 ---
addition, SGHC did not ensure that the related invoices were adequately
supported and agreed with all contract terms, resulting in overpayments.
Furthermore, we noted that SGHC hired immediate family members of employees
to fill 6 of 15 summer intern positions. One of the interns hired was an immediate
family member of the management employee who oversaw and approved the
hiring of the interns, potentially violating State Ethics Laws.
Finally, our audit included a review to determine the status of the two findings
contained in our preceding audit report. We determined that SGHC satisfactorily
addressed one finding. The remaining finding, related to insufficient controls
over collections, is repeated in this report.
MDH’s response to this audit, on behalf of SGHC, is included as an appendix to
this report. We reviewed the response to our findings and related
recommendations, and have concluded that the corrective actions identified are
sufficient to address all audit issues.
We wish to acknowledge the cooperation extended to us during the audit by
SGHC. We also wish to acknowledge MDH’s and SGHC’s willingness to
address the audit issues and implement appropriate corrective actions.
Respectfully submitted,
Gregory A. Hook, CPA
Legislative Auditor
2

--- Page 5 ---
Table of Contents
Background Information 4
Agency Responsibilities 4
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report 4
Findings and Recommendations 5
Questionable Procurement Activity
Finding 1 – The invitation for bid for the purchase of dietary equipment 6
costing $800,000 appeared to be tailored to a particular vendor.
Finding 2 – SGHC circumvented State procurement regulations and MDH 7
procurement policies by artificially dividing procurements for goods
and services to keep them under certain solicitation and delegation
thresholds. In addition, SGHC did not always competitively procure
or verify amounts paid on certain purchases, resulting in questionable
activity and overpayments.
Potential Ethics Violations
Finding 3 – SGHC hired six summer interns who were family members 11
of SGHC employees, including a management employee involved in
the intern-hiring process.
Cash Receipts
 Finding 4 – SGHC did not effectively safeguard and account for its 12
collections and ensure collections were deposited.
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology 14
Agency Response Appendix
 Denotes item repeated in full or part from preceding audit report
3

--- Page 6 ---
Background Information
Agency Responsibilities
The Spring Grove Hospital Center (SGHC) is a unit of the Maryland Department
of Health (MDH) located in Catonsville, Maryland. SGHC provides a wide range
of comprehensive mental health services to residents of Baltimore City, and
Baltimore and Harford Counties. Furthermore, SGHC provides inpatient
competency and criminal responsibility evaluations and long-term inpatient and
domiciliary care to patients found not criminally responsible. In addition, SGHC
provides ancillary services to the Maryland Psychiatric Research Center, a joint
program between the MDH and the University of Maryland, School of Medicine.
SGHC is accredited by The Joint Commission, which evaluates and monitors
health care organizations nationwide to promote safe, high-quality care, treatment,
and services.
During fiscal year 2018, SGHC had a licensed capacity of 639 inpatients, a
budgeted average daily population of 352 and an actual average daily population
of 367. According to the State's records, total SGHC expenditures were
approximately $86.9 million during fiscal year 2018.
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report
Our audit included a review to determine the status of the two findings contained
in our preceding audit report dated October 15, 2015. We determined that SGHC
satisfactorily addressed one of these findings. The remaining finding is repeated
in this report.
Status of Preceding Findings
Preceding Implementation
Finding Description
Finding Status
Controls were not established to ensure
Repeated
Finding 1 collections were properly accounted for and
(Current Finding 4)
deposited.
SGHC recordkeeping procedures for
Finding 2 equipment were not in compliance with Not repeated
certain requirements.
4

--- Page 7 ---
Findings and Recommendations
Questionable Procurement Activity
Background
During our audit fieldwork, we were advised by Spring Grove Hospital Center
(SGHC) management that the Maryland Department of Health’s (MDH) Office of
the Inspector General (OIG) had received allegations of questionable procurement
activities involving two SGHC employees. OIG conducted a review of the
allegations and issued a report on its findings dated March 6, 2018. The OIG
report disclosed that SGHC employees violated State laws and regulations and
MDH policy when procuring certain goods and services. Specifically, the report
disclosed that a SGHC management employee authorized the award of a $1,800
contract to a company owned by a relative of a SGHC maintenance employee. In
addition, the report disclosed that the management employee circumvented State
procurement regulations and MDH policy by directing work and approving
payments totaling $18,600 to two other vendors without a competitive
procurement process. MDH did not refer these matters to the Office of the
Attorney General or the State Ethics Commission, and SGHC allowed both the
management and maintenance employees to resign in lieu of termination.
Our reading of the OIG report disclosed that this same management employee
was previously involved in
certain procurements that were
the subject of a special review
we conducted in 2008 in
response to allegations that we
received about SGHC through
our fraud, waste, and abuse
hotline. The allegations were
concerning possible improper
procurement activities related to
certain maintenance projects.
Our November 10, 2008 special
report (see cover page) included
four findings and resulted in a
referral of certain matters to the
Office of the Attorney General
– Criminal Division. This same
management employee
separated from State service
after the issuance of our special
5

--- Page 8 ---
report. However, we noted that this management employee was rehired in March
2017 by a SGHC senior management employee who was also involved in the
procurements included in our special review.
Given these circumstances, we expanded our review of SGHC’s procurements
during this fiscal compliance audit to include certain procurements involving
these SGHC employees as well as procurements under certain established
thresholds. Our expanded review identified procurement and monitoring
deficiencies and certain questionable activity described in Findings 1 and 2.
These current matters have been referred by us to the Office of the Attorney
General – Criminal Division. A referral to the Criminal Division does not mean
that a criminal act has actually occurred or that criminal charges will be filed.
Finding 1
The invitation for bid for the purchase of dietary equipment costing $800,000
appeared to be tailored to a particular vendor.
Analysis
Specifications in SGHC’s invitation for bid (IFB) for the purchase of dietary
equipment appeared to be tailored to a particular vendor. In April 2017, the
Department of General Services (DGS), on behalf of SGHC, publicly advertised
the IFB on eMaryland Marketplace (eMM). Although the procurement was
processed through DGS, preparation of the IFB and evaluation of the related bids
were performed by SGHC personnel, including one of the management
employees noted above.
Based on our review, we identified certain equipment design and physical
requirements in the IFB that favored the equipment of a specific vendor
(hereinafter referred to as the “questionable vendor”). For example, we noted that
the IFB included certain equipment size restrictions consistent with the
dimensions of the questionable vendor’s equipment that limited competition on
the procurement. Specifically, during the pre-bid process, one of the eventual
losing bidders questioned the equipment dimensions, noting that the restrictive
size requirements were not necessary for the equipment to fit in the designated
locations. In response, SGHC personnel stated that equipment within two to three
inches of the specified sizes included in the IFB would be considered, but that the
dimensions specified in the IFB would be preferred.
There was no documentation to justify the specified restrictive size requirement or
award preference for those original dimensions, given its potential impact on a
competitive procurement. Our review disclosed that the aforementioned senior
management employee corresponded directly with the questionable vendor
6

--- Page 9 ---
regarding the solicitation after publication of the IFB, but prior to the receipt of
bids. We found that the content of the correspondence between certain SGHC
employees and one vendor raised further questions about the validity of the
procurement.
Three bids were received in response to the IFB, but two of the vendors were
unable to meet the IFB requirements, including equipment dimensions, and were
deemed to be non-responsive. In October 2017, SGHC awarded a contract valued
at $800,000 to the questionable vendor, which had the second lowest cost bid, but
was the only responsive bidder. The equipment was subsequently installed and
the questionable vendor was paid in full.
State procurement law requires agencies to draft specifications to encourage
maximum competition and prohibits agencies from drafting specifications in
favor of a single prospective bidder. In addition, State law generally prohibits
agencies from disclosing information to outside parties, including prospective
bidders, after a solicitation is issued.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that SGHC
a. ensure future specifications are drafted to encourage maximum
competition and not be favorable to a single prospective bidder, as
required by State procurement law;
b. refrain from disclosing information to any interested outside party after
solicitations are issued beyond those specifically provided for in State
law; and
c. after consultation with the Office of the Attorney General – Criminal
Division, work with DGS and legal counsel to determine the appropriate
action to be taken regarding this procurement.
Finding 2
SGHC circumvented State procurement regulations and MDH procurement
policies by artificially dividing procurements for goods and services to keep
them under certain solicitation and delegation thresholds. In addition,
SGHC did not always competitively procure or verify amounts paid on
certain purchases, resulting in certain questionable activity and
overpayments.
Analysis
SGHC circumvented procurement policies and State procurement regulations by
artificially dividing procurements for goods and services to keep them below
7

--- Page 10 ---
certain solicitation and delegation thresholds, and made payments without an
existing purchase order. In addition, our testing of such procurements found that
they were not always competitively procured or that SGHC did not always verify
the propriety of related invoices prior to payment. To the extent these
procurements were not publicly solicited, SGHC employees responsible for
procuring the goods or services were able to directly solicit, receive, and evaluate
bids, and select a vendor without involvement from the MDH Office of
Procurement and Support Services (OPASS) personnel.
Our review of State records disclosed that SGHC had a pattern of splitting
purchases into multiple purchase orders and made additional supplemental
payments to these vendors for which there were no purchase orders on file, as
described in Table 1.
TABLE 1
Summary of Split Purchases and Procurements Lacking Purchase Orders
Procurements Circumventing Public Solicitation Requirements
During the period from February 17, 2015 through December 31, 2018,
 SGHC issued 23 purchase orders in amounts between $14,000 and $15,000 to 19
vendors totaling $339,100, with related payments totaling $259,891; and
 SGHC made 299 additional payments totaling $237,600 to 13 of these vendors for
work performed during this same period that was not associated with any
corresponding purchase orders.
Procurements Circumventing MDH’s Office of Procurement and Support Services
(OPASS)
During the period from February 17, 2015 through September 30, 2017,1
 SGHC issued 30 purchase orders in amounts between $24,000 and $25,000 to 17
vendors totaling $749,100; and
 SGHC made 217 additional payments totaling $219,400 to 9 of these vendors for
work performed during the same period that was not associated with any
corresponding purchase orders.
Source: State Records
1Effective October 1, 2017, the procurement authority delegated to SGHC by the Maryland
Department of Health increased from $25,000 to $50,000.
We selected 10 vendors (including 6 from Table 1) with multiple purchases and
disbursements of $25,000 or less. These 10 vendors received payments totaling
$548,600 during the period from February 17, 2015 through December 31, 2018,
all of which were associated with purchase orders in amounts equal to or below
$25,000 or were not associated with any purchase order. For 7 of these vendors,
the circumstances suggest that SGHC may have intentionally avoided MDH
8

--- Page 11 ---
OPASS and DGS oversight and public solicitation requirements. The two
management employees from our aforementioned 2008 special review had roles
in certain procurements or payment activity associated with these 7 vendors.
Our testing identified procurements that were not competitively procured and
inadequate verifications and documentation to support invoices. As a result,
payments were not always consistent with contract terms, were processed after the
purchase orders had expired, or exceeded the related purchase order maximum
values. We further noted certain questionable activity and overpayments to
vendors. For example, our review disclosed the following conditions:
 SGHC issued several individual $25,000 purchase orders in fiscal years 2016,
2017, and 2018 for grounds maintenance services rather than consolidating
these services into one procurement. In addition, SGHC paid the vendor
$11,300 for services during a lapse between the fiscal year 2016 and 2017
purchase orders. Furthermore, although the invoices supporting the $11,300
in payments referenced the fiscal year 2016 purchase order, the daily rate paid
was $675 rather than the 2016 purchase order rate of $575, resulting in an
overpayment of $1,675.
For the fiscal year 2017 purchase order, SGHC paid the vendor a total of
$73,900, exceeding the awarded purchase order amount by $48,900.
Although the original $25,000 purchase order was competitively bid, SGHC
circumvented OPASS oversight and avoided certain requirements for
purchases greater than $25,000 such as DGS approval, and the use of a
competitive sealed bidding process.
 SGHC issued a $25,000 purchase order to another vendor for tree removal
services to be performed during fiscal year 2016, but paid the vendor a total of
$32,000. Although this procurement was competitively bid, similar to above,
SGHC circumvented OPASS oversight and avoided certain requirements for
purchases greater than $25,000. In addition, certain invoices submitted by the
vendor lacked sufficient details for SGHC to ensure their propriety (such as
the size of the tree removed which, per the contract, was the basis for differing
rates to be charged), and certain rates charged exceeded the rates in the
purchase order. For example, SGHC paid the vendor $1,300 to remove a tree
even though the purchase order rate for the largest sized tree was $600. The
invoices also included charges for certain landscaping services (such as
clearing vines) that were not within the scope of the purchase order.
 SGHC issued annual purchase orders, each totaling $24,960, to a former
employee for maintenance services to be provided in fiscal years 2015
9

--- Page 12 ---
through 2018 without soliciting any bids or publishing the awards. Payments
to the former employee during the period from February 17, 2015 through
June 30, 2018 totaled $100,400. Given the total amount paid to the former
employee, SGHC should have consolidated these procurements and,
accordingly, SGHC circumvented OPASS oversight and avoided certain
requirements for purchases greater than $25,000. SGHC also could not
provide documentation to support how it determined the hourly rate paid to
the former employee and had no process to verify the number of hours
reported on the related invoices.
 SGHC split a $23,286 purchase of four exterior building doors in June 2016
into four individual solicitations, and received bids ranging from $4,700 to
$7,650 per door. SGHC ultimately combined these solicitations into one
purchase order, without complying with the public solicitation requirements
for purchases expected to exceed $15,000.
In addition, although the procurement file indicated that only two bids were
received and the purchase order was awarded to the lower bidder, our review
disclosed that SGHC did not consider bids received from a third vendor for
two of the doors that were collectively $1,800 less than the winning bidder.
Specifically, we sighted quotes from this vendor, for the two doors, that were
maintained outside of the procurement file. Furthermore, the eventual
winning bidder submitted revised quotes for these two doors, increasing the
price by $516, on the same day that the only other recognized bid was
received. There was no change in the scope of work and no explanation from
the bidder for the increased cost. Finally, SGHC could not explain its
rationale for failing to consider the vendor with the lower priced bid for what
were at the time being treated as individual procurements.
State procurement regulations generally require a formal written competitive
procurement and publication of the solicitation and related awards on eMaryland
Marketplace, which was replaced by eMaryland Marketplace Advantage in July
2019, for procurements exceeding $15,000. State procurement regulations further
require contracts valued at more than $50,000 to be awarded through a
competitive sealed bidding process and prohibit procurements from being
artificially divided to circumvent procurement requirements.1 Finally, the MDH
Procurement Policy requires procurements exceeding $50,000 to be submitted to
MDH OPASS for processing.
1 Prior to October 2017, the threshold for competitive sealed bidding required by State
procurement regulations was $25,000.
10

--- Page 13 ---
Recommendation 2
We recommend that SGHC
a. discontinue the practice of artificially dividing procurements to
circumvent State procurement regulations and MDH’s Procurement
Policy;
b. comply with State procurement regulations for competitive
procurements, including publication of solicitations and awards when
required;
c. ensure that vendor invoices contain sufficient details to determine the
propriety and reasonableness of the services performed and amounts
billed, and verify the same prior to payment;
d. conduct thorough reviews of vendor invoices, including those related to
the aforementioned payments, investigate and resolve any discrepancies,
and recover any amounts that are determined to be improperly paid; and
e. consult with the Office of the Attorney General – Criminal Division
before taking any actions related to the questionable procurements noted.
Potential Ethics Violations
Finding 3
SGHC hired six summer interns who were family members of SGHC
employees, including a management employee involved in the intern-hiring
process.
Analysis
SGHC hired six summer interns who were family members of SGHC employees,
including a management employee involved in the intern-hiring process. Based
on a referral to our fraud, waste, and abuse hotline, we reviewed the process used
by SGHC to recruit and hire interns employed during the summer of 2019.
SGHC publicly advertised the intern positions on the Maryland State Online
Employment Center website, with the only requirement that an applicant be a
high school or college student. In response to the recruitment, SGHC received
applications from 31 students and hired 15 as summer interns, each of whom
earned approximately $3,000.
Our review of the personnel files for these 15 interns disclosed that 6 were
immediate family members of SGHC employees, including one whose immediate
family member was a management employee who oversaw and approved the
hiring of the interns. SGHC did not have any documented justification for why
these individuals, including the 6 that were immediate family members, were
selected over the 16 applicants that were not hired as interns.
11

--- Page 14 ---
Senior management personnel at the State Ethics Commission advised us that the
SGHC management employee’s involvement in the intern process and the hiring
of individuals related to SGHC employees could violate several State ethics laws.
The State Ethics Commission would ultimately make any final decision related to
violations of the State ethics laws.
Recommendation 3
We recommend that SGHC comply with State ethics laws. Specifically, we
recommend that SGHC
a. ensure employees refrain from participating in prohibited matters
involving family members,
b. ensure recruitment and hiring practices avoid the appearance of any
preferential treatment by sufficiently documenting the basis for the
hiring decision, and
c. refer this matter to the State Ethics Commission and take appropriate
action based on the Commission’s decision.
Cash Receipts
Finding 4
SGHC did not effectively safeguard and account for its collections and
ensure collections were deposited.
Analysis
SGHC did not effectively safeguard and account for its collections, and did not
have an effective process to ensure collections were deposited. According to
State records, SGHC collections processed during fiscal year 2018 totaled
$654,000, which included $207,000 in patient funds and $198,500 in cafeteria
sales.
 Independent verifications of validated deposit slips to recorded collections
were not properly performed. Specifically, the employee who performed the
deposit verifications did not compare the validated deposit slips to the initial
record of checks received for deposit (such as the cafeteria cash register report
and patient fund prenumbered receipts). Rather, the validated deposit slips
were compared to a secondary summary record of collections, which was
prepared during the deposit process. A similar condition was commented
upon in our two preceding audit reports.
 SGHC did not establish sufficient accountability over and restrict access to
collections. Specifically, separate cash drawers and/or individual userids (for
12

--- Page 15 ---
the automated cash registers) were not used by the two cashiers in the
cafeteria and by the two employees in the Patient Funds Office to establish
accountability over the funds received. A similar condition regarding the
cafeteria was commented upon in our preceding audit report. In addition,
checks received by mail and forwarded to the Patient Funds Office from other
SGHC locations, including the cafeteria, were left in an unsecured location
accessible to any SGHC employee prior to deposit preparation. Furthermore,
five employees in the Office had access to the safe where prepared deposits
were stored prior to transfer to the bank.
 SGHC did not perform a documented verification that credit card collections
(from cafeteria sales) were credited to the State’s account. While we were
advised by SGHC management that verifications were performed, no
documentation was maintained. Credit card sales processed in fiscal year
2018 totaled $21,500.
As a result of these conditions, receipts could be lost or misappropriated without
detection. The Comptroller of Maryland’s Accounting Procedures Manual
requires a reconciliation of the initial record of collections to the amount
deposited. Additionally, the Manual requires that receipts be adequately
safeguarded until deposited, and that separate cash drawers be maintained for
each employee responsible for collections.
Recommendation 4
We recommend that SGHC
a. ensure that deposit verifications are performed for all collections using
the initial record of receipt (repeat),
b. implement separate cash drawers and userids for all cashiers (repeat),
c. restrict access to collections prior to the preparation of the deposit and
restrict access to the safe to only those employees who require access to
perform their assigned job duties, and
d. perform documented verifications that all credit card collections are
properly credited to the State’s account.
13

--- Page 16 ---
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the Spring Grove Hospital Center
(SGHC), a unit of the Maryland Department of Health (MDH), for the period
beginning February 17, 2015 and ending February 18, 2019. The audit was
conducted in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards.
Those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient,
appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and
conclusions based on our audit objectives. We believe that the evidence obtained
provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit
objectives.
As prescribed by the State Government Article, Section 2-1221 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, the objectives of this audit were to examine SGHC’s financial
transactions, records, and internal control, and to evaluate its compliance with
applicable State laws, rules, and regulations.
In planning and conducting our audit, we focused on the major financial-related
areas of operations based on assessments of significance and risk. The areas
addressed by the audit included cash receipts, procurements and disbursements,
corporate purchasing cards, and payroll. Furthermore, we reviewed the recruiting
and hiring of summer interns regarding a referral received on our fraud, waste,
and abuse hotline. We also determined the status of the two findings included in
our preceding audit report.
Our audit did not include certain support services provided to SGHC by MDH’s
Office of the Secretary. These support services (such as certain payroll and
purchasing functions, maintenance of accounting records, and related fiscal
functions) are included within the scope of our audits of MDH’s Office of the
Secretary and Other Units.
To accomplish our audit objectives, our audit procedures included inquiries of
appropriate personnel, inspections of documents and records, observations of
SGHC’s operations, and tests of transactions. Generally, transactions were
selected for testing based on auditor judgment, which primarily considers risk.
Unless otherwise specifically indicated, neither statistical nor non-statistical audit
sampling was used to select the transactions tested. Therefore, the results of the
tests cannot be used to project those results to the entire population from which
the test items were selected.
We also performed various data extracts of pertinent information from the State’s
Financial Management Information System (such as revenue and expenditure
14

--- Page 17 ---
data) and the State’s Central Payroll Bureau (payroll data), as well as from the
contractor administering the State’s Corporate Purchasing Card Program (credit
card activity). The extracts are performed as part of ongoing internal processes
established by the Office of Legislative Audits and were subject to various tests to
determine data reliability. We determined that the data extracted from these
various sources were sufficiently reliable for the purposes the data were used
during this audit. Finally, we performed other auditing procedures that we
considered necessary to achieve our objectives. The reliability of data used in this
report for background or informational purposes was not assessed.
SGHC’s management is responsible for establishing and maintaining effective
internal control. Internal control is a process designed to provide reasonable
assurance that objectives pertaining to the reliability of financial records;
effectiveness and efficiency of operations, including safeguarding of assets; and
compliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations are achieved. As
provided in Government Auditing Standards, there are five components of
internal control: control environment, risk assessment, control activities,
information and communication, and monitoring. Each of the five components,
when significant to the audit objectives, and as applicable to SGHC, were
considered by us during the course of this audit.
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate.
Our reports are designed to assist the Maryland General Assembly in exercising
its legislative oversight function and to provide constructive recommendations for
improving State operations. As a result, our reports generally do not address
activities we reviewed that are functioning properly.
This report includes findings relating to conditions that we consider to be
significant deficiencies in the design or operation of internal control that could
adversely affect SGHC’s ability to maintain reliable financial records, operate
effectively and efficiently, and/or comply with applicable laws, rules, and
regulations. Our report also includes findings regarding significant instances of
noncompliance with applicable laws, rules, or regulations. Other less significant
findings were communicated to SGHC that did not warrant inclusion in this
report.
The response from MDH, on behalf of SGHC, to our findings and
recommendations is included as an appendix to this report. As prescribed in the
15

--- Page 18 ---
State Government Article, Section 2-1224 of the Annotated Code of Maryland,
we will advise MDH regarding the results of our review of its response.
16

--- Page 19 ---
APPENDIX
April 15, 2020
Mr. Gregory A. Hook, CPA
Legislative Auditor
Office of Legislative Audits
State Office Building, Room 1202
301 West Preston Street
Baltimore, MD 21201
Dear Mr. Hook:
Enclosed are the responses to the draft audit report from your Maryland Department of Health
(MDH) - Spring Grove Hospital Center for the period beginning February 17, 2015 and ending
February 18, 2019.
If you have any questions, please contact Frederick D. Doggett at 410-767-0885 or email at
frederick.doggett@maryland.gov.
Sincerely,
Robert R. Neall, Secretary
Maryland Department of Health
cc: Gregg Todd, Deputy Secretary of Operations, MDH
Dwain Shaw, MPH, JD, Chief Executive Officer, Spring Grove Hospital Center, MDH
Frederick D. Doggett, Inspector General, MDH

--- Page 20 ---
Maryland Department of Health
Spring Grove Hospital Center
Agency Response Form
Finding 1
The invitation for bid for the purchase of dietary equipment costing $800,000 appeared to
be tailored to a particular vendor.
We recommend that SGHC
a. ensure future specifications are drafted to encourage maximum competition and not be
favorable to a single prospective bidder;
b. refrain from disclosing information to any interested outside party after solicitations
are issued; and
c. after consultation with the Office of the Attorney General – Criminal Division, work
with DGS and legal counsel to determine the appropriate action to be taken regarding
this procurement.
Agency Response
Background / Factually Accurate
Analysis
Please explain any
concerns with factual
accuracy.
Recommendation a Agree Estimated Completion Date: 08/30/2020
Please provide details of As a result of the OIG investigation, management involved in the
corrective action or procurement process at the time have since resigned and/or were
explain disagreement. terminated and are no longer employed by MDH.
SGHC has removed the procurement function from under the senior
manager’s division and has placed it under the Chief Financial Officer’s
(CFO) division where oversight and management are much more
vigilant.
In order to ensure the promotion of maximum competition, any
specifications obtained and incorporated into a solicitation will be vetted
through the appropriate workgroup that has reasonable subject matter
knowledge of or obtains subject matter information through research or
consultation.
The implementation of this process will be memorialized in a written
policy/guideline.
Page 1 of 8

--- Page 21 ---
Maryland Department of Health
Spring Grove Hospital Center
Agency Response Form
Recommendation b Agree Estimated Completion Date: 06/30/2020
Please provide details of Currently all procurements go through a single procurement department
corrective action or that is embodied in the CFO’s department. Revised written procedures
explain disagreement. and guidelines will be documented and implemented to ensure the
proper separations of duty are in place to preclude any conflict of
interests.
Recommendation c Agree Estimated Completion Date: 6/30/2020
Please provide details of This agency has informed the AG’s office via email (dated 12/30/2019)
corrective action or about findings #1.
explain disagreement.
Page 2 of 8

--- Page 22 ---
Maryland Department of Health
Spring Grove Hospital Center
Agency Response Form
Finding 2
SGHC circumvented State procurement regulations and MDH procurement policies by
artificially dividing procurements for goods and services to keep them under certain
solicitation and delegation thresholds. In addition, SGHC did not always competitively
procure or verify amounts paid on certain purchases, resulting in certain questionable
activity and overpayments.
We recommend that SGHC
a. discontinue the practice of artificially dividing procurements to circumvent State
procurement regulations and MDH’s Procurement Policy;
b. comply with State procurement regulations for competitive procurements, including
publication of solicitations and awards when required;
c. ensure that vendor invoices contain sufficient details to determine the propriety and
reasonableness of the services performed and amounts billed;
d. conduct thorough reviews of vendor invoices, including those related to the
aforementioned payments, investigate and resolve any discrepancies, and recover any
amounts that are determined to be improperly paid; and
e. consult with the Office of the Attorney General – Criminal Division before taking any
actions related to the questionable procurements noted.
Agency Response
Background / Factually Accurate
Analysis
Please explain any
concerns with factual
accuracy.
Recommendation a Agree Estimated Completion Date: 6/30/2020
Please provide details of SGHC has discontinued the practice of artificially dividing
corrective action or procurements. SGHC will comply with all State procurement
explain disagreement. regulations and policies including publication of solicitations and
awards.
SGHC has taken additional measures such as establishing a procurement
integrity committee to review the procurement and to remain in
compliance with OPASS regulations.
We are in the process of drafting policies and procedures that will
govern this committee.
Recommendation b Agree Estimated Completion Date: 6/30/2020
Please provide details of SGHC will comply with the State procurement regulations for
corrective action or competitive procurements, including publication of solicitations and
explain disagreement. awards on eMaryland Marketplace Advantage when required.
Page 3 of 8

--- Page 23 ---
Maryland Department of Health
Spring Grove Hospital Center
Agency Response Form
Recommendation c Agree Estimated Completion Date: 06/30/2020
Please provide details of SGHC will ensure that vendor invoices contain enough details to
corrective action or determine the propriety and reasonableness of the services performed
explain disagreement. and amounts billed. The accounts payable supervisor will verify that the
vendor invoices agree with the contract prices as indicated in the
PO/contract prior to making the final payments.
Recommendation d Agree Estimated Completion Date: 09/30/2020
Please provide details of SGHC will make every effort to review the propriety of the vendor
corrective action or invoices, including those related to the payments indicated in this
explain disagreement. finding, investigate and resolve any discrepancies.
Recommendation e Agree Estimated Completion Date: 9/30/2020
Please provide details of We will consult with the Criminal Division of the Attorney General’s
corrective action or office and provide all informational and documentary support they
explain disagreement. request should they decide to pursue this matter. SGHC will not take
any action until it has received advisement from the Criminal Division of
the AG.
Page 4 of 8

--- Page 24 ---
Maryland Department of Health
Spring Grove Hospital Center
Agency Response Form
Finding 3
SGHC hired six summer interns who were family members of SGHC employees, including
a management employee involved in the intern-hiring process.
We recommend that SGHC comply with State ethics laws. Specifically, we recommend
that SGHC
a. ensure employees refrain from participating in prohibited matters involving family
members,
b. ensure recruitment and hiring practices avoid the appearance of any preferential
treatment, and
c. refer this matter to the State Ethics Commission and take appropriate action based on
the Commission’s decision.
Agency Response
Background / Factually Accurate
Analysis
Please explain any
concerns with factual
accuracy.
Recommendation a Agree Estimated Completion Date: 09/30/20
Please provide details of SGHC will ensure that employees refrain from participating in
corrective action or prohibited matters involving family members. Any employee whose
explain disagreement. family member is or has applied for employment at SGHC, shall not
participate directly or indirectly in the hiring process of the family
member. Upon the discovery of direct or indirect participation of any
employee into the hiring process of a family member, said employee
shall be investigated and reported to the Ethics Commission.
SGHC is in the process of drafting policies/procedures to be
implemented.
Recommendation b Agree Estimated Completion Date: 09/30/20
Please provide details of SGHC will ensure recruitment and hiring practices are free of actual or
corrective action or perceived preferential treatment. SGHC is in the process of
explain disagreement. implementing a tracking mechanism for the approval of all contractual,
temporary, and merit hires to ensure the avoidance of preferential
treatment in the hiring process.
This process will be memorialized into a new policy.
Page 5 of 8

--- Page 25 ---
Maryland Department of Health
Spring Grove Hospital Center
Agency Response Form
Recommendation c Agree Estimated Completion Date: 09/30/20
Please provide details of On December 30, 2019 SGHC has referred this matter via email for a
corrective action or review by Criminal Division of the AG and any further investigation by
explain disagreement. the State Ethics Commission regarding the OLAfinding#3. SGHC will
take the appropriate action based on the Commission’s decision.
Finding 4
SGHC did not effectively safeguard and account for its collections and ensure collections
were deposited.
We recommend that SGHC
a. ensure that deposit verifications are performed for all collections using the initial
record of receipt (repeat),
b. implement separate cash drawers and userids for all cashiers (repeat),
c. restrict access to collections prior to the preparation of the deposit and restrict access to
the safe to only those employees who require access to perform their assigned job
duties, and
d. perform documented verifications that all credit card collections were properly credited
to the State’s account.
Agency Response
Background / Factually Accurate
Analysis
Please explain any
concerns with factual
accuracy.
Recommendation a Agree Estimated Completion Date: 06/30/20
Please provide details of The newly appointed Accounts Clerk Supervisor has begun the
corrective action or independent deposit verification of the bank validated deposit slips to the
explain disagreement. initial recordation document such as the system generated pre numbered
receipts for the patient funds and café collections; document such
verification by initialing on the initial recordation document and on the
bank validated deposit slip. The previous employee independent of cash
collections was verifying the bank validated deposit slips with the check
log for the mailed in collections, partially satisfied the prior audit
exception.
Page 6 of 8

--- Page 26 ---
Maryland Department of Health
Spring Grove Hospital Center
Agency Response Form
Recommendation b Agree Estimated Completion Date: 06/30/20
Please provide details of SGHC will implement additional cash drawers and userids for all
corrective action or cashiers. After a careful decision by the workgroup, this agency
explain disagreement. implemented multiple cash registers for the smooth operation of Café
collections and has established individual user logon ids and passwords
to access the register approximately in March 2017. These registers have
multiple cash drawers and the cashiers are trained in its routine operation
using separate cash drawers. SGHC will ensure that two Cashiers will
not be allowed to use the same cash drawer. CFO will conduct
unannounced review of these cash register operations and will take
corrective actions if necessary.
A new separate secured cash drawer has been installed independent of
the other cash drawers in the Patients Fund office. The backup cashiers
currently utilizing this drawer in the event of transition or lunch breaks
etc.
We are in the process of memorializing this new process in policy and
all relevant staff will be required to sign an affirmation that they
understand the process and received a copy of the procedures.
Recommendation c Agree Estimated Completion Date: 6/30/20
Please provide details of The current patient funds program is old and allows only limited user
corrective action or access. Currently the Finance office is working with the IT department
explain disagreement. in the process of replacing the existing patient fund accounts program
that would be more compatible with the present operating system and
ultimately allow more accountability and independent user access.
All checks received for deposits are secured in the cash drawers until
transported to the bank; eventually restricting unauthorized access to the
collections.
Due to staff turnover, the department reallocated resources to perform
daily routines which included certain cash receipt functions involved
with the safe. Nonetheless, this condition has been corrected and there is
only one main cashier, a newly hired employee and two additional
backup cashiers, authorized to access the safe. No more than three
individuals will have access to the cash safe.
We are in the process of memorializing this process in a written
procedure.
Page 7 of 8

--- Page 27 ---
Maryland Department of Health
Spring Grove Hospital Center
Agency Response Form
Recommendation d Agree Estimated Completion Date: 6/30/20
Please provide details of Effective immediately, the credit card collection verification process is
corrective action or being assigned to an employee who is independent of the credit card
explain disagreement. collections verifications process.
With this new reconciliation process, the assigned employee will record
the credit card collections from the following document to a excel
spreadsheet:
 Daily credit card collections from the Café Sales
Summary
 Bank Statement
 ACH transmittal – faxed copy received from the
Comptroller’s office.
 DAFR 7200 – Daily Journal Register (Report from
FMIS)
Daily, this employee will verify the accuracy of credit card
collections/deposits and signs and dates the backup documents used for
reconciliation. This employee will also investigate any discrepancies
during this daily review and forward them to the CFO for further actions,
if necessary. This employee will submit a final monthly reconciliation
report to the CFO/Designee for approvals.
We are in the process of memorializing this procedure.
Page 8 of 8

--- Page 28 ---
A T
UDIT EAM
Heather A. Warriner, CPA
Audit Manager
Sandra C. Medeiros
Senior Auditor
Kush C. Patel
Staff Auditor