Title: Board of Liquor License Commissioners for Baltimore City


Supplements to the Board Response

BLLC’s 2020 Standard Operating Procedures

Department of Finance Audit Letter

Letters from the State Ethics Commission

Letter from the Baltimore City Ethics Board
Date: 05/11/2020
Type: Performance
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5eb9a966a1ce580b10501ef6
Extracted: 2025-06-19T11:41:01.009199
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Performance Audit Report
Board of Liquor License Commissioners
for Baltimore City
May 2020
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Senator Clarence K. Lam, M.D. (Senate Chair) Delegate Carol L. Krimm (House Chair)
Senator Malcolm L. Augustine Delegate Steven J. Arentz
Senator Adelaide C. Eckardt Delegate Mark S. Chang
Senator George C. Edwards Delegate Keith E. Haynes
Senator Katie Fry Hester Delegate Michael A. Jackson
Senator Cheryl C. Kagan Delegate David Moon
Senator Benjamin F. Kramer Delegate April R. Rose
Senator Cory V. McCray Delegate Geraldine Valentino-Smith
Senator Justin D. Ready Delegate Karen Lewis Young
Senator Craig J. Zucker One Vacancy
To Obtain Further Information
Office of Legislative Audits
301 West Preston Street, Room 1202
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Phone: 410-946-5900 ꞏ 301-970-5900 ꞏ 1-877-486-9964 (Toll Free in Maryland)
Maryland Relay: 711
TTY: 410-946-5401 ꞏ 301-970-5401
E-mail: OLAWebmaster@ola.state.md.us
Website: www.ola.state.md.us
To Report Fraud
The Office of Legislative Audits operates a Fraud Hotline to report fraud, waste, or abuse involving State
of Maryland government resources. Reports of fraud, waste, or abuse may be communicated anonymously
by a toll-free call to 1-877-FRAUD-11, by mail to the Fraud Hotline, c/o Office of Legislative Audits, or
through the Office’s website.
Nondiscrimination Statement
The Department of Legislative Services does not discriminate on the basis of age, ancestry, color, creed,
marital status, national origin, race, religion, gender, gender identity, sexual orientation, or disability in the
admission or access to its programs, services, or activities. The Department’s Information Officer has been
designated to coordinate compliance with the nondiscrimination requirements contained in Section 35.107
of the United States Department of Justice Regulations. Requests for assistance should be directed to the
Information Officer at 410-946-5400 or 410-970-5400.

--- Page 3 ---
May 11, 2020
Senator Clarence K. Lam, M.D., Senate Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Delegate Carol L. Krimm, House Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Members of Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Annapolis, Maryland
Ladies and Gentlemen:
We have conducted a performance audit to evaluate the effectiveness and
efficiency of the management practices of the Board of Liquor License
Commissioners for Baltimore City (BLLC) as required by the State
Government Article, Section 2-1220 of the Annotated Code of Maryland. The
law requires our audit to focus on BLLC operations relating to licensing,
inspections, disciplinary procedures, and management oversight, which
broadly represent the four audit objectives established. BLLC issued 1,216
alcoholic beverage and adult entertainment licenses during license year 2018,
and fiscal year 2018 revenues totaled $2.5 million, primarily derived from
license fees.
This is our third audit of the BLLC and we have noticed continual improvement
in BLLC audit results, with the number of report findings decreasing from 24 in
our first report, to 18 in the second, and now 8 in this report. In addition, our
current audit disclosed that BLLC made significant improvements in addressing
the conditions noted in our preceding audit of BLLC, with only one of the prior
findings repeated in this audit report. For example, BLLC established the Board
of Liquor License Commissioners for Baltimore City: 2018 Policy and Procedure
Manual (SOPs) providing structure to the licensing, inspections, disciplinary
procedures, and management oversight processes and allowing for consistency
and accountability. Additionally, BLLC implemented an inspection database
which monitors inspection activity and outcomes, and stores critical inspection
information and inspection documentation. Nevertheless, our audit disclosed that

--- Page 4 ---
BLLC could improve portions of the SOPs to be more comprehensive and it still
had deficiencies in each of the four areas reviewed.
Licensing
BLLC did not always follow established procedures for securing and
processing cash receipts and certain procedures need improvement to ensure
collections are properly deposited.
Inspections
BLLC’s SOPs were not comprehensive since they did not require that
inspection reports be retained after being recorded into the inspection
database, did not require that recorded inspection information be
independently verified, did not formally establish the frequency and type of
inspections to be conducted for each licensee, and did not specify if and when
follow-up inspections should be conducted after violations are noted.
Additionally, we noted that BLLC did not always follow its SOPs when
investigating complaints received through Baltimore City’s “311” Customer
Service Request System and there were instances in which inspectors did not
issue violations to establishments that had a previous history of abated noise
complaints nor document the reason why a violation was not issued. Finally,
BLLC’s methodology to monitor that establishments were inspected at
frequencies consistent with its goal of four inspections of each establishment
annually, including one routine inspection, needs improvement.
Disciplinary Procedures
BLLC did not properly track and monitor certain instances of licensee
noncompliance (such as building violations) and did not always maintain
sufficient documentation of internal reviews performed to support
determinations of whether to present instances of noncompliance to the Board
for adjudication.
Management Oversight
Although BLLC monitored Board and employee compliance with State ethics
filing requirements, procedures were not established to monitor employee
compliance with statutory independence restrictions in State law regarding
secondary employment and business investments.
Our overall audit scope, objectives, and methodology are explained on page 7.
BLLC’s response to this audit is included as an appendix to this report. In
accordance with State law, we have reviewed the response and, while BLLC
generally agrees with the recommendations in this report, we identified certain
2

--- Page 5 ---
instances in which statements in the response conflict with or disagree with
the report findings. In each instance, we reviewed and reassessed our audit
documentation, and reaffirmed the validity of our finding. In accordance with
generally accepted government auditing standards, we have included “auditor
comments” within the response to explain our position. Finally, there are
other aspects of the response which will require further clarification, but we
do not anticipate that these will require the Committee’s attention to resolve.
We wish to acknowledge the cooperation extended to us during the audit by
the Board and the staff of the BLLC. We also wish to acknowledge the
Board’s willingness to address the audit issues and to implement appropriate
corrective actions.
Respectfully submitted,
Gregory A. Hook, CPA
Legislative Auditor
3

--- Page 6 ---
4

--- Page 7 ---
Table of Contents
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology 7
Audit Scope 7
Objectives and Methodology 7
Fieldwork and Agency Response 8
Background Information 10
Agency Responsibilities 10
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report 11
Findings and Recommendations 13
Objective 1 – Licensing
Objective and Methodology 13
Background 13
New and Transfer Licenses 15
License Renewals 16
Conclusion 16
Findings
* Finding 1 – BLLC did not always follow its Standard Operating 17
Procedures (SOP) for securing and processing cash receipts and
certain procedures need improvement to ensure all collections are
properly deposited.
Objective 2 – Inspections
Objective and Methodology 19
Background 19
Conclusion 21
Findings
Finding 2 – BLLC’s SOPs did not include certain critical aspects of the 22
inspection process.
Finding 3 – BLLC did not always retain inspection reports to support the 23
information recorded in the inspection database. Additionally, the
recorded information was not independently reviewed for accuracy.
* Denotes item repeated in full or part from preceding audit report
5

--- Page 8 ---
Finding 4 – BLLC did not always follow its SOPs when investigating and 24
documenting complaints received through Baltimore’s City’s 311
Complaint System.
Finding 5 – BLLC inspectors did not always follow up on inspection 26
violations and did not always appropriately document conclusions
when conducting inspections.
Finding 6 – BLLC’s process to monitor the inspections of licensed 27
establishments did not provide assurance that all licensees
were subject to an annual inspection or inspected at appropriate
frequencies.
Objective 3 – Disciplinary Procedures
Objective and Methodology 29
Background 29
Conclusion 31
Findings
Finding 7 – BLLC did not track and monitor instances of licensee 32
noncompliance that did not involve the Baltimore Police Department
or the Baltimore City Sheriff’s Office to ensure that each was properly
addressed.
Objective 4 – Management Oversight
Objective and Methodology 33
Conclusion 33
Findings
Finding 8 – BLLC had not have an ongoing internal process to identify 34
potential conflicts regarding interests in the alcohol beverage industry
consistent with State law specific to BLLC.
Agency Response Appendix
6

--- Page 9 ---
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
Audit Scope
The State Government Article, Section 2-1220(f) of the Annotated Code of
Maryland, requires the Office of Legislative Audits, at least once every four
years, to conduct a performance audit of the Board of Liquor License
Commissioners for Baltimore City (BLLC) to evaluate the effectiveness and
efficiency of the management practices of BLLC and the economy with which
BLLC uses resources. The law also states the audit shall focus on operations
relating to licensing, inspections, disciplinary procedures, and management
oversight.
Our audit was performed in accordance with generally accepted government
auditing standards. Those standards require we plan and perform the audit to
obtain sufficient, appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our
findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives. We believe that the
evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions
based on our audit objectives.
Objectives and Methodology
Our audit included the following objectives:
1. Evaluate the adequacy of procedures over alcoholic beverage licensing and
the maintenance of related records, and determine if the licensing process
complied with State law and Board requirements.
2. Evaluate the adequacy of BLLC policies and procedures for conducting
inspections of alcoholic beverage licensees and maintaining related records,
and to determine whether inspections were performed in accordance with
policies and procedures.
3. Evaluate the disciplinary process and determine if BLLC complied with
applicable State law, enforced applicable Board rules and regulations
governing licensees, and maintained accurate disciplinary records.
4. Evaluate management processes to determine whether proper oversight exists
over BLLC operations.
To accomplish our objectives, we reviewed applicable State laws, and the policies
and procedures established by the Board and BLLC administrative personnel
governing the licensing process and related records. We also reviewed pertinent
sections of BLLC’s Board of Liquor License Commissioners for Baltimore City:
2018 Policy and Procedure Manual that governs BLLC administrative functions
7

--- Page 10 ---
and the Alcoholic Beverages Rules and Regulations for the Board of Liquor
License Commissioners for Baltimore City, which governs the conduct of licensee
business operations.
Additionally, we interviewed BLLC staff to determine the processes used to issue
licenses, conduct inspections, administer disciplinary proceedings, and maintain
related records. We also observed the licensing and disciplinary hearing
processes.
We obtained data files of current BLLC licensees as of December 2018 and a
report of the licenses transferred and renewed during license year 2018 (May 1,
2017 through April 30, 2018) from the BLLC licensing database; this database is
stored on the servers maintained by the Baltimore City Mayor’s Office of
Information Technology. We also obtained a data file of inspections performed
during license year 2018 from a separate inspection database maintained by the
Baltimore City Office of Information and Technology. We used these data files
to perform various tests of the licensing, inspection, and disciplinary processes,
and performed various tests of the relevant data and determined these data files
were sufficiently reliable for the purposes used during the audit.
We also reviewed the licensee paper files and the minutes of Board hearings that
evidenced the decisions and actions taken by the Board. Finally, we obtained
records of complaints registered through Baltimore City’s “311” Customer
Service Request System (311 System) to evaluate BLLC’s process for following
up on complaints.
Generally, transactions were selected for testing based on auditor judgment,
which primarily considers risk. Unless otherwise specifically indicated, neither
statistical nor non-statistical audit sampling was used to select the transactions
tested. Therefore, the results of the tests cannot be used to project those results to
the entire population from which the test items were selected. The reliability of
data used in this report for background or informational purposes was not
assessed. In addition to the conditions included in this report, other findings were
communicated to BLLC that were not deemed significant and, consequently, did
not warrant inclusion in this report.
Fieldwork and Agency Response
We conducted our fieldwork from December 2018 to April 2019. BLLC’s
response to our findings and recommendations is included as an appendix to this
audit report. As prescribed in the State Government Article, Section 2-1224 of
8

--- Page 11 ---
the Annotated Code of Maryland, we will advise BLLC regarding the results of
our review of its response.
9

--- Page 12 ---
Background Information
Agency Responsibilities
The operations of the Board of Liquor License Commissioners for Baltimore City
(BLLC) are governed by Title 12 of the Alcoholic Beverages Article of the
Annotated Code of Maryland for the alcoholic beverage licensing, and by Subtitle
1 of Article 15 of the Baltimore City Code for the licensing and regulation of
adult entertainment businesses. BLLC is responsible for processing applications
for and renewals of licenses to sell beer, wine, and liquor; conducting periodic
inspections of businesses licensed to sell alcoholic beverages; collecting all
license fees and fines; fining, suspending, or revoking the licenses of violators of
alcoholic beverage laws; and licensing and regulating adult entertainment
businesses in Baltimore City. BLLC also issues licenses for special events (such
as one-day licenses for beer and wine festivals) and for special venues (such as a
casino, zoo, or stadium). According to BLLC records, which we verified through
testing, there were 1,216 alcoholic beverage and adult entertainment licenses
(excluding special event licenses) issued during the 2018 license year (May 1,
2017 through April 30, 2018).
All BLLC revenues from licenses issued, fines, and late fees are paid to Baltimore
City’s Director of Finance, and all BLLC expenditures, including employee
salaries, are paid by the City. Furthermore, BLLC is included in the City’s annual
budget and its financial activity is included in the City’s Comprehensive Annual
Financial Report. BLLC’s budgeted expenditures for fiscal year 2019 were $2.1
million and provided for 22 employees. According to Baltimore City records,
BLLC’s fiscal year 2018 revenues totaled approximately $2.5 million and
expenditures totaled approximately $1.9 million. In accordance with State law,
BLLC revenues in excess of its expenditures and salaries are to be used by the
Mayor and City Council for the general purposes of the City.
BLLC is governed by a three-person board, plus one alternate member. The
Mayor of Baltimore appoints two members and the President of the City Council
of Baltimore City appoints one member and the alternate member. The
appointments are subject to the advice and consent of the Maryland Senate. As of
December 2018, BLLC had 16 full-time staff—which included 3 executive staff,
1 supervising inspector, 7 full-time inspectors, and 5 support staff—as well as a
part-time appeals counsel and a community liaison contractual employee. Except
for the executive secretary and deputy secretary, all employees of the Board are in
the classified civil service of the City.
10

--- Page 13 ---
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report
Based on our current assessment of significance and risk relative to our audit
objectives, our audit included a review to determine the status of 17 of the 18
findings contained in our preceding audit report dated July 13, 2016. As
disclosed in the following table, we determined BLLC satisfactorily addressed 16
of these findings. The remaining finding is repeated in this report.
11

--- Page 14 ---
Status of Preceding Findings
Preceding Implementation
Finding Description
Finding Status
BLLC lacked formal written policies to guide and control the
Finding 1 Not repeated
licensing process.
BLLC renewed certain licenses without ensuring licensees paid
Finding 2 Not repeated
the proper amounts.
BLLC did not assess the proper license fee for the casino nor
Finding 3 Not repeated
ensure casino concessionaires were licensed.
BLLC did not always ensure license transfer were completed
Finding 4 Not repeated
within 180 days of receiving Board approval.
BLLC did not establish a process to receive updates to licensee
Finding 5 Not repeated
criminal records as required by law.
Procedures and recordkeeping practices over cash receipts and Repeated
Finding 6
accounts receivable did not provide sufficient control. (Current Finding 1)
BLLC lacked comprehensive written policies and procedures over
Finding 7 Not repeated
the inspection process.
BLLC lacked an effective tracking system to monitor inspection
Finding 8 Not repeated
activities.
Finding 9 The Chief Inspector did not document duties performed. Not repeated
BLLC lacked comprehensive written procedures over 311
Finding 10 complaints and many complaints were closed without adequate Not repeated
documentation of investigation results.
BLLC did not use sound meters to investigate noise-related Not repeated
Finding 11
complaints. (Not followed up on)
BLLC lacked written policies and procedures for certain aspects of
Finding 12 Not repeated
the disciplinary process.
BLLC did not monitor closed establishments to ensure the Not repeated
Finding 13
alcoholic beverages licenses expired in accordance with State law.
BLLC had not implemented management practices to effectively
Finding 14 Not repeated
oversee and manage the Agency’s function.
Finding 15 Financial disclosure forms were not filed as required. Not repeated
BLLC did not formally evaluate employee performance on a
Finding 16 Not repeated
routine basis as required.
Proper internal controls were not established over payroll
Finding 17 Not repeated
processing and payroll testing disclosed various problems.
BLLC did not digitize its records by July 1, 2015 as required by
Finding 18 Not repeated
State law.
12

--- Page 15 ---
Findings and Recommendations
Objective 1 - Licensing
Objective and Methodology
Our objective for the licensing process was to evaluate the adequacy of Board of
Liquor License Commissioners for Baltimore City (BLLC) procedures for
alcoholic beverage licensing and the maintenance of related records, and to
determine, based on this evaluation and transaction testing, if the licensing
process complied with the State law and Board requirements. To accomplish our
objective, we reviewed applicable State laws and the policies and procedures
established by the Board and BLLC administrative personnel governing the
licensing process and related records. We also reviewed pertinent sections of
BLLC’s Board of Liquor License Commissioners for Baltimore City: 2018 Policy
and Procedure Manual (SOPs) and the Alcoholic Beverages Rules and
Regulations for the Board of Liquor License Commissioners for Baltimore City.
Additionally, we interviewed BLLC staff to determine the processes used to
collect fees; issue, renew, and transfer licenses; and maintain related records. We
obtained data files of the current licenses as of December 2018 and a report of the
licenses transferred and renewed during license year 2018 (May 1, 2017 through
April 30, 2018) from the BLLC automated licensing system maintained by the
Baltimore City Mayor’s Office of Information Technology. We used the license
files to perform various tests of the licensing process including license renewals,
license transfers, and collection of related cash receipts. We performed various
tests of the relevant data and determined that the data were sufficiently reliable for
the purposes the data were used during the audit.
Background
BLLC processes applications for new licenses, license renewals, and transfers of
existing licenses to sell beer, wine, and liquor in Baltimore City and licenses adult
entertainment businesses in the City. There are different classes of alcoholic
beverage licenses and each are valid for a one-year period ending April 30; the
general classes of licenses are A, B, C, and D. Class A licenses are issued to
liquor stores, Class C licenses are issued to non-profit private clubs, and Class D
licenses are issued to taverns. Class B licenses are issued to restaurants, and other
special venues as described in law, including arenas, hotels/motels, casinos, zoos,
and stadiums. BLLC also issues licenses for special events (such as beer and
wine festivals). Finally, BLLC issues adult entertainment licenses for a one-year
period ending June 30.
13

--- Page 16 ---
According to BLLC records, there were 1,189 alcoholic beverage and 27 adult
entertainment licenses, excluding special event licenses, issued during license
year 2018 (May 1, 2017 through April 30, 2018). Annual fees for alcoholic
beverage licenses are established in State law and vary depending on the type of
establishment and the beverages sold. The Baltimore City Code establishes the
$1,000 annual fee for an adult entertainment business license, which is in addition
to the alcoholic beverage license fee, if applicable. Table 1 includes the types of
licenses issued by BLLC and the related license fees. Additional permits and
other privileges with fees can be found in Table 2.
Table 1
Annual License Fees and Licenses Issued for License Year 2018
Annual
Licenses
License Type License
Issued
Fee
Class A Beer and Wine1 $110 29
Class A Beer, Wine, and Liquor1 $858 205
Class A - 2 Beer, Wine, and Liquor2 $858 10
Class B Beer and Wine3 $165 12
Class B Beer, Wine, and Liquor (seating capacity of 200 or fewer)3 $1,320
318
Class B Beer, Wine, and Liquor (seating capacity greater than 200)3 $1,800
Class B Beer, Wine, and Liquor (Hotel/Motel)3 $6,500 29
Class B-D-7 Beer, Wine, and Liquor3 $1,320 415
Class B Beer, Wine, and Liquor (Video Lottery Facility)4 $15,000 1
Class B Beer, Wine, and Liquor (Video Lottery Concessionaire)4 $5,000 0
Class C Beer and Wine $83 13
Class C Beer, Wine and Liquor $550 46
Class D Beer and Wine3 $165 41
Class D Beer, Wine, and Liquor3 $825 50
All Other Alcoholic Beverage Licenses Varies 20
Adult Entertainment $1,000 27
Total Licenses 1,216
Source: Annotated Code of Maryland and the Baltimore City Code and BLLC’s licensing records.
License Type Class: A-Package Goods; B-Restaurant; C-Private Membership Club; D-Tavern
Notes:
1 Class A beer, wine, and liquor licenses are valid for six days a week from 6 a.m. to 12 a.m. the
following day.
2 Class A-2 beer, wine, and liquor licenses are valid for six days a week from 9 a.m. to 12 a.m. the
following day.
3 Class B and Class D beer, wine, and liquor licenses are valid for seven days a week operations.
4 There were two Video Lottery Concessionaire licensees in license year 2018, however BLLC issues
a single license to the Video Lottery Facility, therefore, the table states ‘0’ Video Lottery
Concessionaire licenses were issued.
14

--- Page 17 ---
Table 2
Additional Permits and Privileges and Related Fees
Permits and Other Privileges Annual Fee
Live Entertainment (for Class B) $500
Off Premises Catering (for Class B) $500
Outdoor Table Service (for Class B) $200
Beer and Wine Tasting (for Class A) $25/per day
One Day Beer and Wine $25/ per day
One Day Beer, Wine, and Liquor $50/ per day
Special Amusement License (for Class D) $750
Refillable Container Permit (On Sale Licenses) $500
Refillable Container Permit (Off Sale Licenses) $50
Growler Fee $50
Special Sunday (for Class A) $75
Special Supplemental License (for class D) $75
Source: Annotated Code of Maryland
New and Transfer Licenses
Applicants for new licenses and license transfers complete an application form,
submit a fee of $600 to BLLC that consists of a $500 application fee and $100
hearing fee, and submit information for a criminal background check (for any new
license holders). A license transfer occurs when there is a change in ownership or
location, or when a licensee wants to provide additional services (such as live
entertainment) not covered by the existing license.
Applications are processed by BLLC staff who are to ensure applicants include all
required information and pay the appropriate fees. The Board schedules public
hearings to review the new and transfer applications, and to vote on approval of
the licenses. If approved, applicants must submit additional documents to BLLC
(such as a valid trader’s license and proof of personal property tax payment).
Once all documentation is submitted, BLLC staff will notify the applicant when
the license is ready for pick up and the applicant will pay the appropriate license
fee at that time and the license will be issued.
According to the Board, there has been a moratorium on the issuance of new
licenses since 1968, except for restaurant, arena, and hotel licenses, or as
authorized by law. In license year 2018 there were approximately 92 transfers
finalized according to BLLC’s system.
15

--- Page 18 ---
License Renewals
BLLC mails all current licensees a renewal application prior to March 1 of each
year. By law, licensees must file a renewal application between March 1 and
March 31. Renewal applications with the renewal processing fee ($50) are
submitted to BLLC either by mail or in person. BLLC may assess a late fee of
$50 per day, up to a maximum of $1,500, for renewal applications submitted after
March 31 of each year. BLLC staff will notify the applicant when the license is
ready for pick up and the applicant will pay the appropriate license fee at that
time. To retain their licenses, licensees must provide certain documents,
including a copy of valid trader’s license and proof of payment of personal
property taxes, by June 30th of each year.
Conclusion
Our preceding audit report included six findings in the Licensing Objective
(Findings 1-6 in the preceding audit report). We determined that BLLC
satisfactorily addressed five of these findings. The remaining finding regarding
cash receipts is repeated in this report.
Specifically, BLLC established SOPs providing structure to the licensing process
and allowing for consistency and accountability. We also found improvements in
processes used for license renewals, including collecting the appropriate fees and
obtaining updated criminal background information on licensees, as well as in the
timeliness of license transfers. Finally, BLLC had improved its accounts
receivable records to prevent licensees with outstanding balances from renewing
or transferring their licenses.
However, BLLC did not always follow established procedures for securing and
processing cash receipts, and certain procedures need improvement to ensure all
collections were deposited. According to Baltimore City records, BLLC’s
revenues totaled approximately $2.5 million in fiscal year 2018.
16

--- Page 19 ---
Findings
Finding 1
BLLC did not always follow its SOPs for securing and processing cash
receipts, and certain procedures need improvement to ensure all collections
are properly deposited.
Analysis
BLLC did not always follow its SOPs for securing and processing cash receipts,
and certain procedures need improvement to ensure all collections are properly
deposited. According to Baltimore City records, BLLC’s fiscal year 2018
revenues totaled approximately $2.5 million.
Processing Collections
Collections were not properly secured. Specifically, BLLC staff did not always
restrictively endorse checks immediately upon receipt as required by BLLC’s
SOPs. Specifically, we observed two employees responsible for processing
checks who did not restrictively endorse the checks immediately upon receipt as
required by the SOPs. In addition, BLLC did not always properly secure
undeposited checks in a locked cash box as required by its SOPs. In March 2019,
we found a cash box that had been left unlocked overnight and contained an
unendorsed check.
Separation of Duties
There was a lack of adequate separation of duties over cash receipts. Specifically,
one employee prepared checks for deposit and delivered the checks to the
Baltimore City Department of Finance (DoF) for bank deposit and recordation
into the City’s accounting records. This employee also periodically reconciled the
deposit documentation to these accounting records to ensure all receipts were
properly accounted for. Finally, this employee was assigned capabilities in the
cash receipts and licensing systems which allowed the employee to record a
collection and later void the collection and delete the license.
Although a supervisor reviewed the deposit reconciliations, the supervisor relied
on documents, including support for voided transactions, that were prepared by
the aforementioned employee. Consequently, this employee could misappropriate
collections without detection. During our testing, we did not note any
irregularities. We also noted that the transfer of checks to DoF were not
documented. After our inquiries, BLLC was told by DoF personnel that receipts
are not provided to entities for their collections received for deposit. The lack of a
policy at DoF to provide receipts makes the adequate segregation of duties over
the reconciliations all the more critical.
17

--- Page 20 ---
Similar conditions relating to processing of collections and the reconciliation
process were commented upon in our preceding audit report.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that BLLC
a. comply with its SOPs and ensure there are proper internal controls over
cash receipts, including restrictively endorsing all checks immediately
upon receipt and properly securing checks (repeat); and
b. ensure the deposit reconciliations are performed and voided transactions
are reviewed by an employee without access to collections (repeat) using
original source documentation.
We advised BLLC on accomplishing the necessary separation of duties using
existing personnel.
18

--- Page 21 ---
Objective 2 - Inspections
Objective and Methodology
Our objective for the inspection process was to evaluate the adequacy of BLLC
policies and procedures for conducting inspections of alcoholic beverage
licensees and maintaining related records, and to determine whether inspections
selected for review and testing were conducted in accordance with policies and
procedures.
To accomplish our objective, we reviewed applicable State laws, and the policies
and procedures established by the Board and BLLC administrative personnel
governing the inspection process and related records. We also obtained and
reviewed the Alcoholic Beverages Rules and Regulations for the Board of Liquor
License Commissioners for Baltimore City and BLLC’s Standard Operating
Procedures (SOPs) for license years 2018 and 2019. We interviewed BLLC staff
to determine the processes used to conduct, record, and monitor inspections.
We obtained a data file, which we deemed reliable for our purposes, from the
inspection database maintained for BLLC by the Baltimore City Office of
Information and Technology. The database included 6,159 inspection-related
activities conducted during license year 2018. We judgmentally selected a sample
of 60 licensees to determine if inspections were properly documented and
supported with an inspection report. Furthermore, we performed a detailed
review of information recorded in the database for one inspection for 20 of the
aforementioned licensees, to ensure inspections were properly conducted in
accordance with BLLC policies and recorded in the inspection database.
Finally, we tested 15 complaints registered through Baltimore City’s “311”
Customer Service Request System (311 System) to evaluate whether BLLC
properly handled complaint-initiated inspections.
Background
BLLC conducts periodic inspections of businesses licensed to sell alcoholic
beverages as well as licensed adult entertainment businesses in Baltimore City.
State law does not specify the frequency of or establish a schedule for required
inspections, but BLLC management advised us that its informal goal is to conduct
four inspections of each licensee annually. BLLC conducts three primary types of
inspections – routine, compliance, and investigation to be considered in achieving
the aforementioned goal. For each routine and compliance inspection, BLLC
inspectors prepare an inspection report, which is a paper form used to document
the compliance areas reviewed as well as any violations and corrective actions
needed.
19

--- Page 22 ---
According to the BLLC records, during license year 2018, BLLC inspectors
conducted 6,159 inspection-related activities, which consisted of 2,586 routine
inspections, 2,613 compliance inspections, 435 inspections in response to 311
System complaints, 220 investigations, 147 transfer/new application activities,
151 sign-posting activities, and 7 one-day event inspections.
 Routine inspections are inspections of licensed liquor establishments to
determine if they are open and operating in full compliance with the Alcoholic
Beverages Rules and Regulations for the Board of Liquor License
Commissioners for Baltimore City (such as validity of licenses and bathroom
operation and cleanliness).
 Compliance inspections are to determine whether an establishment is open
and operating and there are no significant peripheral violations.
 Investigation inspections of licensees are usually conducted based on
complaints or tips received from the public (such as for allegations of
underaged drinking or illegal gambling) or concerns noted by inspectors
during a routine inspection. These investigations may be conducted with
other government agencies such as the Baltimore Police Department.
 Inspections of licensees in response to complaints received from the Baltimore
City’s 311 Customer Service Request System are referred to as 311 complaint
inspections. The 311 System allows City residents to file complaints by
telephone or online. The 311 System’s employees refer complaints to the
appropriate agency for follow up. Agencies receiving the referrals may
update the complaint system with the current status and ultimate complaint
resolution. This information is available to the public via the 311 System
website.
 New/transfer application activities are completed by inspectors at the site of a
proposed new license or the transfer of an existing license to another location
to post a sign and gather information. This information includes if the
location is the required distance away from schools and how many liquor
establishments are within a defined area.
 Sign-posting activities are completed by inspectors at a licensed establishment
or an establishment for which the license is pending Board approval. The
inspector places the sign and takes photos indicating it was placed and the
photos are then uploaded into the inspection database.
20

--- Page 23 ---
 One-day inspections occur for special events such as beer and wine festivals
to ensure the event is operating according to the Alcoholic Beverages Rules
and Regualtions for the Board of Liquor License Commissioners for
Baltimore City.
BLLC has written guidance over the Inspection Division operations. Specifically,
the Alchoholic Beverages Rules and Regulations for the Board of Liquor License
Commissioners for Balitmore City, revised December 17, 2015, provides specific
guidance to licensees and is used as criteria for determining violations. State law
requires BLLC to review these Rules and Regulations every five years thereafter.
As a result of our preceding audits, BLLC prepared SOPs that were approved by
the Board. The SOPs were first adopted in 2016 and have been updated each year
in 2017, 2018, and 2019.
Conclusion
Our preceding audit report included five findings in the Inspection Objective
(Findings 7-11 in the preceding audit report). We determined that BLLC
satisfactorily addressed four of these findings. The remaining finding was not
reviewed during this audit based on our current assessment of significance and
risk to our audit objectives.
Specifically, BLLC established SOPs for the inspection process which included
guidance on conducting and documenting inspections and the processing and
resolutions of 311 System complaints. Additionally, BLLC implemented an
inspection database which monitors inspection activity and outcomes, and stores
critical inspection information and inspection documentation. BLLC also
maintained documentation that duties, including supervision of inspection staff
and review of inspection results, were performed by the Chief Inspector.
However, the SOPs were not comprehensive since they did not require that
inspection reports be retained after being recorded, did not require that recorded
inspection information be independently verified to source documentation (the
inspection reports), did not formally establish the frequency and type of
inspections to be conducted for each licensee, and did not specify if and when
follow-up inspections should be conducted after violations are noted.
Additionally, we noted that BLLC did not always follow its SOPs when
investigating 311 System complaints and there were instances in which inspectors
did not issue violations for repeated substantiated complaints nor document the
reason why a violation was not issued. Finally, BLLC needs to improve its
methodology to monitor the frequency of inspections conducted of each
establishment annually.
21

--- Page 24 ---
Findings
Finding 2
BLLC’s SOPs did not include certain critical aspects of the inspection
process.
Analysis
BLLC’s SOPs, established after our preceding audit, were not as comprehensive
as necessary, as they did not specifically address certain critical aspects of the
inspection process.
 The SOPs did not require inspection reports to be retained after entry into the
inspection database, and did not require inspection information recorded to be
independently reviewed for accuracy. Consequently, our tests of inspections
disclosed that BLLC did not always retain the inspection reports and
inspection information was not always accurately recorded (Finding 3).
 The SOPs did not specify the frequency of or establish a formal schedule for
required inspections for each licensed establishment. BLLC management
advised us that its informal goal is to inspect each establishment at least four
times each year, including at least one routine inspection (Finding 6).
 The SOPs did not specify if and when follow-up inspections should be
conducted after issues or violations are noted (Finding 5). Follow-up
inspections are necessary to ensure that establishments have taken corrective
action to address the noted issues or violations.
BLLC generally has discretion over follow-up inspections except for instances
of investigating establishments selling alcohol to underage individuals through
undercover underage buy attempts. BLLC management advised that these
inspections are performed in conjunction with the Baltimore Police
Department and BLLC does not have complete control over the
establishments selected for follow-up inspections. Nonetheless, the SOPs
should specify the timeframes for attempting to perform follow-up
inspections, including for underage buy attempts, and should provide
guidance on documenting instances in which BLLC is unable to perform
follow-up inspections that involve assistance from the Baltimore Police
Department.
Recommendation 2
We recommend BLLC enhance its SOPs to address the aforementioned
critical aspects of the inspection process.
22

--- Page 25 ---
Finding 3
BLLC did not always retain inspection reports to support the information
recorded in the inspection database. Additionally, the recorded information
was not independently reviewed for accuracy.
Analysis
BLLC did not always retain inspection reports to support the information
recorded in the inspection database by BLLC personnel. Additionally, the
recorded information was not independently reviewed for accuracy. As noted in
Finding 2, the SOPs did not contain these requirements.
For 60 judgmentally selected establishments, we reviewed the routine,
compliance, and investigation inspections recorded in the inspection database
during license year 2018 to determine if the inspections were supported by an
inspection report. These 60 establishments had 263 inspections recorded in the
inspection database; however, BLLC could only provide the inspection reports
supporting 52 inspections (20 percent). For example, BLLC could not provide
any inspection reports to support all 43 inspections recorded for 25
establishments.
Our limited testing of available inspection reports noted that data were generally
reflected accurately in the inspection database. However, we noted that
inspection information was not always recorded in a manner consistent with
requirements established in the SOPs. We performed a detailed review of
information recorded in the database for one inspection for 20 of the
aforementioned establishments, none of which had supporting inspection reports.
We determined that 15 inspections were not documented accurately as required
by the SOPs.
For example, proper photos of the establishments were not documented for 11
inspections, including 2 inspections that did not include any photos, 1 inspection
that included a photo of the wrong establishment, and 2 inspections that reused
photos from a previous inspection. A current photo is required by the SOP and
provides assurance that the establishment is open and operating (an inspection
attribute). In addition, required information (such as trader’s license expiration
date and fire capacity) was not recorded into the database for 7 inspections and
the business name or address was incorrectly recorded for 2 inspections. Since
the inspection report was not retained for any of these inspections, we were
unable to determine if these were recordation errors or deficiencies in the
conducted inspections.
23

--- Page 26 ---
Recommendation 3
We recommend that BLLC
a. retain inspection reports to support the information recorded in the
inspection database, and
b. establish a process to independently review inspection information
recorded for accuracy and consistency.
Finding 4
BLLC did not always follow its SOPs when investigating and documenting
complaints received through Baltimore City’s 311 complaint system.
Analysis
BLLC did not always follow its SOPs in response to complaints received through
Baltimore City’s 311 System. BLLC received 1,586 complaints through the 311
System during the period from May 1, 2017 through January 9, 2019. Our test of
BLLC’s response to 15 complaints (recorded in the 311 System database)
disclosed that 12 complaints were not adequately investigated or documentation
of the investigations was deficient. For 7 of the 12 complaints, multiple
deficiencies were noted. Table 3 reflects our test results of the 15 complaint
investigations.
Table 3
Results of 311 Complaint Testing
Lack of
Inadequate Documented
Inadequate Complainant
Test Actions Taken Reasons for
Inspection Not
Item to Investigate not Issuing
Documentation Contacted
Complaints Violation
Notices
1  
2
3
4 
5 
6  
7  
8  
9
10  
11  
12 
13   
14 
15 
TOTAL 4 8 3 5
24

--- Page 27 ---
Inadequate Actions Taken to Investigate Complaints
We determined that four complaints tested were not adequately investigated. For
two of the complaints related to loud noise, the inspectors investigated them on
the following day at a time when similar conditions would not have been
observed (such as when the establishment was closed). For the third complaint,
also related to loud noise, the inspector did not visit the establishment or speak
with an employee of the establishment prior to clearing the complaint, as required
by the SOPs. For the final complaint tested, which related to operating after
hours, BLLC did not have documentation to indicate if the inspector visited the
establishment or spoke with an employee of the establishment, and there was no
documentation as to whether the complaint was substantiated.
Inadequate Inspection Documentation
We determined that eight investigations tested were not adequately documented.
Seven investigations were not recorded in the inspection database, as required by
the SOPs. Inspectors are required to enter a report of the observed activity into
the BLLC inspection database, without regard to whether the complaint was
substantiated, and to inform the bartender or manager of the licensed
establishment of the complaint. For the final investigation tested the photos used
,
were from a previously recorded inspection. The failure to record the complaints
in the inspection database results in an incomplete complaint history for the
licensed establishment. For the eight investigations tested, we did note, however,
that the responses to the complaints were recorded in the separate Baltimore City
311 System as required by the SOPs .
Lack of Documented Reasons for Not Issuing Violation Notices
We determined that, for three investigations tested—all of which were noise
complaints—the inspector did not document the reason(s) for not issuing a
violation notice, despite witnessing the loud music (two establishments) and the
fact that the establishments (three establishments) had a history of previously
abated noise complaints as reflected in the 311 System.
Complainant Not Contacted
Complainants for five investigations tested provided phone numbers; however,
there was no documentation that BLLC made contact with the complainant either
before or after the related investigation. For one of these five, the complainant
specifically requested to be contacted by BLLC before the investigation.
Contacting the complainant prior to the investigation provides the inspector with
the opportunity to gather additional, relevant information. BLLC’s SOPs require
the inspector to contact the complainant, if a phone number is provided, both
during the preliminary investigation and after the results of the investigation are
determined.
25

--- Page 28 ---
Recommendation 4
We recommend that BLLC conduct adequate and documented investigations
of complaints received through the City’s 311 System in accordance with its
SOPs.
Finding 5
BLLC inspectors did not always follow up on inspection violations and did
not always document conclusions when conducting inspections.
Analysis
BLLC did not always conduct follow-up inspections or take other action to ensure
licensees resolved violations noted during inspections. Additionally, BLLC
inspectors did not always document their conclusions when conducting
inspections. As noted in Finding 2, the SOPs did not specify if and when follow-
up inspections should be performed for violations noted during inspections.
For the 20 inspections described in Finding 3 that we reviewed in detail, there
were 10 inspections which identified violations or other issues. For 6 of the 10
inspections, however, there was no documentation that a BLLC inspector had
followed up to determine if the violations and other issues had been resolved. For
2 of the 6 inspections, licensees were operating in a manner inconsistent with the
type of license issued, and for 2 of the 6 inspections establishments were serving
underage customers.
Additionally, BLLC inspectors did not always document conclusions when
conducting 3 of the 20 inspections tested. For example, inspection information
recorded in the database for one establishment indicated that the establishment did
not have a trader’s license, which is required by State law; however, there was no
indication that the inspector issued a warning or took other action to ensure
compliance.
Recommendation 5
We recommend that BLLC
a. conduct follow-up inspections or take other appropriate actions to
ensure violations noted during inspections are resolved, and
b. ensure inspectors are documenting conclusions when conducting
inspections.
26

--- Page 29 ---
Finding 6
BLLC’s process to monitor the inspections of licensed establishments did not
provide assurance that all licensees were subject to an annual inspection or
inspected at appropriate frequencies.
Analysis
BLLC’s methodology to monitor that its licensed establishments were inspected
at appropriate frequencies needs improvement. While State law does not specify
the frequency of required inspections, BLLC management advised us that its
informal goal is for each of its over 1,200 licensees is to annually conduct four
inspections, including one routine inspection to determine if the establishment is
open and operating in full compliance with the Alcoholic Beverages Rules and
Regulations for the Board of Liquor License Commissioners for Baltimore City.1
However, the report BLLC used to monitor the frequency of establishment
inspections for its more than 1,200 licensees contained certain activities that,
although counted as an inspection activities, did not include actual physical
inspections of the establishments as anticipated by the goal.
Consequently, the report used by BLLC during bi-monthly meetings with
inspectors to monitor the frequency of inspections needed to achieve the annual
goal of four inspections, included activities such as sign-posting activities and
transfer application activities. While these are important activities to monitor,
they are not actual inspections to be considered under the annual inspection goal.
As such, the inclusion of these activities overstates the true inspection activity and
should not be considered in determining if establishments are being adequately
monitored for compliance with the Alcoholic Beverages Rules and Regulations
for the Board of Liquor License Commissioners for Baltimore City. We
determined that these non-inspection activities are separately reported elsewhere
and could be excluded during the bi-monthly meetings when the frequency of
establishment inspections is being reviewed.
Based on our analysis of activities recorded in the database for license year 2018,
approximately 20 percent of the activity included in the inspection goal and
monitoring reports did not represent activity related to the goal. In our opinion,
to ensure effective monitoring, the reports should only include routine,
compliance and investigation inspections which BLLC uses to determine the
achievement of its four inspection goal for each establishment.
Based on our analysis of the inspection database, we determined that 58
establishments did not have any inspections during license year 2018 and 581
1 As noted in Finding 2, we have taken issue with the SOPs not formalizing the frequency of or
schedule for required inspections.
27

--- Page 30 ---
establishments had fewer than four inspections conducted, including 90 that
received only one inspection. We also noted that 127 establishments did not have
a routine inspection during license year 2018. Routine inspections are more
comprehensive than all other inspections and would include, for example, a
review to ensure the establishment is properly purchasing its alcohol from a
distributor, the bar is clean and meets Baltimore City Health Department
Standards, and the bathroom and kitchen are clean and working. Subsequently,
BLLC management advised us that almost half of the 58 establishments with no
inspections were closed or had a pending request for an extension based on a
qualifying hardship event, which if correct still leaves occurrences of licensed
operating establishments without any inspection during the year.
Recommendation 6
We recommend that BLLC
a. modify the methodology used to monitor the frequency of inspections
conducted of each licensed establishment, and
b. ensure that all licensed establishments are periodically inspected.
28

--- Page 31 ---
Objective 3 – Disciplinary Procedures
Objective and Methodology
Our objective for BLLC’s disciplinary procedures was to evaluate the disciplinary
process, BLLC’s compliance with applicable State laws, its enforcement of
applicable Alcoholic Beverages Rules and Regulations for the Board of Liquor
License Commissioners for Baltimore City governing licensees, and its
maintenance of disciplinary records.
To accomplish this objective, we interviewed BLLC employees to determine the
process that occurs when it is determined that a violation may have occurred. We
also observed six public Board hearings in which cases resulting from licensee
violations were adjudicated. Additionally, we performed testing to evaluate
whether the disciplinary process was properly administered and documented. We
also reviewed the monitoring of licensees inactive for more than 180 days which
would expire, by law, to determine if the Board and BLLC took appropriate
action.
Background
Disciplinary proceedings occur to adjudicate instances of licensee noncompliance
with State laws and the Alcoholic Beverages Rules and Regulation for the Board
of Liquor License Commissioners for Baltimore City. Disciplinary proceedings
result from violations noted during licensee inspections (including complaint
investigations), “311” complaint inspections, and referrals received from the
Baltimore Police Department and other regulatory entities. Instances of licensee
noncompliance are subject to internal reviews prior to being sent to the Board for
adjudication.
State law provides that the Board is charged with the duty of enforcing provisions
of the Alcoholic Beverages Article of the Annotated Code of Maryland. The
Board is responsible for adjudicating cases to determine if violations have
actually occurred and for setting the related penalties. The Board generally holds
hearings three times a month in public sessions to adjudicate these cases, as well
as to grant new licenses and license transfers. The hearings are considered quasi-
judicial and include testimony from inspectors, police, and licensee
representatives, including counsel. The Board will obtain other information, as
needed (such as the licensee’s violations history), prior to making a decision and
determining whether a penalty is appropriate. The “preponderance of the
evidence” standard is used to determine if the licensee has been found in violation
of the Alcoholic Beverages Rules and Regulation for the Board of Liquor License
Commissioners for Baltimore City. Licensees may appeal the decisions of the
Board to the Circuit Court.
29

--- Page 32 ---
Licensees are provided the Board’s rulings verbally at the hearing and in writing
in a Penalty Assessment Notice if the ruling results in a penalty (fine, suspension,
or revocation). The Notice includes the amount of the penalty, and the amount of
time the licensee has to pay the fine (usually 30 days). If the licensee fails to pay
the fine within 30 days, the license will be physically removed by a BLLC
inspector.
The Alcoholic Beverages Article of the Annotated Code of Maryland includes
penalty provisions for licensees found guilty of violating State law and/or the
Alcoholic Beverages Rules and Regulation for the Board of Liquor License
Commissioners for Baltimore City.
 For any violation which is cause for suspension, the Board may, for a first
offense, impose a fine of not more than $500 or suspend the license or
both.
 For any subsequent offense, the Board may impose a fine of not more than
$3,000 or suspend the license or both.
 For underage sales of alcohol, the Board may impose a fine not exceeding
$1,000 or suspend the license or both.
 The Board may revoke or suspend any license for any cause which, in the
judgment of the Board, is necessary to promote the peace or safety of the
community in which the place of business is situated.
 A license must be revoked or suspended under certain specific
circumstances (such as when a licensee makes a material false statement
in any application for a license or permit).
According to BLLC’s records, in fiscal year 2018 there were 166 fines assessed
by the Board totaling approximately $148,350. Table 4 below reflects a summary
of Board hearings for fiscal year 2018.
30

--- Page 33 ---
Table 4
Board of Liquor License Commissioners for Baltimore City Hearings
Fiscal Year 2018
Number Number Percentage Percentage
Referral Source of of of of
Hearings Violations Hearings Violations
Baltimore Police Department 2 5 1% 2%
BLLC Inspectors 13 28 7% 10%
Comptroller of Maryland 1 1 0% 0%
Baltimore Police Department and
134 168 67% 61%
BLLC Inspectors
Sheriff’s Office and BLLC Inspectors 35 38 18% 14%
Other - combination of multiple referral sources 15 37 7% 13%
TOTALS 200 277 100% 100%
Source: Board of Liquor License Commissioner for Balitmore City’s meeting minutes
Conclusion
Our preceding audit report included two findings in the Disciplinary Procedures
Objective (Findings 12-13 in the preceding audit report). We determined that
BLLC satisfactorily addressed both of these findings. Specifically, BLLC
established comprehensive SOPs for the disciplinary process which included
guidance on when violations should be brought to the Board and which set an
appropriate standard of timeliness for conducting hearings. Additionally, the
SOPs included guidance for monitoring establishments that were closed to
determine if the alcoholic beverage licenses had expired in accordance with State
law.
However, during the current audit we determined that BLLC did not properly
track and monitor certain instances of licensee noncompliance (such as building
violations) and did not always maintain sufficient documentation of internal
reviews performed to support determinations of whether to present instances of
noncompliance to the Board for adjudication. Specifically, BLLC only tracked
and maintained documentation of the reviews performed related to instances of
noncompliance involving the Baltimore Police Department or the Baltimore City
Sheriff’s Office, but not for instances of noncompliance noted by BLLC
inspectors or other regulatory agencies.
31

--- Page 34 ---
Findings
Finding 7
BLLC did not track and monitor instances of licensee noncompliance that
did not involve the Baltimore Police Department or the Baltimore City
Sheriff’s Office to ensure that each was properly addressed.
Analysis
BLLC did not track and monitor instances of licensee noncompliance (such as,
building violations) that did not involve the Police Department or Sheriff’s Office
to ensure that each was properly addressed. BLLC also did not maintain
documentation of internal reviews performed to support determinations of
whether to present instances of noncompliance to the Board for adjudication.
While BLLC maintained a status log and supporting documentation for instances
of noncompliance referred by the Police Department and the Sheriff’s Office
similar documents were not maintained for other instances of noncompliance. As
a result, BLLC lacked assurance that all instances of licensee noncompliance were
reviewed, properly addressed, or reported as potential violations to the Board.
We tested two instances of noncompliance that did not involve the Police
Department or Sheriff’s Office. We noted that there was no documentation that
one instance of noncompliance had been addressed. This instance of
noncompliance from November 2017 involved electrical problems in which a
“cease and desist” order to stop all operations was issued by the Baltimore City
Fire Department. As of February of 2019 there was no documentation that this
instance of noncompliance had been internally reviewed or presented to the Board
for action (such as assessment of a fine or suspension of license). We were
advised by BLLC management that this instance of noncompliance should likely
have been presented to the Board.
Recommendation 7
We recommend that BLLC
a. track and monitor all instances of licensee noncompliance; and
b. maintain documentation of the reviews performed to support
determinations, including referral of instances of noncompliance to the
Board (as potential violations).
32

--- Page 35 ---
Objective 4 – Management Oversight
Objective and Methodology
Our objective was to review management processes to determine whether proper
oversight exists over BLLC operations. To accomplish this objective, we
reviewed Board approved SOPs, interviewed BLLC employees, and reviewed
BLLC’s procedures with respect to employee payroll, employee performance
evaluations, financial disclosures and potential conflicts of interest, and the
digitization of BLLC records. We also tested payroll processing, employee
independence, and employee evaluations.
Conclusion
Our preceding audit report included five findings in the Management Oversight
Objective (Findings 14-18). We determined that BLLC satisfactorily addressed
these five findings.
Specifically, BLLC implemented management practices to oversee its operations
and to help ensure efficient and effective practices which included the
establishment of SOPs which aided in BLLC resolving a significant number of
findings identified in the preceding audit report. Additionally, BLLC established
a process to formally evaluate employee performance on a routine basis, required
employees and commissioners to file annual disclosures with the State Ethics
Commission, and established recommended controls over payroll. Furthermore,
license records were also digitized by BLLC as required by State law, and
regulations regarding ensuring the safety of personally identifiable information
were adopted.
Our current audit found that while BLLC did monitor Board and employee
compliance with State ethics filing requirements, procedures were not established
to monitor employee and commissioner compliance with statutory independence
restrictions regarding secondary employment and business investments.
33

--- Page 36 ---
Findings
Finding 8
BLLC did not have an ongoing internal process to identify potential conflicts
regarding interests in the alcohol beverage industry consistent with State law
specific to BLLC.
Analysis
BLLC did not have an ongoing internal process to identify potential conflicts in
the alcohol beverage industry consistent with the Alcoholic Beverages Article of
the Annotated Code of Maryland specific to BLLC. Although subsequent to the
preceding audit report, BLLC did obtain written attestations from existing
employees in 2016 and established a process to obtain written attestations when
new employees are hired as to the potential conflicts, BLLC did not require
employees and commissioners to periodically attest to their knowledge of and
compliance with independence requirements concerning business investments and
secondary employment specific to the alcohol beverage industry.
BLLC management advised us that it believed that its employees’ and
commissioners’ annual disclosures with the State Ethics Commission (SEC),
effective October 2017, were sufficient to address any conflict of interest
concerns of fact or appearance. While the SEC annual disclosures address
securities held, ownership in business entities, and secondary employment, the
disclosures were not tailored to address the independence requirements of the
aforementioned State law. This law requires that BLLC employees and
commissioners not have a direct or indirect occupation, business, or investment
interest in a premise where alcoholic beverages are manufactured, distributed, or
sold. Additionally, employees and commissioners are forbidden from soliciting
or accepting a commission, remuneration, gift, or political contribution from a
person engaged in the manufacture or sale of alcoholic beverages or a license
holder. Therefore, only obvious conflicts of interest (such as a business with
“liquor” in the name) may draw the attention of the SEC if it happened to review
the disclosures in detail. In these situations, the SEC would notify BLLC of the
potential conflict of interest.
We reached out to the SEC staff regarding the sole reliance on annual SEC
reporting. Although the SEC staff would not formally commit to the desirability
of enhanced reporting, as we are recommending, we were advised that it was
understood that some agencies impose ethical standards on their employees that
exceed the requirements of Public Ethics Law. In the case of the BLLC
employees and commissioners, we believe that significant potential conflicts and
34

--- Page 37 ---
additional ethical standards exist beyond those to be identified by SEC reporting,
justifying periodic additional unique reporting.
Recommendation 8
We recommend that BLLC supplement the required annual SEC disclosures
with a separate internal periodic process (such as, annually) for employees
and commissioners to identify potential conflicts in the alcohol beverage
industry specific to BLLC’s law, as is already required from employees at the
time of their initial hire.
35

--- Page 38 ---
APPENDIX

--- Page 40 ---
OLA Presentation of Documentation Included with BLLC’s
Response
The Board’s formal response to the audit report included a number of additional
documents that in our opinion are not directly related to BLLC’s positions on the
factual accuracy of each report finding and its agreement or disagreement with
each audit recommendation. Consequently, we have declined to include those
documents as an appendix to this report. However, as a courtesy to the Board, we
have included the following documents on our website to accompany the audit
report, as Supplements to the Board’s Response:
 BLLC’s 2020 Standard Operating Procedures
 Department of Finance Audit Letter
 Letters from the State Ethics Commission
 Letter from the Baltimore City Ethics Board
The following Board submitted documents were excluded in their entirety from
publication by us, as they included business names and addresses, which is
contrary to our policy of not publicizing such personal information in our audit
reports:
 2019 and 2020 Police Tracker
 BLLC Item Listing

--- Page 41 ---
Board of Liquor License Commissioners
for Baltimore City
Agency Response Form
Finding 1
BLLC did not always follow its SOPs for securing and processing cash receipts, and certain
procedures need improvement to ensure all collections are properly deposited.
We recommend that BLLC
a. comply with its SOPs and ensure there are proper internal controls over cash receipts,
including restrictively endorsing all checks immediately upon receipt and properly
securing checks (repeat); and
b. ensure the deposit reconciliations are performed and voided transactions are reviewed
by an employee without access to collections (repeat) using original source
documentation.
We advised BLLC on accomplishing the necessary separation of duties using existing
personnel.
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide Although the auditors state that employees may not have immediately
additional comments as endorsed checks upon receipt at the front counter as directed by our SOPs,
deemed necessary. it is a common practice for staff to take such invoices back to their desks
and endorse the checks there. The BLLC also has a backup policy in place
to prevent any misappropriation of checks or money orders. In addition, the
BLLC believes that its SOPs address how checks and money orders are
deposited with the City and its deposit reconciliation process is sufficient to
protect its financial operations.
Recommendation 1a Disagree Estimated Completion Date: Completed
Please provide details of The BLLC disagrees with the implication of the Auditor’s “repeat” finding
corrective action or that the agency does not ensure that its employees “comply with its SOPs”
explain disagreement. concerning its financial operations. As per the SOPs, the accountant reviews
invoices created by front office staff to ensure that each invoice matches
with an “endorsed” check received by the BLLC. If the accountant
discovers an invoice not associated with a check or vice versa, the
accountant will bring this to the attention of the Assistant Executive
Secretary or front office staff member to rectify the issue. The BLLC admits
that the Auditors found one instance where an employee did not secure his
or her lockbox after placing the check inside of it. However, the Auditors
only performed one spot check during their 4 months on site and upon
conducting their inspection did not show interest in viewing the Assistant
Executive Secretary or Accountant’s lockboxes – these individuals secure
almost all of the checks after hours – during their one spot check.
Nevertheless, the BLLC did reprimand the employee and provided
Page 1 of 12

--- Page 42 ---
Board of Liquor License Commissioners
for Baltimore City
Agency Response Form
additional training to ensure checks/money orders were secure. The BLLC
will continue to train and monitor its employees for compliance within its
internal controls over cash receipts.
Recommendation 1b Disagree Estimated Completion Date: Completed
Please provide details of The BLLC strongly disagrees with the Auditor’s “repeat” finding. In the
corrective action or 2016 Audit, the OLA stated that “there was a lack of adequate separation of
explain disagreement. duties over the cash receipts and accounts receivable function.” The OLA
further added that since the BLLC did not have adequate staffing, as BLLC
had an Accounting Assistant at the time, the agency should “implement
independent supervisory reviews to ensure the propriety and completeness
of cash receipt deposits and the appropriateness of voided receipts and
accounts receivable.” Subsequent to the OLA 2016 Audit, the BLLC
worked with the Department of Finance (DOF) to create SOPs, which
would provide for an “independent supervisory review” of cash receipt
deposits and the appropriateness of voided receipts and accounts receivable.
In addition, the BLLC created an Accountant position – the BLLC never
had an accountant to oversee its deposits and invoices – and hired for that
position in early 2017. With the SOPs and personnel in place, the BLLC
initiated monthly meetings (AccountingStat) wherein the Deputy Executive
Secretary (DES) reviewed all of the work product of the Accountant, which
included invoices, deposits, voids, deposit reconciliations, and distribution
of monies into DOF accounts that the agency issued. Before implementing
these SOPs, the DOF reviewed and approved the processes as sufficient to
meet the “independent supervisory review” requested by the OLA in 2016.
Using this model, the agency ensures compliance with financial protocols
established by the DOF in its SOPs – which include deposit reconciliations
and allocation of revenues. Lastly, the BLLC lacks control over the manner
in which it receives in-person paper verification for deposits it makes with
the DOF. DOF’s system is not structured to provide such documentation.
What the City’s system does provide – and does so with similarly situated
agencies – is an electronic report detailing all deposits made by submitted
batch. See attached letter from Baltimore City Finance Director Mr. Henry
Raymond. Our Accountant, who has direct access to these reports, reviews
them to ensure each check deposited was recorded and placed in the correct
revenue account. Any inconsistences are relayed to DOF, which in turn
reviews, responds, and addresses any concerns. DOF has approved and
sanctioned the aforementioned processes as sufficient to meet the
“independent supervisory review” requested by the OLA in 2016.
Auditor’s Comment: BLLC disagrees with elements of Finding 1 and with both
Recommendations 1a) and 1b). The primary basis for the disagreement is BLLC’s
contention that its processes are in accordance with Baltimore City government cash
Page 2 of 12

--- Page 43 ---
Board of Liquor License Commissioners
for Baltimore City
Agency Response Form
handling policies and procedures. OLA was not charged with auditing the Baltimore City
government in general, but observes that the condition reported on in Finding 1
represents inadequate internal control and is contrary to basic internal control
requirements, including those established by the Comptroller of Maryland in its
Accounting Procedures Manual which requires in part, the “immediate (OLA emphasis)
recording of cash receipts for accounting control purposes”, the “restrictive endorsement
of checks ‘for deposit only’ immediately upon receipt (OLA emphasis)”, and the
“segregation of the cash receipts handling duties from the cash receipts and` accounts
receivable record keeping, billing and reconciliation (OLA emphasis) functions.” These
controls were not found to be practiced by the BLLC. For that reason, the findings were
appropriately considered to be repeated from the preceding audit report. Finally, the last
element of BLLC’s response to Recommendation 1b re: a deposit receipt from the City
Finance Office is irrelevant, and should be ignored as the issue does not appear in the
audit report.
The letter from the Baltimore City Finance Director referenced in BLLC’s response is not
included as part of the report, but is included on the OLA website as Supplements to the
Board’s Response.
Page 3 of 12

--- Page 44 ---
Board of Liquor License Commissioners
for Baltimore City
Agency Response Form
Finding 2
BLLC’s SOPs did not include certain critical aspects of the inspection process.
We recommend BLLC enhance its SOPs to address the aforementioned critical aspects of
the inspection process.
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide The BLLC appreciates the input from the OLA as it relates to this finding
additional comments as and has included such additional guidance in its 2020 SOPs to address
deemed necessary. aspects of the inspection process highlighted in 2020 OLA Audit.
Recommendation 2 Agree Estimated Completion Date: 4/1/2020
Please provide details of Within its 2020 SOPs the BLLC established polices that require inspection
corrective action or reports to be retained and processes to independently review inspection
explain disagreement. reports, provide additional guidance on 311 investigations, and direct
inspectors on the issuance of violations.
Page 4 of 12

--- Page 45 ---
Board of Liquor License Commissioners
for Baltimore City
Agency Response Form
Finding 3
BLLC did not always retain inspection reports to support the information recorded in the
inspection database. Additionally, the recorded information was not independently
reviewed for accuracy.
We recommend that BLLC
a. retain inspection reports to support the information recorded in the inspection
database, and
b. establish a process to independently review inspection information recorded for
accuracy and consistency.
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide In 2016, the BLLC worked with the Baltimore City Information
additional comments as Technology Department (BCIT) to create a software program that allows
deemed necessary. inspectors to input inspection report information and generate a digital
report that was maintained on our database. Intent on having a “paperless”
inspections process, the BLLC heeded the advice of BCIT and began to
destroy all of its original reports starting in 2018 once the information was
recorded into the Sharepoint system and automatically uploaded to the
BLLC’s on-line library each week. In August of 2018, the BLLC received
advice from the Attorney General’s Office indicating that the BLLC should
cease and desist from destroying such records in order to maintain the
original documents. The BLLC immediately complied with the Attorney
General’s advice and now maintains the original inspection reports within
each case file.
Recommendation 3a Agree Estimated Completion Date: 4/1/2020
Please provide details of To address this finding, in its 2020 SOPs, the BLLC drafted SOP 3.05
corrective action or “Approval Pathway Process for Routine and Compliance Inspections,”
explain disagreement. which requires each inspector to maintain and submit each original copy of
their inspection report to the Chief Inspector. After review and approval of
the report, the Chief Inspector delivers the report to the administrative
division for filing.
Recommendation 3b Agree Estimated Completion Date: 4/1/2020
Please provide details of To address this finding, in its 2020 SOPs, the BLLC drafted SOP 3.05
corrective action or “Approval Pathway Process for Routine and Compliance Inspections,”
explain disagreement. which establishes a process wherein the Chief Inspector or his or her
designee to independently review each inspector’s report for accuracy and
consistence. The BLLC had informally used such a process in 2018, but
finally formalized it with its 2020 SOPs and has trained its inspection staff
accordingly in its use.
Page 5 of 12

--- Page 46 ---
Board of Liquor License Commissioners
for Baltimore City
Agency Response Form
Finding 4
BLLC did not always follow its SOPs when investigating and documenting complaints
received through Baltimore City’s 311 complaint system.
We recommend that BLLC conduct adequate and documented investigations of complaints
received through the City’s 311 System in accordance with its SOPs.
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide The BLLC follows a two-step process that involves two separate systems
additional comments as for recording and reporting all 311 calls. The first, called Salesforce, sends
deemed necessary. an email to an inspector immediately after the call for service is entered on-
line or via phone. As per the BLLC’s SOPs, the assigned inspector is to
respond, investigate, and report on his or her findings. He or she does so by
sending an electronic report to the Salesforce system which provides a
description of the inspector’s observations, the actions taken by the
inspector to address the allegation, if applicable, and a final resolution to the
issue. Second, inspector is then required – on the next working day – to
return to the office and complete a second report concerning the 311 call
and enter that report into the BLLC’s Sharepoint Inspection system. In each
case cited by the auditors, the BLLC received, responded to when practical,
and closed out the 311 call in a timely manner. Most of the issues cited by
the auditors in this finding had nothing to do with whether or not the BLLC
received, responded, or reported in the Salesforce system on a 311 call, but
had to do with lack of proof that an inspector called a complainant or
inspectors’ reports submitted to the BLLC’s Sharepoint system. Lastly, as
to the Auditors’ concerns regarding how the BLLC may not follow-up on
311 calls, the BLLC would like to make clear that the agency reviews all
311 calls every two weeks, identifies establishments that receive 2 or more
calls, and allocates investigative resources to those establishments to
determine the validity of the complaint, if the inspector is unable to do so at
the time of the call.
Recommendation 4 Agree Estimated Completion Date: 4/1/2020
Please provide details of Addressing the Auditor’s concerns, the BLLC drafted enhanced policies
corrective action or and procedures regarding how inspectors shall respond, report, and close
explain disagreement. out all 311 calls. As per 2020 SOP 3.06 “311 Response Policy,” the BLLC
requires inspectors to contact complainants, instructs inspectors on referrals
to applicable agencies for violations outside of the BLLC’s scope, and
provides general guidance and increased flexibility on how to respond and
report on: noise complaints, sanitation and safety issues, operating after
hour complaints, and repeat calls for service.
Page 6 of 12

--- Page 47 ---
Board of Liquor License Commissioners
for Baltimore City
Agency Response Form
Finding 5
BLLC inspectors did not always follow up on inspection violations and did not always
document conclusions when conducting inspections.
We recommend that BLLC
a. conduct follow-up inspections or take other appropriate actions to ensure violations
noted during inspections are resolved, and
b. ensure inspectors are documenting conclusions when conducting inspections.
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide The BLLC disagrees with the conclusion that the OLA found in their
additional comments as analysis. Furthermore, the OLA’s analysis is misleading and would leave
deemed necessary. one to interpret that the BLLC neither issues nor charges violations for
underage drinking or BD7 tavern checks.
Recommendation 5a Disagree Estimated Completion Date: Completed
Please provide details of For each of the 20 cases the audit team identified, the BLLC either issued a
corrective action or violation or a violation was not warranted. Of the 10 violations identified by
explain disagreement. the Audit team, all 10 were charged by the BLLC and brought before the
Board for a public hearing, found guilty, and were issued a fine and/or
suspension. The OLA’s concern in these cases is that the BLLC did not
return to the same locations and test the same licensees to determine
whether or not they would commit the same infractions. That is what the
Auditors are defining as not “following-up.” The BLLC disagrees with such
a finding as the agency lacks the capacity to perform the necessary “follow-
up” the auditors deem appropriate. For example, the 10 cases that the
auditors cite involve sales to minors or BD7 checks. Such cases can only be
investigated only in conjunction with Baltimore City Police Department
resources – i.e. the BLLC uses Baltimore City Police Cadets to attempt
underage purchases. While the BLLC suggests locations for the BCPD to
visit to conduct enforcement, it is the BCPD that ultimately chooses where
to conduct such enforcement and, for the most part, their decision on where
to conduct covert operations is based on calls for service regarding violent
crime, not whether or not a licensed establishment sells to a minor. While
there are times that such trends correspond, there are many times that they
do not. In addition, the usefulness of an underage cadet is limited in time
and location when conducting such operations. Once a cadet’s identity is
discovered, his or her likeness is either remembered or communicated to
other license holders, thereby limiting the effectiveness of using such a
cadet. Thus, it makes no sense to use the same cadet or another cadet whose
likeness is known among licensees to conduct the same enforcement action
Page 7 of 12

--- Page 48 ---
Board of Liquor License Commissioners
for Baltimore City
Agency Response Form
at the same locations. Lastly, the BLLC wants to avoid “targeting” certain
locations or groups of license holders for enforcement efforts. Such
targeting could lead to charges of discrimination and/or litigation which the
BLLC seeks to avoid.
Recommendation 5b Disagree Estimated Completion Date: Completed
Please provide details of The three examples that the OLA uses to draw their conclusion do not
corrective action or reflect a lack of required follow-up, as per State law, BLLC rules and
explain disagreement. regulations, and its SOPs. The first instance involves an inspector report
that indicates a lack of a trader’s license for a location that was pending
transfer soon after the inspection in question occurred. This location was
closed while the transfer application was pending and thus it was not
necessary for the location to have an active traders license. The second
instance involved an inspector who gave a warning to a licensee that her
Alcohol Awareness certification was to set expire in the next few days. This
happened on 3/9/2018, while her certification was still valid. By 3/31/2018,
the agency had a copy of the licensee’s renewed and valid Alcohol
Awareness Certification. No follow-up was deemed necessary. In the third
instance, an inspector performed an inspection (mistakenly) at a formerly
licensed location no longer under the jurisdiction of the BLLC. The OLA
believed that the inspector should have issued a violation (he could not
because it was not a licensed location) or should have emailed the health or
housing department and requested an inspection be performed to ensure the
establishment was in compliance with City BYOB laws. While the BLLC
understands the importance of the latter, issuing a finding for something
that the BLLC is technically not responsible for under the law is unjustified.
Auditor’s Comment: BLLC disagrees with Recommendation 5a, to conduct follow-up
inspections or take other appropriate actions to ensure violations noted during inspections
are resolved, by stating that it is not always practical to follow-up on certain violations,
especially when they involve the cooperation of the Police Department. We continue to
believe that based on the nature of the violations, it is both reasonable and appropriate to
conduct follow-up inspections to determine if noted violations or issues have been
resolved, or document the BLLC’s reasons why follow up inspections cannot be
performed, such as unavailability of necessary Baltimore Police Department resources.
In addition, for the condition related to Recommendation 5b, BLLC continues to
incorrectly interpret our analysis, after it having been explained in detail during our audit
exit conference. The condition did not relate to follow-up not performed, as BLLC
states, but that the conclusions resulting from inspections conducted were not recorded in
the inspection database, as required.
Page 8 of 12

--- Page 49 ---
Board of Liquor License Commissioners
for Baltimore City
Agency Response Form
Finding 6
BLLC’s process to monitor the inspections of licensed establishments did not provide
assurance that all licensees were subject to an annual inspection or inspected at
appropriate frequencies.
We recommend that BLLC
a. modify the methodology used to monitor the frequency of inspections conducted of each
licensed establishment, and
b. ensure that all licensed establishments are periodically inspected.
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide Alc. Bev. Art. 12-2203 states that locations that do not operate at least once
additional comments as every 90 days shall come before the Board to request to reopen. To achieve
deemed necessary. this end, the BLLC sets as its aspirational goal that each location be
inspected four times per year. While the BLLC would not characterize its
inspection goal as “informal,” in its 2020 SOPs the BLLC states explicitly
that it is the “aspirational goal” that each licensed location be inspected four
times per year. In addition, the agency closely adhered to 2019 BLLC SOP
3.07, entitled “Non-Operating Locations,” which directed inspection and
administrative staff to meet bi-weekly to review all locations which have
not received an inspection. Pursuant to this SOP, the BLLC identified most
if not all of the locations that did not receive inspections and had an
explanation for why each location was not inspected (pending transfer,
hardship extension, transfer hardship extension, contract purchaser, secured
creditor, etc.).
Recommendation 6a Agree Estimated Completion Date: 4/1/2020
Please provide details of BLLC SOP 3.02 “Inspection Expectations, Tracking, Back Check
corrective action or Inspections” of the 2020 SOPs, clearly states that “the agency sets forth the
explain disagreement. aspirational goal of inspecting each location four (4) times per license
year.” Next, the agency removed “sign posting” and “transfer-application”
activities from the inspection report analysis. As such, future reports now
calculate inspections based on the following inspection types: Routine
Inspections, Compliance Inspections, and Special Investigations.
Recommendation 6b Agree Estimated Completion Date: 4/1/2020
Please provide details of In 2020 the BLLC drafted SOPs 3.02 “Inspection Expectations, Tracking,
corrective action or Back Check Inspections” and 3.10 “Non-Operating Locations,” which
explain disagreement. address the auditors’ concerns. While the BLLC believes it was monitoring
all establishments periodically in 2018-2019 in accordance with the
Alcoholic Beverages Article, the agency agrees with the auditors that its
SOPs needed to be enhanced to provide increased clarity and guidance.
Page 9 of 12

--- Page 50 ---
Board of Liquor License Commissioners
for Baltimore City
Agency Response Form
Finding 7
BLLC did not track and monitor instances of licensee noncompliance that did not involve
the Baltimore Police Department or the Baltimore City Sheriff’s Office to ensure that each
was properly addressed.
We recommend that BLLC
a. track and monitor all instances of licensee noncompliance; and
b. maintain documentation of the reviews performed to support determinations, including
referral of instances of noncompliance to the Board (as potential violations).
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide The BLLC disputes the OLA’s statement that “the BLLC did not maintain
additional comments as documentation of internal reviews performed to support determinations of
deemed necessary. whether to present instances of non-compliance to the Board for
adjudication.” 2019 BLLC SOP 3.05(4)(d) “Violation Review and Charging
Process” requires the DES to log in all reports received, lists the charge and
corresponding charging date, and if not charged list his or her determination
as to why not into the Report Tracking database. The BLLC provided the
Report Tracking log for 2019 to the OLA. While the BLLC agrees with the
OLA that it did not track ALL non-Police and Sheriff Office reports, the
BLLC disputes the aforementioned quote as it explicitly maintained such
documentation as to its internal reviews.
Recommendation 7a Agree Estimated Completion Date: 8/1/2019
Please provide details of The BLLC agrees that it should track all reports that it receives. Starting in
corrective action or August of 2019, the BLLC expanded upon its Report Tracking log to
explain disagreement. include the tracking of State Comptroller Reports, Inspector Reports not
associated with a law enforcement agency, and reports that it receives from
other City and State agencies.
Recommendation 7b Agree Estimated Completion Date: 8/1/2019
Please provide details of The BLLC agrees that it should maintain documentation of all reviews that
corrective action or it performs for all reports that it receives and believes by expanding the
explain disagreement. tracking of the types of reports received, all information from all applicable
agencies will be reviewed to determine if there is a prima facie case that a
licensed establishment should be charged with a violation. However, the
OLA’s finding lacks context. As per the OLA, the BLLC charged 277
violations from 200 reports for FY18. Out of the random selection of three
(3) reports from that total, the OLA found that two out of three were
properly charged and brought before the Board. The sole report – one out of
the 200 that the BLLC received – that was not charged could have been
brought before the Board. In that case, the licensee was issued a cease and
Page 10 of 12

--- Page 51 ---
Board of Liquor License Commissioners
for Baltimore City
Agency Response Form
desist order for electrical cords that were not properly installed in
November of 2017. The licensee abated the issue in a timely fashion and
was not operating while the issue was outstanding. While the matter may
have been brought before the Board for a hearing, the BLLC notes a review
and charging compliance rate of 99.5% (199 out of 200) is a significant
achievement. Furthermore, this finding should be viewed in light of the fact
that in FY18 the BLLC led all other local licensing Boards in the State of
Maryland in the number of violation cases reviewed, charges filed, and
convictions obtained. See Comptroller’s Report of FY18:
https://www.marylandtaxes.gov/reports/static-
files/revenue/alcoholtobacco/annual/AnnualReportFY2018.pdf
Page 11 of 12

--- Page 52 ---
Board of Liquor License Commissioners
for Baltimore City
Agency Response Form
Finding 8
BLLC did not have an ongoing internal process to identify potential conflicts regarding
interests in the alcohol beverage industry consistent with State law specific to BLLC.
We recommend that BLLC supplement the required annual SEC disclosures with a
separate internal periodic process (such as, annually) for employees and commissioners to
identify potential conflicts in the alcohol beverage industry specific to BLLC’s law, as is
already required from employees at the time of their initial hire.
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide The BLLC does not disagree with OLA’s recommendation that the agency
additional comments as could enhance its oversight of conflicts of interest by Commissioners and
deemed necessary. employees by taking a proactive approach. However, the BLLC disagrees
with OLA’s “finding” that the agency was required to have an “ongoing
internal process” to identify any conflicts of interest among its
Commissioners and employees. Starting in 2016 all Commissioners and
employees of the BLLC came into compliance by receiving training and
filing timely financial disclosure forms with the City’s Board of Ethics. See
attached letter from Executive Director of the Baltimore City Board of
Ethics from Mr. Avery Aisenstark. In October of 2017, the law changed
requiring the Commissioners and employees of the Board to receive
training and file their financial disclosure forms with the Maryland State
Ethics Commission (SEC). In October of 2018, the law was further
amended to ensure that Commissioners received enhanced training and
certification by the SEC. Since October of 2017 the BLLC’s
Commissioners and employees have been – and continue to be in full
compliance with the law: all have received training, received their
certification, and filed their financial disclosure forms in a timely manner
up and until CY2019 filings. See the attached letter(s) from Executive
Director of the State Ethics Commission from Mr. Michael Lord.
Recommendation 8 Agree Estimated Completion Date: 5/1/2020
Please provide details of To address the OLA’s concerns, the BLLC redrafted SOP 1.06 to include an
corrective action or annual “conflicts of interest” inquiry into to whether or not any
explain disagreement. Commissioner or employee of the BLLC has a financial or proprietary
interest in a wholesaler, distributor, or retail vendor of alcoholic beverages.
Any response by any person that presents a conflict of interest will be
forwarded to the SEC for investigation and review.
OLA Note: The letters from the City and State Boards of Ethics referred to in BLLC’s
response are not included as part of the report, but are included on the OLA website as
Supplements to the Board’s Response.
Page 12 of 12

--- Page 53 ---
A T
UDIT EAM
Adam J. Westover, CPA
Audit Manager
Lisa M. Beers, CFE
Senior Auditor
Keli R. Edmonds
Alice Z. Liu, CPA
Daniel P. Nuccio, CPA, CFE
Staff Auditors