Title: Comptroller of Maryland - Revenue Administration Division
Date: 06/01/2020
Type: Fiscal Compliance
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5ed55b07a1ce581294466d5a
Extracted: 2025-06-19T11:41:20.466035
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Audit Report
Comptroller of Maryland
Revenue Administration Division
January 2024
Public Notice
In compliance with the requirements of the State Government Article Section
2-1224(i), of the Annotated Code of Maryland, the Office of Legislative Audits
has redacted cybersecurity findings and related auditee responses
from this public report.
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Senator Clarence K. Lam, M.D. (Senate Chair) Delegate Jared Solomon (House Chair)
Senator Joanne C. Benson Delegate Steven J. Arentz
Senator Paul D. Corderman Delegate Andrea Fletcher Harrison
Senator Katie Fry Hester Delegate Steven C. Johnson
Senator Shetty L. Hettleman Delegate Mary A. Lehman
Senator Cheryl C. Kagan Delegate David Moon
Senator Cory V. McCray Delegate Julie Palakovich Carr
Senator Justin D. Ready Delegate Stephanie M. Smith
Senator Bryan W. Simonaire Delegate M. Courtney Watson
Senator Craig J. Zucker One Vacancy
To Obtain Further Information
Office of Legislative Audits
The Warehouse at Camden Yards
351 West Camden Street, Suite 400
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Phone: 410-946-5900
Maryland Relay: 711
TTY: 410-946-5401 ꞏ 301-970-5401
E-mail: webmaster@ola.state.md.us
Website: www.ola.state.md.us
To Report Fraud
The Office of Legislative Audits operates a Fraud Hotline to report fraud, waste, or abuse involving State
of Maryland government resources. Reports of fraud, waste, or abuse may be communicated anonymously
by a toll-free call to 1-877-FRAUD-11, by mail to the Fraud Hotline, c/o Office of Legislative Audits, or
through the Office’s website.
Nondiscrimination Statement
The Department of Legislative Services does not discriminate on the basis of age, ancestry, color, creed,
marital status, national origin, race, religion, gender, gender identity, sexual orientation, or disability in the
admission or access to its programs, services, or activities. The Department’s Information Officer has been
designated to coordinate compliance with the nondiscrimination requirements contained in Section 35.107
of the United States Department of Justice Regulations. Requests for assistance should be directed to the
Information Officer at 410-946-5400 or 410-970-5400.

--- Page 3 ---
January 22, 2024
Senator Clarence K. Lam, M.D., Senate Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Delegate Jared Solomon, House Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Members of Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Annapolis, Maryland
Ladies and Gentlemen:
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the Comptroller of Maryland
(COM) – Revenue Administration Division (RAD) for the period beginning
September 21, 2018 and ending September 30, 2021. RAD is primarily
responsible for receiving and depositing various tax remittances, processing tax
returns, maintaining taxpayer records, distributing taxes in accordance with State
laws, issuing income tax refunds, and providing assistance to taxpayers.
Our audit disclosed that RAD did not conduct all required reviews of tax
overpayments that taxpayers chose to apply to the next tax year, which for two tax
types not reviewed totaled approximately $1.2 billion between December 2018
and July 2021; and although reviews were performed for a third tax type, they
were not sufficiently comprehensive. Furthermore, RAD did not ensure that
refund replacement checks issued, which totaled approximately $29.5 million in
calendar year 2021, were reviewed by supervisory personnel as required.
We also noted that RAD did not ensure that current records of deceased
individuals, which are used to help ensure that fraudulent or otherwise improper
tax returns and refunds are not processed, were regularly loaded into the COM’s
automated State of Maryland Tax (SMART) system, which RAD uses for
processing returns and refunds. In addition, RAD had not determined the cost
benefit of expanding the use of its current individual taxpayer data analytics
vendor to help identify corporate and business tax fraud.
We also noted a lack of control over certain checks received. Finally, our audit
also disclosed certain cybersecurity-related findings. However, in accordance
with the State Government Article, Section 2-1224(i) of the Annotated Code of
Maryland, we have redacted the findings from this audit report. Specifically,

--- Page 4 ---
State law requires the Office of Legislative Audits to redact cybersecurity
findings in a manner consistent with auditing best practices before the report is
made available to the public. The term “cybersecurity” is defined in the State
Finance and Procurement Article, Section 3.5-301(b), and using our professional
judgment we have determined that the redacted findings fall under the referenced
definition. The specifics of the cybersecurity findings were previously
communicated to those parties responsible for acting on our recommendations.
Our audit also included a review to determine the status of the six findings
contained in our preceding audit report on RAD. For the non-cybersecurity-
related findings we determined that RAD satisfactorily addressed three of those
five findings. The remaining two findings are repeated in this report.
COM’s response to this audit, on behalf of RAD, is included as an appendix to
this report. We reviewed the response and noted agreement to our findings and
related recommendations and while there are other aspects of the response which
will require further clarification, we do not anticipate that these will require the
Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee’s attention to resolve. Additionally, in
accordance with our policy, we have edited COM’s response to remove vendor
names or products. Finally, consistent with State law, we have redacted the
elements of COM’s response related to the cybersecurity audit findings.
We wish to acknowledge the cooperation extended to us during the audit by RAD.
We also wish to acknowledge COM’s and RAD’s willingness to address the audit
issues and implement appropriate corrective actions.
Respectfully submitted,
Gregory A. Hook, CPA
Legislative Auditor
2

--- Page 5 ---
Table of Contents
Background Information 5
Agency Responsibilities 5
Financial Activities 5
System Implementation 7
Pass-Through Entity Credit Processing Delays 8
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report 9
Findings and Recommendations 10
Taxpayer Refunds
* Finding 1 – The Revenue Administration Division (RAD) did not 10
conduct all required reviews of declaration credits (tax overpayments
that taxpayers chose to apply to the next tax year) and the reviews
performed were not sufficiently comprehensive.
Finding 2 – RAD did not ensure that refund replacement checks, which 11
totaled $29.5 million during calendar year 2021, were reviewed by
supervisory personnel as required by its policy.
Data Matches
Finding 3 – RAD did not ensure that current death records were obtained 12
and loaded into the Comptroller of Maryland’s automated State of
Maryland Tax (SMART) system, resulting in potential improper tax
returns and refunds going undetected.
Data Analytics for Fraud Detection
Finding 4 (Policy Issue) – RAD did not determine the cost benefit of 13
expanding the use of its existing individual taxpayer data analytics
vendor to help identify corporate and business tax fraud.
SMART
Finding 5 – Redacted cybersecurity-related finding 14
* Denotes item repeated in full or part from preceding audit report
3

--- Page 6 ---
COMPASS
Finding 6 – Redacted cybersecurity-related finding 14
Cash Receipts
* Finding 7 – RAD had not established sufficient controls over checks for 14
tax payments received in the mail at its Annapolis location, as certain
documentation used to account for batches of checks processed was not
retained prior to May 2021.
Information Systems Security and Control
Finding 8 – Redacted cybersecurity-related finding 16
Finding 9 – Redacted cybersecurity-related finding 16
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology 17
Exhibit 1 – Listing of Most Recent Office of Legislative Audits Fiscal 21
Compliance Audits of Comptroller of Maryland Divisions as of
October 2023
Exhibit 2 – Compass Release Schedule 22
Agency Response Appendix
* Denotes item repeated in full or part from preceding audit report
4

--- Page 7 ---
Background Information
Agency Responsibilities
The primary responsibilities of the Comptroller of Maryland’s (COM) Revenue
Administration Division (RAD) include receiving and depositing various tax
remittances, processing tax returns, maintaining taxpayer records, distributing
taxes in accordance with applicable State laws, issuing income tax refunds, and
providing assistance to taxpayers. RAD also administers certain laws and
regulations pertaining to the dispensing and content of motor fuel and collects
excise taxes for motor fuel, alcoholic beverages, and tobacco.1
Our office conducts separate fiscal compliance audits of other COM units. A
listing of the most recent fiscal compliance audits of COM units performed during
the current audit cycle can be found in Exhibit 1 of this report.
Financial Activities
According to RAD’s records, significant taxes collected (sources greater than
$100 million annually) for fiscal years 2019, 2020, and 2021, are listed in Figure
1. According to the State’s records, during fiscal year 2022, RAD’s expenditures
totaled approximately $60.7 million (See Figure 2).
1 Previously, RAD also administered laws and regulations pertaining to the manufacture, storage,
transportations, sale, and distribution of alcoholic beverages and tobacco. However, effective
January 1, 2021 all such functions were to be performed by the newly established independent
Alcohol and Tobacco Commission. Effective May 3, 2023, Chapter 255, Laws of Maryland
2023 renamed the Alcohol and Tobacco Commission as the Alcohol, Tobacco, and Cannabis
Commission.
5

--- Page 8 ---
Figure 1
Selected Tax Collections and Distributions
Applicable to Fiscal Years 2019 – 2021
(sources greater than $100 million annually)
Fiscal Year
(dollars stated in millions)
2019 2020 2021
Gross income taxes collected $20,504 $21,430 $23,994
Less:
Refunds 2,786 2,843 2,941
Administrative expenses 21 24 27
Total refunds and expenses 2,807 2,867 2,968
Balance available for distribution $17,697 $18,563 $21,026
Distribution of remaining balance:
To State’s General Fund $11,105 $11,751 $13,167
To Local Subdivisions Reserve Fund 6,123 6,539 7,480
To other Funds as provided by 469 273 379
State Law (including the
Transportation Trust Fund)
Total distributions $17,697 $18,563 $21,026
Gross sales and use tax collections
which are primarily credited to the State’s
General Fund $4,902 $4,969 $5,471
Gross motor fuel tax collections
which are primarily credited to the
Transportation Trust Fund $1,182 $1,122 $1,061
Gross tobacco tax collections
which are primarily credited to the State’s
General Fund $357 $363 $388
Gross estate tax collections
which are primarily credited to the State’s
General Fund $138 $150 $192
Note: Distributions shown relate to the stated fiscal year but were not necessarily distributed in that year.
Source: RAD Records
6

--- Page 9 ---
Figure 2
RAD Positions, Expenditures, and Funding Sources
Full Time Equivalent Positions as of June 30, 2022
Positions Percent
Filled 341 90.4%
Vacant 36 9.6%
Total 377
Fiscal Year 2022 Expenditures
Expenditures Percent
Salaries, Wages and Fringe Benefits $ 31,292,852 51.5%
Technical and Special Fees 1,083,886 1.8%
Operating Expenses 28,327,318 46.7%
Total $ 60,704,056
Fiscal Year 2022 Funding Sources
Funding Percent
General Fund $ 33,516,298 55.2%
Special Fund 14,172,833 23.3%
Reimbursable Fund 13,014,925 21.5%
Total $ 60,704,056
Source: State financial and personnel records
System Implementation
RAD has historically used COM’s automated State of Maryland Tax (SMART)
system to record and process tax return information and issue refunds for
corporate and individual income taxes, as well as for other taxes, such as
employer withholding taxes, and sales and use taxes. In fiscal year 2018, with the
assistance of the Maryland Department of Information Technology, COM’s
Office of the Comptroller initiated a competitive procurement for an information
technology modernization project to replace SMART. In December 2018, the
Board of Public Works approved a ten-year contract, with one additional five-year
option and a cumulative value of approximately $159.7 million, with a primary
vendor2 to implement the Revenue Premier Enterprise system, referred to as
COMPASS. In addition to replacing the current functionality of SMART,
2 Other vendors are associated with the project to perform specific tasks such as oversight and
consulting, the “primary vendor” is responsible for system design.
7

--- Page 10 ---
COMPASS is intended to improve automation of business processes and best
practices, create a taxpayer interface to allow for more timely and direct
communication, and provide additional fraud detection capabilities for RAD.
COMPASS will be implemented in three phases or Releases, with all Releases
anticipated to be completed by July 2024 (See Exhibit 2). RAD transitioned to
COMPASS for alcohol taxes and corporate taxes in July 2020 and February 2021,
respectively, as Release 1 of the implementation. During calendar year 2021
revenues processed in COMPASS for the aforementioned two tax types totaled
approximately $2.4 billion. As of May 2022, the vendor had been paid $51.8
million.
Pass-Through Entity (PTE) Credit Processing Delays
Subsequent to completion of our fieldwork, we received an allegation through our
fraud, waste, and abuse hotline of taxpayers experiencing extensive delays in
receiving refunds claimed on personal income tax returns that included a PTE
credit. State law provides that a member of a PTE, such as a partner in a
partnership, may claim a credit on their personal income tax return for taxes paid
by the PTE attributable to the member’s share of the PTE’s taxable income.
Accompanying the aforementioned allegation was a September 19, 2023 letter to
tax professionals from the Office of the Comptroller acknowledging challenges in
processing returns claiming the PTE credit, attributing delays to the complexity of
returns filed, lack of staff, and outdated technology. The letter outlined the steps
being taken and the progress being made to address these challenges and delays,
as well steps that tax professionals can take to help expedite return processing.
Upon our inquiries, RAD advised us in October 2023 that the majority of the
outstanding credits had been resolved. We attempted to obtain detailed
documentation to support the number of returns with PTE credits received and the
applicable tax returns not yet processed for calendar year 2021. However, RAD
was unable to provide us with the requested information prior to the issuance of
this report and as such, we were unable to determine the disposition of the PTE
credits to determine the veracity and disposition of the allegation. Consequently,
we will pursue the matter once the information is obtained and will disclose the
results of our review at a later date.
8

--- Page 11 ---
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report
Our audit included a review to determine the status of the six findings contained
in our preceding audit report dated June 1, 2020. As disclosed in Figure 3, for the
non-cybersecurity-related findings, we determined that RAD satisfactorily
addressed three of these five findings. The remaining two findings are repeated in
this report.
Figure 3
Status of Preceding Findings
Preceding Implementation
Finding Description
Finding Status
An effective process was not in place to ensure
that significant financial adjustments made to
Finding 1 Not repeated
taxpayer accounts in two units were subject to
supervisory or managerial review.
Declaration credits, representing tax
Repeated
overpayments that taxpayers chose to apply to
Finding 2 (Current Finding
the next tax year, were not always reviewed for
1)
propriety as required.
RAD did not comply with its established review
Finding 3 procedures to ensure the propriety of significant Not repeated
individual taxpayer refunds.
RAD had not established sufficient controls
over checks for income tax payments received
in the mail at its Annapolis location, as several Repeated
Finding 4 employees were assigned incompatible (Current Finding
functions, and certain documentation used to 7)
account for batches of checks processed was not
retained.
Controls over collections received in the
Baltimore cash office were not sufficient to
Finding 5 Not repeated
ensure that those collections were properly
accounted for and deposited.
Security and audit events for several critical
Finding 6 databases were either not logged or not Status Redacted3
reviewed for propriety.
3 Specific information on the current status of this cybersecurity-related finding has been redacted
from the publicly available report in accordance with State Government Article, Section 2-
1224(i) of the Annotated Code of Maryland.
9

--- Page 12 ---
Findings and Recommendations
Taxpayer Refunds
Finding 1
The Revenue Administration Division (RAD) did not conduct all required
reviews of declaration credits (tax overpayments that taxpayers chose to
apply to the next tax year) and the reviews performed were not sufficiently
comprehensive.
Analysis
Required reviews of declaration credits (which are tax overpayments that
taxpayers chose to apply to the subsequent tax year rather than receive as a tax
refund) were either not performed or were not sufficient to ensure that the credit
was valid. RAD procedures require all declaration credits exceeding an
established dollar threshold to be reviewed for propriety. However, our review
disclosed that declaration credits for corporate and fiduciary tax returns, which
totaled approximately $1.2 billion between December 2018 and July 2021, were
not reviewed, and credits for individual tax returns were not reviewed for tax year
2020.4
Furthermore, although declaration credits for individual tax returns were reviewed
for tax years 2018 and 2019, the number of credits reviewed was less than the
total required by RAD policy, and the reviews were not sufficiently
comprehensive. Specifically, RAD only reviewed 221 credits totaling $3.7
million of the 5,511 totaling $513.2 million that should have been reviewed for
tax years 2018 and 2019. In addition, the reviews that were conducted did not
include an examination of required supporting documentation, such as taxpayer’s
withholdings from their W-2 forms. Rather, the review used uploaded taxpayer
prepared return data already in SMART for verification purposes, which would
not provide an independent verification of the data.
These reviews are meant to ensure that declaration credits processed are valid and
are to include an examination of required taxpayer supporting documentation,
which would typically include required documentation of a taxpayer’s
withholdings and credits. Comments regarding the lack of a sufficient number of
reviews for individual tax returns were included in our preceding audit report. In
its response to that report, the Comptroller of Maryland, on behalf of RAD, stated
that effective June 2020, taxpayer declaration credits would be reviewed in
accordance with established procedures and documentation of these reviews
4 The latest year in which reviews could have been performed as of the time of our audit.
10

--- Page 13 ---
would be retained. During our current audit RAD management advised that the
aforementioned corrective actions were not fully implemented because staff was
working on other activities.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that RAD
a. conduct required reviews of declaration credits for individual (repeat),
corporate, and fiduciary tax returns; and
b. ensure that the reviews include a review of critical supporting
documentation, such as documentation of a taxpayer’s withholdings.
Finding 2
RAD did not ensure that refund replacement checks, which totaled $29.5
million during calendar year 2021, were reviewed by supervisory personnel
as required by its policy.
Analysis
Refund replacement checks processed in calendar year 2021 totaling $29.5
million were not subjected to supervisory review as required by RAD’s policy.
Replacement checks are generated for several reasons, including when an original
refund check is returned by a taxpayer due to an error, a taxpayer claims to have
not received their refund check, or the taxpayer has passed away. RAD’s policy
requires that supervisors use weekly output reports of replacement checks to
select refunds for review within 30 days of the report. RAD’s policy also requires
that on a monthly basis, management personnel ensure that the supervisory
reviews were performed and verify that high dollar refunds were proper.
Our test of replacement checks issued in calendar year 2021 disclosed that, as of
March 2022, no supervisory reviews had been performed for checks issued during
45 of the 52 weeks totaling approximately $29.5 million, and the reviews of
checks for the other 7 weeks totaling approximately $3.3 million were performed
between 1 and 9 months late. In addition, the required monthly management
reviews were not performed. Upon our inquiry in April 2022, RAD began
performing the missing calendar year 2021 supervisory and management reviews.
Recommendation 2
We recommend that RAD ensure that all supervisory and management
reviews of replacement refund checks are performed as required, including
those noted above.
11

--- Page 14 ---
Data Matches
Finding 3
RAD did not ensure that current death records were obtained and loaded
into the Comptroller of Maryland’s automated State of Maryland Tax
(SMART) system, resulting in potential improper tax returns and refunds
going undetected.
Analysis
RAD lacked assurance that monthly death records used to help identify improper
tax returns and refunds had been obtained and loaded into SMART, and our
review disclosed five months in 2020 for which this data was not obtained. RAD
obtained national death records from the National Technical Information Service
on a monthly basis and uploaded them into SMART to help identify potentially
fraudulent or otherwise improper tax returns and refunds. Although RAD policy
required supervisory personnel to verify that the monthly death records were
received and uploaded, we found there was no documentation supporting that the
verifications were performed during the audit period. For at least five months we
determined that the verifications were not performed, which contributed to the
five months of missing records remaining undetected.
Specifically, we noted that the death records from May 2020 through September
2020 had not been obtained and uploaded into SMART. RAD was not aware that
the records were not obtained and uploaded (evidencing the lack of a verification)
until we brought the matter to its attention in September 2022. The failure to
obtain the death records is significant because during tax year 2021, the death
matches resulted in tax returns claiming refunds of approximately $18.4 million
being suspended for further investigation.
Recommendation 3
We recommend that RAD
a. ensure that required supervisory reviews of monthly data uploads are
performed and documented, and
b. obtain the missing death records and match the data to tax returns and
refunds claimed since May 2020 to identify potentially improper returns
and claims.
12

--- Page 15 ---
Data Analytics for Fraud Detection
Finding 4 (Policy Issue)
RAD did not determine the cost benefit of expanding the use of its existing
individual taxpayer data analytics vendor to help identify corporate and
business tax fraud.
Analysis
RAD did not determine the cost benefit of using its data analytics vendor to help
identify fraud beyond individual tax returns such as corporate and business
returns. RAD contracted with a vendor to assist with fraud detection using
complex algorithms based on historical fraudulent return information and
continual machine learning of individual tax returns deemed fraudulent.
Individual tax returns with high indicators of fraud based on these analytics are
reviewed by RAD for propriety. During calendar year 2021, the contractor
identified approximately 78,000 individual tax returns warranting further
investigation, of which 6,499 associated with $13.2 million in refunds were
determined by RAD to be potentially fraudulent.
Our review disclosed that RAD did not consider using the vendor for other types
of returns such as corporate, business, pass-through entities, and employer
withholding tax; although we confirmed that the vendor provides such services to
other states. During fiscal year 2021, State tax revenues related to these tax
sources totaled approximately $18.1 billion. RAD management advised us that
they did not use the vendor for these returns because it would cost more, but could
not provide us with a cost benefit analysis to support its decision. Given the
results the vendor has had with individual returns, we believe RAD should
determine the cost benefit of using data analytics for other tax returns.
Recommendation 4
We recommend that RAD determine the cost benefit of expanding its current
use of its data analytics for other types of tax returns.
13

--- Page 16 ---
SMART
We determined that Finding 5 related to “cybersecurity”, as defined by the State
Finance and Procurement Article, Section 3.5-301(b) of the Annotated Code of
Maryland, and therefore is subject to redaction from the publicly available audit
report in accordance with the State Government Article 2-1224(i). Consequently,
the specifics of the following finding, including the analysis, related
recommendation(s), along with COM’s responses, have been redacted from this
report copy.
Finding 5
Redacted cybersecurity-related finding.
COMPASS
We determined that Finding 6 related to “cybersecurity”, as defined by the State
Finance and Procurement Article, Section 3.5-301(b) of the Annotated Code of
Maryland, and therefore is subject to redaction from the publicly available audit
report in accordance with the State Government Article 2-1224(i). Consequently,
the specifics of the following finding, including the analysis, related
recommendation(s), along with COM’s responses, have been redacted from this
report copy.
Finding 6
Redacted cybersecurity-related finding.
Cash Receipts
Finding 7
RAD had not established sufficient controls over checks for tax payments
received in the mail at its Annapolis location, as certain documentation used
to account for batches of checks processed was not retained prior to May
2021.
Analysis
Critical documentation used to maintain accountability and control over checks
received by RAD through the mail at its Annapolis location, which constituted
most of the tax payments received by RAD, were either not retained prior to May
2021 or were not reviewed for propriety. Consequently, there was an increased
14

--- Page 17 ---
risk that checks could be misappropriated without detection. According to RAD’s
records, Annapolis mail collections totaled approximately $5.6 billion during
fiscal year 2021, which accounted for the majority of payments received by RAD.
Our review disclosed that RAD did not retain batch control sheets used to provide
accountability and control over batches of tax returns and checks received in the
mail prior to their initial recordation via scanning into RAD’s imaging system. A
similar condition was commented upon in our preceding audit report. In response
to that report, RAD stated that batch control sheets would be retained starting in
January 2020, but RAD did not begin retaining the documents until May 2021.
Furthermore, even when batch control sheets were retained, subsequent
adjustments to the control sheets were made without explanation. Our review of
42 batch control sheets maintained from July 2021 through September 2021
disclosed that 17 batches had a total of 282 adjustments, such as the removal of
checks, without any explanation or support.
Batch control sheets are uniquely numbered and provide documentation of the
number and type of tax returns within each batch and whether the batch included
associated check receipts. The batched documents and checks were transferred
among personnel within several RAD units for processing and the batch control
sheets were initialed by each RAD employee until final scanning. Accordingly,
the batch control sheets provide a record of the transfer of the documents and
checks among RAD personnel and provide assurance that the collections
remained intact until recordation into SMART occurs via the scanning of the
checks. In addition, as each scanned tax return is associated with the batch
control number in RAD’s records, the batch control sheet provides a future
reference if needed for taxpayer inquiries.
The State Government Article of the Annotated Code of Maryland, Section 10-
615 requires State agencies, including RAD, to retain critical documentation
relating to their financial operations or collection of State taxes until required and
authorized audits have been completed.
Recommendation 7
We recommend that RAD
a. retain copies of batch control sheets to provide accountability and control
over tax returns and collections prior to recordation (repeat), and
b. retain support for any adjustments made to batch control sheets.
15

--- Page 18 ---
Information Systems Security and Control
We determined that the Information Systems Security and Control section,
including Findings 8 and 9 related to “cybersecurity”, as defined by the State
Finance and Procurement Article, Section 3.5-301(b) of the Annotated Code of
Maryland, and therefore are subject to redaction from the publicly available audit
report in accordance with the State Government Article 2-1224(i). Consequently,
the specifics of the following findings, including the analysis, related
recommendations, along with COM’s responses, have been redacted from this
report copy.
Finding 8
Redacted cybersecurity-related finding.
Finding 9
Redacted cybersecurity-related finding.
16

--- Page 19 ---
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the Comptroller of Maryland
(COM) – Revenue Administration Division (RAD), for the period beginning
September 21, 2018 and ending September 30, 2021. The audit was conducted in
accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards. Those
standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient,
appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and
conclusions based on our audit objectives. We believe that the evidence obtained
provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit
objectives.
As prescribed by the State Government Article, Section 2-1221 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, the objectives of this audit were to examine RAD’s financial
transactions, records, and internal control, and to evaluate its compliance with
applicable State laws, rules, and regulations.
In planning and conducting our audit, we focused on the major financial-related
areas of operations based on assessments of significance and risk. The areas
addressed by the audit included the processing, evaluating, verifying, and
recording of tax data as reported by taxpayers and other parties; the collection of
tax receipts; the issuance of tax refunds; and information technology systems. We
also determined the status of the findings contained in our preceding audit report.
Our audit did not include certain support services provided to RAD by COM –
Office of the Comptroller. These support services (such as procurement,
processing of invoices, maintenance of accounting records, human resources, and
related fiscal functions) are included within the scope of our audit of the Office of
the Comptroller. In addition, our audit did not include certain support services
provided to RAD by COM – Central Payroll Bureau. These support services
(payroll processing) are included within the scope of our audit of the Central
Payroll Bureau. Furthermore, our audit did not include certain support services
provided to RAD by COM – Information Technology Division related to the
monitoring of information technology equipment and services and the operation
of the Annapolis Data Center. The operation of the Annapolis Data Center
includes the development and maintenance of RAD applications and maintenance
of the operating system and security software environment. These support
services are included in the scope of our audit of the Information Technology
Division.
Our assessment of internal controls was based on agency procedures and controls
in place at the time of our fieldwork. Our tests of transactions and other auditing
17

--- Page 20 ---
procedures were generally focused on the transactions occurring during our audit
period of September 21, 2018 to September 30, 2021, but may include
transactions before or after this period as we considered necessary to achieve our
audit objectives.
To accomplish our audit objectives, our audit procedures included inquiries of
appropriate personnel, inspections of documents and records, tests of transactions,
and to the extent practicable, observations of RAD’s operations. Generally,
transactions were selected for testing based on auditor judgment, which primarily
considers risk, the timing or dollar amount of the transaction, or the significance
of the transaction to the area of operation reviewed. As a matter of course, we do
not normally use sampling in our tests, so unless otherwise specifically indicated,
neither statistical nor non-statistical audit sampling was used to select the
transactions tested. Therefore, unless sampling is specifically indicated in a
finding, the results from any tests conducted or disclosed by us cannot be used to
project those results to the entire population from which the test items were
selected.
We performed various data extracts of pertinent information from the State’s
Financial Management Information System (such as revenue data). The extracts
are performed as part of ongoing internal processes established by the Office of
Legislative Audits and were subject to various tests to determine data reliability.
We determined that the data extracted from this source were sufficiently reliable
for the purposes the data were used during this audit. We also extracted data from
RAD’s systems for the purpose of testing certain areas, such as refund activity.
We performed various tests of the relevant data and determined that the data were
sufficiently reliable for the purposes the data were used during the audit. Finally,
we performed other auditing procedures that we considered necessary to achieve
our audit objectives. The reliability of data used in this report for background or
informational purposes was not assessed.
RAD’s management is responsible for establishing and maintaining effective
internal control. Internal control is a process designed to provide reasonable
assurance that objectives pertaining to the reliability of financial records,
effectiveness and efficiency of operations including safeguarding of assets, and
compliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations are achieved. As
provided in Government Auditing Standards, there are five components of
internal control: control environment, risk assessment, control activities,
information and communication, and monitoring. Each of the five components,
when significant to the audit objectives, and as applicable to RAD, were
considered by us during the course of this audit.
18

--- Page 21 ---
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate.
Our reports are designed to assist the Maryland General Assembly in exercising
its legislative oversight function and to provide constructive recommendations for
improving State operations. As a result, our reports generally do not address
activities we reviewed that are functioning properly.
This report includes findings relating to conditions that we consider to be
significant deficiencies in the design or operation of internal control that could
adversely affect RAD’s ability to maintain reliable financial records, operate
effectively and efficiently, and/or comply with applicable laws, rules, and
regulations. Our report also includes findings regarding significant instances of
noncompliance with applicable laws, rules, or regulations. Finally, this report
includes a finding, which is identified as a “Policy Issue”. Such findings
represent significant operational or financial-related issues for which formal
criteria may not necessarily exist, and for which management has significant
discretion in addressing, but the recommendation represents prudent and or
practical actions, which we believe should be implemented by the agency to
improve outcomes. Other less significant findings were communicated to RAD
that did not warrant inclusion in this report.
State Government Article Section 2-1224(i) requires that we redact in a manner
consistent with auditing best practices any cybersecurity findings before a report
is made available to the public. This results in the issuance of two different
versions of an audit report that contains cybersecurity findings – a redacted
version for the public and an unredacted version for government officials
responsible for acting on our audit recommendations.
The State Finance and Procurement Article, Section 3.5-301(b), states that
cybersecurity is defined as “processes or capabilities wherein systems,
communications, and information are protected and defended against damage,
unauthorized use or modification, and exploitation.” Based on that definition, and
in our professional judgment, we concluded that certain findings in this report fall
under that definition. Consequently, for the publicly available audit report all
specifics as to the nature of cybersecurity findings and required corrective actions
have been redacted. We have determined that such aforementioned practices, and
government auditing standards, support the redaction of this information from the
public audit report. The specifics of these cybersecurity findings have been
19

--- Page 22 ---
communicated to RAD and those parties responsible for acting on our
recommendations in an unredacted audit report.
The response from COM, on behalf of RAD, to our findings and
recommendations is included as an appendix to this report. Depending on the
version of the audit report, responses to any cybersecurity findings may be
redacted in accordance with State law. As prescribed in the State Government
Article, Section 2-1224 of the Annotated Code of Maryland, we will advise COM
regarding the results of our review of its response.
20

--- Page 23 ---
Exhibit 1
Listing of Most Recent Office of Legislative Audits
Fiscal Compliance Audits of Comptroller of Maryland Divisions
As of October 2023
Most Recent
Name of Audit Areas Covered
Report Date
 Management of the State payroll system
 Non-budgeted funds maintained for payroll
deductions
10/05/23
1 Central Payroll Bureau  Critical information systems
 Support services to other units of the
Comptroller for processing payroll
timekeeping records
 Procurement
 Equipment
Information Technology  Support services to other units of the
2 Division (Fiscal Comptroller for monitoring information 02/02/22
Operations) technology related services and maintaining
information technology equipment inventory
records
 Confiscated Property
Field Enforcement
3  Business licenses 09/07/21
Bureau
 Routine Inspections
 Investigations, collection of delinquent taxes,
and other taxpayer compliance activities
related to individual income taxes
 Audits and investigations, collection of
4 Compliance Division 12/18/20
delinquent taxes, and other taxpayer
compliance activities related to business taxes
 Identification, collection, and distribution of
unclaimed property
 State agency vendor payment processing
General Accounting  Vendor table maintenance
5 11/09/20
Division  State agency working funds
 Corporate purchasing card program
Information Technology  Maintenance and monitoring of mainframe
6 Division – Annapolis operating system, various security functions, 07/27/20
Data Center Operations and critical databases
 Capital grants monitoring
 Procurement and disbursements
Office of the
 Corporate Purchasing cards
Comptroller
7  Support services to other divisions of the 08/29/19
Bureau of Revenue
Comptroller, such as processing invoices,
Estimates
maintenance of accounting records, human
resources, and related fiscal functions
21

--- Page 24 ---
Exhibit 2
Compass Release Schedule
22

--- Page 25 ---
APPENDIX
Brooke E. Lierman
Comptroller
Andrew Schaufele
Chief Deputy Comptroller
January 12, 2024
Mr. Gregory A. Hook, CPA, Legislative Auditor
300 West Preston Street
Room 1202
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Dear Mr. Hook:
Enclosed is the Comptroller’s response to your report on the Revenue Administration
Division for the period beginning September 21, 2018 and ending September 30, 2021.
We have carefully reviewed each finding, and we believe that our responses fully
address each recommendation contained in the report. Should you need additional
information or clarification, please contact David Hildebrand, Director, Office of Risk
Management by email at dhildebr@marylandtaxes.gov or by telephone at 410-260-7768.
The Comptroller appreciates your objective appraisal of our operations and your
recommendations for continuous improvement and commends your auditors for their
professionalism and thorough review.
Sincerely,
Andrew M. Schaufele
Chief Deputy Comptroller
Robert R. Scheerer
Director, Revenue Administration Division
Cc: Honorable Brooke Elizabeth Lierman, Comptroller
80 Calvert Street, Annapolis, Maryland 214040466 410-260-7310 1-800-552-3941 (MD) www.marylandtaxes.gov
Fax: 443-681-1065 MRS 711 (MD) TTY 410-260-7157 aschaufele@marylandtaxes.gov

--- Page 26 ---
Comptroller of Maryland
Revenue Administration Division
Agency Response Form
Taxpayer Refunds
Finding 1
The Revenue Administration Division (RAD) did not conduct all required reviews of
declaration credits (tax overpayments that taxpayers chose to apply to the next tax year)
and the reviews performed were not sufficiently comprehensive.
We recommend that RAD
a. conduct required reviews of declaration credits for individual (repeat), corporate, and
fiduciary tax returns; and
b. ensure that the reviews include a review of critical supporting documentation, such as
documentation of a taxpayer’s withholdings.
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide Point of clarification, the terminology is “over credit” not a declaration
additional comments as credit
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 1a Agree Estimated Completion Date: 01/2024
Please provide details of RAD will conduct the reviews in accordance with procedures
corrective action or established that utilizes a query from the Data Warehouse
explain disagreement.
Recommendation 1b Agree Estimated Completion Date: 07/2022
Please provide details of RAD will continue to rely on W-2 information loaded into the system
corrective action or when businesses submit their annual MW-508 reconciliation each year.
explain disagreement. We perform a cursory review of this process to verify accuracy
Page 1 of 8

--- Page 27 ---
Comptroller of Maryland
Revenue Administration Division
Agency Response Form
Finding 2
RAD did not ensure that refund replacement checks, which totaled $29.5 million during
calendar year 2021, were reviewed by supervisory personnel as required by its policy.
We recommend that RAD ensure that all supervisory and management reviews of
replacement refund checks are performed as required, including those noted above.
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 2 Agree Estimated Completion Date: 06/30/22
Please provide details of All reviews will be completed on refund replacement checks per
corrective action or procedures. Calendar year review of 2021 items was completed in
explain disagreement. June 2022.
Page 2 of 8

--- Page 28 ---
Comptroller of Maryland
Revenue Administration Division
Agency Response Form
Data Matches
Finding 3
RAD did not ensure that current death records were obtained and loaded into the
Comptroller of Maryland’s automated State of Maryland Tax (SMART) system, resulting
in potential improper tax returns and refunds going undetected.
We recommend that RAD
a. ensure that required supervisory reviews of monthly data uploads are performed and
documented, and
b. obtain the missing death records and match the data to tax returns and refunds
claimed since May 2020 to identify potentially improper returns and claims.
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 3a Agree Estimated Completion Date: 05/23/2023
Please provide details of Monthly uploads are now confirmed and documented by RAD’s Project
corrective action or Management Office as an additional step in the procedure.
explain disagreement.
Recommendation 3b Agree Estimated Completion Date: 01/2024
Please provide details of The Death Master File is uploaded monthly currently. We submitted a
corrective action or request to obtain a cumulative file but have yet to receive a response.
explain disagreement. Should we receive a response we will determine if there is a benefit to
retroactively match the missing uploads from May 2020 through
September 2020.
Page 3 of 8

--- Page 29 ---
Comptroller of Maryland
Revenue Administration Division
Agency Response Form
Data Analytics for Fraud Detection
Finding 4 (Policy Issue)
RAD did not determine the cost benefit of expanding the use of its existing individual
taxpayer data analytics vendor to help identify corporate and business tax fraud.
We recommend that RAD determine the cost benefit of expanding its current use of its
data analytics for other types of tax returns.
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 4 Agree Estimated Completion Date: 06/2024
Please provide details of The Comptroller of Maryland is recognized nationally as the pioneer of
corrective action or implementing the fraud model for personal income tax and is intent on
explain disagreement. identifying and preventing fraud across all tax types. We will work with
the outside vendor to determine cost and approach, an expansion of the
existing fraud detection system will require additional funding. It is
important to note that, due to the strength of bad actors, additional
funding goes beyond the development and implementation of the
algorithm. Our best-in-call income tax model is still only correct 50% of
the time, that means that staff must be available to adjudicate algorithm
results, answer phone calls, process documentation and correspondence
validating identity, and hear appeals. We strongly implore the State to
support this initiative, but we also have to ensure that the total cost for
implementation is provided.
Page 4 of 8

--- Page 30 ---
Comptroller of Maryland
Revenue Administration Division
Agency Response Form
SMART
The Office of Legislative Audits (OLA) has determined that Finding 5 related to
“cybersecurity”, as defined by the State Finance and Procurement Article, Section 3.5-301(b) of
the Annotated Code of Maryland, and therefore is subject to redaction from the publicly
available audit report in accordance with the State Government Article 2-1224(i). Although the
specifics of the finding, including the analysis, related recommendation(s), along with COM’s
responses, have been redacted from this report copy, COM’s responses indicated agreement with
the finding and related recommendations.
Finding 5
Redacted cybersecurity-related finding.
Agency Response has been redacted by OLA.
Page 5 of 8

--- Page 31 ---
Comptroller of Maryland
Revenue Administration Division
Agency Response Form
COMPASS
OLA has determined that Finding 6 related to “cybersecurity”, as defined by the State Finance
and Procurement Article, Section 3.5-301(b) of the Annotated Code of Maryland, and therefore
is subject to redaction from the publicly available audit report in accordance with the State
Government Article 2-1224(i). Although the specifics of the finding, including the analysis,
related recommendation(s), along with COM’s responses, have been redacted from this report
copy, COM’s responses indicated agreement with the finding and related recommendations.
Finding 6
Redacted cybersecurity-related finding.
Agency Response has been redacted by OLA.
Page 6 of 8

--- Page 32 ---
Comptroller of Maryland
Revenue Administration Division
Agency Response Form
Cash Receipts
Finding 7
RAD had not established sufficient controls over checks for tax payments received in the
mail at its Annapolis location, as certain documentation used to account for batches of
checks processed was not retained prior to May 2021.
We recommend that RAD
a. retain copies of batch control sheets to provide accountability and control over tax
returns and collections prior to recordation (repeat), and
b. retain support for any adjustments made to batch control sheets.
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 7a Agree Estimated Completion Date: 01/01/2023
Please provide details of Batch control sheets are retained in accordance with internal procedures
corrective action or
explain disagreement.
Recommendation 7b Agree Estimated Completion Date: 01/01/2023
Please provide details of Documentation is retained to support adjustments to batch control sheets
corrective action or in accordance with internal procedures.
explain disagreement.
Page 7 of 8

--- Page 33 ---
Comptroller of Maryland
Revenue Administration Division
Agency Response Form
Information Systems Security and Control
OLA has determined that the Information Systems Security and Control section, including
Findings 8 and 9 related to “cybersecurity”, as defined by the State Finance and Procurement
Article, Section 3.5-301(b) of the Annotated Code of Maryland, and therefore are subject to
redaction from the publicly available audit report in accordance with the State Government
Article 2-1224(i). Although the specifics of the following findings, including the analysis,
related recommendations, along with COM’s responses, have been redacted from this report
copy, COM’s responses indicated agreement with the findings and related recommendations.
Finding 8
Redacted cybersecurity-related finding.
Agency Response has been redacted by OLA.
Finding 9
Redacted cybersecurity-related finding.
Agency Response has been redacted by OLA.
Page 8 of 8

--- Page 34 ---
A T
UDIT EAM
Michael J. Murdzak, CPA
Audit Manager
R. Brendan Coffey, CPA, CISA
Edwin L. Paul, CPA, CISA
Information Systems Audit Managers
David R. Fahnestock, CPA
Data Analytics Manager
Nathan H. Suffin, CPA
Senior Auditor
Michael K. Bliss
Eric Alexander, CPA, CISA
Information Systems Senior Auditors
Matthew P. Henry
Oluwafemi E. Ogundolie
Dianne P. Ramirez
Yuvaraj N. Sharma
Brian M. Webbert
Staff Auditors
Vickey K. Micah
Charles O. Price
Information Systems Staff Auditors
Ian T. Pontius
Data Analytics Unit Auditor