Title: Maryland Department of Health - Efforts to Identify and Analyze Improper Medicaid Payments
Date: 06/23/2020
Type: Performance
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5ef4ae23a1ce580a44d22e32
Extracted: 2025-06-19T11:41:41.850216
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Performance Audit Report
Maryland Department of Health
Efforts to Identify and Analyze Improper Medicaid Payments
June 2020
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Senator Clarence K. Lam, M.D. (Senate Chair) Delegate Carol L. Krimm (House Chair)
Senator Malcolm L. Augustine Delegate Steven J. Arentz
Senator Adelaide C. Eckardt Delegate Mark S. Chang
Senator George C. Edwards Delegate Andrea Fletcher Harrison
Senator Katie Fry Hester Delegate Keith E. Haynes
Senator Cheryl C. Kagan Delegate Michael A. Jackson
Senator Benjamin F. Kramer Delegate David Moon
Senator Cory V. McCray Delegate April R Rose
Senator Justin D. Ready Delegate Geraldine Valentino-Smith
Senator Craig J. Zucker Delegate Karen Lewis Young
To Obtain Further Information
Office of Legislative Audits
301 West Preston Street, Room 1202
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Phone: 410-946-5900 ꞏ 301-970-5900 ꞏ 1-877-486-9964 (Toll Free in Maryland)
Maryland Relay: 711
TTY: 410-946-5401 ꞏ 301-970-5401
E-mail: OLAWebmaster@ola.state.md.us
Website: www.ola.state.md.us
To Report Fraud
The Office of Legislative Audits operates a Fraud Hotline to report fraud, waste, or abuse involving State
of Maryland government resources. Reports of fraud, waste, or abuse may be communicated anonymously
by a toll-free call to 1-877-FRAUD-11, by mail to the Fraud Hotline, c/o Office of Legislative Audits, or
through the Office’s website.
Nondiscrimination Statement
The Department of Legislative Services does not discriminate on the basis of age, ancestry, color, creed,
marital status, national origin, race, religion, gender, gender identity, sexual orientation, or disability in the
admission or access to its programs, services, or activities. The Department’s Information Officer has been
designated to coordinate compliance with the nondiscrimination requirements contained in Section 35.107
of the United States Department of Justice Regulations. Requests for assistance should be directed to the
Information Officer at 410-946-5400 or 410-970-5400.

--- Page 3 ---
June 23, 2020
Senator Clarence K. Lam, M.D., Senate Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Delegate Carol L. Krimm, House Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Members of Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Annapolis, Maryland
Ladies and Gentlemen:
We have conducted a performance audit to determine if the Maryland
Department of Health (MDH), including its Division of Program Integrity
(DPI), had a comprehensive approach in place to identify and analyze
improper Medicaid-related payments for the period beginning July 1, 2015
and ending June 30, 2018. During fiscal year 2018, disbursements for
Medicaid-related payments totaled $10.9 billion.
Our audit disclosed that MDH had not established a comprehensive risk-based
approach to identify and analyze improper Medicaid payments. Specifically,
MDH had not established a periodic risk assessment process to identify and
document overall risks and to allocate its resources to areas of highest risk.
We also found that DPI’s data analytics were not robust, were not tied to a
risk-based approach or plan, and did not fully address Managed Care
Organization (MCO) encounter data. Furthermore, MDH did not take
advantage of data analysis services available through the federal government
that could improve the effectiveness of its analytics. Finally, MDH did not
implement a formal process to measure and report quantifiable benefits from
the operation of DPI, which has the primary responsibility to identify and
analyze improper Medicaid-related payments.
In addition, MDH was not adequately identifying and addressing potential
improper Medicaid-related payments. We noted numerous areas where claims
were paid without validation to ensure the provider was properly enrolled and

--- Page 4 ---
qualified for Medicaid, as required by federal or State regulations. For example,
during the period July 1, 2015 to June 30, 2018, MDH approved prescription and
laboratory claims totaling approximately $175 million submitted by prescribing
physicians and referring providers whose enrollment in Medicaid was not
validated. We also found that MDH’s controls were not adequate to identify and
prevent improper Medicaid payments related to incarcerated individuals. We
identified approximately $9.6 million of potential improper Medicaid payments
related to incarcerated individuals during fiscal years 2016 to 2018.
Our audit also disclosed deficiencies with MDH’s Medicaid Management
Information System edits that did not trigger a suspension or denial of certain
high-risk claims (such as certain potential duplicate claims payments and
payments to providers after a credible allegation of fraud was determined).
Furthermore, we identified several deficiencies related to MDH’s oversight of the
MCOs providing Medicaid services. For example, MDH did not ensure that the
MCOs included certain critical information in their encounter data and performed
required investigations of the encounter data. MDH also did not ensure MCOs
had not paid claims for excluded services. Such services are paid directly by
MDH, and if an MCO were to pay providers directly for these services, it could
improperly increase the MCO’s subsequent capitation (per person) rates.
MDH’s response to this audit is included as an appendix to this report. We
reviewed the response to our findings and related recommendations, and have
concluded that the corrective actions identified are sufficient to address all
audit issues. While MDH agrees with the recommendations in this report, we
identified certain instances in which statements in the response conflict with
or disagree with a report finding. We reviewed and reassessed our audit
documentation, and reaffirmed the validity of our finding. In accordance with
generally accepted government auditing standards, we have included an
“auditor comment” within MDH’s response to explain our position.
We wish to acknowledge the cooperation extended to us during the audit by
MDH and its willingness to address the audit issues and implement
appropriate corrective actions.
Respectfully submitted,
Gregory A. Hook, CPA
Legislative Auditor
2

--- Page 5 ---
Table of Contents
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology 5
Audit Scope 5
Objectives and Methodology 6
Fieldwork and Agency Response 7
Background Information 8
Agency Responsibilities 8
Medicaid Payment Methodologies 9
Responsibility to Identify and Analyze Improper Payments 10
Findings and Recommendations 11
Objective 1 – To determine if the Maryland Department of Health (MDH)
had established a comprehensive documented risk-based approach to
focus the efforts of its program integrity operations on areas of highest
risk and applied industry best practices in its use of data analytics to
effectively identify improper Medicaid-related payments. Additionally,
to determine if MDH measured and reported quantifiable benefits of
its program integrity operations.
Objective and Methodology 11
Conclusion 11
Findings
Finding 1 – MDH’s process to identify and analyze improper Medicaid 12
payments through its Division of Program Integrity (DPI) was not
comprehensive and did not incorporate certain best practices.
Objective 2 – To determine if MDH’s operations were adequately
identifying and addressing potential improper Medicaid-related
payments.
Objective and Methodology 15
Conclusion 15
Findings
Finding 2 – MDH did not ensure that prescribing physicians and referring 16
providers were enrolled in Medicaid, as required by federal
regulations. We determined that MDH approved prescription and
laboratory claims totaling approximately $175 million submitted by
3

--- Page 6 ---
prescribing physicians and referring providers whose enrollment in
Medicaid was not validated.
Finding 3 – MDH did not ensure that rendering providers for certain 17
group practices were enrolled in Medicaid, as required by
State regulations.
Finding 4 – MDH accepted encounter data from Managed Care 19
Organizations (MCOs) that excluded necessary data elements and
hindered its ability to perform effective oversight, including DPI’s
use of data analytics to identify and analyze improper claim activity.
Finding 5 – MDH did not perform a data match or have an alternative 20
method to determine if MCOs were paying claims related to certain
services that MDH had carved out from the MCO contracts.
Finding 6 – MDH did not ensure MCO providers rendering services to 21
Maryland recipients were enrolled as Medicaid providers, as required
by federal regulations that became effective January 1, 2018.
Finding 7 – MDH did not ensure each MCO conducted required 22
investigations of encounter claims activity.
Finding 8 – A data match performed by MDH to identify incarcerated 24
individuals who were improperly enrolled in MCOs was based on
incomplete data and was not used to identify and prevent improper
fee-for-service payments related to incarcerated individuals. Our
expanded data match identified approximately $9.6 million of
potential improper claim payments that had not been identified or
investigated by MDH.
Finding 9 – Claims processing edits were not properly implemented to 26
prevent payments after a credible allegation of fraud against a
provider was determined. Additionally, certain existing claims
processing edits were not always designed in a manner to analyze
critical criteria that could be indicative of either duplicate payments
or overpayments.
Agency Response Appendix
4

--- Page 7 ---
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
Audit Scope
We conducted a performance audit to determine if the Maryland Department of
Health (MDH), including its Division of Program Integrity, had a comprehensive
approach in place to identify and analyze improper Medicaid-related payments.
This audit was initiated as a result of significant increases in Medicaid
expenditures over the past decade and ever increasing healthcare costs. The
Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS) is currently projecting that
total spending for Medicaid will rise an average of 5.5 percent per year from 2018
to 2027.
There is a high risk of significant improper payments and fraud, waste, and abuse
in the Medicaid program, which has been identified and reported both at the
federal level (such as by CMS and the Government Accountability Office) and by
other state audit organizations. These reports also identified insufficiencies,
concerns, or needed areas of improvement in other states’ program integrity
operations to more effectively identify and analyze improper payments.
The scope of our performance audit was limited to reviewing Medicaid claim
activity for a three-year period for fiscal years 2016, 2017, and 2018 and focused
on the control activities, entities, and data involved with identifying and analyzing
improper Medicaid payments. Our audit did not include an evaluation of
procedures and controls over recipient eligibility, calculation of payments to
Managed Care Organizations (MCOs), or verification of drug rebates. These
areas are subject to separate audits our Office performs of MDH.
We conducted this audit under the authority of the State Government Article,
Section 2-1221 of the Annotated Code of Maryland and performed it in
accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards. Those
standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient,
appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and
conclusions based on our audit objectives. We believe that the evidence obtained
provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit
objectives.
5

--- Page 8 ---
Objectives and Methodology
Our audit included the following two objectives:
1. To determine if MDH had established a comprehensive documented risk-
based approach to focus the efforts of its program integrity operations on
areas of highest risk and applied industry best practices in its use of data
analytics to effectively identify improper Medicaid-related payments.
Additionally, to determine if MDH measured and reported quantifiable
benefits of its program integrity operations.
2. To determine if MDH’s operations were adequately identifying and
addressing potential improper Medicaid-related payments.
To accomplish our objectives, we obtained data extracts from the Medicaid
Management Information System (MMIS II) for a three-year period for fiscal
years 2016, 2017, and 2018 to perform data analytics of more than 290 million
fee-for-service claim payments and MCO encounter data records. The data we
obtained were subject to various tests to determine data reliability, including
tracing samples of randomly selected claims to MMIS II for accuracy and
comparing claim totals to control totals of expenditures for completeness. We
also ensured the coding logic we used for extracting the data records from MMIS
II was designed properly. Based on these reviews, we determined the claims data
were sufficiently reliable for use in our audit. For the encounter data, we
determined that the data agreed to the data as maintained in MMIS II. However,
our audit work disclosed the encounter data was deficient as it did not include
certain critical data elements (see Finding 4).
Additionally, we reviewed reports and documentation pertaining to the Medicaid
program, with particular focus on improper Medicaid payments, from other state
and federal agencies. Furthermore, we interviewed various MDH employees
responsible for identifying and analyzing improper Medicaid payments. We
conducted tests, analyses, inspections of documents and records, and
observations, as we deemed necessary to achieve our objectives.
More detailed descriptions of the specific objectives and related methodologies
are discussed in the Findings and Recommendations section of this report.
6

--- Page 9 ---
Fieldwork and Agency Response
We conducted our fieldwork from May 2018 to May 2019. MDH’s response to
our findings and recommendations is included as an appendix to this report. As
prescribed in the State Government Article, Section 2-1224 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, we will advise MDH regarding the results of our review of its
response.
7

--- Page 10 ---
Background Information
Agency Responsibilities
The Medical Care Programs Administration (MCPA) of the Maryland
Department of Health (MDH) operates under both Title XIX of the federal Social
Security Act (Medicaid) and State law. Medicaid is a joint federal and state
entitlement program for low-income individuals. The program is administered by
the states, which are required to provide healthcare coverage to all applicants who
meet the program’s eligibility criteria.
Medicaid represents a significant portion of Maryland’s expenditures. For fiscal
year 2018, approximately 27 percent of total State expenditures were for
Medicaid. Specifically, of the $41 billion spent by the State (from all funding
sources) in fiscal year 2018, $10.9 billion was spent on Medicaid. Funding for
Medicaid totaled $6.7 billion from federal funds, $3.2 billion from State general
funds, and an additional $1 billion from special and reimbursable funds.
__________________________________________________________________
Figure 1
Medicaid Represents 27 Percent of Maryland Expenditures
Source: State of Maryland Comprehensive Annual Financial Report, Fiscal Year 2018
8

--- Page 11 ---
Medicaid Payment Methodologies
MDH uses two methodologies for paying Medicaid claims.
Managed Care Organizations (MCOs)
According to MCPA records as of June 30, 2018, approximately 1.2 million (or
86 percent) of the 1.4 million Medicaid recipients were enrolled in HealthChoice,
the statewide managed care program that began in 1997. Under HealthChoice,
MCPA makes specified capitation (per person) payments to Maryland’s nine
private MCOs to cover the cost of services provided to enrolled Medicaid
recipients. In general, the MCOs contract with and pay health care professionals
and other entities (such as hospitals) to provide these services. The capitation
rates vary by recipient based on several factors, including the recipient’s
demographics and medical history. MCPA also reimburses the MCOs for certain
high-cost activities (such as newborn deliveries and Hepatitis C treatments).
While the MCOs provide a wide variety of services to enrolled recipients, certain
services (such as behavioral health services) are paid for on a fee-for-service basis
by MCPA even for recipients enrolled in an MCO. These services are termed
“carve outs.”
MCOs submit encounter data to MCPA to show what services were performed so
outcomes can be measured and future rates can be based on past actual services
provided. Encounter data generally represent billed claims that providers submit
to MCOs.
During fiscal year 2018, MCPA made payments to the MCOs totaling
approximately $5.6 billion, which represents slightly more than half of the costs
for Maryland’s Medicaid program.
Fee-for-Service
Populations excluded from the HealthChoice managed care program include the
institutionalized and individuals who are dually eligible for Medicaid and
Medicare. Populations not covered by an MCO are covered on a fee-for-service
basis. Under the fee-for-service system, health providers (such as physicians,
hospitals, and medical equipment suppliers) are paid a fee for each service or
supply provided. Fees are generally billed at rates established by MCPA or, in the
case of hospital stays, at rates established by the Maryland Health Services Cost
Review Commission. Annually, fee-for-service costs represent slightly less than
half of the costs for Maryland’s Medicaid program.
9

--- Page 12 ---
Responsibility to Identify and Analyze Improper Payments
The federal government defines improper payments as “any payment that should
not have been made or that was made in an incorrect amount under statutory,
contractual, administrative, or other legally applicable requirements.” Incorrect
amounts include both overpayments and underpayments.
According to 2017 Payment Error Rate Measurement Reviews performed by the
Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS), the improper payment rate in
Medicaid fee-for-service payments nationally was estimated at 12.9 percent.
Although Maryland’s improper payment rate was almost half the national
average, it significantly increased by more than forty percent from the last review
CMS performed in 2014. Based on the 2017 review of Maryland, CMS’
projected improper payments in Medicaid fee-for-service payments totaled
approximately $382 million for fiscal year 2016.
MDH’s Office of the Inspector General (OIG) includes the Division of Program
Integrity (DPI), which is a key component of MDH’s efforts to identify and
analyze improper Medicaid-related payments. As of June 30, 2018, the OIG had
64 employees, including 37 employees assigned to DPI. DPI includes the
Surveillance and Utilization Review Subsystem (SURS) unit. Using its own
information system, the SURS unit performs various data analytics on Medicaid
claims (both fee-for-service and MCO encounter data) to identify and analyze
improper Medicaid-related payments. The SURS unit performs data analytics,
primarily on an ad hoc basis, based on its own ideas and through communications
with CMS or other states, or to follow up on investigations initiated by others
within DPI and MDH.
10

--- Page 13 ---
Findings and Recommendations
Objective 1 – Effectiveness of Program Integrity Operations
Objective and Methodology
Our objective was to determine if the Maryland Department of Health (MDH) had
established a comprehensive documented risk-based approach to focus the efforts
of its program integrity operations on areas of highest risk and applied industry
best practices in its use of data analytics to effectively identify improper
Medicaid-related payments. Additionally, our objective was to determine if MDH
measured and reported quantifiable benefits of its program integrity operations.
To accomplish this objective, we reviewed numerous reports by other states and
the federal government to identify best practices and recommendations for
program integrity operations and oversight activities to effectively identify and
analyze improper Medicaid-related payments. We also interviewed multiple
MDH staff, including those in the Office of the Inspector General (OIG) and its
Division of Program Integrity (DPI), to obtain an understanding of MDH’s
processes to identify and analyze improper Medicaid-related payments. This
included gaining an understanding of DPI’s Surveillance and Utilization Review
Subsystem (SURS) information system that is used for DPI’s data analysis of
Medicaid-related payments, and evaluating DPI’s use of the system and its
capabilities. Additionally, we researched the availability of other data analysis
services that MDH could potentially take advantage of through the federal
government. Finally, we evaluated whether MDH measures and reports
quantifiable benefits of its program integrity operations, a practice that was
recommended in a federal Government Accountability Office (GAO) Report.
Conclusion
We determined that MDH had not established a comprehensive risk-based
approach to focus the efforts of its program integrity operations on areas of
highest risk. Specifically, MDH had not established a periodic risk assessment
process to identify and document overall risks and to allocate its resources,
including DPI resources, to areas of highest risk. We also found that DPI’s data
analytics were not robust, were not tied to a risk-based approach or plan, and did
not fully address Managed Care Organization (MCO) encounter data.
Furthermore, MDH did not take advantage of data analysis services available
through the federal government that could improve the effectiveness of its
analytics. Finally, MDH did not implement a formal process to measure and
report quantifiable benefits of its program integrity operations.
11

--- Page 14 ---
Finding 1
MDH’s process to identify and analyze improper Medicaid payments
through its DPI was not comprehensive and did not incorporate certain best
practices.
Analysis
MDH’s process to identify and analyze improper Medicaid payments through its
DPI was not comprehensive and did not incorporate certain best practices.
Specifically, DPI’s work was generally limited to reacting to ad-hoc requests from
MDH divisions or from within DPI for specific information related to
investigations of improper Medicaid payments. DPI did not utilize robust data
analytic techniques based on a risk-based approach, did not use available federal
data matching services, and did not implement a mechanism to track and quantify
measurable benefits of its operations. Based on our research, these practices
could help MDH proactively focus its limited resources on areas of greatest
concern and risk.
DPI’s Data Analytics Need Improvement
DPI’s use of data analytics to review Medicaid claims through its SURS unit was
not robust, was not tied to a risk-based approach or plan, and did not fully address
MCO encounter data.
The tools used by DPI’s SURS unit lacked capabilities to perform cross-matching
between different datasets (such as cross matching between MDH’s own systems
and other datasets external to MDH) that could help identify improper payments.
Additionally, DPI could not perform geo-mapping and data visualization
techniques (summary charts and tables) to proactively highlight trends, patterns,
and irregularities in Medicaid payment activity by provider or recipient. For
example, a geo-map could help identify a provider who submits a high volume of
Medicaid claims for services to recipients who reside long distances from the
provider’s office, warranting further investigation. Consequently, during our
audit, we performed our own advanced data analytics using available commercial
software that we determined was more comprehensive than the software available
through the SURS unit. For example, in Findings 2, 3, 5, 8, and 9, our data
analytics used methods and cross-matching techniques not available through the
SURS unit to identify various potential improper payments, and throughout our
audit work we analyzed data for trends, patterns, or irregularities in Medicaid
payment activity by provider.
Additionally, DPI’s data analytics were not tied to a risk-based approach or
annual plan. A risk-based approach is important for data analytics activities and
can enhance the effectiveness of such activities. According to a July 2015 GAO
12

--- Page 15 ---
report, titled A Framework for Managing Fraud Risk in Federal Programs, one of
the leading practices for data analytics activities is to take a risk-based approach
to data analytics and consider the benefits and costs of investing in specific data-
analytic tools and techniques. MDH personnel advised us that they attempted to
address areas of risk throughout their work, but did not have a formal or
documented approach or an annual plan. Given its limited resources, DPI’s
primary focus was following up on fraud tips and related investigations instead of
proactively addressing areas of known risks.
Furthermore, DPI did not provide effective oversight of the Managed Care
Program, since it was not performing comprehensive analytics of MCO encounter
data. Instead, DPI’s encounter data analysis was generally limited to reviewing a
specific issue that came to their attention through a fee-for-service or provider
investigation. DPI personnel advised that they rely significantly on the MCOs’
investigative units to ensure the propriety of encounter data activity. However, as
noted in Finding 7, MDH did not ensure each MCO conducted investigations of
encounter data activity, as required.
DPI Did Not Use Available Federal Data Matching Services
DPI did not leverage available data matching resources provided through the
United States Treasury’s Do Not Pay (DNP) Center. The DNP Center is a free
robust analytic tool that helps agencies identify and prevent improper payments
by matching agency data to various federal databases (such as multiple death
record databases and the List of Excluded Individuals and Entities1) some of
which are only available through the federal government. Additionally, the DNP
Center provides pattern and trend analysis, detection of anomalies to identify high
risk areas, and detection of duplicates. While MDH obtained extracts from some
of the same databases used by the DNP Center (such as the List of Excluded
Individuals and Entities) and performed its own in-house matches, we concluded
that MDH’s matches lacked the comprehensive analytical approach performed by
the DNP Center such as trend analysis and detection of anomalies. Consequently,
we believe MDH could achieve better data matching results through the DNP
Center instead of performing its own matches.
MDH Did Not Perform a Risk Assessment and Lacked Measurable and
Quantifiable Benefits for its Program Integrity Operations
MDH did not periodically perform a risk assessment of potential improper
Medicaid payments to identify and document overall risks and use that
information to allocate its resources, including DPI resources. Additionally,
1 The DNP Center includes death databases beyond what is used by MDH. The List of Excluded
Individuals and Entities identifies entities excluded by the federal government from participating
in federal healthcare programs.
13

--- Page 16 ---
MDH did not implement a formal process to measure and report quantifiable
benefits of its program integrity operations. Furthermore, MDH could not
accurately support how it developed its reported savings from DPI efforts of
$68.6 million over the five-year period from 2014 to 2018.
According to a January 2015 GAO report, titled Medicaid Information
Technology, Maryland was identified as one of seven states that could not identify
any steps taken to quantify improvements in the outcomes or effectiveness of its
program integrity efforts attributable to the use of information systems. Such
steps should include conducting a formal annual risk assessment and tracking the
measurable and quantifiable benefits of its systems. Without these steps, MDH
lacked assurance that its limited resources were used effectively to identify and
analyze improper Medicaid payments.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that MDH take steps to effectively identify and analyze
improper Medicaid payments through its program integrity operations by
a. implementing a robust system of data analytics based on a risk-based
approach that incorporates cross-matching, geo-mapping, and trend
analysis to proactively highlight irregularities in Medicaid payment
activity;
b. performing comprehensive analytics of MCO encounter data as part of
its oversight of MCO activities;
c. taking advantage of data matching services available through the United
States Treasury’s DNP Center; and
d. performing a periodic documented risk assessment and implementing a
formal process to measure and report reliable quantifiable benefits of its
program integrity operations.
14

--- Page 17 ---
Objective 2 – MDH’s Operations to Identify and Address
Potential Improper Medicaid Payments
Objective and Methodology
Our objective was to determine if MDH’s operations were adequately identifying
and addressing potential improper Medicaid-related payments.
To accomplish this objective, we reviewed State and federal laws and regulations
and interviewed MDH staff to obtain an understanding of various processes
critical to ensuring the proper payment of claims. This included gaining an
understanding of processes and controls and performing a walkthrough of claims
processing, the Medicaid Management Information System (MMIS II) edit
controls, and post payment reviews (such as data matches) performed to identify
potential improper Medicaid-related payments. We also obtained an
understanding of provider enrollment processes and related system controls to
ensure claims are only paid for services rendered by qualified providers meeting
federal and State requirements. We obtained and extracted claims data and
encounter data from MMIS II for the period July 1, 2015 through June 30, 2018
and performed numerous analytics and matches to identify potential improper
Medicaid-related payments. Certain of these potential improper payments were
selected on a test-basis for further investigation to determine the propriety of
claim payments.
Conclusion
We determined that MDH’s operations were not adequately identifying and
addressing potential improper Medicaid-related payments. We noted numerous
areas where claims were paid without validation to ensure the provider was
properly enrolled and qualified for Medicaid, as required. We also found that
MDH’s controls were not adequate to identify and prevent improper Medicaid
payments related to incarcerated individuals. Our audit also disclosed
deficiencies in MMIS II system edits that did not trigger a suspension or denial of
certain high-risk claims (such as certain potential duplicate claim payments and
payments to providers after a credible allegation of fraud was determined).
Furthermore, we identified several deficiencies related to MDH’s oversight of the
MCOs. For example, MDH did not ensure that the MCOs included certain
critical information in their encounter data and performed required investigations
of the encounter data. MDH also did not ensure MCOs had not paid claims for
excluded services.
15

--- Page 18 ---
Finding 2
MDH did not ensure that prescribing physicians and referring providers
were enrolled in Medicaid, as required by federal regulations. During the
period July 1, 2015 to June 30, 2018, MDH approved prescription and
laboratory claims totaling approximately $175 million submitted by
prescribing physicians and referring providers whose enrollment in
Medicaid was not validated.
Analysis
MDH did not ensure that prescribing physicians and referring providers were
enrolled in Medicaid prior to approving claims, as required by federal regulations
established by the Affordable Care Act in 2011. During the period July 1, 2015 to
June 30, 2018, of the 17 million pharmacy and laboratory claims totaling
approximately $2 billion, MDH approved 1.6 million claims totaling
approximately $175 million submitted by prescribing physicians and referring
providers whose enrollment in Medicaid was not validated. Since MDH did not
have an approved Medicaid number to identify the prescribing physicians and
referring providers at the time of the claim, MDH’s MCPA allowed the claims to
be processed in MMIS II with a general number (known as a dummy number).
The information identifying the provider associated with these claims was not
provided to DPI which prevented DPI from performing comprehensive data
analysis to oversee Medicaid claim activity and to identify improper payments.
Ensuring that prescribing and referring providers are prescreened and enrolled in
Medicaid helps to reduce fraud and lowers risk to consumers. For example,
identifying the prescribing physician on pharmacy claims can help detect if
opioids and other high-risk prescription medications are being prescribed by
certain physicians in a questionable manner. Additionally, our cursory review of
the laboratory providers with the highest dollar amount of claims for which the
dummy number was applied disclosed at least 5 laboratories of the top 15 that
were subsequently under investigation or had settlements against them for
improper billing or claims. This included two laboratories that were investigated
by the federal government resulting in large settlements.
MDH management advised they were aware of their non-compliance with
requirements that prescribing physicians and referring providers be enrolled in
Medicaid and are working to address this issue. For example, MDH planned to
take steps to verify Medicaid enrollment of prescribing physicians on submitted
pharmacy claims, and MDH sent a memorandum to the Centers for Medicare and
Medicaid Services (CMS) in June 2018 indicating its difficulty getting providers
to comply and seeking CMS’ guidance. As of April 2019, MDH advised they had
not received a response.
16

--- Page 19 ---
Recommendation 2
We recommend that MDH
a. ensure that prescribing physicians and referring providers are enrolled in
Medicaid, as required by federal regulations prior to paying related
claims;
b. ensure required enrollment information identifying the prescribing
physicians and referring providers is provided to DPI to perform
comprehensive data analysis of claim activity; and
c. continue to pursue guidance from CMS or consider contacting other
states for guidance to assist in meeting enrollment requirements for
prescribing physicians and referring providers.
Finding 3
MDH did not ensure that rendering providers for certain group practices
were enrolled in Medicaid, as required by State regulations.
Analysis
MDH did not ensure that rendering providers for certain group practices
(physical, occupational, and speech therapy) were enrolled in Medicaid, as
required by State regulations. Specifically, of the approximately 846,000 claims
paid, totaling $46.2 million, during the period from July 1, 2015 to June 30, 2018
for certain therapy group practices services, we determined that approximately
835,000 claims totaling $45.6 million related to approximately 21,700 Medicaid
recipients did not include identification of the rendering providers. As a result,
there was lack of assurance as to whether the services were performed by properly
qualified medical practitioners enrolled in Medicaid.
We noted that claim amounts related to these therapy group practices increased by
89 percent from fiscal year 2016 to fiscal year 2018. Also, as shown in Table 1,
these claims were submitted by 125 practices, with 10 practices or 8 percent of
the practices representing 67 percent of the claim activity.
17

--- Page 20 ---
__________________________________________________________________
Table 1
Medicaid Claims Submitted by Therapy Practices
Without Identification of Rendering Providers
July 1, 2015 to June 30, 2018
(claims amount in millions)
Practices Claims Claims
Number Percentage Number Percentage Amount Percentage
Top 10 Practices 10 8% 557,000 67% $30.5 67%
Remaining
115 92% 278,000 33% $15.1 33%
Practices
Totals 125 835,000 $45.6
Source: Office of Legislative Audits analysis of MDH records
According to State regulations, physical therapists, occupational therapists, and
speech therapists are required to be enrolled in Medicaid in order to render
services to Medicaid recipients. MDH management advised us that they were
aware of this issue and distributed a written notification to therapy group practices
in August 2017 stating the requirement that rendering providers needed to be
enrolled in Medicaid by November 15, 2017. Additionally, the notification
specified that effective January 1, 2018, Medicaid claims were required to
identify the rendering provider information on each claim. However, as of our
review in February 2019, MDH advised us that it had not enforced either of these
requirements.
Recommendation 3
We recommend that MDH
a. ensure rendering providers are Medicaid enrolled, as required; and
b. deny claims when information identifying the rendering provider is not
submitted.
18

--- Page 21 ---
Finding 4
MDH accepted encounter data from MCOs that excluded necessary data
elements and hindered its ability to perform effective oversight, including
DPI’s use of data analytics to identify and analyze improper claim activity.
Analysis
MDH accepted encounter data from MCOs that excluded necessary data elements
and hindered its ability to perform effective oversight, including DPI’s use of data
analytics to identify and analyze improper claim activity. Specifically, the
encounter data submitted by MCOs to MDH through December 31, 2017 did not
include the following three critical elements; 1) paid or denied status of claim, 2)
claim payment amount, and 3) rendering provider information. According to
federal rules issued by CMS and in effect at that time, MCOs were required to
include these elements in their encounter data. As shown in Table 2, these
excluded elements significantly impacted MDH’s use of the encounter data.
__________________________________________________________________
Table 2
Impact of Excluded Encounter Data Elements
Excluded Data Element Impact
DPI could not effectively identify paid claims and could not
Paid or denied status of claim readily focus its investigative and analytic efforts on only
paid claims.
DPI could not readily determine the materiality of claim
Claim payment amount activity and focus its analytic efforts on the most significant
claims.
DPI could not focus its analytic efforts on certain providers
Rendering provider information or identify unusual patterns in provider claim activity that
warranted further investigation.
__________________________________________________________________
Since these elements were excluded, DPI required assistance from each MCO to
manually research and obtain this information for each claim it investigated.
Beginning January 1, 2018, MDH’s MCO contracts required that encounter data
submitted to MDH include the claim payment amount and rendering provider
information (two of the three previously excluded data elements). However, the
contracts did not specifically address the inclusion of the claim’s status as paid or
denied. Consequently, this data element was still not submitted with the
encounter data. In addition, as of January 2019, MDH had not fully implemented
changes to MMIS II to enable MDH to use the two additional data elements when
19

--- Page 22 ---
analyzing encounter data. We were advised by MDH information technology
personnel that the necessary system changes were not implemented in January
2018 because the changes were not communicated in writing through its work
order request process. As of January 2020, we were further advised that these
system changes had still not been implemented.
Recommendation 4
We recommend that MDH ensure
a. encounter data submitted by MCOs includes all federally required data
elements, including the paid or denied status of the claim; and
b. system changes to MMIS II are implemented timely to enable DPI to use
complete encounter data to help identify and analyze improper claim
activity.
Finding 5
MDH did not perform a data match or have an alternative method to
determine if MCOs were paying claims related to certain services that MDH
had carved out from the MCO contracts.
Analysis
MDH did not perform a data match or have an alternative method to determine if
MCOs were paying claims related to certain services that MDH had carved out
from the MCO contracts. Carve out services (such as behavioral health, dental,
and HIV treatments) are those services that are specifically excluded from
coverage by MCOs and instead are covered directly by MDH as fee-for-service
claims. If MCOs paid claims related to these carve out services, this could
potentially result in capitation rates being set too high.
Based on risk analysis, we performed a data match of fee-for-service behavioral
health claims to the encounter data reported by the MCOs during the period from
July 2015 through June 2018 to determine if the claims were duplicated.
According to MDH’s records, fee-for-service behavioral health claims totaled
$3.5 billion during this period. Our match was based on a fee-for-service claim
having the same date of service, recipient, diagnosis, provider, and claim charge
as the reported encounter data from the MCO and disclosed approximately 1.1
million potential duplicate claims totaling $65.4 million.
Due to limitations in the MCO encounter data (such as no indication as to whether
the related claims were paid or denied as identified in Finding 4), we were unable
to determine from the data itself whether the encounters were actually paid by the
MCOs and represented improper payments. Therefore, we selected 20 match
20

--- Page 23 ---
results related to four MCOs and obtained documentation from each MCO to
determine if the MCOs actually paid these claims for services that were excluded
from their contracts. Based on our review, we determined 8 match results were
improperly paid, while the other 12 match results were properly denied or not
paid. These results could indicate a significant issue with MCOs paying providers
for excluded services. However, since the MCO encounter data lacks certain
critical data elements (such as whether each encounter was paid or denied), MDH
was unable to determine the extent of this issue.
Finally, although MDH contracts with an independent certified public accounting
firm to conduct an annual agreed-upon-procedure review of each MCO’s
capitation rate setting, their scope did not include testing for such occurrences.
Consequently, the annual reviews do not provide assurance that carve out services
were excluded from MCO claim payments.
Recommendation 5
We recommend MDH
a. perform a data match using reliable encounter data or have an
alternative method (such as the annual agreed-upon procedure reviews)
to ensure that MCOs are not paying claims related to certain services that
are carved out from the MCO contracts; and
b. take corrective action to address carve out service claims, including the
claims mentioned above, that MCOs improperly paid.
Finding 6
MDH did not ensure MCO providers rendering services to Maryland
recipients were enrolled as Medicaid providers, as required by federal
regulations that became effective January 1, 2018.
Analysis
As of February 2019, MDH had not identified all MCO providers (such as general
practitioners, physicians, specialists, and other providers) who rendered services
to Maryland recipients and verified that they were enrolled as Medicaid providers
as required by federal regulations that became effective January 1, 2018.
Consequently, there was a lack of assurance that MCO providers rendering
services to Medicaid recipients were properly screened and meet all Medicaid
enrollment requirements, including that the provider was properly licensed and
was not debarred or excluded from participating in Medicaid.
Specifically, in November 2017 MDH estimated that there were approximately
10,000 MCO providers rendering services to Maryland Medicaid recipients whose
21

--- Page 24 ---
Medicaid enrollment needed to be verified by the January 1, 2018 deadline. Due
to the administrative burden involved with verifying that each of these MCO
providers met the enrollment requirements, MDH requested a one-year extension
from CMS. In its request for an extension, MDH provided CMS with a timeline
of actions it intended to take in order to comply by January 1, 2019. MDH
advised us that CMS did not provide a response granting this extension.
Based on our review of MDH records, as of February 2019, MDH was
maintaining a list that only tracked the enrollment status of 2,928 of the estimated
10,000 MCO providers. Additionally, the tracking records indicated that only 13
percent of these 2,928 MCO providers had applied to become Medicaid providers,
but did not identify how many had been verified. MDH was unable to provide an
explanation for why it was not tracking all of the estimated MCO providers or
why it was unable to comply by its requested deadline extension.
According to MDH, as of February 2019, the MCOs self-reported that 75 to 85
percent of their providers had been enrolled in Medicaid. However, no detailed
support (such as listings of the specific MCO providers who had been enrolled)
was provided to MDH by the MCOs to support these reported figures.
Recommendation 6
We recommend MDH take action to ensure MCO providers rendering
services to Maryland recipients are identified and enrolled as Medicaid
providers, as required by federal regulations.
Finding 7
MDH did not ensure each MCO conducted required investigations of
encounter claims activity.
Analysis
MDH did not ensure each MCO conducted required investigations of encounter
claims activity. MCOs are required by their MDH contract to conduct
investigations of their encounter claims activity and report information on those
investigations periodically to DPI. These investigations are critical to ensure
MCO payments to providers for encounter claims are proper. Improper claim
payments can result in higher medical costs for MCOs and in turn higher
capitation rates paid by MDH to the MCOs.
According to a 2017 CMS report, the number of investigations conducted by the
MCOs was “extremely low” relative to the size of Maryland’s Medicaid managed
care program. As shown in Table 3, the number of MCO investigations
22

--- Page 25 ---
performed in fiscal year 2018, in our opinion, was also extremely low relative to
the number of Medicaid enrollees and payments. Specifically, the nine MCO’s
reported that investigations were conducted on at least 409 providers during fiscal
year 2018, and one of those MCOs, with $1.455 billion in payments and almost
300,000 enrollees, investigated just 84 providers. Furthermore, two of the nine
MCOs did not report sufficient details regarding their investigations. Specifically,
one MCO only provided a summary report indicating total number of
investigations and recoveries but the report did not include any details of the
specific investigations performed. The other MCO did not report any
investigations.
MDH’s MCO contract terms may have contributed to the low number of
investigations of encounter claims activity. Specifically, the contracts did not
specify the nature, extent, and frequency of investigations to be performed by the
MCOs or how providers should be selected for investigation, did not establish
detailed reporting requirements for investigation results, and did not include any
penalty provisions or incentives related to investigations. For example, we
determined that other states had implemented policies allowing the MCO to share
in recoveries of improper claims.
__________________________________________________________________
Table 3
Summary of MCO Investigations for Fiscal Year 2018
(payment amount in millions)
Fiscal Year Number of
Count of
MCO 2018 Providers
Enrollees
Payments Investigated
MCO 1 299,689 $1,455 84
MCO 2 280,401 1,139 62
MCO 3 218,722 1,120 10
MCO 4 155,862 706 168
MCO 5 90,561 453 32
MCO 6 64,050 280 *
MCO 7 26,379 197 5
MCO 8 44,598 232 48
MCO 9 4,393 14 *
Totals 1,184,655 $5,596 409
*Could not be determined due to lack of reported investigations
Source: MDH records and MDH Enrollment Data published by the Hilltop Institute
__________________________________________________________________
23

--- Page 26 ---
Recommendation 7
We recommend that MDH
a. ensure MCOs conduct investigations of encounter claims activity, as
required and provide adequate details of each investigation so
appropriate follow up can be performed; and
b. modify MCO contracts to specify the nature, extent, and frequency of
investigations to be performed and reporting requirements, and include
penalties and incentives related to investigations.
Finding 8
A data match performed by MDH to identify incarcerated individuals who
were improperly enrolled in MCOs was based on incomplete data and was
not used to identify and prevent improper fee-for-service payments related to
incarcerated individuals. Our expanded data match identified
approximately $9.6 million of potential improper claim payments during
fiscal years 2016 to 2018 that had not been identified or investigated by
MDH.
Analysis
A weekly data match performed by MDH to identify incarcerated individuals who
were improperly enrolled in MCOs was based on incomplete data. Furthermore,
the MDH match did not include certain data needed to identify and prevent
improper fee-for-service payments related to incarcerated individuals. We
obtained incarceration records from the Department of Public Safety and
Correctional Services (DPSCS) and performed our own match to MMIS II claims
records which identified approximately $9.6 million of potential improper claim
payments related to incarcerated individuals during fiscal years 2016 to 2018 that
had not been identified or investigated by MDH.
Although MDH performed a weekly match to ensure that incarcerated individuals
were not enrolled in MCOs which could result in improper capitation payments,
MDH management advised us that it routinely received incomplete data from
DPSCS. For example, data pertaining to the incarceration period for certain
inmates was either missing or incomplete. MDH also advised us that it previously
made attempts to improve the reliability of the data with DPSCS but it had been
unable to fully resolve the issues. MDH’s match also did not identify certain fee-
for-service claims which are disallowed while individuals are incarcerated2 and
MDH had not established other controls to identify and prevent these improper
payments.
2 Medicaid only covers certain fee-for-service claims (such as inpatient hospital care) for
incarcerated individuals.
24

--- Page 27 ---
We contacted DPSCS to obtain incarceration data for fiscal years 2016 to 2018 in
order to perform our own match with Medicaid claims paid during the same
period. We performed various testing to ensure the accuracy and completeness of
the incarceration data. Based on these tests, we determined the queries used by
DPSCS to generate the incarceration data for MDH needed to be modified in
order to obtain more complete and accurate data. For example, we requested that
DPSCS modify the query to obtain necessary data to reflect the proper periods of
incarceration based on dates of inmate intake, transfer, and release. We
determined that the data we finally obtained from DPSCS after this modification
were sufficiently reliable for the purposes of our match.
Based on our match, we identified $9.6 million in potential improper Medicaid
payments related to more than 3,200 individuals who were incarcerated on the
dates the services were provided. These potential improper payments included
$7.9 million in MCO capitation payments and $1.7 million in fee-for-service
payments that were disallowed since the individual was incarcerated. We
determined that these match results were either not previously identified by MDH
through its weekly matches or MDH had not taken corrective action to adjust the
claims. Our test of the 20 incarcerated individuals from our match with the
highest dollar value claims, totaling $912,000, disclosed improper claim payments
totaling $867,000 for 19 of these 20 individuals. This included $539,000 in MCO
capitation payments for ineligible enrollees and $328,000 in fee-for-service
payments for disallowed services. We provided these test results to MDH to
determine if they had a reasonable explanation for why these claims were paid.
MDH could not justify the claim payments.
Recommendation 8
We recommend that MDH
a. continue to work in conjunction with DPSCS to obtain complete and
accurate incarceration data for its match,
b. establish controls based on match results to identify and prevent
disallowed fee-for-service payments for incarcerated individuals,
c. ensure incarcerated individuals are timely disenrolled from MCOs to
prevent improper capitation payments, and
d. investigate the potential improper payments we identified and take
corrective action (such as recovery of improper payments).
25

--- Page 28 ---
Finding 9
Claims processing edits were not properly implemented in MMIS II to
prevent payments after a credible allegation of fraud against a provider was
determined. Additionally, certain existing claims processing edits were not
always designed in a manner to analyze critical criteria that could be
indicative of either duplicate payments or overpayments.
Analysis
Claims processing edits were not properly implemented in MMIS II to prevent
claim payments after a credible allegation of fraud3 against a provider was
determined. Additionally, certain claims processing edits in MMIS II were not
always designed in a manner to analyze critical criteria that could be indicative of
either duplicate payments or overpayments.
Claims Payment Edits Were Not Properly Implemented
MDH’s MMIS II claims processing edits were not properly implemented to
prevent payments to providers who were suspended after MDH’s OIG determined
there was a credible allegation of fraud against the providers. Specifically, claims
processing edits only prevented payments with a date of service after the
determination of a credible allegation of fraud rather than preventing the payment
of all claims submitted after the determination, as permitted by federal
regulations.
Our review of claims paid to suspended providers between January 1, 2016 and
June 30, 2018 identified 12,904 claims totaling $1.2 million that were improperly
paid, based on federal regulations, to 16 different providers after MDH’s OIG
determined there were credible allegations of fraud against these providers. These
payments were made from 3 to 285 days after the suspension date and included
2,271 payments totaling $172,000 that were made 30 days or more after the date
of suspension. All of these claims had dates of service prior to the determination
of the credible allegation of fraud but were paid after the provider’s suspension
date.
Federal regulations require state Medicaid agencies to suspend all Medicaid
payments to a provider after the agency determines that there is a credible
allegation of fraud for which an investigation is pending under the Medicaid
program against an individual or entity unless the agency has good cause to not
suspend payments or to suspend payments only in part.
3 Based on federal regulations, a credible allegation of fraud can be an allegation from any source
(such as investigations, fraud hotline complaints, data mining, and patterns identified in provider
audits) that has been verified by a state and determined to be reliable.
26

--- Page 29 ---
Claims Payment Edits Were Not Properly Designed to Identify Duplicate
Payments and Overpayments
Although MDH had implemented various MMIS II system edits to analyze claims
data for the purpose of preventing and detecting improper claim payments, our
review identified two scenarios in which duplicate payments and overpayments
would not be detected by these existing system edits. The first scenario relates to
situations where claims were submitted by two different rendering providers for
the same service. In these situations, claim payment processing edits were not in
place to trigger a denial or suspension of the claim payment when critical
elements matched that were indicative of a potential duplicate payment or
overpayment. The second scenario relates to claims involving both Medicaid and
Medicare reimbursements (known as Medicare crossover claims). In these
situations, MDH did not always apply system edits to detect potential duplicate
claims.
Our analysis of claims data for fiscal year 2016 through 2018 disclosed 62,000
claims totaling approximately $3.0 million that related to the above noted
scenarios and could be indicative of potential duplicate payments or
overpayments. These claims were submitted by 1,867 providers, including 15
providers that accounted for $1.1 million of the $3.0 million claims. We
performed a targeted test of 30 claims, totaling $46,900, related to these 15
providers to determine if these claims did, in fact, represent duplicate payments or
overpayments. After presenting our test results to MDH for further review and
research, we concluded there were issues with 27 of these claims totaling
$45,300, as summarized in Table 4.
27

--- Page 30 ---
_______________________________________________________________
Table 4
Summary of Potential Overpayments or Duplicate Payments Tested
Overpayments
Claim
or Duplicate
Payments Summary of Further Review
Payments
Tested
Identified
Claims were correctly submitted by two different rendering
providers (dual surgeons for the same procedure) but the payment
amount was not properly adjusted to only pay the claim at 62.5
percent to each provider, in accordance with CMS guidance.
Instead, each provider was paid 100 percent of the claim. This
resulted in overpayments of $8,100 related to the claims selected for
$21,650 $150,450
testing and $16,200 in total overpayments for these dual surgeons.
While MDH had identified this programming error in January 2019,
MDH did not take action to recover the overpayments for these
claims and other similar claims that had also been overpaid (even
though it was still within the allowable timeframe to do so).
Overpayments related to these other claims totaled $134,250.
Claims may have been incorrectly submitted by two different
rendering providers and are probable duplicate payments. MDH did
not have documentation on file to determine whether these claims
9,950 9,950
were proper and not duplicates. MDH advised us the claims may
have been improperly billed without the appropriate coding but
further review would be necessary by contacting the providers.
Claims were submitted by the provider to both Medicare and
Medicaid but should have only been paid by Medicare. As
12,200 12,200
confirmed through review of source billing documentation or
confirmation from MDH, both claims were paid without detection.
Claims were submitted by the provider to both Medicare and
Medicaid. Claims were correctly paid by Medicare but were
incorrectly paid by Medicaid. Although, MDH subsequently
1,500 1,500
detected and recovered these duplicate claim payments through other
means, MDH did not attempt to modify its system edits to prevent
these types of duplicate payments in the future.
$45,300 $174,100
__________________________________________________________________
Recommendation 9
We recommend that MDH
a. establish claims processing edits to prevent all payments to providers who
have a credible allegation of fraud against them,
b. evaluate and enhance claims processing edits to trigger a denial or
suspension when critical data elements match that are indicative of
potential duplicate payments or overpayments related to claims
28

--- Page 31 ---
submitted by two rendering providers or claims involving both Medicaid
and Medicare reimbursements, and
c. follow up on the aforementioned claims paid after a credible allegation of
fraud was determined and the potential duplicate payments and
overpayments identified and take corrective action (such as pursuing
recovery or processing adjustments to offset future claim payment
amounts).
29

--- Page 32 ---
APPENDIX
May 28, 2020
Mr. Gregory A. Hook, CPA
Legislative Auditor
Office of Legislative Audits
State Office Building, Room 1202
301 West Preston Street
Baltimore, MD 21201
Dear Mr. Hook:
Enclosed, please find the responses to the draft performance audit report on the Maryland
Department of Health - Effort to Identify and Analyze Improper Medicaid Payments for the
period beginning July 1, 2015 and ending June 30, 2018.
If you have any questions, please contact Frederick D. Doggett at 410-767-0885 or email at
frederick.doggett@maryland.gov.
Sincerely,
Robert R. Neall, Secretary
Maryland Department of Health
Enclosure
cc: Dennis R. Schrader, Deputy Secretary for Health Care Financing, MDH
Frederick D. Doggett, Inspector General, MDH
Dionne R. Washington, Chief of Staff, Health Care Financing, MDH

--- Page 33 ---
Maryland Department of Health
Efforts to Identify and Analyze Improper Medicaid Payments
Agency Response Form
Finding 1
MDH’s process to identify and analyze improper Medicaid payments through its DPI was
not comprehensive and did not incorporate certain best practices.
We recommend that MDH take steps to effectively identify and analyze improper Medicaid
payments through its program integrity operations by
a. implementing a robust system of data analytics based on a risk-based approach that
incorporates cross-matching, geo-mapping, and trend analysis to proactively highlight
irregularities in Medicaid payment activity;
b. performing comprehensive analytics of MCO encounter data as part of its oversight of
MCO activities;
c. taking advantage of data matching services available through the United States
Treasury’s DNP Center; and
d. performing a periodic documented risk assessment and implementing a formal process
to measure and report reliable quantifiable benefits of its program integrity operations.
Agency Response
Analysis Factually Accurate
Please provide
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 1a Agree Estimated Completion Date: 12/31/2020
Please provide details of In October 2019, the DPI placed a solicitation in the Maryland
corrective action or Marketplace for a new SURS contractor. The scope of work, as defined
explain disagreement. in the solicitation, has been expanded from the previous contract to focus
more on a risk-based approach and incorporate the additional data
analytic tools identified in this recommendation. A new contract should
be in place by the end of calendar year 2020.
Recommendation 1b Agree Estimated Completion Date: 12/31/2020
Please provide details of Data runs performed using SURS incorporate both FFS and MCO claims
corrective action or data. As such, data being analyzed by the DPI includes both FFS and
explain disagreement. MCO claims. The DPI expects to be able to run more comprehensive
data analytics on MCO data once the new SURS contract is in place.
Recommendation 1c Agree Estimated Completion Date: 12/31/2020
Please provide details of Our understanding of the U.S. Treasury’s “Do Not Pay” Center is that it
corrective action or would require a data-sharing agreement between MDH and the Federal
explain disagreement. government that does not currently exist. The DPI will explore this
option. In the meantime, the DPI notes that the Do Not Pay database
Page 1 of 14

--- Page 34 ---
Maryland Department of Health
Efforts to Identify and Analyze Improper Medicaid Payments
Agency Response Form
draws information from various federal databases that are currently used
by DPI, including the List of Excluded Individuals and Entities; the
Social Security Death Index; and Vital Statistics.
Recommendation 1d Agree Estimated Completion Date: 12/31/2020
Please provide details of DPI is in the process of revising all of its policies and procedures. As
corrective action or part of this effort, we will include formal processes for risk assessment,
explain disagreement. as well as measuring and reporting quantifiable benefits of DPI
operations.
Finding 2
MDH did not ensure that prescribing physicians and referring providers were enrolled in
Medicaid, as required by federal regulations. During the period July 1, 2015 to June 30,
2018, MDH approved prescription and laboratory claims totaling approximately $175
million submitted by prescribing physicians and referring providers whose enrollment in
Medicaid was not validated.
We recommend that MDH
a. ensure that prescribing physicians and referring providers are enrolled in Medicaid, as
required by federal regulations prior to paying related claims;
b. ensure required enrollment information identifying the prescribing physicians and
referring providers is provided to DPI to perform comprehensive data analysis of claim
activity; and
c. continue to pursue guidance from CMS or consider contacting other states for guidance
to assist in meeting enrollment requirements for prescribing physicians and referring
providers.
Agency Response
Analysis Factually Accurate
Please provide MDH has been in partial compliance with the prescriber enrollment
additional comments as provision for 18-24 months. We send the Pharmacy Point-of-Sale (POS)
deemed necessary. vendor a file to edit against that includes: 1) sanctioned provider
information; 2)“bogus” NPIs from a point-in-time data pull; and 3)
hundreds of providers who “ignored” outreach for a few years and never
enrolled. What MDH has not been able to implement is a change where
the POS vendor would edit pharmacy encounters against a daily FFS
Provider file of individual prescribers.
Second paragraph, bottom of page 11 states, “identifying prescribing
Page 2 of 14

--- Page 35 ---
Maryland Department of Health
Efforts to Identify and Analyze Improper Medicaid Payments
Agency Response Form
physician on pharmacy claims can help detect if opioids and other
high-risk prescription medications are being prescribed by certain
physicians in a questionable manner.” MDH does capture the prescriber
NPI on pharmacy claims. We just do not edit on the NPI currently. The
prescriber data is put into the “referring provider” field for Pharmacy
claims. The DPI could use this data presently to do the analysis
described.
Recommendation 2a Agree Estimated Completion Date: 4/30/2021
Please provide details of MDH is implementing the Prescriber Enrollment edits for the FFS
corrective action or Program with the launch of the new Pharmacy POS system, which is
explain disagreement. expected to go-live Winter 2021. MDH is also actively working toward
implementation of referring provider enrollment for Spring 2021. MDH
Provider Services and Systems team is developing an online “Provider
Look-up” tool to help labs identify whether referring physicians are
enrolled prior to billing. The tool is in development and being tested
presently and MDH expects to launch in Summer/Fall 2020.
Recommendation 2b Agree Estimated Completion Date: 1/1/2020
Please provide details of As the prescribing and referring physicians are enrolled, DPI shall have
corrective action or access to the required enrollment identifying information. Prescriber data
explain disagreement. is presently available in the “referring” field for Pharmacy claims.
Recommendation 2c Agree Estimated Completion Date: 1/1/2020
Please provide details of MDH did seek CMS guidance as early as Summer 2018, related to
corrective action or enrolling prescribing and referring physicians and did eventually receive
explain disagreement. guidance since discussions with the auditors. MDH moved ahead with
implementing an enrollment path for ORP providers that does not
include a provider agreement. CMS indicated in their response over a
year later in June 2019 that MDH may develop a provider agreement for
ORP providers that is separate from the agreement executed by
providers who render Medicaid-billable services. MDH shall work with
its legal team and provider enrollment system vendor to develop and
implement an ORP provider agreement.
MDH regularly participates on All-State calls on Provider Enrollment
Compliance and also attends the Medicaid Integrity Institute (MII) work
sessions in South Carolina as offered.
Page 3 of 14

--- Page 36 ---
Maryland Department of Health
Efforts to Identify and Analyze Improper Medicaid Payments
Agency Response Form
Finding 3
MDH did not ensure that rendering providers for certain group practices were enrolled in
Medicaid, as required by State regulations.
We recommend that MDH
a. ensure rendering providers are Medicaid enrolled, as required; and
b. deny claims when information identifying the rendering provider is not submitted.
Agency Response
Analysis Factually Inaccurate
Please provide During the audit period of July 1, 2015 through June 30, 2018, the
additional comments as Provider Type 28 EPSDT Therapy Group Providers were not required to
deemed necessary.
enroll their individual rendering providers. Medicaid incorporated by
reference the EPSDT Manual within 10.09.23.01-1 effective January 1,
2017. Page 9 of the IBR EPSDT Manual states, “renderers in a therapy
group provider type practice (Provider Type 28) are not required to be
assigned an individual rendering Maryland Medical Assistance provider
number.” Further, page 12 states, “At this time, only therapy group
(provider type 28) providers can bill without including a rendering
provider number on the claim.”
Please note that the EPSDT manual incorporated by reference in 2017
implemented policies that had been in effect throughout the audit period
noted above.
To support this finding, OLA cited versions of the EPSDT Manual dated
July 1, 2018, and January 1, 2019. Both of these versions were published
and adopted (incorporated by reference) after the end of the audit period
(June 30, 2018), and therefore are not applicable to the scope of the
audit. MDH updated the Manual based on guidance from CMS
indicating that individual rendering providers must enroll with state
Medicaid programs; CMS subsequently announced, however, that the
enrollment of rendering providers is not a federal requirement.
The licenses of rendering providers are verified in accordance with the
IBR manual in effect during the audit period and incorporated into the
regulations in 2017. Page 9 states, “a listing of therapists and license
numbers of participating members of the practice must be attached to the
Page 4 of 14

--- Page 37 ---
Maryland Department of Health
Efforts to Identify and Analyze Improper Medicaid Payments
Agency Response Form
therapy group application for in-state applicants. Out-of-state applicants
must submit a copy of all licenses and/or certificates of the therapists
participating in the practice.” This verification occurred during initial
enrollment and revalidation of the Group.
Auditor’s Comment: In its response, the Maryland Department of Health (MDH)
agreed with all of the recommendations but indicated that they believed the analysis was
not factually accurate. MDH contends that during the audit period early and periodic
screening, diagnosis, and treatment (EPSDT) therapy group providers were not required
to enroll their rendering providers nor identify rendering providers on claims. However,
MDH does not acknowledge that prior to the incorporation of the January 2017 EPSDT
Manual in the Code of Maryland Regulations (COMAR), COMAR incorporated the
Physicians’ Services Provider Fee Manual. This Manual, effective January 2014, itself
references Maryland Medicaid’s billing instructions, which are directly applicable to
EPSDT providers and clearly indicate requirements for rendering providers, including
physical therapists, occupational therapists, and speech-language pathologists, to be
enrolled and be assigned a provider number for billing purposes. In addition, in August
2017, eight months after the EPSDT Manual became effective, MDH sent a written
notification to all therapy group providers clarifying that their rendering providers are
required to be enrolled and identified on each claim. Finally, a July 2018 update to the
EPSDT Manual made it consistent with both the aforementioned billing instructions and
the August 2017 written notification, by re-affirming MDH’s position of the rendering
provider enrollment and billing requirements for therapy group practices. Consequently,
we believe our analysis is accurate, valid, and supported.
Recommendation 3a Agree Estimated Completion Date: 12/31/2020
Please provide details of While Maryland Medicaid did not require that individual rendering
corrective action or providers be enrolled during the audit period, Medicaid chose to begin
explain disagreement.
enrolling these providers in late 2017 when we were under the
impression that it was a Federal requirement.
Maryland began the process of enrolling new Provider Type 28 EPSDT
Therapy Providers as Type of Practice 35-Groups following the audit
period in 2018. New providers enrolling from this point forward were
set-up initially as Type of Practice 35-Groups. Medicaid has been
enrolling individual rendering providers for these groups with Type of
Practice 35 - Group since that time. Medicaid is in the process of
changing the legacy Type of Practice 99s to Type of Practice 35s, but
many of the individual rendering providers are already enrolled.
Page 5 of 14

--- Page 38 ---
Maryland Department of Health
Efforts to Identify and Analyze Improper Medicaid Payments
Agency Response Form
Due to the COVID-19 state of emergency, MDH’s plan to issue a
transmittal requiring all historical, or legacy, Provider Type 28 EPSDT
Therapy Groups begin submitting individual rendering providers has
been postponed by a few months. MDH intends to send this transmittal
by late Summer/Fall 2020.
Recommendation 3b Agree Estimated Completion Date: 12/31/20
Please provide details of MDH is currently denying claims for all Provider Type 28s with a
corrective action or Type of Practice 35 - Group. Maryland began the process of enrolling
explain disagreement.
new Provider Type 28 EPSDT Therapy Providers as Type of Practice
35-Groups in 2018. Any new group providers were automatically subject
to claims denials if their individual rendering providers were not
enrolled.
Between October 1, 2020 and December 31, 2020, MDH intends to
change the remaining historical, or legacy, Provider Type 28 EPSDT
Therapy Groups with Type of Practice 99 to Type of Practice 35s. Once
these providers change to Type of Practice 35, MDH will deny claims
where the individual rendering provider information is not submitted or
not actively enrolled.
Page 6 of 14

--- Page 39 ---
Maryland Department of Health
Efforts to Identify and Analyze Improper Medicaid Payments
Agency Response Form
Finding 4
MDH accepted encounter data from MCOs that excluded necessary data elements and
hindered its ability to perform effective oversight, including DPI’s use of data analytics to
identify and analyze improper claim activity.
We recommend that MDH ensure
a. encounter data submitted by MCOs includes all federally required data elements,
including the paid or denied status of the claim; and
b. system changes to MMIS II are implemented timely to enable DPI to use complete
encounter data to help identify and analyze improper claim activity.
Agency Response
Analysis Factually Accurate
Please provide
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 4a Agree Estimated Completion Date: 3/31/2020
Please provide details of MDH concurs that these three data elements are beneficial to the
corrective action or Department and allows better use of encounter data for analytics.
explain disagreement. However, since March 2020, all of these data elements (paid and denied
status, claim payment amount, rendering provider information) are now
required as part of our encounter data and have been included in
subsequent encounter data sets.
Recommendation 4b Agree Estimated Completion Date: 7/31/2020
Please provide details of MDH shall work to draft a change request to modify the MMIS and
corrective action or ensure timely implementation. MDH shall also coordinate
explain disagreement. communication with MCOs to ensure all parties involved align business
rules, update encounter data submission guidelines, and set up processes
with the Medicaid business units to detect and identify improper claims
activity within encounter data.
Page 7 of 14

--- Page 40 ---
Maryland Department of Health
Efforts to Identify and Analyze Improper Medicaid Payments
Agency Response Form
Finding 5
MDH did not perform a data match or have an alternative method to determine if MCOs
were paying claims related to certain services that MDH had carved out from the MCO
contracts.
We recommend MDH
a. perform a data match using reliable encounter data or have an alternative method
(such as the annual agreed-upon procedure reviews) to ensure that MCOs are not
paying claims related to certain services that are carved out from the MCO contracts;
and
b. take corrective action to address carve out service claims, including the claims
mentioned above, that MCOs improperly paid.
Agency Response
Analysis Factually Accurate
Please provide
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 5a Agree Estimated Completion Date: 16/30/2021
Please provide details of MDH concurs with the recommendation to perform a data match using
corrective action or reliable encounter data to ensure MCOs are not paying claims related to
explain disagreement. certain services that are carved out of the MCO capitation rates. MDH
will work with the MCOs to develop an annual process (or more
frequently) to perform a paid claims review related to carve-out
(excluded) services.
Recommendation 5b Agree Estimated Completion Date: 26/30/2021
Please provide details of The plan is to review these claims annually, and, if there are carve-out
corrective action or claims that have been paid by both the MCOs or by the ASO, those will
explain disagreement. be sent back to the MCO or ASO for correction.
1 This date is subject to change depending on the COVID-19 crisis
2 This date is subject to change depending on the COVID-19 crisis
Page 8 of 14

--- Page 41 ---
Maryland Department of Health
Efforts to Identify and Analyze Improper Medicaid Payments
Agency Response Form
Finding 6
MDH did not ensure MCO providers rendering services to Maryland recipients were
enrolled as Medicaid providers, as required by federal regulations that became effective
January 1, 2018.
We recommend MDH take action to ensure MCO providers rendering services to
Maryland recipients are identified and enrolled as Medicaid providers, as required by
federal regulations.
Agency Response
Analysis Factually Accurate
Please provide
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 6 Agree Estimated Completion Date: 1/1/2020
Please provide details of Encounter Subsystem edits have gone live since the time of the audit. As
corrective action or of January 1, 2020, the MMIS Encounter Data Subsystem edits all
explain disagreement. encounters for MCO par providers against the FFS Provider Subsystem
for dates of service on or after 1/1/20, submitted on or after 1/1/20.
These edits ensure that all MCO providers that are rendering services,
but not currently enrolled are identified and subsequently enrolled as
Medicaid providers.
CMS has also provided for exceptions to the FFS screening/enrollment
requirements for “non-par” (not in the MCO network) MCOs providers,
such as hospitals/hospitalists providing emergency one-time services
when a participant is traveling out-of-state. MDH built this CMS
exception into the Encounter Data edits that went live on 1/1/20.
Page 9 of 14

--- Page 42 ---
Maryland Department of Health
Efforts to Identify and Analyze Improper Medicaid Payments
Agency Response Form
Finding 7
MDH did not ensure each MCO conducted required investigations of encounter claims
activity.
We recommend that MDH
a. ensure MCOs conduct investigations of encounter claims activity, as required and
provide adequate details of each investigation so appropriate follow up can be
performed; and
b. modify MCO contracts to specify the nature, extent, and frequency of investigations to
be performed and reporting requirements, and include penalties and incentives related
to investigations.
Agency Response
Analysis Factually Accurate
Please provide
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 7a Agree Estimated Completion Date: 12/31/2020
Please provide details of DPI has identified significant inconsistencies in MCOs reports on
corrective action or investigations. In cooperation with MCOs, DPI is developing and
explain disagreement. implementing an MCO reporting dashboard that will require more
detailed reporting. All fields on the dashboard will be consistent, better
enabling DPI to efficiently track and monitor the number and status of
investigations being performed by each MCO. The dashboard will
enable DPI to follow up on individual investigations as needed.
Recommendation 7b Agree Estimated Completion Date: 12/31/2020
Please provide details of DPI will work with Medicaid to ensure that the MCO contracts mirror
corrective action or the investigation requirements procedures now being revised, including
explain disagreement. use of the new reporting dashboard. DPI will also work with Medicaid
to identify appropriate contractual incentives and penalties.
Page 10 of 14

--- Page 43 ---
Maryland Department of Health
Efforts to Identify and Analyze Improper Medicaid Payments
Agency Response Form
Finding 8
A data match performed by MDH to identify incarcerated individuals who were
improperly enrolled in MCOs was based on incomplete data and was not used to identify
and prevent improper fee-for-service payments related to incarcerated individuals. Our
expanded data match identified approximately $9.6 million of potential improper claim
payments during fiscal years 2016 to 2018 that had not been identified or investigated by
MDH.
We recommend that MDH
a. continue to work in conjunction with DPSCS to obtain complete and accurate
incarceration data for its match,
b. establish controls based on match results to identify and prevent disallowed fee-for-
service payments for incarcerated individuals,
c. ensure incarcerated individuals are timely disenrolled from MCOs to prevent improper
capitation payments, and
d. investigate the potential improper payments we identified and take corrective action
(such as recovery of improper payments).
Agency Response
Analysis Factually Accurate
Please provide
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 8a Agree Completion Date: 1/28/2020
Please provide details of MCPA agrees with the recommendation and shall continue to work in
corrective action or conjunction with DPSCS to obtain complete and accurate incarceration
explain disagreement. data for its match and shall work to identify other sources of accurate
data to enhance the identification of incarcerated individuals.
Recommendation 8b Agree Completion Date: 3/31/2020
Please provide details of MDH uses match criteria (SSN, First name, Last Name, DOB) to
corrective action or identify incarcerated individuals that may be enrolled with an MCO. By
explain disagreement. utilizing this process to accurately disenroll incarcerated individuals,
MCPA has prevented improper capitation payments for thousands of
inmates.
In addition to the automated disenrollment process, MDH regularly
receives referrals from MCOs or other stakeholders about incarcerated
individuals. The process to verify the individual’s incarcerated status and
Page 11 of 14

--- Page 44 ---
Maryland Department of Health
Efforts to Identify and Analyze Improper Medicaid Payments
Agency Response Form
manually disenroll the individual from the MCO is outlined in the SOP
shared with OLA.
MCPA is developing new ways to improve the current incarcerated
MCO disenrollment process. One such way is the development of a
report to include near matches from the Weekly DPSCS/MDH eligibility
matching process. The weekly report would be reviewed by MDH and if
the individual can be accurately matched, then the MCO disenrollment
would occur manually. The report shall be available in March 2020.
Recommendation 8c Agree Completion Date: 1/28/2020
Please provide details of When MDH is notified through an automated process or manually
corrective action or validates an individual’s incarceration status, the necessary steps to
explain disagreement. ensure individuals are disenrolled timely are taken. Pursuant to COMAR
10.67.02.06.E(2)(d), the enrollee’s disenrollment shall take effect from
the first day of the month following the month in which the Department
verifies the individual is an inmate. MDH shall ensure this process
continues to be followed to avoid erroneous capitated payments.
Recommendation 8d Agree Estimated Completion Date: 7/1/2020
Please provide details of MCPA shall research the potential improper payments identified and
corrective action or take corrective action such as, recovery of improper payments as
explain disagreement. appropriate.
Page 12 of 14

--- Page 45 ---
Maryland Department of Health
Efforts to Identify and Analyze Improper Medicaid Payments
Agency Response Form
Finding 9
Claims processing edits were not properly implemented in MMIS II to prevent payments
after a credible allegation of fraud against a provider was determined. Additionally,
certain existing claims processing edits were not always designed in a manner to analyze
critical criteria that could be indicative of either duplicate payments or overpayments.
We recommend that MDH
a. establish claims processing edits to prevent all payments to providers who have a
credible allegation of fraud against them,
b. evaluate and enhance claims processing edits to trigger a denial or suspension when
critical data elements match that are indicative of potential duplicate payments or
overpayments related to claims submitted by two rendering providers or claims
involving both Medicaid and Medicare reimbursements, and
c. follow up on the aforementioned claims paid after a credible allegation of fraud was
determined and the potential duplicate payments and overpayments identified and take
corrective action (such as pursuing recovery or processing adjustments to offset future
claim payment amounts).
Agency Response
Analysis Factually Accurate
Please provide
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 9a Agree Estimated Completion Date: 9/30/2020
Please provide details of MDH agrees that there was a problem with Payment Withhold data not
corrective action or going to its ASOs. The Division of Medicaid Information Systems
explain disagreement. (DMIS) has recently developed a supplemental daily provider file for the
ASOs, which includes payment withhold data. DMIS is ready for testing
with the new Behavioral Health ASO.
Medical Benefits Management - Division of Dental, Clinics and Labs
needs to work on updating the provider file for the Dental ASO as well,
and MDH will continue to move this effort forward.
In addition, MDH will establish claims processing edits within the
MMIS system to prevent all payments to providers who have credible
allegations of fraud against them.
Recommendation 9b Agree Estimated Completion Date: 12/31/2020
Page 13 of 14

--- Page 46 ---
Maryland Department of Health
Efforts to Identify and Analyze Improper Medicaid Payments
Agency Response Form
Please provide details of MDH will perform a careful analysis of the identified potential duplicate
corrective action or claim categories as well as the related MDH policies. A risk analysis
explain disagreement. will be performed to compare prevalence, false positives and true
duplicates. Where appropriate MDH will enhance the duplicate system
edits to deny the dupes and/or flag potential duplicate claims for
retrospective review, followed by appropriate retraction or offset.
Recommendation 9c Agree Estimated Completion Date: 12/31/2020
Please provide details of MDH will develop a process to identify duplicate claims and
corrective action or overpayments and follow up erroneously paid claims or fraudulent
explain disagreement. activity as identified through this audit or subsequent analysis.
Page 14 of 14

--- Page 47 ---
A T
UDIT EAM
Matthew L. Streett, CPA, CFE
Audit Manager
David R. Fahnestock, CPA
Evan E. Naugle
Senior Auditors
Marina I. Bulatova
Charles H. Hinds, IV, CPA
Staff Auditors