Title: Kent County Public Schools
Date: 07/06/2020
Type: Local School Systems
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5efde86ea1ce580798992e9b
Extracted: 2025-06-19T11:42:02.820423
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Financial Management Practices Audit Report
Kent County Public Schools
July 2020
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Senator Clarence K. Lam, M.D. (Senate Chair) Delegate Carol L. Krimm (House Chair)
Senator Malcolm L. Augustine Delegate Steven J. Arentz
Senator Adelaide C. Eckardt Delegate Mark S. Chang
Senator George C. Edwards Delegate Andrea Fletcher Harrison
Senator Katie Fry Hester Delegate Keith E. Haynes
Senator Cheryl C. Kagan Delegate Michael A. Jackson
Senator Benjamin F. Kramer Delegate David Moon
Senator Cory V. McCray Delegate April R. Rose
Senator Justin D. Ready Delegate Geraldine Valentino-Smith
Senator Craig J. Zucker Delegate Karen Lewis Young
To Obtain Further Information
Office of Legislative Audits
301 West Preston Street, Room 1202
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Phone: 410-946-5900 ꞏ 301-970-5900 ꞏ 1-877-486-9964 (Toll Free in Maryland)
Maryland Relay: 711
TTY: 410-946-5401 ꞏ 301-970-5401
E-mail: OLAWebmaster@ola.state.md.us
Website: www.ola.state.md.us
To Report Fraud
The Office of Legislative Audits operates a Fraud Hotline to report fraud, waste, or abuse involving State
of Maryland government resources. Reports of fraud, waste, or abuse may be communicated anonymously
by a toll-free call to 1-877-FRAUD-11, by mail to the Fraud Hotline, c/o Office of Legislative Audits, or
through the Office’s website.
Nondiscrimination Statement
The Department of Legislative Services does not discriminate on the basis of age, ancestry, color, creed,
marital status, national origin, race, religion, gender, gender identity, sexual orientation, or disability in the
admission or access to its programs, services, or activities. The Department’s Information Officer has been
designated to coordinate compliance with the nondiscrimination requirements contained in Section 35.107
of the United States Department of Justice Regulations. Requests for assistance should be directed to the
Information Officer at 410-946-5400 or 410-970-5400.

--- Page 3 ---
July 6, 2020
Senator Clarence K. Lam, M.D., Senate Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Delegate Carol L. Krimm, House Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Members of Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Annapolis, Maryland
Ladies and Gentlemen:
We conducted an audit of the financial management practices of the Kent County
Public Schools (KCPS) in accordance with the requirements of the State
Government Article, Section 2-1220(e) of the Annotated Code of Maryland. The
objectives of this audit were to evaluate whether KCPS’ procedures and controls
were effective in accounting for and safeguarding its assets and whether its
policies provided for the efficient use of financial resources.
Our audit disclosed that KCPS needs to improve internal controls and
accountability in certain areas, including payroll processing, information systems,
procurement and disbursements, and health care claims and fee processing. For
example, adequate internal controls had not been established over the review of
human resources and payroll transactions for propriety. Furthermore, adequate
access controls had not been established over its financial management system.
We also found that significant risks existed within KCPS’ computer network. For
example, monitoring of security activities over critical systems were not sufficient
and its computer network was not properly secured. In this regard, publicly
accessible servers were located in the KCPS internal network rather than being
isolated in a separate protected network zone to minimize security risks.
KCPS’ procurement policies were not sufficiently comprehensive and KCPS did
not always verify amounts billed with contract terms. We also found that KCPS
did not ensure the accuracy of payments for employee and retiree healthcare costs
and administrative fees. According to KCPS’ records, during the plan year ended

--- Page 4 ---
August 31, 2018, healthcare expenditures totaled $3.5 million, which included
$389,000 in administrative fees and stop-loss insurance coverage costs.
Finally, based on our current audit assessment of significance and risk to our audit
objectives, our audit included a review to determine the status of 11 of the 12
findings contained in our preceding audit report. We determined that KCPS
satisfactorily addressed 5 of these findings. The remaining 6 findings are
repeated in this report.
KCPS’ response to this audit is included as an appendix to this report. We
reviewed the response to our findings and related recommendations, and have
concluded that the corrective actions identified are sufficient to address all audit
issues.
We wish to acknowledge the cooperation extended to us during our audit by
KCPS. We also wish to acknowledge KCPS’ willingness to address the audit
issues and to implement appropriate corrective actions.
Respectfully submitted,
Gregory A. Hook, CPA
Legislative Auditor
2

--- Page 5 ---
Table of Contents
Background Information 5
Statistical Overview 5
Oversight 6
External Audits 6
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report 6
Findings and Recommendations 8
Revenue and Billing Cycle 8
Federal Funds 9
Procurement and Disbursement Cycle
* Finding 1 – Kent County Public Schools (KCPS) had not established 11
adequate controls over procurements and disbursements as certain
transactions processed were not subject to independent review.
Finding 2 – KCPS’ procurement policies were not sufficiently 12
comprehensive, as they did not incorporate certain best practices for
consideration when evaluating possible participation in an
intergovernmental cooperative purchasing agreement. In addition,
KCPS did not obtain contract copies to verify invoice pricing.
Human Resources and Payroll
* Finding 3 – KCPS did not ensure critical human resources and payroll 14
transactions were independently reviewed for propriety, and salary
increases were not always approved by the Board as required.
Equipment Control and Accountability 15
Information Technology
 Finding 4 – KCPS did not ensure employee access to its automated 16
financial system applications was appropriate.
* Finding 5 – Proper logging and monitoring controls were not established 18
over a critical database, and certain publicly accessible servers were
improperly located within the internal network.
* Denotes item repeated in full or part from preceding audit report
3

--- Page 6 ---
Facilities Construction, Renovation, and Maintenance 19
Transportation Services 20
Food Services 20
School Board Oversight
* Finding 6 – Financial disclosure statements were not filed or did not 21
include all required information, and an ethics panel had not been
established in accordance with KCPS’ ethics policy.
Management of Other Risks
* Finding 7 – KCPS did not ensure the propriety of employee and retiree 23
health care claims paid and did not verify plan administrative fees
were properly charged. In addition, KCPS did not obtain copies or
Board approval of the annual TPA administrative agreements.
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology 25
Agency Response Appendix
* Denotes item repeated in full or part from preceding audit report
4

--- Page 7 ---
Background Information
Statistical Overview
According to student enrollment records compiled by the Maryland State
Department of Education (MSDE), Kent County Public Schools (KCPS) ranks
24th in student enrollment among the 24 public school systems in Maryland.
Fiscal year 2018 full-time student enrollment was 1,993 students. KCPS has 5
schools, consisting of 3 elementary schools, 1 middle school, and 1 high school.
According to KCPS’ audited financial statements, fiscal year 2018 expenditures
were approximately $32.2 million and revenues were approximately $31.7
million. The largest expenditure category was salaries and wages, including
benefits, which accounted for approximately 78 percent of total expenditures
during fiscal year 2018. According to MSDE records, during the 2017-2018
school year, KCPS had 267 full-time equivalent positions, which consisted of 190
instructional and 77 non-instructional positions.
________________________________________________________
Table 1
KCPS Expenditures by Category and Selected Statistical Data
Fiscal Year 2018
(amounts in thousands)
___________________________________________________
Source: KCPS’ Fiscal Year 2018 Audited Financial Statements and MSDE Data
5

--- Page 8 ---
Oversight
KCPS is governed by a local school board, consisting of five elected voting
members and a non-voting student member. The State and the Kent County
government provide the vast majority of KCPS funding. In addition, MSDE
exercises considerable oversight through the establishment and monitoring of
various financial and academic policies and regulations, in accordance with
certain provisions of the Annotated Code of Maryland. MSDE also works with
KCPS to comply with the requirements and mandates of federal law. Kent
County government exercises authority over KCPS primarily through the review
and approval of KCPS’ annual operating and capital budgets.
External Audits
KCPS engages a certified public accounting firm to independently audit its annual
financial statements. Additionally, the auditor conducts what is referred to as a
Single Audit of KCPS’ federal grant programs (as required by federal
regulations). We reviewed the resulting financial statement audit and Single
Audit reports for fiscal years 2014 through 2018, and examined the related work
papers for fiscal year 2018, which were the latest available at the time we
performed our audit fieldwork.
There were similarities between the work of the independent certified public
accounting firm that audited KCPS’ financial statements and conducted the Single
Audit, and the risks and scope of our audit in certain areas. As a result, we
reduced the scope of our audit work related to State and local government
revenues received via wire transfer, accounts receivable, and federal grant
activity.
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report
Based on our current audit assessment of significance and risk relative to our
audit objectives, our audit included a review to determine the status of 11 of the
12 findings contained in our preceding audit report dated May 13, 2013. We
determined that KCPS satisfactorily addressed five of these findings. The
remaining six findings are repeated in this report, as noted in the following table.
6

--- Page 9 ---
Table 2
Status of Preceding Findings
Preceding Implementation
Finding Description
Finding Status
Accountability over student activity fund cash receipts was Not repeated
Finding 1
not maintained at one school. (Not followed up on)
KCPS did not have an independent verification process to
Finding 2 Not repeated
ensure all amounts were deposited.
User access to the automated financial system was not Repeated
Finding 3 restricted for certain employees and proper controls were not (Current Finding 1
established over disbursements and wire transfers. and 4)
KCPS did not analyze the cost benefit of continuing to
Finding 4 Not repeated
outsource certain facility management services.
Certain users of the automated human resources and payroll Repeated
Finding 5 system had been assigned incompatible functions, and (Current Finding 3
reports of payroll changes were not generated. and 4)
KCPS’ policies and physical inventory procedures need
Finding 6 improvement to promote more accountability over Not repeated
equipment.
Proper monitoring and authentication controls were not
Repeated
Finding 7 established over a critical database, application, and
(Current Finding 5)
application server.
Repeated
Finding 8 The KCPS network was not properly secured.
(Current Finding 5)
Controls over disaster recovery planning, backup of critical
Finding 9 data and devices, and anti-virus protection of critical devices Not repeated
were not sufficient.
KCPS entered into a long-term agreement to purchase solar
Finding 10 energy but did not establish sufficient procedures to verify Not repeated
the related billings.
KCPS financial disclosure forms were not always filed as
Repeated
Finding 11 required and the forms were not sufficiently comprehensive
(Current Finding 6)
as required.
KCPS did not ensure that claims paid were reviewed for
Repeated
Finding 12 propriety or verify the eligibility of health care coverage
(Current Finding 7)
participants.
7

--- Page 10 ---
Findings and Recommendations
Revenue and Billing Cycle
Background
Kent County Public Schools (KCPS) revenues consist primarily of funds received
from Kent County, the State, and the federal government. According to KCPS’
audited financial statements, revenues from all sources totaled approximately $32
million in fiscal year 2018, including approximately $11 million from the State.
See Table 3 below for KCPS’ revenue sources per enrolled student in fiscal year
2018 according to its audited financial statements.
__________________________________________________________________
Table 3
KCPS Revenue Sources Per Enrolled Student
Fiscal Year 2018
__________________________________________________________________
Source: KCPS’ Audited Financial Statements and MSDE Data
In addition, schools collect funds for other purposes such as student activities,
clubs, and school publications. Because they are not considered school revenue,
these school activity funds are accounted for separately by each school and
8

--- Page 11 ---
reported in summary in the audited financial statements. Although this revenue is
raised through student-related activities, KCPS has a fiduciary duty to safeguard
these funds. For fiscal year 2018, school activity fund collections totaled
$249,000 and the June 30, 2018 balance was $114,000.
External Audits
There were similarities between the work of the independent certified public
accounting firm that audited the KCPS financial statements and the objectives of
our audit of certain revenue activities. As a result, we reduced the scope of our
audit work related to State and local government revenues received via wire
transfer and accounts receivable, for which the auditor’s procedural review and
testing disclosed no material weaknesses or significant deficiencies.
Reviews of School Activity Funds
KCPS’ Board of Education (the Board) has a fiduciary responsibility to ensure
that school activity funds were used only for intended purposes. KCPS has
developed procedures to establish a uniform method for reporting receipts,
expenditures, and balances related to school sponsored activities. The procedures
indicate that bank and fund reconciliations are to be prepared for the principal’s
review and submitted monthly to the finance department. We also noted that a
documented site visit was performed for each school annually that included a
review of disbursements and deposits.
Conclusion
Based on our current assessment of significance and risk to our audit objectives,
and in consideration of the work of the independent certified public accounting
firm, our audit included a limited review of procedures and controls in the
accounting for and safeguarding of assets to determine the status of a prior report
item and we relied on the work of the firm to provide audit coverage pertaining to
the procedures and controls related to the accounting for and safeguarding of cash
receipts with respect to revenue and billing.
Federal Funds
Background
KCPS receives funds pertaining to federal government programs that are
generally restricted for use for a specific program (such as the School Lunch
Program or Special Education). According to the audited Schedule of
Expenditures of Federal Awards in the KCPS Single Audit, fiscal year 2018
expenditures totaled $2.6 million, including federally funded fee-for-service
programs such as Medicaid reimbursement for special education services.
9

--- Page 12 ---
Single Audit Report Disclosed No Reportable Conditions Regarding Federal
Grant Management
There were similarities in the work performed by the independent certified public
accounting firm that conducted the Single Audit of KCPS’ federal grants and the
objectives of our audit in this area. In addition to expressing an opinion on
KCPS’ compliance with the terms of several grant programs, the auditor also
considered the existing internal control structure’s impact on compliance and
audited the required Schedule of Expenditures of Federal Awards (which includes
claimed and reported grant expenditures) for fiscal year 2018.
The related reports stated that KCPS complied, in all material respects, with the
requirements applicable to its major federal programs. With respect to internal
controls over compliance with, and the operation of, major federal programs, the
auditor did not identify any material weaknesses or significant deficiencies.
Conclusion
Based on our current assessment of significance and risk to our audit objectives,
and in consideration of the work performed by the independent certified public
accounting firm that conducted the Single Audits, we relied on the work of the
firm pertaining to policies, procedures, and controls with respect to federal grants
and expenditures.
Procurement and Disbursement Cycle
Background
According to the audited financial statements and KCPS records, non-payroll
disbursements totaled $7.2 million during fiscal year 2018. Generally,
requisitions are entered into the automated payment system by the requesting
department and are electronically approved by the respective department head
and/or the Supervisor of Finance. A Finance Office employee converts the
approved requisitions in the system to purchase orders which are then issued to
vendors. Invoices are to be submitted by vendors directly to the Finance Office.
The receipt of goods and services is confirmed by the requesting department
before payments are processed by the Finance Office. The Finance Office uses an
automated system to print vendor checks or transfer funds electronically and to
post the payments to the financial records.
KCPS’ written procurement policies require that procurements over $25,000 be
competitively bid in accordance with Section 5-112 of the Education Article of
the Annotated Code of Maryland. The policies also require that contracts and
agreements over $25,000 be approved by the Board.
10

--- Page 13 ---
Finding 1
KCPS had not established adequate controls over procurements and
disbursements as certain transactions processed were not subject to
independent review.
Analysis
KCPS had not established adequate controls over procurements and
disbursements as certain transactions processed were not subject to independent
review.
 Vendors could be added, or information changed on the automated
procurement and accounts payable system without adequate verification.
Specifically, only verbal approval was obtained prior to adding new vendors
to or changing vendor information in the system. In addition, KCPS did not
periodically generate a report of vendor additions, or changes, for review by
independent personnel to supporting documents, such as taxpayer number
identification forms (W-9), to ensure that the vendor information recorded
was accurate and proper.
 Although KCPS had a process in place to review all accounts payable
transactions for propriety with supporting documentation, such as purchase
orders, prior to payment processing, the employee responsible for this review
also had system access capabilities that allowed them to process payments.
Accordingly, this review was not an effective control process due to the lack
of reviewer independence from the transaction processing function.
As a result, unauthorized purchases and disbursements could be processed
without detection. Our review did not disclose any inappropriate transactions. A
similar condition related to reviewing payments processed to supporting
documentation were commented upon in our preceding audit report.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that KCPS strengthen its controls over procurements and
disbursements. Specifically, we recommend that KCPS
a. ensure that changes to the vendor information recorded in the automated
accounts payable system are verified to appropriate source
documentation by an independent employee; and
b. ensure that an independent employee conducts a documented comparison
of transactions and checks processed to the related supporting
documentation, at least on a test basis (repeat).
11

--- Page 14 ---
Finding 2
KCPS procurement policies were not sufficiently comprehensive, as they did
not incorporate certain best practices for consideration when evaluating
possible participation in an intergovernmental cooperative purchasing
agreement (ICPA). In addition, KCPS did not obtain contract copies to
verify invoice pricing.
Analysis
KCPS procurement policies were not sufficiently comprehensive, as they did not
incorporate certain recognized best practices or requirements of State law when
evaluating the merits of possible participation in an ICPA. Specifically, the
following critical best practices or statutory requirements were not included in
KCPS’ policies.
 Analyze all costs of conducting competitive solicitations
 Research, compare, and evaluate available ICPAs
 Verify that the ICPA has a clause allowing participation by other parties
 Verify the ICPA solicitation was competitively bid and publicly advertised
and obtain originating agency’s competitive procurement documentation
(including public advertisements and proposal evaluations)
 Verify terms, scope of services, specifications and price meet the entity’s
needs
 Prepare a written assessment of the benefits of using an ICPA, as required
by State law
 Execute an addendum of participation with the lead contract agency and
remove or incorporate necessary local terms and conditions
 Obtain a copy of the ICPA and related price lists for invoice verification
Since the items in the above list were not included in the procurement policies,
KCPS did not consistently follow these practices when using ICPAs.
Specifically, our test of KCPS’ participation in four ICPAs during fiscal years
2018 and 2019 with contract awards totaling approximately $587,000 disclosed
that KCPS had not documented its assessment of the benefits of using the ICPA
as required by State law. Additionally, KCPS had not obtained price lists for two
ICPAs totaling $240,000 and therefore, could not verify the accuracy of vendor
billings. We obtained price lists and attempted to perform limited testing of
invoices totaling $237,000 paid to these two vendors during fiscal years 2018 and
2019, but we could not determine if the invoice and contract pricing agreed
because the item descriptions contained in the two documents were dissimilar.
Furthermore, for three ICPAs, KCPS did not obtain the originating agency’s
competitive procurement documentation (including public advertisements and
12

--- Page 15 ---
proposal evaluation information) and did not execute an addendum to remove or
incorporate necessary local terms and conditions. Finally, two ICPAs did not
have a clause that allowed other entities, such as KCPS, to participate.
State law, which legal counsel to the Maryland General Assembly advised us is
applicable to local education agencies, allows the use of cooperative purchasing
arrangements or ICPAs only after the using entity has determined (or assessed) in
writing that the use of such arrangements will provide cost benefits, promote
administrative efficiencies, or promote intergovernmental cooperation1. Further,
the National Institute of Government Purchasing, as well as other public and
educational organizations have published ICPA best practices that include
comprehensive multi-step checklists that require, among other things (as per list
above), that prospective ICPA users verify that the contract allows other entities
to participate, the contract was awarded through a competitive procurement
process, and requires that addendums be executed documenting their participation
and incorporating local required terms and conditions.
Recommendation 2
We recommend that KCPS establish more comprehensive procurement
policies for the use of ICPAs that incorporate the best practices listed above.
In particular, KCPS should
a. ensure that the ICPA allows for the utilization of the contract;
b. obtain the originating agency’s competitive procurement documentation,
including public advertisements and proposal evaluation information;
c. ensure that price lists are obtained from ICPA vendors and used to verify
the propriety of billed vendor costs;
d. comply with State law and ensure that a written determination is
prepared of the benefits of using ICPAs; and
e. execute an addendum of participation with the lead agency and remove
or incorporate necessary local terms and conditions.
1 Section 13-110 of the State Finance and Procurement Article of the Annotated Code of Maryland
in part, defines an intergovernmental cooperative purchasing agreement (ICPA). As defined, an
ICPA is a contract that is entered into by at least one governmental entity in a certain manner,
that is available for use by the governmental entity entering the contract and at least one
additional governmental entity, and that is intended to promote efficiency and savings that can
result from intergovernmental cooperative purchasing. The aforementioned law applies to all
ICPAs regardless of the services, goods, or commodities purchased. In addition, Section 5-
112(a)(3) of the Education Article of the Code provides that local education agencies do not
need to conduct competitive procurements for goods and commodities if they use a contract
awarded by public agencies or intergovernmental purchasing organizations and the originating
procuring agency followed public bidding procedures.
13

--- Page 16 ---
Human Resources and Payroll
Background
Payroll expense represents the largest single cost component in the KCPS budget.
According to KCPS’ records, fiscal year 2018 salary, wage, and benefit costs
totaled $25 million representing approximately 78 percent of the total
expenditures. According to Maryland State Department of Education reports,
during the 2017-2018 school year KCPS had 267 full-time positions, which
consisted of 190 instructional positions and 77 non-instructional positions.
KCPS uses an automated financial system to maintain human resources
information and process and record payroll transactions. The system also
generates payroll checks and direct deposit advices. A badge scanning system is
used for most full-time employees to record employee time and create electronic
bi-weekly timesheets for on-line supervisory approval, while manual timesheets
are used for the remaining employees. A third system is used to track employee
leave usage.
Finding 3
KCPS did not ensure critical human resources and payroll transactions were
independently reviewed for propriety, and salary increases were not always
approved by the Board as required.
Analysis
KCPS did not ensure critical human resources and payroll transactions were
independently reviewed for propriety, and salary increases were not always
approved by the Board as required.
 KCPS did not perform independent documented reviews of all critical
personnel and payroll transactions processed. Specifically, the processing of
new hires, other earnings transactions, and rate increases were not subject to
independent review, and available system reports that could be used for that
purpose were not generated. Although a supervisory review of salary levels
was performed, on a test basis, for each payroll run in comparison to what was
budgeted, this review was not independent, not documented, and did not
include the use of supporting human resources records. In fiscal year 2017
and 2018, salary increases totaled $1.9 million.
 Our review of payroll payments to 30 different employees totaling $94,700
during fiscal year 2019, who had combined annual salaries of $2 million,
disclosed that for two employees the pay rates paid were in excess of the
Board approved union contract rates. Specifically, two employees had each
14

--- Page 17 ---
received a salary increase in February 2017 that was $5,000 in excess of the
salary allowed by union contracts, without the required approval of the Board.
Additionally, no approved payroll authorization forms were on file for the two
employees, who continued to receive the additional payments, totaling
approximately $10,000, in fiscal year 2019.
Our test of payroll transactions and adjustments did not disclose any inappropriate
or erroneous transactions (other than those commented on above). Similar
conditions regarding the lack of supervisory review and approval of critical
transactions were commented upon in our preceding audit report.
Recommendation 3
We recommend that KCPS ensure that adequate controls are in place over
payroll processing. Specifically, we recommend that KCPS
a. perform independent supervisory reviews of changes processed for the bi-
weekly payroll, at least on a test basis, by agreeing changes to appropriate
supporting documentation (repeat); and
b. ensure all salary increases are properly supported and approved, and
retroactive Board approval is obtained for the two salary increases cited
above or recover the excess payments.
Equipment Control and Accountability
Background
According to KCPS’ audited financial statements, the undepreciated value of its
capital equipment was $8.3 million as of June 30, 2018. KCPS maintains
centralized automated records to track equipment inventory with a cost of $5,000
or more (including assets capitalized for financial statement purposes). In
addition, KCPS tracks equipment deemed as sensitive that is subject to theft (such
as information technology items) with a cost of $500 or more using automated
records for control purposes.
Conclusion
Based on our current assessment of significance and risk relative to our audit
objectives, our audit did not include a review of policies, procedures, and controls
with respect to the Equipment area of operations.
15

--- Page 18 ---
Information Technology
Background
The KCPS Technology Department maintains and administers the KCPS
computer network, computer operations, and onsite information systems
applications. KCPS operates a wide area network, with internet connectivity, as
well as connections to the individual schools and to the computer applications,
resources, and servers within the KCPS headquarters building. The critical KCPS
applications for the student management system and financial management
system are hosted offsite by a cloud service provider.
Finding 4
KCPS did not ensure employee access to its automated financial system
applications was appropriate.
Analysis
KCPS did not ensure that employee access to its automated financial system
applications, such as accounts payable and payroll, was appropriate, as we found
a number of employees with unnecessary or incompatible access capabilities.
 Six employees were assigned critical system user access capabilities that
allowed them to perform incompatible procurement and accounts payable
functions, such as adding or changing a vendor, entering invoices and
processing payments. Furthermore, three of these employees had access to
the blank check stock and two of these employees were responsible for
printing checks that included access to authorized facsimile signatures. Also
two Finance Office employees, including one who served as the system
administrator, could perform all procurement and accounts payable system
functions, and could add or change employee accesses, including their own,
and change system settings. Additionally, KCPS had established a shared
logon ID for use by external auditors that they believed was inquiry only, but
we found inadvertently allowed them to perform a number of critical accounts
payable system functions, including the processing of transactions. Our
review did not disclose any inappropriate transactions processed using this
shared logon ID.
 Eight employees were assigned critical system user access capabilities that
allowed them to perform incompatible or unnecessary human resource and
payroll functions, such as adding employees and processing payroll
transactions without the need for online independent approval. Specifically,
the same two Finance Office employees mentioned above could perform all
human resource and payroll system functions and could also perform system
16

--- Page 19 ---
administrator functions. Additionally, four employees had access that allowed
them to add employees, change salary and process payroll payments with one
employee also having access to change direct deposit information. Finally,
another two employees had access that we determined was not required for
their job duties.
 Available transaction history reports identifying specific transactions
unilaterally processed by the above users were not generated for review.
 KCPS had not established a formal process for granting or modifying system
user access capabilities that required documented supervisory approval. The
level of access was based upon either electronic mail messages or verbal
requests made by supervisors. Furthermore, although a periodic supervisory
review of general employee access was performed, it did not consider whether
the employees had excessive capabilities or could perform incompatible
functions.
A similar condition regarding the assignment of system access capabilities was
commented upon in our preceding audit report.
Recommendation 4
We recommend that KCPS
a. restrict user’s capabilities to those needed to perform their job duties,
and separate employee duties to eliminate incompatible functions
(repeat);
b. utilize available transaction history reports that identify transactions
processed by the above users for independent supervisory review of any
such transactions for propriety;
c. establish a formal process for granting or modifying system user access
capabilities that requires independent documented supervisory and
system administrator approval; and
d. perform a periodic documented independent review of financial
applications system access for employees with unnecessary or
incompatible access capabilities.
17

--- Page 20 ---
Finding 5
Proper logging and monitoring controls were not established over a critical
database, and certain publicly accessible servers were improperly located
within the internal network.
Analysis
Proper logging and monitoring controls were not established over a critical
database, and certain publicly accessible servers were improperly located within
the internal network.
 One critical system database was configured such that almost no database
security and audit activity was logged. Examples of database activities which
should be logged and monitored include direct changes to critical data tables
and changes to database security settings. Additionally, usage of a powerful
system account and certain critical privileges were logged, however, this
logged information was not periodically reviewed for propriety. These
conditions could result in unauthorized or inappropriate activities (affecting
the integrity of the production database information) going undetected by
management. Best practices identified in the State of Maryland Information
Technology Security Manual require that information systems must generate
audit records for all security-relevant events, and procedures must be
developed to routinely (for example real time or weekly) review audit records
for indications of inappropriate activities and report findings to appropriate
officials for prompt resolution. A similar condition was commented upon in
our two preceding audit reports.
 Certain publicly and widely accessible servers were located in the KCPS
internal network rather than being isolated in a separate protected network
zone to minimize security risks. These servers, if compromised, could expose
the internal network’s resources to attack from external sources. Best
practices, identified in the Information Technology Security Manual require
that publicly accessible servers reside in an external protected network zone to
safeguard those servers as well as the entity’s internal network. A similar
condition was commented upon in our preceding audit report.
Recommendation 5
We recommend that KCPS establish appropriate logging and monitoring
controls for critical databases and properly secure its publicly accessible
servers. Specifically, we recommend that KCPS
a. log all critical database security and audit events, regularly generate
reports of these logged events, perform independent reviews of these
18

--- Page 21 ---
reports on a timely basis, and document and retain these reviews for
future reference (repeat); and
b. relocate all publicly accessible servers to a separate protected network
zone to limit security exposures to the internal network segment (repeat).
Facilities Construction, Renovation, and Maintenance
Background
KCPS employs a staff of 21 employees to maintain 5 schools and a number of
other facilities (such as administrative and support offices). According to its
fiscal year 2018 Capital Improvement Plan, necessary construction, major
renovations, and systemic improvements to KCPS’ facilities over the next six
years are estimated to cost approximately $3.4 million (reported amount was
$29.7 million, but we adjusted the amount since two elementary schools initially
included in the Plan have since closed).
KCPS Capital Projects Were Generally Competitively Procured and Related
Expenditures Were Properly Supported
Our review of four construction-related procurements during fiscal years 2018
and 2019 totaling $1.7 million disclosed that two of the four contracts totaling
$1.2 million were competitively procured. One of the remaining two contracts
was an ICPA totaling $347,000 that was commented upon earlier in Finding 2,
while the other was a sole source contract totaling $128,000. Our test of four
invoices totaling $95,000 for two of the four contracts disclosed that the invoices
were properly supported and the amounts invoiced were in accordance with
contract terms.
Processes are in Place to Promote Ongoing Facility Maintenance and to
Minimize Energy Costs
KCPS has processes in place to promote ongoing facility maintenance and to
minimize energy costs. For example, KCPS provides preventive maintenance of
its buildings and equipment to prevent emergency repairs. In addition, KCPS
utilizes vendor energy metering systems to monitor heating and air conditioning
usage. KCPS also has written policies that encourage both students and
employees to be aware of and limit their energy use. Finally, KCPS participates
in a consortium with other Eastern Shore entities to purchase energy at the best
possible terms for members of the consortium. According to documents provided
by KCPS from the consortium (which we did not audit), KCPS saved over
$299,000 through energy cost avoidance from fiscal years 2001 to 2018. KCPS
also makes use of geothermal and solar alternative energy sources.
19

--- Page 22 ---
Conclusion
Our audit did not disclose any significant deficiencies in the design or operation
of KCPS’ internal control over the facilities construction, renovation, and
maintenance financial-related areas of operations reviewed. Our audit also did
not disclose any significant instances of noncompliance with applicable laws,
rules, or regulations.
Transportation Services
Background
KCPS has approximately 1,700 students eligible to receive student transportation
service. These students were transported on 13 contractor-owned buses and 10
system-owned buses during fiscal year 2018. According to KCPS financial
records, fiscal year 2018 transportation costs totaled $2.0 million with $1.3
million (65 percent) representing payments for contracted bus services. KCPS
reported that 657,000 route miles were traveled to transport students for the 2017-
2018 school year.
Payments to bus contractors consist of amounts for the purchase of a bus (known
as a per-vehicle allotment or PVA, intended as reimbursement for the cost of a
bus and a flat rate for return on investment), hourly reimbursements for drivers, a
per-mile maintenance fee, and fuel costs. KCPS bus contracts are for an initial 4-
year term subject to a renewal term of two years thereafter over the 15-year useful
life of the bus unless terminated by the Board at its discretion or by the contractor
giving written notice by July 1 of the upcoming school year.
Conclusion
Our audit did not disclose any significant deficiencies in the design or operation
of KCPS’ internal control over the transportation services financial-related areas
of operations reviewed. Our audit also did not disclose any significant instances
of noncompliance with applicable laws, rules, or regulations.
Food Services
Background
According to the audited financial statements, food service operating expenditures
totaled $1.2 million in fiscal year 2018, which were primarily funded from federal
sources totaling $862,000 and food sales totaling $183,000. According to MSDE
records, KCPS had 17 food service positions in fiscal year 2019 consisting of 15
cafeteria positions and 2 administrative positions. Food and related supplies are
20

--- Page 23 ---
received and stored at a central warehouse and delivered to the schools as needed,
and KCPS has a cooking cafeteria at all five of its schools.
Conclusion
Based on our current assessment of significance and risk to our audit objectives,
our audit did not include a review of policies, procedures, and controls with
respect to the Food Service financial area of operations.
School Board Oversight
Background
The Kent County Board of Education (the Board) is composed of five elected
members and a non-voting student representative. In its oversight responsibilities,
the Board contracted with a certified public accounting firm for independent
audits of the KCPS financial statements and federal programs. The Board meets
at least monthly for regular meetings and as needed for closed meetings during
the school year.
KCPS Adopted an Ethics Policy that Met the Requirements of State Law
The KCPS Board has adopted a detailed ethics policy that conforms to State law
and includes provisions for conflicts of interest and financial disclosure and was
approved by the State Ethics Commission. Provisions of this policy are
applicable to Board members as well as all KCPS employees. The policy
required that KCPS establish an ethics panel consisting of three members to be
appointed by the Board to interpret ethics policies and provide advice on policy
implementation, as well as to review and rule on any reported complaints of ethics
violations. According to the ethics policy, Board members, and candidates for the
Board, are required to complete a comprehensive financial disclosure statement,
and the Superintendent and seven department supervisors are required to file a
less comprehensive annual gifts and conflict of interest disclosure statement, by
April 30th of each year.
Finding 6
Financial disclosure statements were not filed or did not include all required
information, and an ethics panel had not been established in accordance with
KCPS’ ethics policy.
Analysis
KCPS employees and Board members did not comply with the financial
disclosure reporting requirements of KCPS’ ethics policy. Our review of the
21

--- Page 24 ---
statement submissions for calendar year 2018, as of September 2019, disclosed
the following conditions:
 None of the elected Board members had filed comprehensive financial
disclosure statements since calendar year 2015. The comprehensive financial
disclosure statements include disclosing interests in real estate and business
entities and outside employment. Instead, the Board members filed a
disclosure statement for gifts and conflicts of interest (self-identified), which
was less in scope than the required comprehensive financial disclosure.
Additionally, the eight employees that were required to file gifts and conflicts
of interest disclosure statements, did not file the disclosures. Consequently,
KCPS may not be aware of all conflicts of interest issues.
 An ethics panel had not been established as required by its policy since it
became effective June 2012.
We commented on the failure to ensure all applicable school officials filed
financial disclosure statements and reported information consistent with the
requirements of its policy in our preceding audit report.
Recommendation 6
We recommend that KCPS ensure that
a. all applicable Board members and employees file the applicable required
annual disclosure statements in a timely manner (repeat), and
b. establish an ethics panel in accordance with its policy.
Management of Other Risks
Healthcare Background
KCPS is a member of the Eastern Shore of Maryland Educational Consortium
Health Alliance Trust (hereinafter referred to as the Consortium) for employee
and retiree health care. The Consortium members are self-insured for healthcare
costs up to a designated stop-loss amount of $150,000 per participant per plan
year. The Consortium negotiates contracts with a third-party administrator (TPA)
for health care claims processing services for employee medical (including
vision), dental and prescription costs and for the stop-loss insurance coverage.
The TPA bills KCPS monthly subscription charges based on the number of
participants and their medical coverage and medical providers submit claims to
the TPA who pays them on behalf of KCPS. KCPS also pays its TPA an
administrative fee for these services. In a year-end settlement process, which
22

--- Page 25 ---
segregates the participating agencies for the plan year ending August 31, the TPA
nets the amount of medical claims it paid against the monthly subscription
charges billed to and paid by KCPS to determine any excess amount due from or
to be reimbursed to either party.
According to the TPA’s records for the plan year ended August 31, 2018, KCPS
health care expenditures totaled approximately $3.5 million including $183,000
for administrative fees and $206,000 for stop-loss insurance coverage. As of
September 2019, according to the TPA’s records, KCPS provided health
insurance benefits to 626 enrolled employees, dependents, and retirees.
Finding 7
KCPS did not ensure the propriety of employee and retiree health care
claims paid and did not verify plan administrative fees were properly
charged. In addition, KCPS did not obtain copies or Board approval of the
annual TPA administrative agreements.
Analysis
KCPS lacked procedures and controls to ensure that amounts paid to the TPA for
medical claims and administrative fees were proper.
 KCPS did not audit the propriety of the medical claims paid on its behalf by
the TPA to ensure that the services were actually provided, covered by the
health plans, appropriately priced, and accurately reported on the year-end
settlement. Furthermore, KCPS did not receive detailed claims data from the
TPA to verify the propriety of the aforementioned items and correctness of the
year-end settlement. A similar condition was commented upon in our
preceding audit report.
 KCPS did not verify that administrative fees and premiums billed by the TPA
agreed with its payroll records for enrolled employees. We were advised that
the only verification performed was to ensure changes in coverage reported by
the KCPS human resources office were reflected on the monthly invoice, but
this verification was not documented. In addition, the monthly rates charged
for the various coverage categories (medical, vision, dental, and prescription
drug) and stop-loss insurance were not verified for agreement with the TPA
contract. Our recalculation of the administrative fees and stop-loss insurance
charges, for the 2017-2018 contract year, based on the listed participant
counts on certain monthly invoices reviewed and the related contract rates did
not disclose significant variances.
23

--- Page 26 ---
 KCPS had not requested or received copies of the annual administrative and
stop loss agreements for fiscal years 2014 through 2018 nor were these
agreements approved by its Board. The annual TPA agreements which were
executed by a Consortium representative on KPCS’ behalf, were obtained by
KCPS at our request from the Consortium. The most recent agreement that
we reviewed with KCPS’ TPA for medical care services covered the one-year
period from September 1, 2017 to August 31, 2018 at a cost of $389,000 for
administrative fees and stop-loss insurance coverage costs.
The State of Maryland’s Office of Personnel Services and Benefits administers
self-insured health plans for state employees, and contracts for comprehensive
reviews of claims paid by plan administrators. According to the Office, improper
payments identified from these reviews have consistently exceeded the cost of the
reviews.
Recommendation 7
We recommend that KCPS establish procedures to verify the amounts paid
for health insurance and TPA administrative fees. Specifically, we
recommend that KCPS
a. verify the propriety of health care claims paid, by obtaining
documentation supporting amounts invoiced and ensuring audits are
conducted of the claims reported as paid by the TPA (repeat);
b. compare its records of enrolled employees to TPA invoices and contract
rates to determine the propriety of related fees and premiums billed; and
c. ensure all healthcare contracts are approved by the Board and retained
on file to verify billings.
24

--- Page 27 ---
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We conducted a performance audit to evaluate the effectiveness and efficiency of
the financial management practices of the Kent County Public Schools (KCPS).
We conducted this audit under the authority of the State Government Article,
Section 2-1220(e) of the Annotated Code of Maryland, and performed it in
accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards. Those
standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient,
appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and
conclusions based on our audit objectives. We believe that the evidence obtained
provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit
objectives.
We had two broad audit objectives:
1. Evaluate whether the KCPS procedures and controls were effective in
accounting for and safeguarding its assets.
2. Evaluate whether the KCPS policies provided for the efficient use of
financial resources.
In planning and conducting our audit of KCPS, we focused on 11 major financial-
related areas of operations as approved on December 6, 2016 by the Joint Audit
and Evaluation Committee of the Maryland General Assembly in accordance with
the enabling legislation. The scope of the work performed in each of these areas
was based on our assessments of significance and risk. Therefore, our follow-up
on the status of findings included in our preceding audit report on KCPS dated
May 13, 2013, was limited to those findings that were applicable to the current
audit scope for each of the 11 areas.
The audit objectives excluded reviewing and assessing student achievement,
curriculum, teacher performance, and other academic-related areas and functions.
Also, we did not evaluate the KCPS Comprehensive Education Master Plan or
related updates, and we did not review the activities, financial or other, of any
parent teacher association, group, or funds not under the local board of
education’s direct control or management.
To accomplish our objectives, we reviewed applicable State laws and regulations
pertaining to public elementary and secondary education, as well as policies and
procedures issued and established by KCPS. We also interviewed personnel at
KCPS and the Maryland State Department of Education (MSDE), and staff at
other local school systems in Maryland (as appropriate). Our audit procedures
25

--- Page 28 ---
included inspections of documents and records, and observations of KCPS
operations. We also tested transactions and performed other auditing procedures
that we considered necessary to achieve our objectives, generally for the period
from July 1, 2017 to May 30, 2019. Generally, transactions were selected for
testing based on auditor judgment, which primarily considers risk. Unless
otherwise specifically indicated, neither statistical nor non-statistical audit
sampling was used to select the transactions tested. Therefore, the results of the
tests cannot be used to project those results to the entire population from which
the test items were selected. For certain areas within the scope of the audit, we
relied on the work performed by the independent accounting firm that annually
audits KCPS’ financial statements and conducts the federal Single Audit.
We used certain statistical data—including financial and operational—compiled
by MSDE from various informational reports submitted by the Maryland local
school systems. This information was used in this audit report for background or
informational purposes, and was deemed reasonable.
We also extracted data from the KCPS automated financial management system
for the purpose of testing expenditure and payroll transactions. We performed
various audit procedures on the relevant data and determined the data were
sufficiently reliable for the purposes the data were used during the audit.
KCPS’ management is responsible for establishing and maintaining effective
internal control. Internal control is a process designed to provide reasonable
assurance that objectives pertaining to the reliability of financial records;
effectiveness and efficiency of operations including safeguarding of assets; and
compliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations are achieved. As
provided in Government Auditing Standards, there are five components of
internal control: control environment, risk assessment, control activities,
information and communication, and monitoring. Each of the five components,
when significant to the audit objectives, and as applicable to KCPS, were
considered by us during the course of this audit.
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate. In addition
to the conditions included in this report, other findings were communicated to
KCPS that were not deemed significant and, consequently, did not warrant
inclusion in this report.
26

--- Page 29 ---
We conducted our fieldwork from May 2019 to October 2019. The KCPS
response to our findings and recommendations is included as an Appendix to this
report. As prescribed in the State Government Article, Section 2-1224 of the
Annotated Code of Maryland, we will advise KCPS regarding the results of our
review of its response.
27

--- Page 31 ---
Kent County Public Schools
Agency Response Form
Procurement and Disbursement Cycle
Finding 1
KCPS had not established adequate controls over procurements and disbursements as
certain transactions processed were not subject to independent review.
We recommend that KCPS strengthen its controls over procurements and disbursements.
Specifically, we recommend that KCPS
a. ensure that changes to the vendor information recorded in the automated accounts
payable system are verified to appropriate source documentation by an independent
employee ; and
b. ensure that an independent employee conducts a documented comparison of
transactions and checks processed to the related supporting documentation, at least on
a test basis (repeat).
Agency Response
Analysis Factually Accurate
Please provide We are the smallest school system in Maryland and do not have the
additional comments as funds to hire additional staff to address all the recommendations and
deemed necessary. unable to segregate all duties. In the future, the Supervisor of Finance
will review user accounts is independent of processes.
Recommendation 1a Agree Estimated Completion Date: January 2020
Please provide details of KCPS will implement a process to notify the Supervisor of Finance will
corrective action or of any vendor changes needed. The Supervisor of Finance will review all
explain disagreement. documentation for the vendor for verification and accuracy purposes.
KCPS will also obtain training to see if this process can be documented
and noted in the system.
Recommendation 1b Agree Estimated Completion Date: March 2020
Please provide details of The Supervisor of Finance will review and evaluate the Accounts
corrective action or Payable process to compare the transactions and checks processed to
explain disagreement. ensure that the supporting documentation is correct. KCPS will attempt
to test this periodically.
Page 1 of 9

--- Page 32 ---
Kent County Public Schools
Agency Response Form
Finding 2
KCPS procurement policies were not sufficiently comprehensive, as they did not
incorporate certain best practices for consideration when evaluating possible participation
in an intergovernmental cooperative purchasing agreement (ICPA). In addition, KCPS did
not obtain contract copies to verify invoice pricing.
We recommend that KCPS establish more comprehensive procurement policies for the use
of ICPAs that incorporate the best practices listed above. In particular, KCPS should
a. ensure that the ICPA allows for the utilization of the contract;
b. obtain the originating agency’s competitive procurement documentation, including
public advertisements and proposal evaluation information;
c. ensure that price lists are obtained from ICPA vendors and used to verify the propriety
of billed vendor costs;
d. comply with State law and ensure that a written determination is prepared of the
benefits of using ICPAs; and
e. execute an addendum of participation with the lead agency and remove or incorporate
necessary local terms and conditions.
Agency Response
Analysis Factually Accurate
Please provide
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 2a Agree Estimated Completion Date: January 2020
Please provide details of KCPS will review contracts to determine if utilization of ICPA is
corrective action or possible.
explain disagreement.
Recommendation 2b Agree Estimated Completion Date: January 2020
Please provide details of KCPS will obtain a copy of the bid, advertisements, and evaluation
corrective action or forms.
explain disagreement.
Recommendation 2c Agree Estimated Completion Date: January 2020
Please provide details of KCPS will obtain copies of the price lists and verify invoices.
corrective action or
explain disagreement.
Recommendation 2d Agree Estimated Completion Date: January 2020
Page 2 of 9

--- Page 33 ---
Kent County Public Schools
Agency Response Form
Please provide details of KCPS will ensure that a written document of determination is performed
corrective action or by the individual procuring the items prior to receiving approval by the
explain disagreement. Board concerning the benefits of utilizing ICPA.
Recommendation 2e Agree Estimated Completion Date: March 2020
Please provide details of KCPS will execute an addendum of participation with the leading
corrective action or agency and will review local terms and conditions.
explain disagreement.
Page 3 of 9

--- Page 34 ---
Kent County Public Schools
Agency Response Form
Human Resources and Payroll
Finding 3
KCPS did not ensure critical human resources and payroll transactions were
independently reviewed for propriety, and salary increases were not always approved by
the Board as required.
We recommend that KCPS ensure that adequate controls are in place over payroll
processing. Specifically, we recommend that KCPS
a. perform independent supervisory reviews of changes processed for the bi-weekly
payroll, at least on a test basis, by agreeing changes to appropriate supporting
documentation (repeat); and
b. ensure all salary increases are properly supported and approved, and retroactive Board
approval is obtained for the two salary increases cited above or recover the excess
payments.
Agency Response
Analysis Factually Accurate
Please provide
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 3a Agree Estimated Completion Date: January 2020
Please provide details of The Supervisor of Finance will attempt to review any changes to bi-
corrective action or weekly payroll to ensure that the changes are aligned with the supporting
explain disagreement. documentation on a test basis. The Supervisor of Finance will assess the
processes to ensure separation of duties are implemented given the small
staff at KCPS. This will be documented when performed.
Recommendation 3b Agree Estimated Completion Date: January 2020
Please provide details of Although the Board authorized the salary increases, we failed to
corrective action or document approval in the Closed Minutes. Retroactive approval was
explain disagreement. completed during January 13th Board Meeting. Going forward, all salary
changes will be properly supported and approved by the Board.
Page 4 of 9

--- Page 35 ---
Kent County Public Schools
Agency Response Form
Information Technology
Finding 4
KCPS did not ensure employee access to its automated financial system applications was
appropriate.
We recommend that KCPS
a. restrict user’s capabilities to those needed to perform their job duties, and separate
employee duties to eliminate incompatible functions (repeat);
b. utilize available transaction history reports that identify transactions processed by the
above users for independent supervisory review of any such transactions for propriety;
c. establish a formal process for granting or modifying system user access capabilities that
requires independent documented supervisory and system administrator approval; and
d. perform a periodic documented independent review of financial applications system
access for employees with unnecessary or incompatible access capabilities.
Agency Response
Analysis Factually Accurate
Please provide We are the smallest school system in Maryland and do not have the
additional comments as funds to hire additional staff to address all the recommendations and
deemed necessary. unable to segregate all duties. In the future, the Supervisor of Finance
will review user accounts is independent of processes.
Recommendation 4a Agree Estimated Completion Date: January 2020
Please provide details of The Supervisor of Finance will review and evaluate user access for
corrective action or KCPS to the extent possible given a small staff. The Supervisor of
explain disagreement. Finance will identify the essential access needed by the specified users
requesting access at KCPS; especially access needed for procurement
and disbursement processes. Upon thorough review, user’s access will
be restricted based on determined job duties.
Recommendation 4b Agree Estimated Completion Date: March 2020
Please provide details of The Supervisor of Finance will review and evaluate the Accounts
corrective action or Payable process to compare the transactions and checks processed to
explain disagreement. ensure that the supporting documentation is correct. KCPS will attempt
to test this periodically.
Recommendation 4c Agree Estimated Completion Date: January 2020
Please provide details of KCPS will attempt to review its processes, in order to, establish a more
corrective action or formal process for granting and/or modifying user access. KCPS will
explain disagreement. ensure that the process is documented and approved by the Supervisor,
as well as, ensuring that the administrator is independent of the
Procurement and Accounts Payable process. The Supervisor of Finance
will work with the KCPS IT Department to create a System Access User
Page 5 of 9

--- Page 36 ---
Kent County Public Schools
Agency Response Form
Form. To be noted, the administrator that currently grants access is
independent of both the Procurement and Accounts Payable process.
Recommendation 4d Agree Estimated Completion Date: March 2020
Please provide details of Given our limited resources, the Supervisor of Finance will review and
corrective action or evaluate the procurement and disbursement process to identify the
explain disagreement. essential access needed by the specified users requesting access at
KCPS. This will be performed and documented periodically.
Page 6 of 9

--- Page 37 ---
Kent County Public Schools
Agency Response Form
Finding 5
Proper logging and monitoring controls were not established over a critical database, and
certain publicly accessible servers were improperly located within the internal network.
We recommend that KCPS establish appropriate logging and monitoring controls for
critical databases and properly secure its publicly accessible servers. Specifically, we
recommend that KCPS
a. log all critical database security and audit events, regularly generate reports of these
logged events, perform independent reviews of these reports on a timely basis, and
document and retain these reviews for future reference (repeat); and
b. relocate all publicly accessible servers to a separate protected network zone to limit
security exposures to the internal network segment (repeat).
Agency Response
Analysis Factually Accurate
Please provide
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 5a Agree Estimated Completion Date: TBD
Please provide details of KCPS has agreed to work with our critical system vendor to ensure
corrective action or proper logging and monitoring controls are in place. The publicly
explain disagreement. accessible server in question is hosted off-site through our cloud
provider.
Recommendation 5b Agree Estimated Completion Date: TBD
Please provide details of KCPS has agreed to work with Kent Gov (KCIT) to develop a DMZ
corrective action or containing any and all publicly accessible servers. We will also
explain disagreement. implement additional VLANS which will further restrict access to any
and all KCPS servers.
Page 7 of 9

--- Page 38 ---
Kent County Public Schools
Agency Response Form
School Board Oversight
Finding 6
Financial disclosure statements were not filed or did not include all required information,
and an ethics panel had not been established in accordance with KCPS’ ethics policy.
We recommend that KCPS ensure that
a. all applicable Board members and employees file the applicable required annual
disclosure statements in a timely manner (repeat), and
b. establish an ethics panel in accordance with its policy.
Agency Response
Analysis Factually Accurate
Please provide
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 6a Agree Estimated Completion Date: September
2019
Please provide details of All disclosure statements will be obtained annually.
corrective action or
explain disagreement.
Recommendation 6b Agree Estimated Completion Date: January 2020
Please provide details of At the January 13, 2020 Board Meeting, Ethics Panel members were
corrective action or approved.
explain disagreement.
Page 8 of 9

--- Page 39 ---
Kent County Public Schools
Agency Response Form
Management of Other Risks
Finding 7
KCPS did not ensure the propriety of employee and retiree health care claims paid and did
not verify plan administrative fees were properly charged. In addition, KCPS did not
obtain copies or Board approval of the annual TPA administrative agreements.
We recommend that KCPS establish procedures to verify the amounts paid for health
insurance and TPA administrative fees. Specifically, we recommend that KCPS
a. verify the propriety of health care claims paid, by obtaining documentation supporting
amounts invoiced and ensuring audits are conducted of the claims reported as paid by
the TPA (repeat);
b. compare its records of enrolled employees to TPA invoices and contract rates to
determine the propriety of related fees and premiums billed; and
c. ensure all healthcare contracts are approved by the Board and retained on file to verify
billings.
Agency Response
Analysis Factually Accurate
Please provide
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 7a Agree Estimated Completion Date: TBD
Please provide details of As a member of the Consortium, KCPS has engaged an outside firm to
corrective action or conduct a claims audit. An audit will be conducted every 3 years.
explain disagreement.
Recommendation 7b Agree Estimated Completion Date: December
2019
Please provide details of A monthly reconciliation of invoices and enrolled employees will be
corrective action or executed by an HR administrator to ensure appropriate fees and
explain disagreement. premiums are billed.
Recommendation 7c Agree Estimated Completion Date: TBD
Please provide details of The Consortium holds the contracts with the providers. However, KCPS
corrective action or will attempt to communicate with the Consortium team to see if a
explain disagreement. contract or MOU can be obtained so that it can be approved by the
Board. Further review will be conducted concerning this
recommendation.
Page 9 of 9

--- Page 40 ---
A T
UDIT EAM
Raymond G. Burton Jr., CPA, CFE
Audit Manager
Richard L. Carter, CISA
R. Brendan Coffey, CPA, CISA
Information Systems Audit Managers
Ken H. Johanning, CPA, CFE
Senior Auditor
Romin J. Gouin
Information Systems Senior Auditor
Sporthi J. Carnelio
John B. Wachter, CFE
Staff Auditors