Title: Maryland Department of Health - Developmental Disabilities Administration - Follow-up Review
Date: 07/10/2020
Type: Special Reports and Letters
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5f061257a1ce581064943db7
Extracted: 2025-06-19T11:42:23.461107
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Special Review
Maryland Department of Health
Developmental Disabilities Administration
Follow-up Review
July 2020
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Senator Clarence K. Lam, M.D. (Senate Chair) Delegate Carol L. Krimm (House Chair)
Senator Malcolm L. Augustine Delegate Steven J. Arentz
Senator Adelaide C. Eckardt Delegate Mark S. Chang
Senator George C. Edwards Delegate Andrea Fletcher Harrison
Senator Katie Fry Hester Delegate Keith E. Haynes
Senator Cheryl C. Kagan Delegate Michael A. Jackson
Senator Benjamin F. Kramer Delegate David Moon
Senator Cory V. McCray Delegate April R. Rose
Senator Justin D. Ready Delegate Geraldine Valentino-Smith
Senator Craig J. Zucker Delegate Karen Lewis Young
To Obtain Further Information
Office of Legislative Audits
301 West Preston Street, Room 1202
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Phone: 410-946-5900 ꞏ 301-970-5900 ꞏ 1-877-486-9964 (Toll Free in Maryland)
Maryland Relay: 711
TTY: 410-946-5401 ꞏ 301-970-5401
E-mail: OLAWebmaster@ola.state.md.us
Website: www.ola.state.md.us
To Report Fraud
The Office of Legislative Audits operates a Fraud Hotline to report fraud, waste, or abuse involving State
of Maryland government resources. Reports of fraud, waste, or abuse may be communicated anonymously
by a toll-free call to 1-877-FRAUD-11, by mail to the Fraud Hotline, c/o Office of Legislative Audits, or
through the Office’s website.
Nondiscrimination Statement
The Department of Legislative Services does not discriminate on the basis of age, ancestry, color, creed,
marital status, national origin, race, religion, gender, gender identity, sexual orientation, or disability in the
admission or access to its programs, services, or activities. The Department’s Information Officer has been
designated to coordinate compliance with the nondiscrimination requirements contained in Section 35.107
of the United States Department of Justice Regulations. Requests for assistance should be directed to the
Information Officer at 410-946-5400 or 410-970-5400.

--- Page 3 ---
July 10, 2020
Senator Clarence K. Lam, M.D., Senate Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Delegate Carol L. Krimm, House Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Members of Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Annapolis, Maryland
Ladies and Gentlemen:
We have conducted a follow-up review of actions taken by the Maryland
Department of Health (MDH) – Developmental Disabilities Administration
(DDA) to address the findings in our July 8, 2019 audit report. In that report, we
concluded that DDA’s accountability and compliance rating was unsatisfactory.
MDH, on behalf of DDA, provided a status report, as of January 7, 2020,
indicating the implementation status of each finding as well as its corrective
action plan, including timelines and processes to monitor the implementation of
the plan. In summary, DDA’s status report indicated that 5 findings had been
corrected (recommendations fully implemented) and additional corrective actions
were required to fully implement the recommendations for the 6 remaining
findings.
We performed certain procedures to evaluate the appropriateness of actions taken
by DDA for 7 of the 11 findings. Specifically, based on our assessment of the
relative significance of the 11 findings, we reviewed 4 of the findings which
MDH’s status report indicated were corrected and 3 findings which MDH’s status
report indicated required additional actions. Our review, which was performed
during the period from January to March 2020, disclosed that DDA had corrected
2 of the 7 findings and had made progress, but had not resolved 5 other findings
(including 2 that MDH reported as corrected).
Exhibit 1 identifies DDA’s assessed implementation status for all 11 findings,
according to the status report, as well as the results of our review for the 7

--- Page 4 ---
findings. Exhibit 2 describes, in detail, the results of our review of the status of
DDA's efforts to implement the recommendations for the 5 findings that we
determined DDA had not fully corrected. To obtain a thorough understanding of
the audit findings, recommendations, and the follow-up status described in
Exhibit 2, the July 8, 2019 report should be consulted due to the technical nature
of some of these findings.
MDH’s status report and response to this report, provided on behalf of DDA, are
included as Appendix A (note that the color coding was included by DDA and
does not reflect OLA’s determination of the implementation status) and Appendix
B, respectively. MDH’s response, as presented in Appendix B, only addresses the
recommendations that we determined to be in progress. We have reviewed
MDH’s response to our assessment of the status of those recommendations and
determined that MDH generally agreed with our assessment. In accordance with
our policy, we have redacted any vendor names or products mentioned by MDH
in the response.
To improve its accountability and compliance rating, DDA should reassess and
continue to implement its corrective action plan for all findings and related
recommendations, and ensure that other areas do not deteriorate. We will review
the status of all of the audit findings during our next audit of DDA. We wish to
acknowledge the cooperation extended to us during the review by DDA. We also
wish to acknowledge MDH’s and DDA’s willingness to address the audit issues
and implement appropriate corrective actions.
Respectfully submitted,
Gregory A. Hook, CPA
Legislative Auditor
2

--- Page 5 ---
Exhibit 1
Implementation Status of Findings in the July 2019
DDA Audit Report
Status as
Determined by Status Based on
Prior Finding
DDA as of Auditor’s Review
January 20201
Consumer Budgets
1. The Developmental Disabilities Administration
(DDA) did not ensure level-of-need scores used to
determine consumers’ service budgets were
In Progress
assigned in accordance with DDA’s established Corrected
(See Exhibit 2)
criteria and were properly recorded in its Provider
Consumer Information System II. Our testing
disclosed that certain scores could not be
supported.
Provider Payments
2. DDA did not identify recurring overpayments made
over several years totaling at least $1.7 million that
were later self-reported by a provider. In addition, In Progress
In Progress
DDA did not subsequently determine the full extent (See Exhibit 2)
of the overpayments to this provider and whether
similar overpayments were made to other
providers.
3. DDA did not conduct audits of providers to ensure
payments were consistent with actual services
delivered and in accordance with the consumers’ In Progress N/A
approved individual plans.
Procurement of Services and Related Billings
4. Fiscal management services contracts were not
comprehensive and properly approved, and DDA
did not monitor the related vendors to ensure the
In Progress
required services were provided and the propriety In Progress
(See Exhibit 2)
of payments. In addition, all related federal
reimbursements were not obtained, including
federal funds totaling $4.9 million.
Page 1 of 3
N/A – Not applicable since we did not review the implementation status of this finding.
1 DDA’s detailed implementation status for each finding is based upon MDH’s status report, as of
January 7, 2020. The status based on the auditor’s review presented by finding in Exhibit 1 was
discussed with, and agreed to by, DDA management personnel.
3

--- Page 6 ---
Exhibit 1
Implementation Status of Findings in the July 2019
DDA Audit Report
Status as
Determined by Status Based on
Prior Finding
DDA as of Auditor’s Review
January 20202
5. DDA did not adequately justify a $2.7 million sole
source contract awarded to an incumbent vendor to
continue assisting in the financial restructuring of Corrected N/A
DDA operations, and could not support a significant
increase in the contract rates for one vendor
employee.
6. DDA did not have an adequate process to ensure that
amounts invoiced by Coordination of Community
In Progress N/A
Services agencies properly reflected consumer
services provided.
Contribution to Care
7. DDA had not taken sufficient action to identify and
In Progress
return improper contribution to care collections In Progress
(See Exhibit 2)
identified during our preceding audit.
Federal Funds
8. DDA did not recover certain federal funds timely,
resulting in lost interest income of approximately
$126,000. These delays were due, in part, to
In Progress N/A
untimely Medicaid eligibility redeterminations.
Provider Consumer Information System II (PCIS2)
9. DDA did not verify the accuracy and completeness of
critical adjustments that were processed in PCIS2,
In Progress
resulting in errors such as overpayments going Corrected
(See Exhibit 2)
undetected, and did not adequately restrict user
access in the system.
Page 2 of 3
N/A – Not applicable since we did not review the implementation status of this finding.
2 DDA’s implementation status for each finding is based upon MDH’s status report, as of January
7, 2020. The status based on the auditor’s review presented by finding in Exhibit 1 was
discussed with, and agreed to by, DDA management personnel.
4

--- Page 7 ---
Exhibit 1
Implementation Status of Findings in the July 2019
DDA Audit Report
Status as
Determined by Status Based on
Prior Finding
DDA as of Auditor’s Review
January 20203
10. The PCIS2 database and its supporting server were Corrected Corrected
running on outdated software versions.
11. PCIS2 database and application backups were not
stored offsite, and DDA did not have a complete Corrected Corrected
information technology disaster recovery plan for
recovering computer operations.
Page 3 of 3
N/A – Not applicable since we did not review the implementation status of this finding.
3 DDA’s implementation status for each finding is based upon MDH’s status report, as of January
7, 2020. The status based on the auditor’s review presented by finding in Exhibit 1 was
discussed with, and agreed to by, DDA management personnel.
5

--- Page 8 ---
Exhibit 2
Detailed Comments on the Findings for Which
the Office of Legislative Audits Deemed the Implementation
Status to be “In Progress”
Consumer Budgets
Prior Finding 1
The Developmental Disabilities Administration (DDA) did not ensure level-
of-need scores used to determine consumers’ service budgets were assigned
in accordance with DDA’s established criteria and were properly recorded in
its Provider Consumer Information System II (PCIS2). Our testing disclosed
that certain scores could not be supported.
Prior Report Recommendation 1
We recommended that DDA
a. perform documented, independent reviews (on a test basis) to ensure that
level-of-need scores were properly assigned and accurately recorded in
PCIS2: and
b. ensure that documentation of the vendor’s assigned level-of-need scores is
retained.
Status as Determined by DDA - Corrected
Office of Legislative Audits (OLA) Assessment of Status – In Progress
DDA did not fully implement the recommendations. DDA established certain
procedures to address both recommendations beginning in October 2019. These
procedures required each of DDA’s four regional offices to perform a quarterly
review of five randomly selected consumer level-of-need scores recorded in
PCIS2 to ensure that those scores were accurately recorded and assigned in
accordance with DDA criteria. In addition, the review was to ensure that
documentation to support the level-of-need score assigned by a vendor was
maintained. At the time of our review, DDA had completed two of the quarterly
reviews, during which it reviewed the level-of-need scores for 40 consumers.
However, we determined that the reviews performed did not sufficiently address
either recommendation.
Specifically, there was no documentation of the specific records (such as medical
records) used to verify the propriety of the scores assigned by the vendor. In
addition, DDA’s review did not identify that 2 of the 40 scores recorded in PCIS2
did not agree with the scores assigned by the vendor and, as of February 2020,
6

--- Page 9 ---
DDA had not corrected 2 other scores that it had identified as incorrect during its
October 2019 review. Finally, we were advised by DDA management that scores
reviewed were selected from a database of cases for which supporting
documentation was received from the vendor, rather than from PCIS2. As a
result, scores for which the vendor had not submitted corresponding
documentation, nor had DDA obtained, were not subject to testing.
Provider Payments
Prior Finding 2
DDA did not identify recurring overpayments made over several years
totaling at least $1.7 million that were later self-reported by a provider. In
addition, DDA did not subsequently determine the full extent of the
overpayments to this provider and whether similar overpayments were made
to other providers.
Prior Report Recommendation 2
We recommended that DDA
a. determine, to the extent possible, the total provider overpayments that
occurred for consumers that were improperly billed, and consult with legal
counsel to determine whether any overpayments identified should be
recovered; and
b. as applicable, for other consumers identified, revise the individual plans and
related PCIS2 designations to reflect the correct service category.
Status as Determined by DDA – In Progress
OLA Assessment of Status – In Progress
DDA took minimal action to implement the recommendations. In regard to
recommendation a, although DDA performed a review to determine whether
additional overpayments occurred, the scope of the review was not sufficient to
address the concerns addressed in our finding. Specifically, the overpayments
noted in our finding occurred because certain consumers’ PCIS2 designations did
not accurately reflect the services those consumers received. DDA’s review did
not include a review of consumers’ PCIS2 designations to ensure they accurately
reflected the services received by the consumers. In addition, during our follow-
up review, DDA management advised us that it would review a sample of billings
from prior to December 2014 from the provider that brought the matter to DDA’s
attention. However, DDA had not performed this review prior to completion of
our follow-up work. Accordingly, DDA's review was not comprehensive enough
to address the recommendation.
7

--- Page 10 ---
In regard to recommendation b, DDA had not revised any consumers’ individual
plans and related PCIS2 designations because its review had not identified
additional overpayments. However, as noted above, DDA’s review was not
sufficient to determine whether additional overpayments had occurred and
therefore, this recommendation was not addressed.
Procurement of Services and Related Billings
Prior Finding 4
Fiscal management services (FMS) contracts were not comprehensive and
properly approved, and DDA did not monitor the related vendors to ensure
the required services were provided and the propriety of payments. In
addition, all related federal reimbursements were not obtained, including
federal funds totaling $4.9 million.
Prior Report Recommendation 4
We recommended that DDA
a. ensure control agency approvals are obtained for fiscal management services,
and contracts are executed that include all relevant contract provisions
(including the contract term and authorized administrative fees);
b. monitor vendor activity and compliance to ensure that all key requirements
and terms are complied with, including site visits and audits, and timely
submission of annual accountings, and return of unspent funds, and that FMS
vendor payments are proper and supported;
c. ensure FMS vendors record all provider payments into Maryland Medicaid
Information Systems II (MMIS II) timely; and
d. take appropriate corrective action to obtain federal reimbursement for any
outstanding claims (including the aforementioned $4.9 million), any annual
accountings not received, and identified overpayments, and consider
recovering any lost investment income resulting from untimely vendor
actions.
Status as Determined by DDA – In Progress
OLA Assessment of Status – In Progress
DDA satisfactorily implemented recommendation d but its implementation of
recommendations a, b, and c was not yet complete.
In regard to recommendation a, DDA issued a request for proposal for a new FMS
vendor in June 2019; however, the procurement had not been finalized at the time
of our review.
8

--- Page 11 ---
In regard to recommendation b, DDA’s status report indicated that it had procured
a Quality Improvement Organization (QIO) vendor in December 2019 to monitor
the FMS vendors, but DDA advised that these reviews had not yet started at the
time of our review. In addition, the QIO contract was not comprehensive as it did
not require the QIO vendor to perform site visits of the FMS vendors or obtain
independent financial audits of the FMS vendors. Furthermore, the contract did
not require the QIO vendor to ensure that the FMS vendors timely submitted
required annual accountings that compared their actual costs to the amounts
previously advanced by DDA and returned any unspent funds to DDA. This is
significant because as of February 2020, DDA had not obtained one FMS
vendor’s fiscal year 2018 and 2019 annual accountings.
Regarding recommendation c, DDA had not established a process to ensure that
the FMS vendors recorded all provider payments into MMIS II timely. Although
DDA’s status report indicated that this process will be addressed once the
aforementioned new FMS vendor procurement is finalized, the request for
proposal for the services did not include a requirement that the FMS vendor
record provider payments in MMIS II. DDA management advised us that DDA
had not yet determined whether the new FMS vendor would be required to
perform this function.
Contribution to Care
Prior Finding 7
DDA had not taken sufficient action to identify and return improper
contribution to care (CTC) collections identified during our preceding audit.
Prior Report Recommendation 7
We recommended that DDA
a. determine the extent of the improperly collected CTC, as practical, (repeat);
and
b. in consultation with the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS),
determine the feasibility of returning any improperly collected funds to
consumers in a manner that does not adversely impact their Medicaid
eligibility.
Status as Determined by DDA – In Progress
OLA Assessment of Status – In Progress
DDA implemented recommendation b, but did not fully implement
recommendation a. Specifically, DDA determined that improper CTC collections
9

--- Page 12 ---
from consumers during the period from January 2013 through June 2014 totaled
approximately $4.1 million and as of February 2020, had only returned $2.4
million to the impacted consumers. In addition, DDA advised us that it would not
be attempting to determine the extent of improper CTC collections that occurred
prior to January 2013 because provider records for that period were not available
since Medicaid regulations only required providers to maintain records for six
years. Nevertheless, DDA had not made any documented provider outreach
efforts to determine record availability beyond the period required by regulations.
In this regard, we note that DDA first became aware of this matter in calendar
year 2014, at which point provider records should have been available dating back
to at least 2008.
Provider Consumer Information Systems II (PCIS2)
Prior Finding 9
DDA did not verify the accuracy and completeness of critical adjustments
that were processed in PCIS2, resulting in errors such as overpayments going
undetected, and did not adequately restrict user access in the system.
Prior Report Recommendation 9
We recommended that DDA
a. establish independent review procedures to ensure the propriety, at least on a
test basis, of critical adjustments in PCIS2 (repeat);
b. establish procedures to ensure that all required adjustments have been entered
in PCIS2 accurately;
c. perform a documented comprehensive periodic review of user access
capabilities to ensure that users are assigned only those capabilities needed to
perform job duties (repeat); and
d. eliminate unnecessary access, including those noted above (repeat).
Status as Determined by DDA - Corrected
OLA Assessment of Status – In Progress
DDA implemented recommendation b, but did not fully implement
recommendations a, c, or d.
We found that for recommendation a, the process DDA established to review
critical adjustments (such as, adjustments to provider payments) in PCIS2 was not
comprehensive. Specifically, DDA did not use available system output reports of
all adjustments recorded to ensure that only authorized adjustments had been
processed. In addition, the employee responsible for performing the review was
10

--- Page 13 ---
not independent since the employee also had the capability to process critical
adjustments in PCIS2.
To address recommendations c and d, DDA implemented monthly PCIS2 user
access reviews, which consisted of verifying that users with the capability to
process critical adjustments required those capabilities to perform their job duties.
Although DDA had eliminated the unnecessary PCIS2 access capabilities for the
13 users noted in our prior finding, the monthly reviews did not always identify
other users with unnecessary access capabilities. For example, our review of
PCIS2 records disclosed that, as of February 2020, 25 of the 37 users (68 percent)
with the capability to adjust provider payments or consumer services had not used
this access within the last six months, indicating potential unneeded system
access.
11

--- Page 14 ---
Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We conducted a follow-up review of the actions taken by the Maryland
Department of Health (MDH) – Developmental Disabilities Administration
(DDA) to address the findings in our July 8, 2019 audit report. In that report, we
concluded that DDA’s fiscal accountability and compliance rating was
unsatisfactory.
The purpose of our review was to determine the status of DDA’s corrective
actions to address certain of our audit findings and recommendations. As
customary, our review did not include all prior report findings and
recommendations, but a number judgmentally selected based on our assessment
of significance. This review was conducted under the authority of Section 2-
1220(a)(4) of the State Government Article of the Annotated Code of Maryland
and was based on our long-standing practice of performing a follow-up review
whenever an agency receives an unsatisfactory rating in its fiscal compliance
audit report. The rating system was established, in accordance with State
Government Article, Section 2-1221, for the purpose of determining an overall
evaluation of an agency’s fiscal accountability and compliance with State laws
and regulations.
Our review consisted of obtaining a status report from MDH, on behalf of DDA,
as of January 7, 2020, which described the level of implementation of each prior
audit report finding, as well as obtaining additional clarifications from DDA of
the actions taken to resolve the selected findings. Our review also consisted of
performing tests and analyses of certain information and holding discussions with
DDA personnel, as we deemed necessary, to determine the status of DDA’s
corrective actions to address the selected findings, including the related
recommendations, from our July 8, 2019 audit report.
This review did not constitute an audit conducted in accordance with generally
accepted government auditing standards. Had we conducted an audit in
accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards, other matters
may have come to our attention that would have been reported.
Our review was conducted primarily during the period from January to March
2020, and our assessment of the status of DDA’s corrective actions was
performed at the time of our review.
MDH’s response, on behalf of DDA, to our follow-up review is included as an
appendix to this report. As prescribed in the State Government Article, Section 2-
12

--- Page 15 ---
1224 of the Annotated Code of Maryland, we will advise DDA regarding the
results of our review of its response.
13

--- Page 16 ---
Appendix A

--- Page 28 ---
APPENDIX B
July 1, 2020
Mr. Gregory A. Hook, CPA
Legislative Auditor
Office of Legislative Audits
State Office Building, Room 1202
301 West Preston Street
Baltimore, MD 21201
Dear Mr. Hook:
Enclosed, please find the responses to the draft report on the Follow-up Review of the Maryland
Department of Health – Developmental Disabilities Administration to address the findings in your July
8, 2019 audit report.
If you have any questions, please contact Frederick D. Doggett at 410-767-0885 or email at
frederick.doggett@maryland.gov.
Sincerely,
Robert R. Neall, Secretary
Maryland Department of Health
Enclosure
cc: Bernard Simon, Deputy Secretary for Developmental Disabilities Administration, MDH
Frederick D. Doggett, Inspector General, MDH
Valerie Roddy, Director of Fiscal Operations, Developmental Disabilities Administration, MDH
Tonia Ferguson, Chief of Staff, Developmental Disabilities Administration, MDH

--- Page 29 ---
Maryland Department of Health
Developmental Disabilities Administration - Follow-up Review
Agency Response Form
Consumer Budgets
Prior Finding 1
The Developmental Disabilities Administration (DDA) did not ensure level-of-need scores
used to determine consumers’ service budgets were assigned in accordance with DDA’s
established criteria and were properly recorded in its Provider Consumer Information
System II (PCIS2). Our testing disclosed that certain scores could not be supported.
We recommended that DDA
a. perform documented, independent reviews (on a test basis) to ensure that level-of-need
scores were properly assigned and accurately recorded in PCIS2: and
b. ensure that documentation of the vendor’s assigned level-of-need scores is retained.
Agency Response
Analysis Factually Accurate
Please provide
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 1a Agree Estimated Completion Date: *10/1/201
Please provide details of DDA will modify its quarterly review process to randomly select the five
corrective action or selected consumer level-of-need scores recorded in PCIS2 at
explain disagreement. Headquarters. The current SOP will be updated to include the new
methodology. We will track the assignment of the five selected
consumers to each regional office and require they submit back to HQ
the level-of-need report that matches the score in PCIS2, the backup
documentation supporting that report, and an attestation that the
documents support the score of the report. All submitted documents will
be kept at HQ and be available upon request.
Recommendation 1b Agree Estimated Completion Date: *10/1/202
Please provide details of Any supporting documentation that does not match scores present in
corrective action or PCIS2 will trigger a change to the persons matrix score in PCIS2 to
explain disagreement. match the documents. All assignment and return of documents will be
recorded in a spreadsheet. The Assistant Director of Operations will
ensure all documents have been received and will sign the spreadsheet to
indicate complete.
1 *This date is subjected to change depending on the COVID-19 crisis
2 *This date is subjected to change depending on the COVID-19 crisis
Page 1 of 6

--- Page 30 ---
Maryland Department of Health
Developmental Disabilities Administration - Follow-up Review
Agency Response Form
Provider Payments
Prior Finding 2
DDA did not identify recurring overpayments made over several years totaling at least $1.7
million that were later self-reported by a provider. In addition, DDA did not subsequently
determine the full extent of the overpayments to this provider and whether similar
overpayments were made to other providers.
We recommended that DDA
a. determine, to the extent possible, the total provider overpayments that occurred for
consumers that were improperly billed, and consult with legal counsel to determine
whether any overpayments identified should be recovered; and
b. as applicable, for other consumers identified, revise the individual plans and related
PCIS2 designations to reflect the correct service category.
Agency Response
Analysis Factually Accurate
Please provide
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 2a Agree Estimated Completion Date: *10/1/203
Please provide details of The DDA will review a sampling of billings of the provider that self -
corrective action or reported the original issue from FY 2014 to determine if there were any
explain disagreement. overpayments. If any discrepancies are identified, the DDA will consult
with legal counsel to determine if any overpayments should be
recovered.
DDA will also repeat the steps taken previously to address the finding
but will incorporate the recommendations made by the OLA auditor to
focus on people served by providers whose license included both
residential and IFC/Shared Living services. If any discrepancies are
discovered, DDA will consult with legal counsel to determine whether
any overpayment identified should be recovered.
Recommendation 2b Agree Estimated Completion Date: *10/1/204
3 *This date is subjected to change depending on the COVID-19 crisis
4 *This date is subjected to change depending on the COVID-19 crisis
Page 2 of 6

--- Page 31 ---
Maryland Department of Health
Developmental Disabilities Administration - Follow-up Review
Agency Response Form
Please provide details of If the review discloses any discrepancies, DDA will investigate and
corrective action or correct any discrepancies.
explain disagreement.
Procurement of Services and Related Billings
Prior Finding 4
Fiscal management services (FMS) contracts were not comprehensive and properly
approved, and DDA did not monitor the related vendors to ensure the required services
were provided and the propriety of payments. In addition, all related federal
reimbursements were not obtained, including federal funds totaling $4.9 million.
We recommended that DDA
a. ensure control agency approvals are obtained for fiscal management services, and
contracts are executed that include all relevant contract provisions (including the
contract term and authorized administrative fees);
b. monitor vendor activity and compliance to ensure that all key requirements and terms
are complied with, including site visits and audits, and timely submission of annual
accountings, and return of unspent funds, and that FMS vendor payments are proper
and supported; and
c. ensure FMS vendors record all provider payments into Maryland Medicaid
Information Systems II (MMIS II) timely.
Agency Response
Analysis Factually Accurate
Please provide DDA received the repayment of $4.2 million for FY’19 on February 7,
additional comments as 2020.
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 4a Agree Estimated Completion Date: *10/1/205
Please provide details of DDA has completed its evaluation and selected a new vendor. The
corrective action or contract was pending approval by Board of Public Works as of April 1,
explain disagreement. 2020, but due to the COVID-19 public health emergency, it will be
delayed to a future date.
Recommendation 4b Agree Estimated Completion Date: *10/1/206
5 *This date is subjected to change depending on the COVID-19 crisis
6 *This date is subjected to change depending on the COVID-19 crisis
Page 3 of 6

--- Page 32 ---
Maryland Department of Health
Developmental Disabilities Administration - Follow-up Review
Agency Response Form
Please provide details of The DDA will request the QIO vendor to conduct an annual audit of the
corrective action or FMS agencies under the Utilization Review section of the contract.
explain disagreement. Pursuant to the 2018 Community Pathways Waiver Renewal, the annual
audit will include a sample review of Self-Directed Services
participants’ budgets, billing, and payments. The DDA will monitor
vendor activity and compliance to ensure that all key requirements and
terms are complied with, and timely submission of annual accountings,
and return of unspent funds, and that FMS vendor payments are proper
and supported.
Recommendation 4c Agree Estimated Completion Date: *10/1/207
Please provide details of Once the contract with the new FMS vendor is approved, DDA will
corrective action or work with the vendor to establish a procedure and timeline for the
explain disagreement. submission of claims. In the meantime, the DDA will work with the
current FMS vendors to ensure the vendors record all provider payments
into Maryland Medicaid Information Systems II (MMIS II) more timely.
Contribution to Care
Prior Finding 7
DDA had not taken sufficient action to identify and return improper contribution to care
(CTC) collections identified during our preceding audit.
We recommended that DDA
a. determine the extent of the improperly collected CTC, as practical, (repeat).
Agency Response
Analysis Factually Accurate
Please provide The analysis states that “In addition, DDA advised us that it would not
additional comments as be attempting to determine the extent of improper CTC collections that
deemed necessary. occurred prior to January 2013 because Provider records for that period
were not available since Medicaid regulations only required Providers to
maintain records for six years.” DDA indicated there was no guarantee
that the records would be available due to Medicaid record retention
requirement of 6 years. (COMAR 10.22.02.13D(1) and10.09.36.03A(9)) As
these records would be needed to confirm the amount collected by
providers, DDA would not be able to confirm the amount owed.
Recommendation 7a Agree Estimated Completion Date: *10/1/208
7 *This date is subjected to change depending on the COVID-19 crisis
8 *This date is subjected to change depending on the COVID-19 crisis
Page 4 of 6

--- Page 33 ---
Maryland Department of Health
Developmental Disabilities Administration - Follow-up Review
Agency Response Form
Please provide details of DDA has focused on the repayment of funds erroneously collected in
corrective action or CY 2013 as that was the year discussed in the original finding. Given
explain disagreement. the accuracy of the amount to be repaid is dependent on provider
records, DDA has not initiated an effort for years prior to CY 2013 as
providers are required to maintain records for a minimum of 6 years and
that time frame has passed.
In terms of the status of the CY 2013 effort, DDA has sent out 2 rounds
of letters to people who were affected by the incorrect collection of CTC
in CY 2013. As noted in the analysis, $2.4 million has been distributed
to 1,275 people who returned the invoices for payment. That is about
50% of the total number of people affected and represents approximately
65% of the amount owed. DDA will explore other approaches to
contacting the people who have not responded to the 2 previous letters
sent out.
Provider Consumer Information Systems II (PCIS2)
Prior Finding 9
DDA did not verify the accuracy and completeness of critical adjustments that were
processed in PCIS2, resulting in errors such as overpayments going undetected, and did
not adequately restrict user access in the system.
We recommended that DDA
a. establish independent review procedures to ensure the propriety, at least on a test basis,
of critical adjustments in PCIS2 (repeat);
c. perform a documented comprehensive periodic review of user access capabilities to
ensure that users are assigned only those capabilities needed to perform job duties
(repeat); and
d. eliminate unnecessary access, including those noted above (repeat).
Agency Response
Analysis Factually Accurate
Please provide
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Page 5 of 6

--- Page 34 ---
Maryland Department of Health
Developmental Disabilities Administration - Follow-up Review
Agency Response Form
Recommendation 9a Agree Estimated Completion Date: *10/1/209
Please provide details of To ensure the independence of the person doing the review of the
corrective action or adjustments, DDA will remove the ability to enter critical adjustments in
explain disagreement. PCIS2 from the staff person responsible for conducting the review.
Recommendation 9c Agree Estimated Completion Date: *6/1/2010
Please provide details of The periodic review of user access capabilities has resulted in reducing
corrective action or the number of users in PCIS2 who could perform certain functions from
explain disagreement. 148 in August of 2019 to 64 in February 2020. However, the follow-up
review by legislative auditors revealed “need confirmed users” as having
not used their rights to make critical adjustments. As such, they felt this
meant a person did not “need” the capability assignment. To address
this, DDA will add to its monthly review process a rule removing these
rights if a user has not used their role for three consecutive months.
Recommendation 9d Agree Estimated Completion Date: *10/1/2011
Please provide details of DDA did remove unnecessary access rights as a result of the above
corrective action or stated process. Rights were removed for 84 people from August 2019 to
explain disagreement.
February 2020. As noted above, DDA will continue to remove
unnecessary access using the new rule to remove access if not used for 3
consecutive months as noted above.
9 *This date is subjected to change depending on the COVID-19 crisis
10 *This date is subjected to change depending on the COVID-19 crisis
11 *This date is subjected to change depending on the COVID-19 crisis
Page 6 of 6

--- Page 35 ---
A T
UDIT EAM
Edward A. Rubenstein, CPA
Audit Manager
Edwin L. Paul, CPA, CISA
Information Systems Audit Manager
Lisa M. Beers, CFE
Senior Auditor
Matthew D. Walbert, CISA
Information Systems Senior Auditor
Patrick J. Cavanaugh, CPA
Thea A. Chimento
Staff Auditors