Title: Department of Housing and Community Development
Date: 07/10/2020
Type: Fiscal Compliance
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5f075836a1ce5810c4fd9d33
Extracted: 2025-06-19T11:42:12.620798
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Audit Report
Department of Housing and Community Development
November 2024
Public Notice
In compliance with the requirements of the State Government Article Section
2-1224(i), of the Annotated Code of Maryland, the Office of Legislative Audits
has redacted cybersecurity findings and related auditee responses
from this public report.
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Senator Clarence K. Lam, M.D. (Senate Chair) Delegate Jared Solomon (House Chair)
Senator Joanne C. Benson Delegate Steven J. Arentz
Senator Paul D. Corderman Delegate Andrea Fletcher Harrison
Senator Katie Fry Hester Delegate Steven C. Johnson
Senator Shelly L. Hettleman Delegate Mary A. Lehman
Senator Cheryl C. Kagan Delegate David H. Moon
Senator Cory V. McCray Delegate Julie Palakovich Carr
Senator Justin D. Ready Delegate Emily K. Shetty
Senator Bryan W. Simonaire Delegate Stephanie M. Smith
Senator Craig J. Zucker Delegate M. Courtney Watson
To Obtain Further Information
Office of Legislative Audits
The Warehouse at Camden Yards
351 West Camden Street, Suite 400
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Phone: 410-946-5900
Maryland Relay: 711
TTY: 410-946-5401 · 301-970-5401
E-mail: webmaster@ola.state.md.us
Website: www.ola.state.md.us
To Report Fraud
The Office of Legislative Audits operates a Fraud Hotline to report fraud, waste, or abuse involving State
of Maryland government resources. Reports of fraud, waste, or abuse may be communicated anonymously
by a toll-free call to 1-877-FRAUD-11, by mail to the Fraud Hotline, c/o Office of Legislative Audits, or
through the Office’s website.
Nondiscrimination Statement
The Department of Legislative Services does not discriminate on the basis of age, ancestry, color, creed,
marital status, national origin, race, religion, gender, gender identity, sexual orientation, or disability in the
admission or access to its programs, services, or activities. The Department’s Information Officer has been
designated to coordinate compliance with the nondiscrimination requirements contained in Section 35.107
of the United States Department of Justice Regulations. Requests for assistance should be directed to the
Information Officer at 410-946-5400 or 410-970-5400.

--- Page 3 ---
November 14, 2024
Senator Clarence K. Lam, M.D., Senate Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Delegate Jared Solomon, House Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Members of Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Annapolis, Maryland
Ladies and Gentlemen:
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the Department of Housing and
Community Development (DHCD) for the period beginning July 11, 2018 and
ending October 31, 2022. DHCD provides services to strengthen communities
and provides affordable housing for people of limited income. DHCD also works
with partners to finance housing opportunities and revitalize places for Maryland
citizens to live, work, and prosper.
Our audit disclosed that DHCD did not effectively monitor recipients of
multifamily loans for compliance with the terms of the related agreements.
DHCD provides loans to multifamily housing developers for the creation or
preservation of affordable rental housing units for low-income individuals. We
found that DHCD did not always obtain and review required documentation from
loan recipients and physical inspections of loan recipients’ properties were not
sufficiently documented to ensure that low-income renters met the eligibility
requirements specified in the loan agreements.
In addition, DHCD did not adequately follow-up on instances of noncompliance
reported by the loan recipients. In this regard, during calendar year 2021, 57
recipients self-reported that they were not in compliance with certain terms of the
loan agreements, including age and income requirements. However, DHCD could
not readily document that it followed up with the recipients to ensure that the
deficiencies were corrected. DHCD also did not take appropriate action when its
inspections determined that low-income housing was not being provided in

--- Page 4 ---
accordance with the loan agreements, and that significant health and safety
concerns identified during inspections were corrected within 24 hours as required.
DHCD did not have an independent review process to ensure that reconciliations
of its State-funded housing loans were completed properly and that errors and
reconciling items were resolved timely. According to DHCD records, the State-
funded loan receivable balance as of June 30, 2022 totaled approximately $1.07
billion. DHCD also did not establish policies governing the issuance of venture
debt loans under the Neighborhood Business Works Program. As of March 2023,
DHCD had issued three venture debt loans totaling $1.5 million.
Our audit also disclosed that DHCD did not comply with State procurement
regulations when obtaining marketing services from two vendors and did not
monitor services provided by a third vendor to ensure the marketing services were
received and amounts invoiced were proper.
Furthermore, our audit disclosed cybersecurity-related findings. However, in
accordance with the State Government Article, Section 2-1224(i) of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, we have redacted the findings from this audit report.
Specifically, State law requires the Office of Legislative Audits to redact
cybersecurity findings in a manner consistent with auditing best practices before
the report is made available to the public. The term “cybersecurity” is defined in
the State Finance and Procurement Article, Section 3.5-301(b), and using our
professional judgment we have determined that the redacted findings fall under
the referenced definition. The specifics of the cybersecurity findings were
previously communicated to those parties responsible for acting on our
recommendations.
Finally, our audit included a review to determine the status of the seven findings
contained in our preceding audit report. For the non-cybersecurity-related
findings, we determined that DHCD satisfactorily addressed three of the five
findings. The remaining two findings are repeated in this report.
DHCD’s response to this audit is included as an appendix to this report. We
reviewed the response and noted general agreement to our findings and related
recommendations. Based on our review of the written responses and additional
clarification obtained from DHCD, we believe the corrective actions identified are
sufficient to address all audit issues. Consistent with State law, we have redacted
the elements of DHCD’s response related to the cybersecurity audit findings.
Finally, we have edited DHCD’s response to remove certain vendor names or
products, as allowed by our policy.
2

--- Page 5 ---
We wish to acknowledge the cooperation extended to us during the audit by
DHCD and its willingness to address the audit issues and implement appropriate
corrective actions.
Respectfully submitted,
Brian S. Tanen
Brian S. Tanen, CPA, CFE
Legislative Auditor
3

--- Page 6 ---
4

--- Page 7 ---
Table of Contents
Background Information 7
Agency Responsibilities 7
Financial Statement Audits 8
Organizational Change 9
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report 9
Findings and Recommendations 11
Multifamily Housing Program
* Finding 1 – The Department of Housing and Community Development 12
(DHCD) did not effectively monitor recipients of multifamily loans
for compliance with the terms of the loan agreements.
Finding 2 – DHCD did not ensure that significant health and safety 14
concerns identified at multifamily housing facilities were corrected
within 24 hours as required.
State-Funded Loans
* Finding 3 – DHCD did not have an independent review process to ensure 15
that reconciliations of its State-funded housing loans were completed
properly and that errors and reconciling items were resolved timely.
Finding 4 – DHCD did not establish policies governing the issuance of 16
Neighborhood Business Works venture debt loans.
Procurements and Disbursements
Finding 5 – DHCD did not comply with State procurement regulations 17
when obtaining marketing services from two vendors and did not
monitor services provided by a third vendor to ensure the marketing
services were received and amounts invoiced were proper.
Information Systems Security and Control
Finding 6 – Redacted cybersecurity-related finding 19
Finding 7 – Redacted cybersecurity-related finding 19
* Denotes item repeated in full or part from preceding audit report
5

--- Page 8 ---
Finding 8 – Redacted cybersecurity-related finding 19
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology 20
Agency Response Appendix
6

--- Page 9 ---
Background Information
Agency Responsibilities
The Department of Housing and Community Development (DHCD) provides
services to strengthen communities and provides affordable housing for people of
limited income. DHCD’s three operating divisions (Development Finance, Credit
Assurance, and Neighborhood Revitalization) administer various housing and
neighborhood revitalization programs that assist families with affordable
homeownership, foreclosure prevention counseling, affordable rental housing, and
housing rehabilitation needs. Through these housing programs, DHCD provides
loans and grants for the purchase and/or rehabilitation of single-family homes and
for the acquisition, construction, renovation, and/or rehabilitation of multifamily
rental housing and community development institutions. DHCD’s remaining
divisions provide administrative support to assist in achieving its goals.
As shown in Figure 1, DHCD’s expenditures have increased significantly since
fiscal year 2020, primarily because of the COVID-19 public health emergency.1
Specifically, DHCD was
responsible for
administering more than $2
billion in State and federal
COVID-19 funds through
various programs such as
the Emergency Rental
Assistance Program and the
Maryland Homeowners
Assistance Fund.
According to the State’s
records, during fiscal year
2022, DHCD’s expenditures totaled approximately $1.3 billion (see Figure 2 on
the following page), of which $1.1 billion related to loans and grants for the
various programs DHCD administers. DHCD’s programs are funded by a
combination of revenue bonds that it issues, Federal Funds, and State
appropriations.
1 Total expenditures in Figure 1 and Figure 2 do not agree because Figure 1 includes non-budgeted
funds.
7

--- Page 10 ---
Figure 2
DHCD Positions, Expenditures, and Funding Sources
Full-Time Equivalent Positions as of June 30, 2022
Positions Percent
Filled 305 91.6%
Vacant 28 8.4%
Total 333
Fiscal Year 2022 Expenditures
Expenditures Percent
Salaries, Wages and Fringe Benefits $ 41,258,643 3.1%
Technical and Special Fees 6,433,922 0.5%
Operating Expenses 1,265,765,533 96.4%
Total $1,313,458,098
Fiscal Year 2022 Funding Sources
Funding Percent
General Fund $ 40,037,023 3.0%
Special Fund 120,654,229 9.2%
Federal Fund 1,123,719,545 85.6%
Reimbursable Fund 29,047,301 2.2%
Total $1,313,458,098
Source: State financial and personnel records
Financial Statement Audits
For fiscal years 2019 through 2022, DHCD engaged independent certified public
accounting firms to perform audits of certain of its financial activities, including
its revenue bonds. Based on significance and risk, we reviewed the following
financial statements:
 Community Development Administration (CDA) Single Family Housing
Revenue Bonds
 CDA Revenue Obligation Funds
 CDA Multifamily Mortgage Revenue Bonds
 State-Funded Loan Programs
8

--- Page 11 ---
In the related audit reports, the firms stated that the financial statements presented
fairly, in all material respects, the related financial positions and the changes in
net assets and cash flows related to the aforementioned programs for the years
then ended in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the
United States of America.
According to its audited financial statements, as of June 30, 2022, DHCD had
loans outstanding (net of allowances for loan losses totaling $363.1 million)
totaling approximately $1.71 billion (see Figure 3).
Figure 3
Loans Outstanding as of June 30, 2022 (in millions)
Funding Source Total Loans Receivable
Loan
Revenue
Program State Funds Amount Percentage
Bonds
Single Family $122 $464 $586 34.3%
Multifamily 490 360 850 49.8%
Other 96 176 272 15.9%
Total $708 $1,000 $1,708
Source: DHCD Audited Financial Statements
Organizational Change
Chapter 74, Laws of Maryland 2021, effective April 13, 2021, transferred the
Office of Rural Broadband from the Department of Information Technology to
DHCD and renamed it as the Office of Statewide Broadband. The activities of the
Office since April 13, 2021 were included in the scope of our current DHCD
audit.
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report
Our audit included a review to determine the status of the seven findings
contained in our preceding audit report dated July 10, 2020. As disclosed in
Figure 4 on the following page, for the non-cybersecurity-related findings, we
determined that DHCD satisfactorily addressed three of the five findings. The
remaining two findings are repeated in this report.
9

--- Page 12 ---
Figure 4
Status of Preceding Findings
Preceding Implementation
Finding Description
Finding Status
The Department of Housing and Community
Development (DHCD) did not always adhere to State
Finding 1 procurement regulations. DHCD also awarded two Not repeated
contracts for amounts substantially higher than the
related proposals.
DHCD improperly used marketing and construction
management services contracts to obtain goods and
services that were outside the scope of the contracts.
Finding 2 Not repeated
Certain of these purchases appeared questionable, and
DHCD could not document that these goods and
services were received.
DHCD’s procedures for reconciling the receivable
Repeated
Finding 3 balances for State-funded loans did not ensure that
(Current Finding 3)
reconciling items were resolved in a timely manner.
DHCD did not monitor multifamily housing loans
timely and effectively. In addition, DHCD did not Repeated
Finding 4
always take appropriate action when a loan recipient (Current Finding 1)
did not comply with the loan agreement.
DHCD did not ensure multifamily housing loans were
recorded in its automated loan servicing system used
for the collection of loan repayments. In addition, for
Finding 5 Not repeated
certain of these loans, DHCD did not generate timely
and accurate annual invoices and pursue delinquent
accounts.
Sensitive personally identifiable information
Finding 6 maintained by DHCD was stored without adequate
Status Redacted2
safeguards.
Malware protection controls for DHCD computers
Finding 7 were not sufficient to provide adequate assurance that Status Redacted2
computers were properly protected from security risks.
2 Specific information on the current status of this cybersecurity–related finding has been redacted
from the publicly available report in accordance with State Government Article, Section 2-
1224(i) of the Annotated Code of Maryland.
10

--- Page 13 ---
Findings and Recommendations
Multifamily Housing Program
Background
DHCD provides loans to multifamily housing developers for the creation or
preservation of affordable rental housing units for low-income individuals. State
law and the financing agreements require that a portion of the rental units in each
multifamily housing project that receives DHCD financing be reserved for low-
income households for the greater of 15 years or the number of years required by
federal law (if the project also receives federal assistance). In addition, the loan
recipients (developers) are required to maintain the facilities in accordance with
certain pre-established standards.
Different divisions within DHCD are responsible for various aspects of the
multifamily housing program, including loan underwriting, monitoring
compliance, and collection. DHCD uses one automated system to monitor
compliance with the terms of the financing (loan) agreements (the loan
monitoring system) and a second automated system to generate invoices and track
loan activity such as repayments (the loan servicing system). The amount and
timing of loan repayments vary based on the type of loan.
Once construction is complete, recipients are required to submit an Annual
Certificate of Compliance (ACC) certifying that the facility is in compliance with
the tenant income restrictions specified in the loan agreement, and that all units
are suitable for occupancy. The recipient is also required to maintain sufficient
records supporting the report for subsequent inspection by DHCD. DHCD
performs annual onsite inspections of the facilities to ensure that information
reported in the ACC is accurate and that housing conditions meet DHCD
standards, including being safe and sanitary. According to agency records, DHCD
was responsible for monitoring 609 facilities that were recipients of multifamily
housing loans during calendar year 2021.
11

--- Page 14 ---
Finding 1
DHCD did not effectively monitor recipients of multifamily loans for
compliance with the terms of the loan agreements.
Analysis
DHCD did not effectively monitor recipients of multifamily loans for compliance
with the terms of the loan agreements.
 DHCD did not obtain and review ACCs from all multifamily loan recipients.
Specifically, as of April 2023, DHCD had not obtained ACCs for 9 of the 609
loan recipients for calendar year 2021 (which were due in June 2022) and had
not reviewed 68 other ACCs. As a result, DHCD lacked assurance that the
approximately 4,900 residential units provided by these 77 recipients were
compliant with the terms of the loan agreements. DHCD advised that it was
not always able to obtain and review the ACCs timely due to high turnover of
inspection staff.
 Annual physical inspections of loan recipient properties did not sufficiently
document that low-income renters met the eligibility requirements specified in
the loan agreements. DHCD procedures required inspectors to verify that
low-income renters met the eligibility requirements but did not specify what
records were to be reviewed or how the review was to be documented. Our
review of inspection results on file for 20 projects with 2,075 rental units,
valued at $127.6 million, disclosed that DHCD did not retain any
documentation to support the verification of renter eligibility. A similar
condition was commented upon in our preceding audit report. DHCD’s
response to that report indicated that it would update its procedures to address
the specific documents to review by September 2019. However, as of April
2023, DHCD had not updated the procedures.
 DHCD did not adequately follow up on instances of noncompliance reported
by the loan recipients. Our review disclosed that 57 (11 percent) of the 532
ACCs that DHCD reviewed for calendar year 2021 indicated that the
recipients were not in compliance with certain terms of the loan agreements
such as age and income requirements. For example, one recipient of a $4.2
million loan reported that one-third of its low-income housing units were
occupied by individuals who exceeded the income limits specified in the loan
agreement. DHCD could not readily document that it followed up with the 57
non-compliant loan recipients to ensure that the deficiencies were corrected3
3 The loan agreements provide that tenants who exceed the specified income limit must vacate the
unit within 24 months.
12

--- Page 15 ---
or to demand repayment of the loan proceeds and/or accelerate repayment of
the loan.
 DHCD did not take appropriate action when its inspections determined that
recipients of multifamily housing loans were not providing low-income
housing in accordance with the related loan agreements. During our audit
testing of various aspects of DHCD’s loan monitoring, we identified 3 DHCD
inspections for which low-income housing was not provided as required.
Specifically, DHCD inspections of 3 loan recipients that provided 56 housing
units determined that 39 units had not been used for low-income housing as
required, including certain units that had been unoccupied for 8 years as of
April 2023. However, as of April 2023, DHCD had not requested repayment
of these three loan recipients as permitted by the related agreements. State
regulations and the regulatory agreements attached to each loan outline the
specific timing of steps for DHCD to demand repayment of the loan proceeds
and/or accelerate repayment in the event the borrower fails to comply with
income and use restrictions.
A similar condition was noted in our preceding report. DHCD’s response to
that report indicated that it established a committee to determine the
appropriate course of action for noncompliant projects. However, DHCD
could not document that the aforementioned three loans were reviewed by this
committee and, as of April 2023, did not have a formal plan to ensure that the
required amount of low-income housing was provided by these recipients.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that DHCD
a. obtain and review ACCs for all multifamily loan recipients;
b. enhance its inspection procedures to specify the records to be used for
verifying renter income eligibility and how this review is to be
documented (repeat); and
c. take appropriate action when noncompliance is reported by loan
recipients and/or identified during the inspections, including for the
properties noted above (repeat).
13

--- Page 16 ---
Finding 2
DHCD did not ensure that significant health and safety concerns identified at
multifamily housing facilities were corrected within 24 hours as required.
Analysis
DHCD did not ensure that significant health and safety concerns identified during
its inspections of multifamily facilities were corrected within 24 hours as
required. DHCD conducts annual inspections of multifamily housing facilities to
ensure the facilities comply with the safety and sanitary requirements of the loan
agreements. Loan recipients are required to remedy significant health and safety
concerns (such as, the presence of mold, rodents, and missing or damaged safety
equipment) identified during these inspections within 24 hours. According to
agency records, DHCD inspections conducted during calendar year 2022
identified 468 significant health or safety concerns.
Although inspection results were recorded in a centralized database, DHCD did
not have a comprehensive process to track the resolution of significant health and
safety concerns to ensure that they were ultimately resolved. Our review of 124
facility inspections conducted between March 2022 and March 2023 disclosed
that the inspectors did not follow up to ensure that the health and safety concerns
were resolved until 3 to 11 months after the conditions were identified, including
2 conditions that were not followed up on until we brought the matter to DHCD’s
attention.
For example, one inspection reviewed was conducted in May 2022 and identified
that smoke detectors were not installed as required, but DHCD did not verify the
condition was corrected until April 2023. Although the inspectors ultimately
followed-up on the aforementioned conditions, a comprehensive process to track
the resolution of health and safety concerns identified during inspections is
critical to ensure that these conditions are addressed within 24 hours as required.
Recommendation 2
We recommend that DHCD develop procedures to ensure that significant
health and safety conditions identified at multifamily housing facilities are
corrected within 24 hours, as required.
4 We arbitrarily selected 12 inspections from a report of significant inspection concerns between
January 2021- March 2023.
14

--- Page 17 ---
State-Funded Loans
Finding 3
DHCD did not have an independent review process to ensure that
reconciliations of its State-funded housing loans were completed properly
and that errors and reconciling items were resolved timely.
Analysis
DHCD did not have an independent review process to ensure that reconciliations
of its State-funded housing loans were completed properly, and that errors and
reconciling items were resolved timely. DHCD contracts with loan servicers to
administer these loans. DHCD maintains independent internal loan records and
records the loans in the State’s Financial Management Information System
(FMIS). According to State accounting records, the State-funded loan receivable
balance as of June 30, 2022 totaled $1.07 billion,5 of which $847.8 million were
administered by one loan servicer. DHCD performs monthly reconciliations of
the loan activity recorded in FMIS, DHCD records, and the loan servicers’ records
to ensure that all loan activity was properly accounted for.
We reviewed DHCD’s procedures for reconciling the records related to this loan
servicer and found that there was no supervisory review of the reconciliations. As
a result, errors and reconciling items were not resolved timely. For example, our
review disclosed that the June 30, 2022 reconciliation performed for one loan
program administered by this loan servicer did not identify a $1.3 million
discrepancy between DHCD’s internal records and FMIS. Our review also
disclosed that the reconciliations included 207 reconciling items totaling $72.5
million that had been unresolved for periods ranging from 6 months to 10 years.
For example, the June 30, 2022 reconciliation for one loan program disclosed a
$1.3 million loan issued in December 2020 that was not recorded in FMIS as of
June 2022.
Similar conditions regarding DHCD’s procedures for reconciling the loan activity
and resolving reconciling items in a timely manner have been commented upon in
our two preceding audit reports dating back to November 2016. Specifically, our
prior report noted that although supervisory employees approved these
reconciliations, they did not verify that longstanding reconciling items were
resolved. In its response to our prior report, DHCD advised that it would
establish procedures to ensure reconciling items were resolved in a timely manner
by the end of calendar year 2020. However, our current audit disclosed that
5 This amount does not include allowances for loan losses, whereas the total loans outstanding
reflected in Figure 3 reflected an allowance for loan losses totaling $363.1 million.
15

--- Page 18 ---
DHCD discontinued the aforementioned supervisory reviews which precluded
DHCD from timely detecting and resolving reconciling items.
Recommendation 3
We recommend that DHCD
a. ensure that comprehensive independent supervisory reviews of loan
record reconciliations are performed; and
b. verify that reconciling items, including the differences noted above, are
investigated and resolved in a timely manner (repeat).
Finding 4
DHCD did not establish policies governing the issuance of Neighborhood
Business Works venture debt loans.
Analysis
DHCD did not establish policies governing the issuance of Neighborhood
Business Works (NBW) venture debt loans. NBW is a small business financing
program that provides financial assistance to qualified entities located in
Maryland. In calendar year 2019, DHCD began issuing venture debt loans
through the NBW program. Venture debt loans are loans made to companies that
do not have positive cash flows or significant assets to give as collateral. Venture
debt loans typically incorporate the right for the lender (DHCD) to obtain equity
in the borrower to compensate for the higher risk of default. According to DHCD
records, NBW loans outstanding as of March 2023 totaled $50.7 million,
including three venture debt loans totaling $1.5 million.6
Although DHCD had comprehensive policies for the standard NBW loan process,
similar policies were not in place for venture debt loans. Specifically, DHCD
policy did not address key elements of the venture debt loan process, including
public solicitation and award of loans; conflict of interest prohibitions; and
guidance for establishing the loan amount, term, and collateral requirements. The
lack of comprehensive policies is significant given that the award process and
structure of the venture debt loans differed from other NBW loans.
In this regard, our review disclosed that DHCD did not publicly advertise the
availability of venture debt funds and did not require the recipients to submit
6 Specifically, DHCD issued a $500,000 loan to a biopharmaceutical company to provide working
capital to expand its manufacturing operation in Maryland and two $500,000 loans to an
animated film production company. An analysis of the loan to the biopharmaceutical company
was included in a February 2024 report issued by the Department of Legislative Services’ Office
of Program Evaluation and Government Accountability entitled Evaluation of Neighborhood
Business Works.
16

--- Page 19 ---
formal loan applications (including conflict of interest attestations), provide
collateral, or demonstrate creditworthiness, as required by DHCD policy for other
NBW loans. In addition, the venture debt loans deferred repayment for between 7
to 15 years; while DHCD policy provided for discretion in determining repayment
periods, other NBW loans we reviewed generally required borrowers to begin
repayment within a few months of the loan execution date.
Recommendation 4
We recommend that DHCD establish comprehensive policies governing the
issuance of NBW venture debt loans.
Procurements and Disbursements
Finding 5
DHCD did not comply with State procurement regulations when obtaining
marketing services from two vendors and did not monitor services provided
by a third vendor to ensure the marketing services were received and
amounts invoiced were proper.
Analysis
DHCD did not comply with State procurement regulations when obtaining
marketing services from two vendors and did not monitor services provided by a
third vendor to ensure the marketing services were received and amounts invoiced
were proper. According to the State’s accounting records, during the period from
July 1, 2018 to June 30, 2022, marketing expenditures totaled approximately $2.9
million. We tested DHCD’s procurement and monitoring of 3 judgmentally
selected marketing contracts (based on considerations, such as, materiality)
totaling approximately $2 million and noted the following conditions.
DHCD Did Not Comply with State Procurement Regulations
DHCD did not comply with State procurement regulations when procuring
marketing services from two vendors totaling $552,000 and $340,000.
Specifically, DHCD did not competitively procure the services and did not enter
into formal written agreements with either vendor. In addition, DHCD did not
obtain required approvals from the Department of General Services (DGS) and
the Board of Public Works (BPW) for either contract.
State procurement regulations require that agencies enter into a competitive
procurement and include certain standard contract provisions (such as, delivery
and acceptance and termination conditions) for procurements exceeding $15,000.
In addition, procurements for goods or services of $50,000 or more require
17

--- Page 20 ---
approval from DGS and procurements of $200,000 or more require approval from
BPW.
DHCD advised that it did not comply with the State procurement regulations
because these services were provided under the DHCD Sponsorship Program.7
However, Sponsorship Program procurements are not exempt from the provisions
of State procurement regulations. Furthermore, these contracts would not qualify
for the Sponsorship Program because DHCD policy prohibited payments to a
vendor under this program in excess of $15,000.
DHCD Did Not Ensure Certain Marketing Services Were Received and Payments
Were Proper
DHCD did not monitor a $1.1 million marketing contract to ensure services were
provided and amounts invoiced were proper. The contract provided that the
vendor was to be paid a fixed fee for each advertisement campaign and any media
purchases (such as print and digital advertisements) were to be billed as a pass-
through to DHCD.
We tested the three highest invoices totaling approximately $326,000 (consisting
of $294,000 for reimbursable media purchases and $32,000 for the vendor’s fee)
for services rendered between June 2021 and August 2022. Our test disclosed that
DHCD only verified the propriety of the vendor’s fee but did not obtain support
for amounts billed for media purchases. DHCD could also not document that it
verified the related advertisements were received. Due to the lack of available
documentation, we could not determine if the marketing services paid for were
received or if the amounts invoiced on this contract were proper.
Recommendation 5
We recommend that DHCD ensure marketing contracts are procured in
accordance with State regulations and are properly monitored. Specifically,
we recommend that DHCD
a. competitively solicit all services over $15,000,
b. execute formal written agreements with vendors as required,
c. obtain required control agency approval for future contracts and
retroactive approval for the contracts above, and
d. ensure services are received and the related billings are adequately
supported and in accordance with the contract terms prior to payment.
7 DHCD contributes funds, materials, or services to vendors in return for recognition,
acknowledgment, or other promotional consideration.
18

--- Page 21 ---
Information Systems Security and Control
We determined that the Information Systems Security and Control section,
including Findings 6 through 8 related to “cybersecurity,” as defined by the State
Finance and Procurement Article, Section 3.5-301(b) of the Annotated Code of
Maryland, and therefore are subject to redaction from the publicly available audit
report in accordance with the State Government Article 2-1224(i). Consequently,
the specifics of the following findings, including the analysis, related
recommendations, along with DHCD’s responses, have been redacted from this
report copy.
Finding 6
Redacted cybersecurity-related finding.
Finding 7
Redacted cybersecurity-related finding.
Finding 8
Redacted cybersecurity-related finding.
19

--- Page 22 ---
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the Department of Housing and
Community Development (DHCD) for the period beginning July 11, 2018 and
ending October 31, 2022. The audit was conducted in accordance with generally
accepted government auditing standards. Those standards require that we plan
and perform the audit to obtain sufficient, appropriate evidence to provide a
reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives.
We believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings
and conclusions based on our audit objectives.
As prescribed by the State Government Article, Section 2-1221 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, the objectives of this audit were to examine DHCD’s financial
transactions, records, and internal control, and to evaluate its compliance with
applicable State laws, rules, and regulations.
In planning and conducting our audit, we focused on the major financial-related
areas of operations based on assessments of significance and risk. The areas
addressed by the audit included procurements and disbursements, payroll, certain
State-funded loan program transactions, specific programs (such as multifamily
and single family housing grants and loans) used by DHCD to promote housing
opportunities and revitalize localities throughout the State, and information
systems security and control. We also determined the status of the findings
included in our preceding audit report.
Our audit did not include an evaluation of internal controls over compliance with
federal laws and regulations for federal financial assistance programs (such as
Section 8 Housing) and an assessment of DHCD’s compliance with those laws
and regulations because the State of Maryland engages an independent accounting
firm to annually audit such programs administered by State agencies, including
DHCD.
Our assessment of internal controls was based on the DHCD’s procedures and
controls in place at the time of our fieldwork. Our tests of transactions and other
auditing procedures were generally focused on the transactions occurring during
our audit period of July 11, 2018 to October 31, 2022, but may include
transactions before or after this period as we considered necessary to achieve our
audit objectives.
To accomplish our audit objectives, our audit procedures included inquiries of
appropriate personnel, inspections of documents and records, tests of transactions,
and to the extent practicable, observations of the DHCD’s operations. Generally,
20

--- Page 23 ---
transactions were selected for testing based on auditor judgment, which primarily
considers risk, the timing or dollar amount of the transaction, or the significance
of the transaction to the area of operation reviewed. As a matter of course, we do
not normally use sampling in our tests, so unless otherwise specifically indicated,
neither statistical nor non-statistical audit sampling was used to select the
transactions tested. Therefore, unless sampling is specifically indicated in a
finding, the results from any tests conducted or disclosed by us cannot be used to
project those results to the entire population from which the test items were
selected.
We also performed various data extracts of pertinent information from the State’s
Financial Management Information System (such as revenue and expenditure
data) and the State’s Central Payroll Bureau (payroll data). The extracts are
performed as part of ongoing internal processes established by the Office of
Legislative Audits and were subject to various tests to determine data reliability.
We determined that the data extracted from these sources were sufficiently
reliable for the purposes the data were used during this audit.
We also extracted data from DHCD’s project and loan accounting systems for the
purpose of testing single and multifamily loans, construction, and weatherization
projects. We performed various tests of the relevant data and determined that the
data were sufficiently reliable for the purposes the data were used during the
audit. Finally, we performed other auditing procedures that we considered
necessary to achieve our audit objectives. The reliability of data used in this
report for background or informational purposes was not assessed.
DHCD’s management is responsible for establishing and maintaining effective
internal control. Internal control is a process designed to provide reasonable
assurance that objectives pertaining to the reliability of financial records;
effectiveness and efficiency of operations, including safeguarding of assets; and
compliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations are achieved. As
provided in Government Auditing Standards, there are five components of internal
control: control environment, risk assessment, control activities, information and
communication, and monitoring. Each of the five components, when significant
to the audit objectives, and as applicable to DHCD, were considered by us during
the course of this audit.
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate.
21

--- Page 24 ---
Our reports are designed to assist the Maryland General Assembly in exercising
its legislative oversight function and to provide constructive recommendations for
improving State operations. As a result, our reports generally do not address
activities we reviewed that are functioning properly.
This report includes findings relating to conditions that we consider to be
significant deficiencies in the design or operation of internal control that could
adversely affect the DHCD’s ability to maintain reliable financial records, operate
effectively and efficiently, and/or comply with applicable laws, rules, and
regulations. Our report also includes findings regarding significant instances of
noncompliance with applicable laws, rules, or regulations. Other less significant
findings were communicated to DHCD that did not warrant inclusion in this
report.
State Government Article Section 2-1224(i) requires that we redact in a manner
consistent with auditing best practices any cybersecurity findings before a report
is made available to the public. This results in the issuance of two different
versions of an audit report that contains cybersecurity findings – a redacted
version for the public and an unredacted version for government officials
responsible for acting on our audit recommendations.
The State Finance and Procurement Article, Section 3.5-301(b), states that
cybersecurity is defined as “processes or capabilities wherein systems,
communications, and information are protected and defended against damage,
unauthorized use or modification, and exploitation.” Based on that definition, and
in our professional judgment, we concluded that certain findings in this report fall
under that definition. Consequently, for the publicly available audit report all
specifics as to the nature of cybersecurity findings and required corrective actions
have been redacted. We have determined that such aforementioned practices, and
government auditing standards, support the redaction of this information from the
public audit report. The specifics of these cybersecurity findings have been
communicated to DHCD and those parties responsible for acting on our
recommendations in an unredacted audit report.
DHCD’s response to our findings and recommendations is included as an
appendix to this report. Depending on the version of the audit report, responses to
any cybersecurity findings may be redacted in accordance with State law. As
prescribed in the State Government Article, Section 2-1224 of the Annotated Code
of Maryland, we will advise DHCD regarding the results of our review of its
response.
22

--- Page 25 ---
APPENDIX
WESMOORE
Governor
ARUNAMILLER
Lt. Governor
JACOBR.DAY
Secretary
JULIA GLANZ
Deputy Secretary
November 6, 2024
Mr. Brian S. Tanen, CPA, CFE
Legislative Auditor
Office of Legislative Audits
The Warehouse at Camden Yards
351 West Camden Street, Suite 400
Baltimore, MD 21201
Dear Mr. Tanen:
Enclosed, please find the responses to the draft audit report on the Maryland
Department of Housing and Community Development for the period
beginning July 11, 2018, to October 31, 2022.
If you have any questions, please contact Charles Akoyo at 410-591-4234 or
email at charles.akoyo@maryland.gov
Sincerely,
Jacob R. Day
Secretary
MARYLANDDEPARTMENTOFHOUSINGANDCOMMUNITYDEVELOPMENT
7800HARKINSRD ●LANHAM,MD20706 ● DHCD.MARYLAND.GOV
301-429-7400 ● 1-800-756-0119 ● TTY/RELAY 711 or 1-800-735-2258

--- Page 26 ---
Department of Housing and Community Development
Agency Response Form
Multifamily Housing Program
Finding 1
DHCD did not effectively monitor recipients of multifamily loans for
compliance with the terms of the loan agreements.
We recommend that DHCD
a. obtain and review ACCs for all multifamily loan recipients;
b. enhance its inspection procedures to specify the records to be used for
verifying renter income eligibility and how this review is to be
documented (repeat); and
c. take appropriate action when noncompliance is reported by loan
recipients and/or identified during the inspections, including for the
properties noted above (repeat).
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide DHCD’s responses to the specific bulleted sub findings and
additional comments as recommendations are below. In general, DHCD acknowledges the
deemed necessary. accuracy of the findings and recognizes the need for greater controls for
asset management monitoring and compliance operations in the
multifamily unit of the Division of Credit Assurance (DCA). While
turnover and understaffing were issues that contribute to this finding, they
are not the only causes.
DCA has begun significant efforts to address these issues, including -
A. hiring a new Director and Deputy Director of the Division of
Credit Assurance (DCA) in 2023.
B. working to expand the quality and quantity of MF staff through
hiring and restructuring of positions and responsibilities. Most notably,
the MF unit created two new positions - a Deputy Director of Compliance
and Quality Control and a Workout Manager - in order to address “Special
Assets” - i.e. loans identified as underperforming, at risk or in default -
and ensure appropriate policies and procedures are in place, followed and
reviewed periodically.
C. undertaking a comprehensive review of all multifamily asset
management policies and procedures and replacing or creating policies
and procedures to provide clarity and direct procedures with specific
timelines and delegations of responsibility to MF staff; and
Page 1 of 11

--- Page 27 ---
Department of Housing and Community Development
Agency Response Form
D. procuring a new compliance management software system that
will provide greater visibility over staff performance and tracking of
outcomes. The new compliance system is expected to “go live” prior to
12/31/2025. Each of these efforts will result in significant improvements
in the areas where findings have been identified.
Recommendation 1a Agree Estimated Completion Date: 12/31/2024
Please provide details of DCA leadership has also identified and is prioritizing the lack of policy,
corrective action or structure and sufficient systems to support monitoring and ensure
explain disagreement. compliance with internal policies for collecting and reviewing ACCs and
identifying and escalating issues of non-compliance. These are being
addressed in the policies and procedures being reviewed, developed and
modified by current management and staff. DHCD will strive for 100%
compliance in its loan recipients, but some non-compliance is to be
expected. More importantly, DHCD intends to focus on ensuring that it
is able to quickly and accurately identify areas of non-compliance and
ensure that they are being addressed and resolved.
Recommendation 1b Agree Estimated Completion Date: 12/31/2025
Please provide details of The existing DCA policies and procedures manual has not been updated,
corrective action or but there has been work completed, both prior to and since the audit, to
explain disagreement. develop standard forms for file and lease inspections. Renter eligibility is
also confirmed, in part, through receipt of annual certificates of
compliance and reviews, however DCA acknowledges that each of these
procedures needs to be developed and modified and that those have been
identified as high priority items for drafting and implementation. DCA
will enhance its inspection procedures, including lists of specific
documents to review and documentation of those reviews. Drafting of
policy and procedure updates to address these issues is underway and
will be complete by March 1, 2025, and will continue to be enhanced
through implementation and use of the new software system beginning
in 2026.
Recommendation 1c Agree Estimated Completion Date: 12/31/2024
Please provide details of DCA is currently in active system and process development with a
corrective action or vendor for a new compliance software for its multifamily loan programs.
explain disagreement. This software will provide a robust, commercial off the shelf system for
compliance monitoring and exceptions reporting that will assist
multifamily staff and management in identifying noncompliance and
ensuring it is being addressed.
The Special Assets group is tasked with assisting portfolio managers
with addressing noncompliance and, in the event the noncompliance is
not addressed, and the project is identified as a Special Asset, developing
a plan of action and ensuring the resolution and return to standard
Page 2 of 11

--- Page 28 ---
Department of Housing and Community Development
Agency Response Form
servicing or escalation and potential enforcement for non-compliant
projects.
Each of the compliance issues and defaults for the three loans identified
by the auditors have been resolved or are in the special assets’ portfolio
and active negotiations for workout or enforcement action in
consultation with the Office of the Attorney General.
Page 3 of 11

--- Page 29 ---
Department of Housing and Community Development
Agency Response Form
Finding 2
DHCD did not ensure that significant health and safety concerns identified at
multifamily housing facilities were corrected within 24 hours as required.
We recommend that DHCD develop procedures to ensure that significant
health and safety conditions identified at multifamily housing facilities are
corrected within 24 hours, as required.
Agency Response
Analysis
Agree Estimated Completion Date: 12/31/2024
Please provide DHCD recognizes the gap in ensuring monitoring deficiencies are
additional comments as resolved satisfactorily. The existing policies and procedures do not
deemed necessary. contain specific, mandated processes to ensure “unsatisfactory” or “below
average” physical inspections are advanced for further action, nor did
DCA have sufficient resources to deal with projects that failed to meet
expectations.
DHCD agrees with this recommendation. DCA has been and is addressing
these findings in the following ways. (1) Development of the Special
Assets team and processes for monitoring and resolving projects and loans
designated as Special Assets. (2) Projects receiving life, safety and health
findings that are not addressed within the required time period will be
required to receive a “below average” or “unsatisfactory” designation, and
will be unable to be passed, closed or scheduled for future years
inspections. Instead, they will be designated as Special Assets and moved
to the Department’s Special Assets team for a plan of action and enhanced
monitoring until such time as the issues have been resolved. The
Department’s policies and procedures are being updated and will reflect
these changes. (3) The asset management compliance software will
automatically flag projects that receive below average or other
designations reflecting high risk and will be able to automatically notify
and provide reports to immediate supervisors and Division management.
These reports will be reviewed periodically to ensure all outstanding
matters are resolved, are being addressed subject to a plan of action, or are
moved to active workout or enforcement. DCA expects to develop further
processes and procedures through the new compliance software to better
track, with specific dates, the successful resolution of identified life, safety
and health issues. As such, these procedures will ensure data is inputted
tracking whether life, safety and health findings (a) were corrected within
24 hours and, if not, (b) if and when they were corrected. Failures of
projects to address findings in a timely manner and/or failures of DCA
Page 4 of 11

--- Page 30 ---
Department of Housing and Community Development
Agency Response Form
staff to follow up and document resolution of these findings, will be
tracked in a central system and will result in escalation to management.
Page 5 of 11

--- Page 31 ---
Department of Housing and Community Development
Agency Response Form
State-Funded Loans
Finding 3
DHCD did not have an independent review process to ensure that
reconciliations of its State-funded housing loans were completed properly
and that errors and reconciling items were resolved timely.
We recommend that DHCD
a. ensure that comprehensive independent supervisory reviews of loan
record reconciliations are performed; and
b. verify that reconciling items, including the differences noted above, are
investigated and resolved in a timely manner (repeat).
Agency Response
Analysis
Recommendation 3a Agree Estimated Completion Date: 06/30/2024
Please provide details of DHCD concurs with this recommendation. Reconciliations of loan
corrective action or records are and have been prepared by the loan analyst and reported
explain disagreement. monthly to the Controller of Loan Accounting. These reconciliations are
acknowledged by the Controller’s initials. Management has enhanced
the internal controls surrounding this process and those reconciliations
are now also subsequently reviewed and acknowledged by the Director
of Finance and Accounting. Monitoring dashboards which include aging
reports will be available to senior management for review monthly by
December 31, 2024. These aging reports will include an action plan for
resolving or mitigating any items that have been outstanding for a period
of time in excess of 90 days and the plans will be approved by senior
management.
Recommendation 3b Agree Estimated Completion Date: 06/30/2025
Please provide details of DHCD concurs with this recommendation. Although progress had been
corrective action or made in resolving this finding previously, repeated turnover in
explain disagreement. leadership including the Deputy Director, Director of Loan Accounting
and Controller of Loan Accounting levels over the past three years
allowed this finding to remain outstanding. In August 2023, the State
Funded Loan Program was realigned to report to a different Deputy
Director. A new Director of Finance and Administration was hired in
January of 2024. A new Controller of Loan Accounting was hired in
September 2023 and a new Director of Finance and Accounting was
hired in March 2024. Internal controls and monitoring dashboards will
be implemented by December 31, 2024, to properly age items for
Page 6 of 11

--- Page 32 ---
Department of Housing and Community Development
Agency Response Form
visibility and monitor the timely resolution of those items for
accountability. All analysts are expected to resolve reconciling items
within 90 days of identification.
To address the existing population of reconciling items, the Department
has hired a dedicated analyst to investigate and resolve existing
reconciling items. This analyst starts on September 11,
2024. Additionally, existing resources are being deployed to assist with
clearing reconciling items. Biweekly meetings with program staff have
commenced to obtain missing documentation or address other
concerns. Monthly reports to senior and executive management on the
progress will be submitted for review and accountability.
Page 7 of 11

--- Page 33 ---
Department of Housing and Community Development
Agency Response Form
Finding 4
DHCD did not establish policies governing the issuance of Neighborhood
Business Works venture debt loans.
We recommend that DHCD establish comprehensive policies governing the
issuance of NBW venture debt loans.
Agency Response
Analysis
Recommendation 4 Agree Estimated Completion Date: 10/15/2024
Please provide details of
corrective action or While DHCD did not publish venture loan underwriting policies, the
explain disagreement. terms and underwriting procedures were thoroughly reviewed with the
internal and external legal counsel for the three NBW Venture loans
closed using state appropriated capital. The NBW Venture Debt
fundings were part of a “pilot” program during 2019-2021 to develop a
new tool to support businesses that could have a strategic economic
impact to their communities and the State. During this time, the
department put forth legislation, set up a formal credit committee to
review and approve venture debt funding, and created the legal
documents to support the venture debt transactions.
With operational experience gained through the 2019-2021 period,
DHCD was able to submit its Venture Debt program as one of eight
programs for its State Small Business Credit Initiative (SSBCI) plan to
the U.S. Treasury. The Venture Program design and implementation are
further detailed in the Department’s SSBCI application. The Venture
Debt program was approved by the U.S. Treasury and was awarded up
to $17,000,0000.
The department will generate written policies and guidelines for the
Venture Debt program by October 15th, 2024.
Page 8 of 11

--- Page 34 ---
Department of Housing and Community Development
Agency Response Form
Procurements and Disbursements
Finding 5
DHCD did not comply with State procurement regulations when obtaining
marketing services from two vendors and did not monitor services provided
by a third vendor to ensure the marketing services were received and
amounts invoiced were proper.
We recommend that DHCD ensure marketing contracts are procured in
accordance with State regulations and are properly monitored. Specifically,
we recommend that DHCD
a. competitively solicit all services over $15,000,
b. execute formal written agreements with vendors as required,
c. obtain required control agency approval for future contracts and
retroactive approval for the contracts above, and
d. ensure services are received and the related billings are adequately
supported and in accordance with the contract terms prior to payment.
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide The two purchases were concerning the agency’s sponsorships. In
additional comments as response to the audit findings and to align with state procurement
deemed necessary. regulations, DHCD has developed and implemented a comprehensive
policy for sponsorships. This new policy ensures that all sponsorship
agreements follow state procurement regulations and includes
procedures for competitive solicitation, formal written agreements, and
necessary approvals, as applicable.
Recommendation 5a Agree Estimated Completion Date: Completed
Please provide details of In response to the audit findings and to align with state procurement
corrective action or regulations, DHCD has developed and implemented a comprehensive
explain disagreement. policy for sponsorships. This new policy ensures that all sponsorship
agreements follow state procurement regulations and includes
procedures for competitive solicitation, formal written agreements, and
necessary approvals, as applicable.
Recommendation 5b Agree Estimated Completion Date: Completed
Please provide details of In response to the audit findings and to align with state procurement
corrective action or regulations, DHCD has developed and implemented a comprehensive
explain disagreement. policy for sponsorships. This new policy ensures that all sponsorship
agreements follow state procurement regulations and includes
Page 9 of 11

--- Page 35 ---
Department of Housing and Community Development
Agency Response Form
procedures for competitive solicitation, formal written agreements, and
necessary approvals, as applicable.
Recommendation 5c Agree Estimated Completion Date: Completed
Please provide details of In response to the audit findings and to align with state procurement
corrective action or regulations, DHCD has developed and implemented a comprehensive
explain disagreement. policy for sponsorships. This new policy ensures that all sponsorship
agreements follow state procurement regulations and includes
procedures for competitive solicitation, formal written agreements, and
necessary approvals, as applicable.
Recommendation 5d Agree Estimated Completion Date: Completed
Please provide details of
corrective action or The marketing services contract raised in the audit was tied to a
explain disagreement. marketing vendor who completed work buying media placements for the
agency pertaining to a National Homeownership Month campaign. The
audit finding claimed there was a lack of documentation to verify if
amounts invoiced were proper or if the marketing services paid for were
received. The agency received final reports from the vendor displaying
that the work placing the Department’s advertising was completed and
outlining the results of the data tracking for the media placements the
vendor made. In addition, the agency viewed physical advertisements
(on bus transit) to support its advertising campaign.
Page 10 of 11

--- Page 36 ---
Department of Housing and Community Development
Agency Response Form
Information Systems Security and Control
The Office of Legislative Audits (OLA) has determined that the Information
Systems Security and Control section, including Findings 6 through 8 related to
“cybersecurity,” as defined by the State Finance and Procurement Article, Section
3.5-301(b) of the Annotated Code of Maryland, and therefore is subject to
redaction from the publicly available audit report in accordance with the State
Government Article 2-1224(i). Although the specifics of the following findings,
including the analysis, related recommendations, along with DHCD’s responses,
have been redacted from this report copy, DHCD’s responses indicated agreement
with the findings and related recommendations.
Finding 6
Redacted cybersecurity-related finding.
Agency Response has been redacted by OLA.
Finding 7
Redacted cybersecurity-related finding.
Agency Response has been redacted by OLA.
Finding 8
Redacted cybersecurity-related finding.
Agency Response has been redacted by OLA.
Page 11 of 11

--- Page 37 ---
A T
UDIT EAM
Heather A. Warriner, CPA
Audit Manager
R. Brendan Coffey, CPA, CISA
Edwin L. Paul, CPA, CISA
Information Systems Audit Managers
Nathan H. Suffin, CPA
Senior Auditor
Peter W. Chong, CISA
Malcolm J. Woodard
Information Systems Senior Auditors
Sporthi J. Carnelio
Jillian A. Novak, CPA
Ibijoke O. Owolabi
John E. Rooney
Stacey D. Streett
Staff Auditors