Title: Comptroller of Maryland - Information Technology Division - Annapolis Data Center Operations
Date: 07/27/2020
Type: Fiscal Compliance
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5f1f324fa1ce580c84c19060
Extracted: 2025-06-19T11:42:55.222401
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Audit Report
Comptroller of Maryland
Information Technology Division
Annapolis Data Center Operations
July 2020
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Senator Clarence K. Lam, M.D. (Senate Chair) Delegate Carol L. Krimm (House Chair)
Senator Malcolm L. Augustine Delegate Steven J. Arentz
Senator Adelaide C. Eckardt Delegate Mark S. Chang
Senator George C. Edwards Delegate Andrea Fletcher Harrison
Senator Katie Fry Hester Delegate Keith E. Haynes
Senator Cheryl C. Kagan Delegate Michael A. Jackson
Senator Benjamin F. Kramer Delegate David Moon
Senator Cory V. McCray Delegate April R. Rose
Senator Justin D. Ready Delegate Geraldine Valentino-Smith
Senator Craig J. Zucker Delegate Karen Lewis Young
To Obtain Further Information
Office of Legislative Audits
301 West Preston Street, Room 1202
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Phone: 410-946-5900 ꞏ 301-970-5900 ꞏ 1-877-486-9964 (Toll Free in Maryland)
Maryland Relay: 711
TTY: 410-946-5401 ꞏ 301-970-5401
E-mail: OLAWebmaster@ola.state.md.us
Website: www.ola.state.md.us
To Report Fraud
The Office of Legislative Audits operates a Fraud Hotline to report fraud, waste, or abuse involving State
of Maryland government resources. Reports of fraud, waste, or abuse may be communicated anonymously
by a toll-free call to 1-877-FRAUD-11, by mail to the Fraud Hotline, c/o Office of Legislative Audits, or
through the Office’s website.
Nondiscrimination Statement
The Department of Legislative Services does not discriminate on the basis of age, ancestry, color, creed,
marital status, national origin, race, religion, gender, gender identity, sexual orientation, or disability in the
admission or access to its programs, services, or activities. The Department’s Information Officer has been
designated to coordinate compliance with the nondiscrimination requirements contained in Section 35.107
of the United States Department of Justice Regulations. Requests for assistance should be directed to the
Information Officer at 410-946-5400 or 410-970-5400.

--- Page 3 ---
July 27, 2020
Senator Clarence K. Lam, M.D., Senate Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Delegate Carol L. Krimm, House Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Members of Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Annapolis, Maryland
Ladies and Gentlemen:
We have audited the Comptroller of Maryland – Information Technology
Division (ITD). ITD operates the Annapolis Data Center which provides
computing and network resources and operates as a computer services bureau for
the Comptroller of Maryland and other customer agencies. This audit represents
the second of two fiscal compliance audits of the ITD and consists of an internal
control review of the data center and network administered by ITD. Our audit did
not include ITD’s fiscal operations which are separately audited by us and
reported upon in an audit report of the same name.
Our audit disclosed that sensitive personally identifiable information (PII) was
maintained in a manner that did not provide adequate safeguards and made the
information more vulnerable to improper disclosure. This sensitive PII involved
mainframe-based data within approximately 12,496,000 records.
Additionally, we found that mainframe security software access and monitoring
controls were not adequate, with reporting and monitoring controls over database
management software also not being adequate.
Our audit also disclosed that network-based intrusion detection prevention system
(IDPS) coverage did not exist for untrusted traffic entering the ITD data center
network from certain origin points, and the Comptroller of Maryland’s mobile
computers did not utilize a host-based firewall. In addition, our audit determined
that security risks existed for the Comptroller network’s information technology
(IT) resources because a group of 57 IT Contractors working on a large systems
project had unnecessary network-level access to the network.

--- Page 4 ---
Finally, our audit included a review to determine the status of the three findings
contained in our preceding audit report. We determined that ITD satisfactorily
addressed one of these findings. The remaining two findings are repeated in this
report.
The Comptroller of Maryland’s response to this audit, on behalf of ITD, is
included as an appendix to this report. In accordance with State law, we have
reviewed the response and noted that ITD disagrees with certain of the
report’s findings, while the nature of other responses, in which there is
agreement, require further clarification. In each instance, we reviewed and
reassessed our audit documentation, and reaffirmed the validity of the finding.
Consequently, we believe ITD’s disagreement has no merit and is contrary to
current State information technology security policy. In accordance with
generally accepted government auditing standards, we have included “auditor
comments” within ITD’s response to explain our position. We will advise the
Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee of any outstanding issues that we
cannot resolve with ITD.
We wish to acknowledge the cooperation extended to us during the audit by
ITD. We also wish to acknowledge the Comptroller’s and ITD’s willingness
to address the audit issues and implement appropriate corrective actions.
Respectfully submitted,
Gregory A. Hook, CPA
Legislative Auditor
2

--- Page 5 ---
Table of Contents
Background Information 4
Agency Responsibilities 4
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report 4
Findings and Recommendations 5
Sensitive Personally Identifiable Information
Finding 1 – The Information Technology Division (ITD) maintained 5
sensitive personally identifiable information in a manner that did not
provide adequate safeguards.
Mainframe Software
* Finding 2 – Controls involving access and monitoring over mainframe 5
security software as well as database software reporting controls
were not adequate.
Network Security
Finding 3 – Network-based intrusion detection and prevention 7
system (IDPS) coverage did not exist for traffic flowing into the
ITD network from certain origin points, and the Comptroller of
Maryland’s mobile computers did not utilize a host-based firewall.
* Finding 4 – Security risks existed from information technology 8
contractors having unnecessary network-level access to the
Comptroller’s network.
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology 10
Agency Response Appendix
* Denotes item repeated in full or part from preceding audit report
3

--- Page 6 ---
Background Information
Agency Responsibilities
The Information Technology Division (ITD) operates the Annapolis Data Center
as a computer service bureau, and all operating costs are reimbursed by user
agencies that are charged for services performed. ITD also develops and
maintains application systems for agencies under the Comptroller of Maryland
and provides data center disaster recovery capabilities. Additionally, ITD
maintains the mainframe operating system and security software environment in
which many agency applications are executed. While retaining operational
responsibility, ITD relocated the mainframe computer to a Baltimore hosting
location during December 2018. Some of the applications supported by ITD
include the Maryland State Integrated Tax System, the State Payroll System, the
Maryland State Financial Management and Information System, and the State’s
Medical Care Programs Administration (Medicaid) System.
ITD operates an internal network that provides services, including internet and
Statewide intranet access, email, and file sharing, to all the divisions of the
Comptroller of Maryland. According to the State’s records, ITD fiscal year 2019
expenditures totaled $40.5 million.
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report
Our audit included a review to determine the status of the three findings contained
in our preceding audit report dated March 31, 2015. As disclosed in the following
table, we determined that ITD satisfactorily addressed one of these findings. The
remaining two findings are repeated in this report.
Status of Preceding Findings
Preceding Implementation
Finding Description
Finding Status
Mainframe security software access and monitoring Repeated
Finding 1
controls were not sufficient. (Current Finding 2)
Contractors had unnecessary network-level access to the Repeated
Finding 2
Comptroller’s network. (Current Finding 4)
Controls over the Comptroller’s Data Loss Prevention
Finding 3 Not Repeated
System need improvement.
4

--- Page 7 ---
Findings and Recommendations
Sensitive Personally Identifiable Information (PII)
Finding 1
The Information Technology Division (ITD) maintained sensitive PII in a
manner that did not provide adequate safeguards.
Analysis
ITD maintained sensitive PII in a manner that did not provide adequate
safeguards. ITD supported computer operations for multiple mainframe
applications, which processed such sensitive information, but without adequate
safeguards. For example, on February 21, 2019, we noted that one application’s
mainframe database contained sensitive PII involving approximately 12,496,000
records, and was maintained in a manner that made the information vulnerable to
improper disclosure. ITD personnel advised us that this sensitive PII was subject
to other substantial mitigating controls; however, our review determined these
controls were not comprehensive. Detailed sensitive aspects of this finding were
omitted from this report, however the related detailed information was previously
shared with ITD for purposes of implementing the following recommendations.
The State of Maryland Information Technology Security Manual requires that
agencies protect confidential data using adequate safeguards and/or other
substantial mitigating controls.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that ITD implement appropriate information security
safeguards for sensitive PII it maintains.
Mainframe Software
Finding 2
Controls involving access and monitoring over mainframe security software
as well as database software reporting controls were not adequate.
Analysis
Controls involving access and monitoring over mainframe security software, and
reporting and monitoring over database management software were not adequate.
 Groups of 3 to 34 unique accounts involving either ITD or Department of
Information Technology (DoIT) personnel had unnecessary direct unlogged or
5

--- Page 8 ---
logged access to 12 categories of critical operating system and other system
software production files. For example, for 10 of the 12 files’ categories, this
access was granted to at least 19 separate accounts, with a subset of 3 of the
files’ categories being defined such that the unnecessary access was granted to
34 separate accounts. Accordingly, unauthorized changes could occur to these
production files causing inappropriate changes to production data, which in
some cases could go undetected. A similar condition was commented upon in
our two preceding audit reports.
 Reviews of security software violation logs pertaining to critical production
systems data files lacked needed controls. As of June 4, 2019, reviews for one
category of violation logs involving a tax-related system were not performed
after November 8, 2017. For a second category of violation logs separate
from the tax-related system, ITD’s log reviews only focused on activity by
certain ITD personnel, with no reviews made for other activity. Accordingly,
there was a lack of assurance as to the propriety of the changes made to
critical files. A similar condition was commented upon in our two preceding
audit reports.
 Activity reporting of changes made to critical database management software
catalog tables were not generated, despite ITD having a software product
capable of producing such information. Catalog tables for database software
record a variety of authorization values for overall database content, users,
and privileges. As such, unauthorized and/or inappropriate activities affecting
the integrity of the database information could go undetected by management.
Recommendation 2
We recommend that ITD
a. restrict access to critical operating and system software files to only those
individuals requiring such access and log all such accesses (repeat);
b. ensure that the review of security software violation logs includes activity
for all time periods and for all users (repeat); and
c. implement activity reporting for changes made to critical database
management software catalog tables, review such reports for propriety,
document these reviews, and retain the reviews for future reference.
6

--- Page 9 ---
Network Security
Finding 3
Network-based intrusion detection and prevention system (IDPS) coverage
did not exist for traffic flowing into the ITD network from certain origin
points, and the Comptroller of Maryland’s mobile computers did not utilize a
host-based firewall.
Analysis
Network-based IDPS coverage did not exist for untrusted traffic entering the ITD
data center network from certain origin points, and the Comptroller of Maryland’s
mobile computers did not utilize a host-based firewall.
 Network-based IDPS inspection coverage did not exist for traffic entering the
ITD network over a mainframe internet connection, the Statewide intranet
connection, and for traffic flowing from a neutral network zone to a database
server network segment. The absence of IDPS coverage for such traffic
entering the ITD network creates network security risk, as such traffic could
contain undetected malicious data.
The State of Maryland Information Technology Security Manual requires
protection against malicious code and attacks by using IDPS coverage to
monitor system events, detect attacks, and identify unauthorized use of
information systems and/or confidential information. Strong network security
uses a layered approach, relying on various resources, and is structured
according to assessed network security risk. Properly configured IDPS
protection can aid significantly in the detection/prevention of, and response to,
potential network security breaches and attacks.
 The Comptroller of Maryland’s laptop computers did not have host-based
firewalls enabled. ITD personnel advised us that the Comptroller’s IT
security policy did not include enabling the host-based firewall on laptop
computers, and a limited test of five laptop computers during June 2019
confirmed that they did not have an enabled host firewall. ITD personnel
advised us that as of June 17, 2019, approximately 600 laptops were in use
within the Comptroller’s offices. If these laptops were used outside of the
Comptroller network locations, those without such firewalls would be
susceptible to attack from untrusted traffic.
The State of Maryland Information Technology Security Manual requires that
information systems control information flows within systems and between
interconnected systems using boundary protection devices such as firewalls
7

--- Page 10 ---
that employ rule sets to provide a traffic filtering capability.
Recommendation 3
We recommend that ITD
a. ensure that IDPS protection exists for all traffic from untrusted sources
entering the ITD network flowing to critical servers and network
segments within the data center, and
b. work in conjunction with the Comptroller of Maryland’s various
divisions and units to ensure that all Comptroller laptop computers are
protected by an enabled and properly configured host-based firewall.
Finding 4
Security risks existed from information technology (IT) contractors having
unnecessary network-level access to the Comptroller’s network.
Analysis
Security risks existed from IT contractors having unnecessary network-level
access to the Comptroller’s network, despite certain indirect security measures
implemented. The Comptroller had a significant development project in progress
to replace multiple existing systems and as of July 17, 2019 the vendor working
on the project employed 57 IT contractors. These 57 IT contractors had
unnecessary network level access to almost all of the Comptroller’s network
versus access to only the Comptroller network devices and ports required to
perform their contractual duties, which involved certain productivity resources,
such as email, printers, and some shared storage. ITD had implemented certain
general measures related to these contractors involving assignment of Comptroller
workstations, network accounts, and some security policies to help protect its
network from these contractors. However, the unnecessary access occurred
because the IT contractors’ remote and onsite Comptroller network traffic was not
subject to any filtering.
The State of Maryland Information Technology Security Manual requires an
authorization process which specifically grants access to information ensuring
that access is strictly controlled, audited, and that it supports the concept of least
privilege allowing only authorized access to accomplish assigned tasks.
A similar condition was commented upon in our two preceding audit reports.
8

--- Page 11 ---
Recommendation 4
We recommend that ITD restrict IT contractors’ network-level access within
the Comptroller network to only those servers and workstations necessary
for them to perform their duties (repeat).
9

--- Page 12 ---
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We have audited the Comptroller of Maryland – Information Technology
Division (ITD). Fieldwork associated with our general controls audit of ITD’s
data center was conducted during the period from March 2019 to June 2019.
Additionally, fieldwork associated with our audit of the network was conducted
during the period from April 2019 to July 2019. The audit was conducted in
accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards. Those
standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient,
appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and
conclusions based on our audit objectives. We believe that the evidence obtained
provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit
objectives.
As prescribed by the State Government Article, Section 2-1221 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, the objectives of this audit were to examine ITD’s internal
control over ITD’s data center and network and to evaluate its compliance with
applicable State laws, rules, and regulations for the computer systems that support
the Comptroller and ITD data center user agencies. Specifically, given ITD’s
widespread responsibility for the Comptroller network, our audit included an
evaluation of the security control environment for all portions of the Comptroller
network controlled by ITD.
In planning and conducting our audit, we focused on the major areas of operations
based on assessments of significance and risk. The areas addressed by the audit
included procedures and controls over the mainframe operating system, security
software, and critical databases. Our audit also included an assessment of the
security controls for critical routers, firewalls, switches, and virtual private
network appliances, as well as an assessment of the security controls related to
ITD’s wireless connectivity and the use of anti-malware software to protect the
Comptroller’s computers. We also determined the status of the findings included
in our preceding audit report.
Our audit did not include ITD’s fiscal operations which are audited separately
within an ITD fiscal operations audit report. The most recent fiscal compliance
report that covered ITD’s fiscal operations was issued on November 13, 2017.
To accomplish our audit objectives, our audit procedures included inquiries of
appropriate personnel, inspections of documents and records, observations of
ITD’s operations, and certain tests to evaluate the effectiveness of controls. We
also performed other auditing procedures that we considered necessary to achieve
10

--- Page 13 ---
our audit objectives. The reliability of data used in this report for background or
informational purposes was not assessed.
ITD’s management is responsible for establishing and maintaining effective
internal control. Internal control is a process designed to provide reasonable
assurance that objectives pertaining to security for the Comptroller’s data center
and network and compliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations are
achieved. As provided in Government Auditing Standards, there are five
components of internal control: control environment, risk assessment, control
activities, information and communication, and monitoring. Each of the five
components, when significant to the audit objectives, and as applicable to ITD,
were considered by us during the course of this audit.
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate.
Our reports are designed to assist the Maryland General Assembly in exercising
its legislative oversight function and to provide constructive recommendations for
improving State operations. As a result, our reports generally do not address
activities we reviewed that are functioning properly.
This report includes findings relating to conditions that we consider to be
significant deficiencies in the design or operation of internal control that could
adversely affect ITD’s ability to operate effectively and efficiently and/or comply
with applicable laws, rules, and regulations. Our report also includes findings
regarding significant instances of noncompliance with applicable laws, rules, or
regulations. Other less significant findings were communicated to ITD that did
not warrant inclusion in this report. Aspects of certain findings contained in this
report address issues of a sensitive nature, and we have omitted that detailed
information from this report. However, for the purposes of implementing the
related recommendations that information was previously shared with ITD.
The response from the Comptroller of Maryland, on behalf of ITD, to our findings
and recommendations is included as an appendix to this report. As prescribed in
the State Government Article, Section 2-1224 of the Annotated Code of
Maryland, we will advise the Comptroller regarding the results of our review of
its response.
11

--- Page 14 ---
APPENDIX
Peter Franchot
C o m p t r o l l e r
Sharonne R. Bonardi
Deputy Comptroller
July 24, 2020
Mr. Gregory Hook, CPA
Legislative Auditor
Office of Legislative Audits
301 West Preston Street, Room 1202
Baltimore, MD 21201
RE: OLA Audit of Information Technology Division – Comptroller of Maryland
Dear Mr. Hook:
Enclosed, please find the Information Technology Division’s (ITD) responses to the
legislative audit by your office conducted between June 4, 2014 through March 11, 2019.
As an agency entrusted with the custody of the sensitive information and data for millions of
taxpayers, there is nothing that is more important to Comptroller Franchot and our team than the
integrity and safety of taxpayer data. Over the past several years, we’ve taken several key measures
to bolster our ability to safeguard taxpayer information.
Because of the Comptroller of Maryland’s efforts to combat tax fraud, I have the honor of
serving as the co-chair of the Senior Executive Board for the Identity Theft Tax Refund Fraud
Information Sharing and Analysis Center (“ISAC”), a position that provides an opportunity for our
agency to share our best practices with members of the IRS’ Security Summit. The Comptroller’s
Office has also worked successfully to align Risk Management and Information Technology
activities to better identify, assess, and mitigate threats to the confidentiality, integrity, and
availability of the agency’s systems and the confidential data that the taxpayers of Maryland entrust
to us. We have strengthened security and background checks for all employees and contractors. We
have updated or replaced hundreds of outdated applications, databases, and servers with modern,
highly secure systems. We have continued to improve our threat and incident detection and
response capabilities. We have done all of these and more, while strengthening our ability to deliver
first-class service to Maryland taxpayers.
We appreciate the value of third-party audits such as these as we constantly aspire to further
improve our best practices. However, we do have respectful but strong points of disagreement over
Finding 4. We do not concur with the Recommendation in Finding 4 and we appreciate the
opportunity to discuss this in detail in our official response. We do, however, concur and have
begun the process of implementing the remainder of the recommendations outlined in the findings.
Louis L. Goldstein Treasury Building • 80 Calvert Street • P.O. Box 466 • Annapolis, Maryland 21404-0466 • 410-260-7806
MRS 711 (MD) or 1-800-735-2258 • TTY 410-260-7157 • sbonardi@comp.state.md.us

--- Page 15 ---
Mr. Gregory Hook, CPA
July 24, 2020
Page 2
As you are aware, the Comptroller’s Office is in the process of phasing in our new, state-of-
the-art tax processing system that will build upon our record of efficiency and success. The
ongoing, phased implementation of the COMPASS system will further transform our ability to
protect taxpayers from cybercrime in this highly dangerous environment using automation,
advanced analytics, and continuous monitoring that meet and exceed Federal and State security
control requirements.
On behalf of Comptroller Franchot, thank you once again for your team’s diligent audit and
for the opportunity to respond to the findings.
Sincerely,
Sharonne R. Bonardi
Deputy Comptroller

--- Page 16 ---
Comptroller of Maryland
Information Technology Division
Annapolis Data Center Operations
Agency Response Form
Sensitive Personally Identifiable Information (PII)
Finding 1
The Information Technology Division (ITD) maintained sensitive PII in a manner that did
not provide adequate safeguards.
We recommend that ITD implement appropriate information security safeguards for
sensitive PII it maintains.
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide While data can be viewed by authorized users, data at rest includes
additional comments as hardware-based protections.
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 1 Agree Estimated Completion Date:
Please provide details of There are additional products concerning this security issue that could be
corrective action or implemented. However, these additional more comprehensive
explain disagreement. mitigating controls will adversely impact day-to-day operations, require
addressing the needs of 60+ unique agencies, and require funding
unavailable at this time. In addition, the specific system reviewed is a
legacy system that is in the process of being replaced.
Auditor’s Comment: ITD agreed with the recommendation but noted it would create
adverse operational impact, affect multiple agencies, and require funding which was
unavailable. On funding, ITD did not provide any related cost estimates. ITD also stated
that the specific system reviewed was being replaced, whereas the finding cited that
specific system as an example among multiple mainframe systems which processed
sensitive PII information without use of adequate safeguards. Further, ITD’s response
was focused on just one of two options, per the finding analysis, for providing needed
information security safeguards.
OLA’ s position is that the PII should be adequately protected, as public studies have
concluded that the cost of data breaches involving PII can be considerable, and
potentially exceed the costs of preventive safeguards. We also believe that if remediation
costs via a preferred security option are proven to be excessive, that ITD needs to pursue
an alternate option, in a prioritized manner, to implement the three-part substantial
mitigating controls, as defined per the Information Technology Security Manual, with
Page 1 of 5

--- Page 17 ---
Comptroller of Maryland
Information Technology Division
Annapolis Data Center Operations
Agency Response Form
related communications shared to customer agencies as necessary. Collectively, we
believe that our finding is justified and the recommended action is both prudent and
appropriate.
Mainframe Software
Finding 2
Controls involving access and monitoring over mainframe security software as well as
database software reporting controls were not adequate.
We recommend that ITD
a. restrict access to critical operating and system software files to only those individuals
requiring such access and log all such accesses (repeat);
b. ensure that the review of security software violation logs includes activity for all time
periods and for all users (repeat); and
c. implement activity reporting for changes made to critical database management
software catalog tables, review such reports for propriety, document these reviews, and
retain the reviews for future reference.
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide Since the preliminary report we performed a comprehensive review,
additional comments as implemented additional restrictions, and conducted process
deemed necessary. improvements to improve access and monitoring over mainframe
security.
Recommendation 2a Agree Estimated Completion Date: 3Q 2020
Please provide details of Access has been restricted to the current extent possible to meet this
corrective action or recommendation. Of the 14 bulleted items:
explain disagreement. 1. 5 were completed
2. 1 was not completed (access deemed ‘necessary’)
3. 8 were partially completed with each of the 8 retaining access for
a very small subset of # USERIDs. This access will remain until
the level of access required changes
We are revamping our library naming conventions to keep in line with
industry standards and simplify the identification of critical system
libraries
Page 2 of 5

--- Page 18 ---
Comptroller of Maryland
Information Technology Division
Annapolis Data Center Operations
Agency Response Form
Recommendation 2b Agree Estimated Completion Date: 4Q 2020
Please provide details of We are designing a new implementation approach for control and
corrective action or logging of all updates to critical system. This includes a regular review
explain disagreement. of such changes for certain critical types of libraries.
Recommendation 2c Agree Estimated Completion Date: Completed
Please provide details of Reporting is in place for the database software catalog table. Daily
corrective action or reviews and documentations of these reports is done by the mainframe
explain disagreement. security team. Results are permanently stored.
Network Security
Finding 3
Network-based intrusion detection and prevention system (IDPS) coverage did not exist for
traffic flowing into the ITD network from certain origin points, and the Comptroller of
Maryland’s mobile computers did not utilize a host-based firewall.
We recommend that ITD
a. ensure that IDPS protection exists for all traffic from untrusted sources entering the
ITD network flowing to critical servers and network segments within the data center,
and
b. work in conjunction with the Comptroller of Maryland’s various divisions and units to
ensure that all Comptroller laptop computers are protected by an enabled and properly
configured host-based firewall.
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide No comment.
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 3a Agree Estimated Completion Date:
Please provide details of ITD agrees to implement IDPS protection for all traffic from untrusted
corrective action or sources and will investigate additional protection for internal neutral
explain disagreement. segments to determine if a cost beneficial solution can be implemented
to enhance existing controls.
Page 3 of 5

--- Page 19 ---
Comptroller of Maryland
Information Technology Division
Annapolis Data Center Operations
Agency Response Form
Recommendation 3b Agree Estimated Completion Date: End of 3Q
2020
Please provide details of We agree with this finding. Review of the options with our current suite
corrective action or of products is complete and we are developing our final recommendation
explain disagreement. for internal approval. This will be a large complex project and due to the
risk involved when dealing with changes in production environments
extensive planning and testing will occur prior to any implementation.
Finding 4
Security risks existed from information technology (IT) contractors having unnecessary
network-level access to the Comptroller’s network.
We recommend that ITD restrict IT contractors’ network-level access within the
Comptroller network to only those servers and workstations necessary for them to perform
their duties (repeat).
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide This response is regarding full-time, contractor employees. Temporary
additional comments as contractors, such as vendor-provided project support, are treated
deemed necessary. differently. They are not granted unsupervised access, do not have
system login or remote access accounts, and are not provided
Comptroller equipment. All work performed is supervised onsite or
through a remote screen-sharing mechanism.
Recommendation 4 Disagree Estimated Completion Date:
Please provide details of The Comptroller of Maryland fully supports the principle of least
corrective action or privileged access, and enhancements to security controls within the
explain disagreement. environment.
Although this is a repeat finding, at present this recommendation still
exceeds current State DoIT security policy, and Federal security
requirements and guidance. The National Institute of Standards and
Technology in September of 2019 released the first initial DRAFT of
guidance for implementation of a zero-trust architecture (that would
meet the recommendation by OLA) and, as of today, has not finalized
the NIST 800-207 document. This recommendation is also not included
in the current Cyber Security Framework for Critical Infrastructure
maintained by the US Department of Homeland Security.
Page 4 of 5

--- Page 20 ---
Comptroller of Maryland
Information Technology Division
Annapolis Data Center Operations
Agency Response Form
Absent final guidance from the experts, agreement with this finding
would place the Comptroller of Maryland in a position of having
mandated controls that far exceed established requirements and control
frameworks.
In addition, we would note that we have multiple compensating controls
throughout the environment and prior to granting access, all contractors
supporting the Comptroller of Maryland are subject to the same
onboarding process as regular employees. This includes background
investigations, fingerprinting, and orientation with the Office of Human
Resources. Contractors also use Comptroller issued hardware and
software that is maintained and secured by ITD. In addition, no
employee, whether contractor or regular employee, has access to the
entire network, whether direct hardwire, wireless or VPN. Access is
controlled by various security mechanisms using the ‘least privileged’
concept to ensure access is granted only where required.
Auditor’s Comment: ITD disagreed with the recommendation to restrict IT contractors’
network level access, by citing demonstrably incorrect information, which could mislead
the reader. For example, the criteria cited by OLA in the Analysis in support of the
principle of least privileged access, in fact, does not exceed the current State DoIT
Security Policy, but is the current policy. The State of Maryland’s IT security policy
guidance has long required limiting access to IT resources as per the least privilege
principle, both historically and per the current Information Technology Security Manual
(ITSM). Our position that the State of Maryland’s ITSM least privilege security principle
extends to network security is long-standing and accepted by other State agencies, and as
such requires restricting the Comptroller’s IT contractors’ network level access to only IT
resources needing to be accessed to fulfill their contractual requirements.
Consequently, in our opinion, ITD is not in compliance with current State security policy
and is placing its IT resources at risk by allowing its IT contractors unnecessary network-
level access to almost all of the Comptroller’s network (versus the Comptroller’s
described “entire network”). Finally, this a repeat finding, and in response to our prior
report item, ITD agreed that contractors’ network-level access should be restricted to
only those servers and workstations to which each contractor requires access, a position
that it now opposes without justification.
Page 5 of 5

--- Page 21 ---
A T
UDIT EAM
Richard L. Carter, CISA
R. Brendan Coffey, CPA, CISA
Information Systems Audit Managers
Edward O. Kendall, CISA
Edwin L. Paul, CPA, CISA
Information Systems Senior Auditors
Peter W. Chong
Joseph R. Clayton
Information Systems Staff Auditors