Title: University System of Maryland - Frostburg State University
Date: 08/05/2020
Type: Fiscal Compliance
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5f2ac61aa1ce581148238b55
Extracted: 2025-06-19T11:43:05.345006
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Audit Report
University System of Maryland
Frostburg State University
September 2024
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Senator Clarence K. Lam, M.D. (Senate Chair) Delegate Jared Solomon (House Chair)
Senator Joanne C. Benson Delegate Steven J. Arentz
Senator Paul D. Corderman Delegate Andrea Fletcher Harrison
Senator Katie Fry Hester Delegate Steven C. Johnson
Senator Shelly L. Hettleman Delegate Mary A. Lehman
Senator Cheryl C. Kagan Delegate David Moon
Senator Cory V. McCray Delegate Julie Palakovich Carr
Senator Justin D. Ready Delegate Stephanie M. Smith
Senator Bryan W. Simonaire Delegate M. Courtney Watson
Senator Craig J. Zucker One Vacancy
To Obtain Further Information
Office of Legislative Audits
The Warehouse at Camden Yards
351 West Camden Street, Suite 400
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Phone: 410-946-5900
Maryland Relay: 711
TTY: 410-946-5401 ꞏ 301-970-5401
E-mail: webmaster@ola.state.md.us
Website: www.ola.state.md.us
To Report Fraud
The Office of Legislative Audits operates a Fraud Hotline to report fraud, waste, or abuse involving State
of Maryland government resources. Reports of fraud, waste, or abuse may be communicated anonymously
by a toll-free call to 1-877-FRAUD-11, by mail to the Fraud Hotline, c/o Office of Legislative Audits, or
through the Office’s website.
Nondiscrimination Statement
The Department of Legislative Services does not discriminate on the basis of age, ancestry, color, creed,
marital status, national origin, race, religion, gender, gender identity, sexual orientation, or disability in the
admission or access to its programs, services, or activities. The Department’s Information Officer has been
designated to coordinate compliance with the nondiscrimination requirements contained in Section 35.107
of the United States Department of Justice Regulations. Requests for assistance should be directed to the
Information Officer at 410-946-5400 or 410-970-5400.

--- Page 3 ---
September 11, 2024
Senator Clarence K. Lam, M.D., Senate Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Delegate Jared Solomon, House Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Members of Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Annapolis, Maryland
Ladies and Gentlemen:
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the University System of
Maryland (USM) – Frostburg State University (FSU) for the period beginning
August 26, 2019 and ending July 15, 2023. FSU is a comprehensive public
institution of USM offering an array of undergraduate and graduate degrees.
Our audit disclosed that FSU did not exercise adequate due diligence or comply
with certain procurement policies and procedures when it acquired a new
financial aid system. FSU subsequently determined it was not cost effective to
continue using the system and opted to discontinue the contract resulting in the
loss of all $680,000 expended on the system.
In addition, FSU did not competitively procure student mental health services
initially procured without competition in October 2019 as an emergency
procurement, and then extended for multiple years using questionable sole source
justifications. Furthermore, FSU did not obtain required Board of Public Works
approval when contract costs for those services exceeded $1 million. FSU also
did not verify that its use of contracts procured by other entities was in the best
interest of FSU as required by USM Board of Regents policies and procedures
and did not verify that rates charged were consistent with the related contracts.
We also noted that FSU did not ensure the accuracy of all institutional aid awards,
and identified incorrect awards totaling approximately $64,000. In addition, we
found insufficient internal controls over student residency determinations,
adjustments to employee leave balances, other earnings transactions, and cash
receipts.

--- Page 4 ---
Finally, our audit included a review to determine the status of the five findings
contained in our preceding audit report. We determined that FSU satisfactorily
addressed four findings. The remaining finding is repeated in this report.
The USM Office’s response to this audit, on behalf of FSU, is included as an
appendix to this report. In accordance with State law, we have reviewed the
response and, while FSU generally agrees with the findings and
recommendations, we identified certain instances in which statements in the
response conflict with or disagree with the report findings and recommendations.
In each instance, we reviewed and reassessed our audit documentation, and
reaffirmed the validity of our finding. In accordance with generally accepted
government auditing standards, we have included “auditor’s comments” within
USM’s response to explain our position. We will advise the Joint Audit and
Evaluation Committee of any outstanding issues that we cannot resolve with FSU.
We wish to acknowledge the cooperation extended to us during the audit by FSU.
We also wish to acknowledge USM’s and FSU’s willingness to address the audit
issues and implement appropriate corrective actions.
Respectfully submitted,
Brian S. Tanen
Brian S. Tanen, CPA, CFE
Legislative Auditor
2

--- Page 5 ---
Table of Contents
Background Information 5
Agency Responsibilities 5
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Reports 7
Findings and Recommendations 8
Contracts and Disbursements
Finding 1 – Frostburg State University (FSU) did not exercise adequate 9
due diligence or comply with certain procurement policies when it
procured a new financial aid system. FSU subsequently determined
it was not cost effective to continue using the system and opted to
discontinue the contract resulting in the loss of all $680,000
expended on the system.
Finding 2 – FSU did not competitively procure student mental health 10
services initially obtained without competition in October 2019
through an emergency procurement, and then extended multiple
years using questionable sole source justifications. FSU also did
not obtain required Board of Public Works approval when contract
costs exceeded $1 million or ensure rates paid were consistent with
the contract.
* Finding 3 – FSU did not verify that its use of contracts procured by other 12
entities was in the best interest of FSU as required by Board of
Regents procurement policies and procedures. FSU also did not
verify that rates charged were consistent with the related contracts.
Student Accounts Receivable
Finding 4 – FSU had not established sufficient controls over student 13
residency determinations and certain adjustments recorded in
student accounts.
Student Financial Aid
Finding 5 – FSU did not ensure that all institutional aid awards, which 14
were based in part on the student’s residency status, reflected the
student’s actual residency status at the time of award. We identified
incorrect awards totaling approximately $64,000.
 Denotes item repeated in full or part from preceding audit report
3

--- Page 6 ---
Payroll
Finding 6 – FSU did not ensure that all critical payroll related transactions, 15
including adjustments to employee leave balances and other earnings
transactions, were independently reviewed for propriety.
Cash Receipts
Finding 7 – FSU employees responsible for verifying that recorded 16
collections were deposited also had access to the related collections
prior to deposit.
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology 18
Agency Response Appendix
4

--- Page 7 ---
Background Information
Agency Responsibilities
Frostburg State University (FSU) is a comprehensive public institution of the
University System of Maryland (USM) and operates under the jurisdiction of the
System’s Board of Regents. FSU offers an array of undergraduate and graduate
degrees with an emphasis on arts, humanities, business, applied technologies,
education, environmental sciences, human services, and social and behavioral
sciences.
During our audit period, student enrollment dropped significantly from 5,178
students (4,429 undergraduate and 749 graduate) in the Fall 2019 semester to
4,075 students (3,344 undergraduate and 731 graduate) in the fall 2023 semester.
According to the Department of Legislative Services’ Analysis of the Fiscal Year
2024 Maryland Executive Budget, FSU management believes that enrollment has
been impacted by various factors, including changes in student preferences to
attend institutions closer to their home. FSU also pointed to a delay in awarding
financial aid it experienced in 2022 as a result of certain system implementation
problems, which we further address in Finding 1.
FSU’s budget is funded by unrestricted revenues, such as tuition and fees and a
State general fund appropriation, as well as restricted revenues, such as federal
grants and contracts. According to the State’s accounting records, FSU’s
revenues for fiscal year 2023 totaled approximately $121.9 million, including a
State general fund appropriation of approximately $51.7 million (see Figure 1 on
the following page).
5

--- Page 8 ---
Figure 1
FSU Positions, Expenditures, and Funding Sources
Full-Time Equivalent Positions as of June 30, 2023
Positions Percent
Filled 594 86.3%
Vacant 94 13.7%
Total 688
Fiscal Year 2023 Expenditures
Expenditures Percent
Salaries, Wages, and Fringe Benefits $ 66,406,397 54.5%
Technical and Special Fees 9,125,006 7.5%
Operating Expenses 46,364,046 38.0%
Total $121,895,449
Fiscal Year 2023 Funding Sources
Funding Percent
Unrestricted
General Fund $ 51,724,885 42.4%
Tuition and Fees 31,378,293 25.7%
Other University Revenues1 26,259,591 21.6%
109,362,769 89.7%
Restricted
Federal Grants and Contracts 8,641,817 7.1%
Other Gifts, Grants, and Contracts 3,890,863 3.2%
12,532,680 10.3%
Total $121,895,449
Source: State financial records and FSU personnel records
1 Includes revenues from Auxiliary Services ($19.3M) and the Higher Education Investment Fund
($3.3M)
6

--- Page 9 ---
Status of Findings from Preceding Audit Report
Our audit included a review to determine the status of the five findings contained
in our preceding audit report on FSU dated August 5, 2020. As disclosed in
Figure 2, we determined that FSU satisfactorily addressed four of these five
findings. The remaining finding is repeated in this report.
Figure 2
Status of Preceding Findings
Preceding Implementation
Finding Description
Finding Status
Frostburg State University (FSU) lacked documentation of
its compliance with University System of Maryland
(USM) Board of Regents procurement policies and
Repeated
Finding 1 procedures regarding the use of contracts established by
(Current Finding 3)
other organizations, institutions, or agencies. In addition,
FSU did not verify that the prices charged were in
accordance with the related established contracts.
FSU did not have a formal agreement governing
construction management services being provided by
Finding 2 another State university and did not receive sufficient Not Repeated
documentation to monitor these services and ensure the
propriety of amounts invoiced by the university.
FSU did not ensure that user access capabilities on its
financial management systems were adequately restricted
Finding 3 Not Repeated
resulting in employees with unnecessary or inappropriate
system capabilities.
FSU’s procedures for logging and monitoring critical
Finding 4 Not Repeated
database security and audit events were not adequate.
FSU did not independently verify that all bookstore
Finding 5 collections were deposited and related refunds were Not Repeated
proper.
7

--- Page 10 ---
Findings and Recommendations
Contracts and Disbursements
Background
Frostburg State University (FSU) is required to follow the University System of
Maryland (USM) Board of Regents (BOR) procurement policies and procedures
when procuring goods and services. We judgmentally selected and reviewed the
procurement of seven contracts collectively valued at $9.8 million. We also
reviewed FSU’s contract monitoring and disbursements processes for these seven
and two additional contracts, all of which had expenditures totaling $24.4 million
during our audit period. Figure 3 shows the nine contracts that we reviewed.
Figure 3
Summary of Contracts Reviewed
Description of Total Total Payments
Item Goods or Type of Procurement2 Contract During Audit
Services Value Period3
Student Financial Aid
System Maryland Education Enterprise
1 $700,840 $523,619
Implementation Consortium (MEEC) Contract
Services
Intergovernmental Cooperative
2 Roof Replacement 3,259,069 1,741,201
Purchasing Agreement (ICPA)
3 Dining Services Competitive Sealed Proposal 62,000,000 18,342,572
4 Drywall Remediation ICPA 705,006 04
5 HVAC Replacement ICPA 2,917,590 992,993
Bleacher
6 ICPA 694,936 694,936
Replacement
Psychological
7 Emergency 1,737,964 1,733,964
Support Services
Electronic Database
8 Statewide Consortium 213,958 213,958
Subscriptions
Student Financial Aid
9 Sole Source 268,821 156,812
System
Total $72,498,184 $24,400,055
Total Procurements Tested2 $9,803,248
Source: FSU Procurement Records
2 Item numbers 3 and 6 were procured before our audit period and the procurement of these items
was not reviewed.
3 We examined FSU’s monitoring of and selected disbursements for all nine contracts.
4 Although this contract did not have payments during our audit period, we tested one payment
totaling approximately $200,000 that was made immediately after the end of our audit period.
8

--- Page 11 ---
Finding 1
FSU did not exercise adequate due diligence or comply with certain
procurement policies when it procured a new financial aid system. FSU
subsequently determined it was not cost effective to continue using the
system and opted to discontinue the contract resulting in the loss of all
$680,000 expended on the system.
Analysis
FSU did not exercise adequate due diligence or comply with certain procurement
policies and procedures when it acquired a new financial aid system, which FSU
advised us it discontinued using because of ongoing system and operational
problems. In October 2021, FSU procured system software and related licensing
for a new student financial aid system for approximately $269,000 through a sole
source procurement. In addition, FSU contracted with another vendor to
implement the system for $701,000 (after change orders) under a Maryland
Enterprise Education Consortium (MEEC) contract. As of July 2023, FSU had
expended approximately $680,000, or 70 percent of the initial expected cost of
implementation. Our review disclosed the following conditions:
 FSU did not prepare a written sole source justification for the system software
and related licensing as required by BOR policy. FSU also did not conduct a
formal analysis to determine if the system would meet the needs of FSU.
Rather, FSU contacted another State university using the system which
provided FSU with a favorable review.
 FSU selected the implementation vendor without preparing and submitting a
detailed task order request for proposal to 16 other potential vendors available
under the MEEC contract. Although not a requirement when using a MEEC
contract, taking steps to solicit proposals from multiple vendors when
available is a common best practice.
The lack of due diligence in the selection of the software and related vendors is
significant because FSU discontinued using the system. Specifically, FSU
activated the system for the Fall 2022 semester, but advised us that it
reimplemented its prior system beginning with the Summer 2024 semester
because of unremedied issues with the new system and because the new system
did not meet its needs.
The contract did not provide for recovery of liquidated damages by FSU if the
vendor was found to be noncompliant in any manner. Regardless, FSU advised
that its legal counsel concluded there is no recourse or liquidated damages to
pursue from the software vendor. According to its legal counsel, the vendor
9

--- Page 12 ---
recommended FSU change certain of its business practices to align with the
vendor’s system (related to the award year for financial aid). However, FSU
determined that this change would have caused significant complications for one
of FSU’s programs, so it asked the vendor to modify its system to accommodate
FSU’s existing practice. This decision significantly impacted the project’s
workload and timeline and FSU encountered unique challenges not faced by
another State university using the system. FSU ultimately decided it was more
economical to return to its prior system than continuing to pay to adjust the new
financial aid system. As a result, FSU may not be able to recover any of the
approximately $680,000 expended under both contracts.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that FSU
a. comply with BOR policies and procedures and exercise sufficient due
diligence when procuring future contracts, and
b. include a provision for liquidated damages in future contracts.
Finding 2
FSU did not competitively procure student mental health services initially
obtained without competition in October 2019 through an emergency
procurement, and then extended multiple years using questionable sole
source justifications. FSU also did not obtain required Board of Public
Works (BPW) approval when contract costs exceeded $1 million or ensure
rates paid were consistent with the contract.
Analysis
FSU continued to use the same vendor for student mental health services initially
obtained without competition through an emergency procurement in October
2019 and without obtaining required BPW approval when contract costs exceeded
$1 million. In addition, FSU did not ensure that rates paid to the vendor agreed
with the contract rates, resulting in overpayments of at least $9,600.
The initial contract, which included annual budgeted costs of approximately
$640,000, did not specify an end date, but indicated that the contract could be
extended by mutual agreement. FSU has continued to use the vendor for these
services by extending the contract multiple times, claiming that the vendor is the
sole source for these services. The extensions established various end dates, the
most recent being September 2024, five years after the initial emergency
procurement. During our audit period, the vendor was paid a total of $1.7 million.
10

--- Page 13 ---
The initial emergency justification stated that FSU lacked staff to provide
required counseling due to resignations. Subsequent sole source justifications
noted that FSU’s location limited the number of mental health providers available,
and that the current vendor was able to meet FSU’s staffing requirements.
However, our review disclosed that the written justification for the initial
emergency contract and subsequent sole source justifications were not signed
until we requested them in August 2023.
Furthermore, we question the validity of the continuous use of sole source given
the nature of the services and no apparent attempt by FSU to competitively
procure the services since inception of the contract. Our online search identified
other vendors who could potentially provide similar services. USM procurement
policies and procedures provide that a sole source procurement should only be
used when a determination is made that only one source will satisfy the
requirements and/or circumstances present, and that action should be taken when
possible to avoid the need to continue to procure the same contract without
competition. The policies and procedures also require a written determination as
to why use of the sole source procurement method was appropriate.
Our review further disclosed that FSU did not obtain BPW approval when total
contract costs exceeded $1 million as required by USM policy, and did not ensure
rates invoiced and paid to the vendor were consistent with the contract. We
reviewed five vendor invoices paid between May and September 2023 totaling
approximately $262,000 and found that certain rates were not consistent with the
contract resulting in overpayments of approximately $9,6005. Specifically, an
addendum to the contract was signed in August of 2023 indicating new rates
effective October of 2023, the start of the next contract year. However, our
review disclosed that FSU paid the new increased rates prior to October. FSU
was not aware of the improper rates paid until we brought the matter to its
attention.
Recommendation 2
We recommend that FSU
a. use a competitive procurement process for the aforementioned student
mental health services;
b. timely prepare and document required justifications when competitive
procurement is not used;
c. obtain required BPW approval when contract costs exceed $1 million;
and
5 We initially selected two recent payments made as of the time of our review. Based on
discrepancies noted, we reviewed three additional payments made that were likely to show the
same problems based on the related timeframe.
11

--- Page 14 ---
d. take steps to identify and recover all overpayments made for the
aforementioned services, including those noted above.
Finding 3
FSU did not verify that its use of contracts procured by other entities was in
the best interest of FSU as required by BOR procurement policies and
procedures. FSU also did not verify that rates charged were consistent with
the related contracts.
Analysis
FSU did not verify that its use of contracts procured by other entities was in the
best interest of FSU as required by BOR procurement policies and procedures. In
addition, FSU did not verify that rates charged were consistent with the related
contracts. Specifically, our review of four contracts totaling $7.6 million entered
into by FSU utilizing contracts procured by other entities (Intergovernmental
Cooperative Purchasing Agreement (ICPA) and MEEC contracts) disclosed the
following conditions:
 FSU did not ensure that the use of these contracts in lieu of competitively
procuring the related goods and services itself was in the best interest of FSU.
FSU also did not ensure that the original contracts procured by those entities
had been awarded using an appropriate procurement process.
A similar condition was noted in our preceding audit report. In response to
that report, FSU disagreed that it was required to document its verification
that the contracts were in the best interest of the institution. We continue to
believe that FSU should perform the verification and document the related
results.
 FSU did not verify that the specific contract rates it was charged were
consistent with the original contract for three of the four ICPA and MEEC
contracts totaling $6.9 million. This condition was noted in our preceding
audit report. In response to that report, FSU indicated that effective
September 2020, it would better document its verification that quotes agreed
to contract pricing.
BOR procurement policies and procedures during the audit period stated that
USM institutions may use contracts established by other organizations,
institutions, or agencies provided that use of the contract is in the best interest of
the institution, and the established contract was awarded after a proper
12

--- Page 15 ---
procurement process6. At least one other USM institution we examined had
documentation on file of other ICPA contracts and pricing it researched, as well
as evidence that the ICPA used was competitively bid.
Recommendation 3
We recommend that FSU document its compliance with USM policies and
verify that
a. its use of contracts established by other organizations, institutions, or
agencies is in the best interest of FSU, and that the contracts were
properly procured (repeat); and
b. amounts invoiced by vendors are consistent with established contract
rates (repeat).
Student Accounts Receivable
Finding 4
FSU had not established sufficient controls over student residency
determinations and certain adjustments recorded in student accounts.
Analysis
FSU had not established sufficient controls over student residency determinations
and certain adjustments recorded in student accounts. Accurate student residency
determinations are important because of the significant differences between in-
state, regional, and out-of-state student tuition rates. For example, the
undergraduate tuition rate for Maryland residents was $7,110 for the Fall 2023
and Spring 2024 semesters, whereas the undergraduate tuition rate for out-of-state
students was $22,292, and $16,446 for out-of-state regional students7.
 No reviews were performed of the initial residency determinations made for
graduate students and initial determinations for undergraduate students were
performed by an employee who was not independent because they could also
change a student’s residency status. In addition, subsequent changes to a
student’s residency status were reviewed for propriety only if initiated by the
Registrar’s Office, which only accounted for 261 of the 1,357 changes (or
19.2 percent) made during our audit period.
 Output reports used to verify the propriety of non-cash credits were
generated by one of the two employees responsible for posting non-cash
6 Subsequent to our audit period, we were advised by USM that the BOR revised its procurement
policies and procedures at its June 14, 2024 meeting.
7 Students who are not residents of Maryland but live within 120 miles of FSU.
13

--- Page 16 ---
credits. As a result, errors or other discrepancies could occur without
detection. According to FSU’s records, non-cash credits totaling
approximately $3.5 million were recorded during fiscal year 2023. FSU was
unable to generate an output report that readily identified transactions
processed by this employee. As a result, we were unable to test such
transactions.
Recommendation 4
We recommend that FSU
a. ensure that independent supervisory reviews of all initial student
residency determinations and residency status changes recorded in the
student accounts receivable system are conducted and documented, and
b. ensure that an independent verification of non-cash credit adjustments is
performed utilizing a report generated by an independent employee.
Student Financial Aid
Finding 5
FSU did not ensure that all institutional aid awards, which were based in
part on the student’s residency status, reflected the student’s actual
residency status at the time of award. We identified incorrect awards
totaling approximately $64,000.
Analysis
FSU did not ensure that all institutional aid awards, which were based in part on
the student’s residency status, reflected the student’s actual residency status at the
time of award. Certain institutional need-based grants are only available to in-
state students and the amount awarded for other grants is impacted by the
student’s residency status. For example, for one type of aid, qualifying out-of-
state students received an award ranging between $5,000 and $10,000, depending
on grade point average and test scores; while qualifying in-State students received
award amounts ranging between $1,000 and $5,000. During fiscal year 2023,
FSU awarded institutional aid totaling approximately $5.3 million to 1,664
students.
Our review disclosed that FSU did not always verify the residency status when
making awards to ensure the student was eligible for the award and the proper
amount of aid was awarded. Our test of 16 students8 who received institutional
8 Our selection was made from higher risk awards, including cases in which the award amount
differed from the expected award amount based on the student’s residency status.
14

--- Page 17 ---
aid based on either merit or need totaling $100,650, disclosed that 6 students
received an award amount based on regional or out-of-state residency status even
though they were classified as in-state students at the time of the award. In
addition, 7 other students received an institutional aid award designated only for
in-state students even though they were classified as regional or out-of-state
students at the time of the award.
We calculated that improper awards totaling $54,650 were made to these students.
These amounts were either refunded to the students or remained in the student
accounts to cover other potential costs. Furthermore, one student was awarded
$9,000 less than they should have been because their award amount was based on
in-state residency status even though they were classified as a regional student at
the time of the award. FSU was not aware of these errors until we brought them
to its attention.
Recommendation 5
We recommend that FSU
a. ensure that all institutional aid award amounts reflect the correct student
residency status; and
b. review the aid awarded to students, including those noted above, and take
appropriate corrective action.
Payroll
Finding 6
FSU did not ensure that all critical payroll related transactions, including
adjustments to employee leave balances and other earnings transactions,
were independently reviewed for propriety.
Analysis
FSU did not ensure that all critical payroll transactions, including adjustments to
employee leave balances and other earnings transactions such as leave payouts,
were independently reviewed for propriety. Between August 26, 2019 and July
15, 2023, FSU processed 591 adjustments that increased employee leave balances
by 20,569 hours and 291 adjustments that decreased leave balances by 2,647
hours. During that same period, FSU processed approximately $5.7 million in
other earnings transactions.
15

--- Page 18 ---
 FSU did not use available system output reports of leave adjustments to
ensure that such adjustments were proper. Our test of four material leave
adjustments that increased leave balances by 3,979 hours disclosed two
adjustments that increased the leave of two employees by 929 hours that did
not appear to be proper. Specifically, the adjustments added leave accrued by
these employees when they worked at a community college when BOR
policies and procedures only allow for the transfer of leave from leave accrued
at other USM institutions or a State agency. Based on our calculations using
the employees’ current salaries, the value of the 929 hours totaled
approximately $24,000.
 Reviews performed to ensure the propriety of other earnings transactions were
performed by employees who were responsible for processing these
transactions, and therefore were not independent. FSU was unable to generate
an output report that readily identified the specific employees who processed
individual other earnings transactions. As a result, we were unable to test
such transactions processed by these employees.
Recommendation 6
We recommend that FSU
a. use available output reports to independently verify leave balance
adjustments to ensure that only valid adjustments have been processed
and take appropriate corrective action when errors are noted, including
those noted above; and
b. perform independent supervisory reviews of other earnings transactions
to supporting documentation.
Cash Receipts
Finding 7
FSU employees responsible for verifying that recorded collections were
deposited also had access to the related collections prior to deposit.
Analysis
FSU did not independently verify that all collections received and recorded at the
university and student billing office (primarily for tuition, fees, and room and
board) were deposited. According to the State’s accounting records that office’s
collections totaled approximately $25.6 million during fiscal year 2023.
Our review disclosed that the two employees responsible for performing deposit
verifications also had access to the related collection prior to deposit. As a result,
16

--- Page 19 ---
errors or other discrepancies could occur without timely detection. The
Comptroller of Maryland’s Accounting Procedures Manual requires an
independent verification of collections to deposit. Our test of three days
collections, totaling $312,375, disclosed that all tested collections were deposited
intact.
Recommendation 7
We recommend that FSU ensure that an employee without access to
collections verifies all recorded collections to deposit. We advised FSU on
accomplishing the necessary separation of duties using existing personnel.
17

--- Page 20 ---
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the University System of
Maryland (USM) – Frostburg State University (FSU) for the period beginning
August 26, 2019 and ending July 15, 2023. The audit was conducted in
accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards. Those
standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient,
appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and
conclusions based on our audit objectives. We believe that the evidence obtained
provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit
objectives.
As prescribed by the State Government Article, Section 2-1221 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, the objectives of this audit were to examine FSU’s financial
transactions, records, and internal control, and to evaluate its compliance with
applicable State laws, rules, and regulations.
In planning and conducting our audit, we focused on the major financial-related
areas of operations based on assessments of significance and risk. The areas
addressed by the audit included procurements and disbursements, student
accounts receivable, financial aid, cash receipts, payroll, corporate purchasing
cards, and information systems security and control. We also determined the
status of the findings contained in our preceding audit report.
Our audit did not include certain support services provided to FSU by the USM
Office and the University of Maryland College Park on a centralized basis for
several other units of USM, such as bond financing and processing certain
construction vendor payments, respectively. These support services are included
within the scope of our audits of the USM Office and the University of Maryland
College Park. In addition, our audit did not include an evaluation of internal
controls over compliance with federal laws and regulations for federal financial
assistance programs and an assessment of FSU’s compliance with those laws and
regulations because the State of Maryland engages an independent accounting
firm to annually audit such programs administered by State agencies, including
the components of the USM.
Our assessment of internal controls was based on agency procedures and controls
in place at the time of our fieldwork. Our tests of transactions and other auditing
procedures were generally focused on the transactions occurring during our audit
period of August 26, 2019 to July 15, 2023, but may include transactions before
or after this period as we considered necessary to achieve our audit objectives.
18

--- Page 21 ---
To accomplish our audit objectives, our audit procedures included inquiries of
appropriate personnel, inspections of documents and records, tests of transactions,
and to the extent practicable, observations of FSU’s operations. Generally,
transactions were selected for testing based on auditor judgment, which primarily
considers risk, the timing or dollar amount of the transaction, or the significance
of the transaction to the area of operation reviewed. As a matter of course, we do
not normally use sampling in our tests, so unless otherwise specifically indicated,
neither statistical nor non-statistical audit sampling was used to select the
transactions tested. Therefore, unless sampling is specifically indicated in a
finding, the results from any tests conducted or disclosed by us cannot be used to
project those results to the entire population from which the test items were
selected.
We also performed various data extracts of pertinent information from the State’s
Financial Management Information System (such as revenue and expenditure
data) and the State’s Central Payroll Bureau (payroll data), as well as from the
contractor administering the State’s Corporate Purchasing Card Program (credit
card activity). The extracts are performed as part of ongoing internal processes
established by the Office of Legislative Audits and were subject to various tests to
determine data reliability. We determined that the data extracted from these
sources were sufficiently reliable for the purposes the data were used during this
audit.
We also extracted data from FSU’s financial system for the purpose of testing
certain areas, such as student accounts receivable and financial aid. We
performed various tests of the relevant data and determined that the data were
sufficiently reliable for the purposes the data were used during the audit. Finally,
we performed other auditing procedures that we considered necessary to achieve
our audit objectives. The reliability of data used in this report for background or
informational purposes was not assessed.
FSU’s management is responsible for establishing and maintaining effective
internal control. Internal control is a process designed to provide reasonable
assurance that objectives pertaining to the reliability of financial records;
effectiveness and efficiency of operations, including safeguarding of assets; and
compliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations are achieved. As
provided in Government Auditing Standards, there are five components of
internal control: control environment, risk assessment, control activities,
information and communication, and monitoring. Each of the five components,
when significant to the audit objectives, and as applicable to FSU, were
considered by us during the course of this audit.
19

--- Page 22 ---
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate.
Our reports are designed to assist the Maryland General Assembly in exercising
its legislative oversight function and to provide constructive recommendations for
improving State operations. As a result, our reports generally do not address
activities we reviewed that are functioning properly.
This report includes findings relating to conditions that we consider to be
significant deficiencies in the design or operation of internal control that could
adversely affect FSU’s ability to maintain reliable financial records, operate
effectively and efficiently, and/or comply with applicable laws, rules, and
regulations. Our report also includes findings regarding significant instances of
noncompliance with applicable laws, rules, or regulations. Other less significant
findings were communicated to FSU that did not warrant inclusion in this report.
The response from the USM Office, on behalf of FSU, to our findings and
recommendations is included as an appendix to this report. As prescribed in the
State Government Article, Section 2-1224 of the Annotated Code of Maryland,
we will advise the USM Office regarding the results of our review of its response.
20

--- Page 23 ---
APPENDIX
3300 METZEROTT ROAD // ADELPHI, MD 20783
WWW.USMD.EDU // 301.445.1923
OFFICE OF ADMINISTRATION AND FINANCE
September 9, 2024
Mr. Brian S. Tanen, CPA, CFE
Legislative Auditor
Office of Legislative Audits
The Warehouse at Camden Yards
351 West Camden Street, Suite 400
Baltimore, MD 21201
Re: University System of Maryland – Frostburg State University
Period of Audit: August 26, 2019 through July 15, 2023
Dear Mr. Tanen,
Thank you for the work of your team and the recommendations you provided. I have enclosed the
University System of Maryland’s responses to your draft report covering the examination of the accounts
and records of the University System of Maryland – Frostburg State University. Our comments refer to the
individual items in the report.
Sincerely,
Ellen Herbst
Senior Vice Chancellor for Administration and Finance
Enclosures
cc: Dr. Ronald Nowaczyk, President, FSU
Ms. Linda R. Gooden, Chair, University System of Maryland Board of Regents
Mr. Louis M. Pope, University System of Maryland Board of Regents
Dr. Jay A. Perman, Chancellor, University System of Maryland
Ms. Celeste Denson, Associate Vice Chancellor for Financial Affairs, USM Office
Mr. David Mosca, Vice Chancellor for Accountability, USM Office
Mr. Michael C. Eismeier, Associate Vice Chancellor and CIO, USM Office
Ms. Samantha Norris, Director, Financial Planning and Analysis, USM Office
Mr. Troy Donoway, Vice President of Administration and Finance, FSU

--- Page 24 ---
University System of Maryland
Frostburg State University
Agency Response Form
Contracts and Disbursements
Finding 1
FSU did not exercise adequate due diligence or comply with certain
procurement policies when it procured a new financial aid system. FSU
subsequently determined it was not cost effective to continue using the
system and opted to discontinue the contract resulting in the loss of all
$680,000 expended on the system.
We recommend that FSU
a. comply with BOR policies and procedures and exercise sufficient due
diligence when procuring future contracts, and
b. include a provision for liquidated damages in future contracts.
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide The financial aid system referenced is a with a vendor FSU has an
additional comments as existing contract. Some of the $680,000 expended for the system would
deemed necessary. have been incurred had FSU continued with the existing system. The
software system was implemented and in use for a period of time before
deciding to return to our previous system. Had FSU not procured that
financial aid system, costs would have still been incurred for continuing
the use of the existing software and for the services of associated
consultants.
FSU disagrees that adequate due diligence was not performed. While not
documented, each decision was given full consideration as being in the
best interest of FSU and the goal of ensuring students were awarded
financial aid in a timely manner. FSU does not agree that a $680,000
loss was incurred. The Financial Aid System was used for three years at
a total cost of $680,000, and student financial aid was successfully
awarded to students during this period. The difference in costs between
the original Financial Aid System and the new System for the three-year
period is $103,000.
Although a successful implementation, there were challenges with the
new System and personnel. Key leadership that were instrumental in
deciding to go with the new technology were no longer with university
within a year of the implementation There was also a complete turnover
Page 1 of 10

--- Page 25 ---
University System of Maryland
Frostburg State University
Agency Response Form
of financial aid staff. The new staff and leadership were more
knowledgeable of the original Financial Aid Software. These factors
along with an analysis of ongoing costs led FSU to make the decision in
the best interest of the University and the students, to return to the
original financial aid system.
Auditor’s Comment: While FSU agrees with our recommendations, it disagrees that
adequate due diligence was not performed and does not agree that a $680,000 loss was
incurred. In regard to the due diligence, FSU acknowledged that they have no
documentation of their due diligence efforts and as such we have no way to verify the
assertions made in its response. In regard to the lost funds, FSU’s response indicates that
the loss was significantly lower because it used the system for a short period prior to the
decision to discontinue its use. Since the system was not intended to be temporary, we
believe that the decision to discontinue using the system would constitute the loss of the
related costs. Furthermore, FSU did not dispute the amount lost during or subsequent to
the audit field work and only raised the concern in its response to the report. In addition,
FSU’s explanation of the circumstances leading up to the decision to discontinue the
system has changed multiple times. Given these conflicting explanations, lack of support
for the decisions made on this contract, and its calculation of the amount lost, we stand by
the facts presented in this report.
Recommendation 1a Agree Estimated Completion Date: 12/01/2024
Please provide details of FSU agrees it did not complete a sole source justification for this
corrective action or purchase. FSU will follow USM’s Procurement Policy and Procedures
explain disagreement. when procuring future contracts.
FSU also agrees that documentation of the due diligence performed on
this project was not adequate. FSU is in the process of developing
methodology to document major IT decisions going forward. This
methodology will include input by the appropriate departments (IT,
Finance, Procurement, Legal) for completeness. Prior to approval of
major IT projects, FSU will document the due diligence steps completed
that led to the decision being made.
Recommendation 1b Agree Estimated Completion Date: 01/01/2025
Page 2 of 10

--- Page 26 ---
University System of Maryland
Frostburg State University
Agency Response Form
Please provide details of FSU will discuss with legal counsel, IT professionals and procurement
corrective action or as to whether including liquidated damages provision in future contracts
explain disagreement. is appropriate.
Page 3 of 10

--- Page 27 ---
University System of Maryland
Frostburg State University
Agency Response Form
Finding 2
FSU did not competitively procure student mental health services initially
obtained without competition in October 2019 through an emergency
procurement, and then extended multiple years using questionable sole
source justifications. FSU also did not obtain required Board of Public
Works (BPW) approval when contract costs exceeded $1 million or ensure
rates paid were consistent with the contract.
We recommend that FSU
a. use a competitive procurement process for the aforementioned student mental
health services;
b. timely prepare and document required justifications when competitive
procurement is not used;
c. obtain required BPW approval when contract costs exceed $1 million;
and
d. take steps to identify and recover all overpayments made for the
aforementioned services, including those noted above.
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 2a Agree Estimated Completion Date: 01/01/2025
Please provide details of FSU is in the process of putting out an RFP for these services on eMMA.
corrective action or
explain disagreement.
Recommendation 2b Agree Estimated Completion Date: 01/01/2025
Please provide details of Going forward, FSU will ensure that required justifications are
corrective action or completed in a timely manner.
explain disagreement.
Page 4 of 10

--- Page 28 ---
University System of Maryland
Frostburg State University
Agency Response Form
Recommendation 2c Agree Estimated Completion Date: 07/01/2024
Please provide details of Going forward, FSU will ensure that required BPW approval is obtained
corrective action or when contract costs exceed $1 million.
explain disagreement.
Recommendation 2d Disagree Estimated Completion Date: N/A
Please provide details of No overpayments exist in relation to the aforementioned contract.
corrective action or
explain disagreement.
Auditor’s Comment: FSU disagrees that any overpayments exist with the contract. As
noted in our Analysis, an addendum to the contract was signed in August of 2023
indicating new rates to pay the vendor beginning in October of 2023, the start of the next
contract year. FSU paid these new increased rates prior to October 2023. FSU did not
dispute the factual accuracy of any of these statements in its response accordingly, we
stand by our finding that the amounts paid were improper and the related costs should be
recovered.
Page 5 of 10

--- Page 29 ---
University System of Maryland
Frostburg State University
Agency Response Form
Finding 3
FSU did not verify that its use of contracts procured by other entities was in
the best interest of FSU as required by BOR procurement policies and
procedures. FSU also did not verify that rates charged were consistent with
the related contracts.
We recommend that FSU document its compliance with USM policies and
verify that
a. its use of contracts established by other organizations, institutions, or
agencies is in the best interest of FSU, and that the contracts were
properly procured (repeat); and
b. amounts invoiced by vendors are consistent with established contract
rates (repeat).
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 3a Agree Estimated Completion Date: 01/01/2025
Please provide details of As FSU enters future contracts, we will comply with the USM policies
corrective action or that are in effect at the time of the contract. FSU is in the process of
explain disagreement. reviewing current procedures with the intention of determining if any
changes need to be made in order to ensure compliance and will
implement any such changes deemed necessary.
Recommendation 3b Agree Estimated Completion Date: 01/01/2025
Please provide details of The functional contract administrator will be responsible for verifying
corrective action or that prices are consistent with contract rates.
explain disagreement.
Page 6 of 10

--- Page 30 ---
University System of Maryland
Frostburg State University
Agency Response Form
Student Accounts Receivable
Finding 4
FSU had not established sufficient controls over student residency
determinations and certain adjustments recorded in student accounts.
We recommend that FSU
a. ensure that independent supervisory reviews of all initial student
residency determinations and residency status changes recorded in the
student accounts receivable system are conducted and documented, and
b. ensure that an independent verification of non-cash credit adjustments is
performed utilizing a report generated by an independent employee.
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 4a Agree Estimated Completion Date: 09/01/2024
Please provide details of FSU is in the process of implementing new procedures to improve
corrective action or segregation of duties to ensure that an independent review is performed
explain disagreement. and properly documented on all student residency changes. The Data
Control Clerk Lead in the Admissions Office will perform the review
and will not have access to make residency changes.
Recommendation 4b Agree Estimated Completion Date: 07/01/2024
Please provide details of An independent verification of non-cash credit adjustments has been
corrective action or implemented. An employee independent of entering non-cash credits and
explain disagreement. independent of the verification process will run the report and perform
the reconciliations.
Page 7 of 10

--- Page 31 ---
University System of Maryland
Frostburg State University
Agency Response Form
Student Financial Aid
Finding 5
FSU did not ensure that all institutional aid awards, which were based in
part on the student’s residency status, reflected the student’s actual
residency status at the time of award. We identified incorrect awards
totaling approximately $64,000.
We recommend that FSU
a. ensure that all institutional aid award amounts reflect the correct student
residency status; and
b. review the aid awarded to students, including those noted above, and take
appropriate corrective action.
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 5a Agree Estimated Completion Date: 09/01/2024
Please provide details of FSU will implement procedures to utilize query and disbursement setup
corrective action or rules to identify students who change residency after they have been
explain disagreement. awarded aid. Any aid adjustments based on the change of residency will
be performed as needed.
Recommendation 5b Agree Estimated Completion Date: 09/01/2024
Please provide details of FSU is in the process of reviewing the aid awards in question and will
corrective action or make appropriate corrections on a case-by-case basis as determined by
explain disagreement. the review.
Page 8 of 10

--- Page 32 ---
University System of Maryland
Frostburg State University
Agency Response Form
Payroll
Finding 6
FSU did not ensure that all critical payroll related transactions, including
adjustments to employee leave balances and other earnings transactions,
were independently reviewed for propriety.
We recommend that FSU
a. use available output reports to independently verify leave balance
adjustments to ensure that only valid adjustments have been processed
and take appropriate corrective action when errors are noted, including
those noted above; and
b. perform independent supervisory reviews of other earnings transactions
to supporting documentation.
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 6a Agree Estimated Completion Date: 09/01/2024
Please provide details of The Benefits Manager reviewed and corrected the accrued sick leave
corrective action or balance errors as identified. Affected employees were notified via letter
explain disagreement. on November 9, 2023. Going forward, the Benefits Manger will ensure
that unused sick leave earned when employed by a community college
will not be transferred to FSU and notify new employees as such at the
time of hire. FSU will implement a tracking system to ensure that only
valid leave balance adjustments are processed and take appropriate
action in the event that any errors are discovered.
Recommendation 6b Agree Estimated Completion Date: 07/01/2024
Please provide details of An approval process will be put into operation with the implementation
corrective action or of Workday.
explain disagreement.
Page 9 of 10

--- Page 33 ---
University System of Maryland
Frostburg State University
Agency Response Form
Cash Receipts
Finding 7
FSU employees responsible for verifying that recorded collections were
deposited also had access to the related collections prior to deposit.
We recommend that FSU ensure that an employee without access to
collections verifies all recorded collections to deposit. We advised FSU on
accomplishing the necessary separation of duties using existing personnel.
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 7 Agree Estimated Completion Date: 06/01/2024
Please provide details of In order to create a proper segregation of duties, as of October 2023, the
corrective action or University and Student Bulling Bursar’s access to the cash registers was
explain disagreement. removed. This employee does not have access to check scanning.
Effective June 1, 2024, the Assistant Bursar’s access to the cash registers
and check scanning has been removed.
Page 10 of 10

--- Page 34 ---
A T
UDIT EAM
Adam J. Westover, CPA
Audit Manager
Edwin L. Paul, CPA, CISA
R. Brendan Coffey, CPA, CISA
Information Systems Audit Managers
Walter L. Horan IV
Senior Auditor
Matthew D. Walbert, CISA
Malcolm J. Woodard
Information Systems Senior Auditors
Michael A. Birchfield
Keli R. Edmonds
Dorian A. Fournier, CIA
Zoe D. Smith
Staff Auditors
Christopher C. Pitre
Information Systems Staff Auditor