Title: Review of Local Government Audit Reports - Fiscal Year Ending June 30, 2019
Date: 08/27/2020
Type: Special Reports and Letters
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5f47abb8a1ce58156c65d90e
Extracted: 2025-06-19T11:43:25.330060
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Review of Local Government Audit Reports
Fiscal Year Ending June 30, 2019
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Senator Clarence K. Lam, M.D. (Senate Chair) Delegate Carol L Krimm (House Chair)
Senator Malcolm L. Augustine Delegate Steven J. Arentz
Senator Adelaide C. Eckardt Delegate Mark S. Chang
Senator George C. Edwards Delegate Andrea Fletcher Harrison
Senator Katie Fry Hester Delegate Keith E. Haynes
Senator Cheryl C. Kagan Delegate Michael A. Jackson
Senator Benjamin F. Kramer Delegate David Moon
Senator Cory V. McCray Delegate April R. Rose
Senator Justin D. Ready Delegate Geraldine Valentino-Smith
Senator Craig J. Zucker Delegate Karen Lewis Young
To Obtain Further Information
Office of Legislative Audits
301 West Preston Street, Room 1202
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Phone: 410-946-5900 ꞏ 301-970-5900 ꞏ 1-877-486-9964 (Toll Free in Maryland)
Maryland Relay: 711
TTY: 410-946-5401 ꞏ 301-970-5401
E-mail: OLAWebmaster@ola.state.md.us
Website: www.ola.state.md.us
To Report Fraud
The Office of Legislative Audits operates a Fraud Hotline to report fraud, waste, or abuse involving State
of Maryland government resources. Reports of fraud, waste, or abuse may be communicated anonymously
by a toll-free call to 1-877-FRAUD-11, by mail to the Fraud Hotline, c/o Office of Legislative Audits, or
through the Office’s website.
Nondiscrimination Statement
The Department of Legislative Services does not discriminate on the basis of age, ancestry, color, creed,
marital status, national origin, race, religion, gender, gender identity, sexual orientation, or disability in the
admission or access to its programs, services, or activities. The Department’s Information Officer has been
designated to coordinate compliance with the nondiscrimination requirements contained in Section 35.107
of the United States Department of Justice Regulations. Requests for assistance should be directed to the
Information Officer at 410-946-5400 or 410-970-5400.

--- Page 3 ---
August 27, 2020
Senator Clarence K. Lam, M.D., Senate Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Delegate Carol L Krimm, House Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Members of Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Annapolis, Maryland
The Honorable Peter V. R. Franchot
Comptroller of Maryland
Ms. Victoria L. Gruber, Executive Director
Department of Legislative Services
Ladies and Gentlemen:
In accordance with the Local Government Article, Section 16-307 of the
Annotated Code of Maryland, we have performed desk reviews of the audit
reports for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2019 filed by each county, incorporated
city or town, and taxing district in Maryland (referred to as local governments).
We also reviewed overdue audit reports for prior fiscal years that were received
over the past year. The desk reviews consisted of assessments of compliance with
certain accounting and auditing standards, evaluations of compliance with certain
State laws, and analyses of selected financial data to identify potential financial
problems.
Most of the financial statements filed by the local governments for the fiscal year
ended June 30, 2019, along with the related independent auditors’ reports,
complied with the accounting and auditing standards that we assessed.
Nevertheless, we identified instances of noncompliance with certain requirements
of our audit guidelines, generally accepted accounting principles, and/or generally
accepted auditing standards. Letters were sent to 48 local governments and, as
applicable, to their independent auditors to notify them of the deficiencies
disclosed by our reviews so that corrective actions could be taken to help ensure
future compliance.

--- Page 4 ---
A number of audit reports were not filed timely in accordance with the
requirements of State law. As of July 30, 2020, eight local governments had not
submitted audit reports for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2019; one of these also
had not filed audit reports for the fiscal years ended June 30, 2018 and 2017.
If a local government does not comply with the audit report filing requirements,
State law provides that the Comptroller of Maryland, on notice from the
Executive Director of the Department of Legislative Services, may order the
discontinuance of all moneys, grants, or State aid to which the local governments
are entitled. We notified the Executive Director of the Department of Legislative
Services of the local government with more than one audit report outstanding.
The fiscal year 2019 financial statements disclosed 10 local governments with
cash deposits that were not adequately collateralized, or otherwise insured, which
is an area of noncompliance with State law. As appropriate, letters were sent to
these local governments, and to their legislative representatives, to communicate
their noncompliance and to request that the local governments advise us of the
corrective actions that will be taken.
Respectfully submitted,
Gregory A. Hook, CPA
Legislative Auditor
2

--- Page 5 ---
Table of Contents
Introduction and Scope 5
Results of Desk Reviews 7
Audit Reports
Finding 1 – A number of local governments had not filed the required 7
audit reports or had filed after the required filing date.
Finding 2 – Auditor’s report for one local government contained 8
a qualified opinion on two opinion units.
Finding 3 – Auditors’ reports for nine local governmental units were 8
not presented in accordance with certain generally accepted
auditing standards.
Financial Statements
Finding 4 – Financial statements submitted by 19 local governments 9
did not meet certain requirements of generally accepted
accounting principles.
Finding 5 – Financial statements, accompanying notes, and required 10
supplementary information did not include certain disclosures
required by generally accepted accounting principles for three
local governments.
Noncompliance with State Law
Finding 6 – Financial statements of 10 local governments contained 11
disclosures that cash deposits were not adequately collateralized,
or otherwise insured, as required by State law.
Potential Financial Problems
Finding 7 – For audit reports received, no local governments were 11
identified with potential financial problems relating to unrestricted
general fund deficit balances or unfavorable financial trends and
ratios.
Special Taxing Districts
Finding 8 – The required reports had not been filed for four special 12
taxing districts as of July 30, 2020.
3

--- Page 6 ---
Exhibit A – Schedule of Audit Reports Containing Disclosures 13
That Cash Deposits Were Not Fully Collateralized or Otherwise
Insured
4

--- Page 7 ---
Introduction and Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
The Local Government Article, Section 16-306 of the Annotated Code of
Maryland requires each county, incorporated city or town, and taxing district in
Maryland (referred to in this report as local governments) to file annual (or once
every four years under specified conditions) audit reports. There were 189 local
government audit reports due for our fiscal year 2019 review (25 counties, 148
cities and towns, and 16 taxing areas that are created under State law). The
reports are to include financial statements, with accompanying notes, and
auditors’ reports that express opinions as to whether the financial statements are
fairly presented. The financial statements are required to be prepared in
accordance with generally accepted accounting principles and audited in
accordance with generally accepted auditing standards. Finally, we annually
prepare and distribute audit guidelines to provide additional information regarding
the accounting, reporting, and auditing requirements.
The Local Government Article, Section 16-307 of the Code requires the Office of
Legislative Audits to perform a desk review of each local government’s annual
audit report for compliance with generally accepted accounting principles and
auditing standards. As part of the desk review process, we also addressed other
attributes as described below. Section 16-308 of the Article specifies the
reporting and review requirements applicable to special taxing districts created by
the counties. The applicable county is responsible for reviewing each special
taxing district’s compliance with the applicable provisions of the law and for
submitting the districts’ reports to the Office of Legislative Audits. The Office is
required to review the results of the counties’ reviews and the districts’ reports for
compliance with the law.
We conducted a desk review of each of the fiscal year 2019 reports that had been
received from the counties, incorporated cities and towns, and taxing districts.
We also reviewed one fiscal year 2016 report (Town of Deer Park); two fiscal
year 2017 reports (Town of Lonaconing and City of Mount Rainier); and seven
fiscal year 2018 reports (Allegany County, City of Hyattsville, Town of
Lonaconing, City of Mount Rainier, City of Seat Pleasant, Bel Air Special Taxing
Area, and Upper Potomac River Commission) that were received over the last
year. The desk reviews consisted of reviewing each audit report in order to
accomplish the following tasks:
 Identify areas of noncompliance with our audit guidelines and certain
accounting and auditing standards pertaining to the presentation of the
financial statements and auditors’ reports.
5

--- Page 8 ---
 Identify any instances of noncompliance with certain provisions of State law
(for example, collateral for bank deposits, timely filing of audit reports).
 Identify local governments with potential financial problems relating to deficit
fund balances or unfavorable trends and ratios, based on analyses of financial
data over the most recent five-year period (July 1, 2014 through June 30,
2019).
We also reviewed each of the fiscal year 2019 special taxing district reports
received and the related results of the counties’ reviews of these reports. The
purpose of our review was to ensure that the counties had reviewed the reports
submitted for compliance with the provisions of the law and to identify instances
in which required reports were not submitted.
At the conclusion of our review, letters were sent to applicable local governments
and their independent auditors to notify them of the deficiencies disclosed during
the review so that corrective actions can be taken to help ensure future
compliance. Additionally, as appropriate, letters were also sent to local
governments, and to their legislative representatives, to communicate certain
noncompliance with State law. For these issues, the local governments were
asked to advise us of corrective actions that will be taken.
6

--- Page 9 ---
Results of Desk Reviews
Audit Reports
Finding 1
A number of local governments had not filed the required audit reports or
had filed after the required filing date.
As of July 30, 2020, eight local governments were delinquent in filing audit
reports as required by the Local Government Article of the Annotated Code of
Maryland.
Local Government Fiscal Years Outstanding
Town of Chesapeake City 2019
Town of Deer Park 2017, 2018, 2019
City of Hyattsville 2019
City of Mount Rainier 2019
City of Seat Pleasant 2019
Bel Air Special Taxing Area 2019
Mount Savage Special Taxing Area 2019
Upper Potomac River Commission 2019
Furthermore, 23 local governments submitted audit reports after the required
filing date. The submission of audit reports after the required filing date was also
noted for 10 of these 23 local governments during at least our preceding year’s
review. The failure of a local government to file an audit report, or a delay in
filing, results in the lack of timely accountability to its citizens. The Local
Government Article, Section 16-306 of the Annotated Code of Maryland
generally requires audit reports to be filed on or before October 31 after the close
of the fiscal year or on or before December 31 after the close of the fiscal year for
those local governments with a population of more than 400,000.
Budget language adopted during previous sessions of the Maryland General
Assemble has resulted in the withholding of transportation aid from certain local
governments pending receipt of their delinquent audit reports. Furthermore, the
failure to file a required report with the Department of Legislative Services for
three successive years provides the Executive Director with reasonable cause to
suppose that the municipality is no longer actively operating under its charter,
which could cause the municipality to have its charter repealed. The failure of the
Town of Deer Park to file the required reports for the fiscal years ending June 30,
2017, 2018, and 2019 has been reported to the Executive Director.
7

--- Page 10 ---
Subsequent to July 30, 2020, the Bel Air Special Taxing Area submitted its audit
report for fiscal year 2019. We will review all delinquent audit reports and take
any follow-up action necessary when the reports are received. The results of
these reviews will be included in the report on our review of fiscal year 2020 local
government audit reports.
The towns of Barclay, Barton, Brookview, Burkittsville, Church Creek, Eldorado,
Galestown, Goldsboro, Henderson, Highland Beach, Hillsboro, Mardela Springs,
Marydel, Port Tobacco, Queen Anne, Rosemont, and Templeville previously
requested and were granted waivers from filing audit reports. These local
governments met the conditions for filing an audit report every fourth year as
provided for under the Local Government Article, Section 16-305 of the Code
and, depending on the waiver period, will be required to file its next audit report
for either fiscal year 2020, 2021, or 2022.
Finding 2
The auditor’s report for one local government contained a qualified opinion
on two opinion units.
The auditor’s report for the Town of Hancock contained a qualified opinion on
the Business-type activities and Enterprise Funds opinion units because the
auditor was unable to obtain sufficient appropriate audit evidence regarding the
accounts receivable balance as of June 30, 2019 and charges for services for the
fiscal year ended June 30, 2019 for each of the major Enterprise Funds.
Although required by our audit guidelines, the auditor for the Town of Hancock
did not submit a separate letter to the Office of Legislative Audits explaining the
reason for the qualified opinion, and the Town’s plans to rectify the problem to
enable the auditor to express unqualified opinions in the future.
Finding 3
Auditors’ reports for nine local governmental units were not presented in
accordance with certain generally accepted auditing standards.
Auditors’ reports for nine local governmental units were not presented in
accordance with certain generally accepted auditing standards. The following is a
summary of these deficiencies:
8

--- Page 11 ---
Number of
Area of Noncompliance
Audit Reports
Auditor’s report did not include all basic elements (for 5
example, auditor did not include an emphasis-of-
matter paragraph related to adjustments to correct a
material misstatement in the previously issued
financial statements).
Auditor did not express an opinion on all opinion units or 4
financial statements.
The Local Government Article, Section 16-306 of the Annotated Code of
Maryland requires that audits be performed in accordance with generally accepted
auditing standards. These standards require, in part, that the auditor express an
opinion(s) as to whether the basic financial statements present fairly, in all
material respects, the respective financial position, the respective changes in
financial position, and cash flows, where applicable, of the local government in
conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of
America.
Financial Statements
Finding 4
Financial statements submitted by 19 local governments did not meet certain
requirements of generally accepted accounting principles.
Financial statements submitted by 19 local governments did not meet certain
requirements of generally accepted accounting principles. The financial
statements of 5 of these 19 local governments included more than one such
deficiency. The financial statements of 1 of these 19 local governments included
a deficiency that was also cited during our preceding year’s review. The
following is a summary of the deficiencies and the corresponding number of
instances:
9

--- Page 12 ---
Number of
Deficiency
Instances
All required financial statements were not presented or 9
presentation of statement(s) was inappropriate.
Misclassification or improper presentation (for example, 9
presentation of net position was improper).
Governmental fund balances were not properly 5
classified.
Items reported as assets, deferred outflows of resources, 2
liabilities, or deferred inflows of resources were not
properly displayed.
Finding 5
Financial statements, accompanying notes, and required supplementary
information did not include certain disclosures required by generally
accepted accounting principles for three local governments.
Certain required information was not included in the financial statements, or
disclosed in the accompanying notes, or the required supplementary information,
for three audit reports. The financial statements of one of these local governments
included a deficiency that was also cited during our preceding year’s review.
Adequate disclosure is necessary to facilitate the understanding of and to provide
for fair presentation of the financial information. The following is a summary of
the areas of insufficient disclosure and the corresponding number of instances:
Number of
Area of Insufficient Disclosure
Instances
Information related to other postemployment benefits 2
Revenue recognition policies 1
10

--- Page 13 ---
Noncompliance with State Law
Finding 6
Financial statements of 10 local governments contained disclosures that
cash deposits were not adequately collateralized, or otherwise insured, as
required by State law.
Twelve financial statements for 10 local governments (primarily from fiscal year
2019, but also from fiscal years 2018 and 2017) contained disclosures that cash
deposits were not adequately collateralized, or otherwise insured, as required by
State law (Exhibit A). The Local Government Article, Section 17-101 of the
Annotated Code of Maryland requires that deposits with financial institutions by
local governmental units be fully collateralized. Full collateralization minimizes
the risk of loss of deposits in the event the financial institution defaults. In
addition, this law requires that collateral be of the types specified in the State
Finance and Procurement Article, Section 6-202 of the Code.
Potential Financial Problems
Finding 7
For audit reports received, no local governments were identified with
potential financial problems relating to unrestricted general fund deficit
balances or unfavorable trends and ratios.
For those local governments that submitted audit reports, we did not identify any
potential financial problems relating to unrestricted general fund deficit balances
or unfavorable trends and ratios, based on our analyses of financial data over the
most recent five-year period (July 1, 2014 through June 30, 2019).
Special Taxing Districts
The preceding contents of this report are applicable to local governments filing
audit reports in accordance with the provisions of the Local Government Article,
Section 16-306 of the Code. Section 16-308 of this Article requires that certain
types of special taxing districts (created by a county) file annual audit or financial
reports with the county in which the districts are located not later than 90 days
after the close of the fiscal year, in accordance with the rules and regulations
established by the applicable county. The applicable county is responsible for
11

--- Page 14 ---
reviewing each district’s compliance with the applicable provisions of the law and
for submitting copies of these reports to the Office of Legislative Audits.
Finding 8
The required reports had not been filed for four special taxing districts as of
July 30, 2020.
As of July 30, 2020, we had not received the required reports for the fiscal year
ended June 30, 2019 for four special taxing districts, which are located in Anne
Arundel County. Anne Arundel County advised us that they were in the process
of pursuing compliance with the applicable filing requirement for these districts
and that appropriate follow-up action would be taken (for example, withholding
funds).
12

--- Page 15 ---
Exhibit A
Schedule of Audit Reports Containing Disclosures That Cash
Deposits Were Not Fully Collateralized or Otherwise Insured
Similar Disclosures
Uninsured/ Included in Audit
Uncollateralized Reports for Each Fiscal
Entity Amount Year Since
At June 30, 2019
Counties
Howard County $304,532 2016
Wicomico County 472,732 2014
Cities and Towns
City of Annapolis 341,508 2017
Town of Brentwood 500,001 2016
Town of Capitol Heights 363,664
Town of Garrett Park 320,774
Town of Hancock 408,315
Town of Lonaconing 236,263 2017
Village of Martin’s Additions 6,243
Town of Morningside 91,736 2018
At June 30, 2018
Cities and Towns
Town of Lonaconing 47,245 2017
At June 30, 2017
Cities and Towns
Town of Lonaconing 91,058
13

--- Page 16 ---
A T
UDIT EAM
Bekana Edossa, CPA, CFE
Audit Manager
Catherine M. Easter
Senior Auditor
John B. Wachter, CFE
Staff Auditor