Title: Review of Community College Audit Reports - Fiscal Year Ending June 30, 2019
Date: 09/11/2020
Type: Special Reports and Letters
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5f5b9f26a1ce580ef80394d0
Extracted: 2025-06-19T11:44:04.316604
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Review of Community College Audit Reports
Fiscal Year Ending June 30, 2019
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Senator Clarence K. Lam, M.D. (Senate Chair) Delegate Carol L Krimm (House Chair)
Senator Malcolm L. Augustine Delegate Steven J. Arentz
Senator Adelaide C. Eckardt Delegate Mark S. Chang
Senator George C. Edwards Delegate Andrea Fletcher Harrison
Senator Katie Fry Hester Delegate Keith E. Haynes
Senator Cheryl C. Kagan Delegate Michael A. Jackson
Senator Benjamin F. Kramer Delegate David Moon
Senator Cory V. McCray Delegate April R. Rose
Senator Justin D. Ready Delegate Geraldine Valentino-Smith
Senator Craig J. Zucker Delegate Karen Lewis Young
To Obtain Further Information
Office of Legislative Audits
301 West Preston Street, Room 1202
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Phone: 410-946-5900 ꞏ 301-970-5900 ꞏ 1-877-486-9964 (Toll Free in Maryland)
Maryland Relay: 711
TTY: 410-946-5401 ꞏ 301-970-5401
E-mail: OLAWebmaster@ola.state.md.us
Website: www.ola.state.md.us
To Report Fraud
The Office of Legislative Audits operates a Fraud Hotline to report fraud, waste, or abuse involving State
of Maryland government resources. Reports of fraud, waste, or abuse may be communicated anonymously
by a toll-free call to 1-877-FRAUD-11, by mail to the Fraud Hotline, c/o Office of Legislative Audits, or
through the Office’s website.
Nondiscrimination Statement
The Department of Legislative Services does not discriminate on the basis of age, ancestry, color, creed,
marital status, national origin, race, religion, gender, gender identity, sexual orientation, or disability in the
admission or access to its programs, services, or activities. The Department’s Information Officer has been
designated to coordinate compliance with the nondiscrimination requirements contained in Section 35.107
of the United States Department of Justice Regulations. Requests for assistance should be directed to the
Information Officer at 410-946-5400 or 410-970-5400.

--- Page 3 ---
September 11, 2020
Senator Clarence K. Lam, M.D., Senate Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Delegate Carol L Krimm, House Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Members of Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Annapolis, Maryland
Mr. Ian D. MacFarlane, Chair
Maryland Higher Education Commission
Ms. Victoria L. Gruber, Executive Director
Department of Legislative Services
Ladies and Gentlemen:
In accordance with the provisions of the Education Article, Section 16-315(h) of
the Annotated Code of Maryland, we have reviewed the audit reports that must be
filed by 15 of the State’s community colleges with the Maryland Higher
Education Commission (MHEC) for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2019.
Our review disclosed that the community colleges and their independent auditors
substantially complied with the applicable statutes and the guidelines promulgated
by MHEC. Specifically, our review disclosed that all opinions expressed by the
colleges’ independent auditors stated that the applicable financial statements were
fairly presented in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in
the United States of America. However, we did identify one audit report with an
instance of noncompliance with generally accepted auditing standards.
Furthermore, we noted six colleges had deficit balances in unrestricted net
position as of June 30, 2019.
Additionally, for one college, the independent auditor reported a material
weakness related to certain compliance requirements for fiscal year 2019. In this
instance, MHEC evaluated the adequacy of the college’s response to the material
weakness and concluded that appropriate corrective actions were indicated, and
stated that it would continue to monitor corrective actions taken by the college.

--- Page 4 ---
A draft copy of this report was provided to MHEC for review and comment.
Since there are no recommendations in this report, a written response was not
necessary.
Respectfully submitted,
Gregory A. Hook, CPA
Legislative Auditor
2

--- Page 5 ---
Purpose of Review and Background Information
In accordance with the provisions of the Education Article, Section 16-315(h) of
the Annotated Code of Maryland, we have reviewed the audit reports that must be
filed by 15 of the State’s community colleges with the Maryland Higher
Education Commission (MHEC) for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2019. We
reviewed these audit reports to determine compliance with the applicable statutes
and the guidelines promulgated by MHEC. We also reviewed the reports to
determine if any of the community colleges had deficit balances in unrestricted
net position, or uninsured/uncollateralized bank deposits. This report contains the
results of that review.
According to the State’s records, State aid totaling approximately $322.9 million
was granted to 15 of Maryland’s 16 community colleges for the fiscal year ended
June 30, 2019. This aid primarily consisted of funding based on cost and student
enrollment data. In addition, it included certain retirement benefits and various
other grants. The remaining college (Baltimore City Community College) is a
budgetary unit of the State and receives an annual State appropriation. Baltimore
City Community College is not subject to the Education Article, Section 16-
315(h) of the Annotated Code of Maryland; however, it obtains annual financial
statement audits that are conducted by a certified public accounting firm. The
College is also subject to fiscal compliance audits by the Office of Legislative
Audits for which separate audit reports are issued.
The Education Article, Section 16-315(a) of the Annotated Code of Maryland
requires MHEC to adopt guidelines for the preparation of annual audit reports on
the colleges. The guidelines promulgated by MHEC as State regulations require
independent auditors to express opinions as to the fairness of presentation of the
colleges’ financial statements as well as of the cost and student enrollment data
used for calculating the State aid to the colleges. The guidelines also require the
auditors to issue management letters containing all material weaknesses in the
colleges’ systems of internal controls. While not required, many of the auditors
issue management letters that contain additional recommendations that were not
considered material weaknesses.
3

--- Page 6 ---
Results of Review
Audit Reports
Thirteen of the 15 audit reports for fiscal year 2019 were filed timely.
Our review disclosed that 13 of the 15 community college audit reports were filed
timely with the Maryland Higher Education Commission (MHEC) for the fiscal
year ended June 30, 2019. The two community college that submitted audit
reports after the required filing date were Allegany College and Garrett College,
both of which filed later than the extension dates granted.
The State’s community colleges are required by law to file annual audit reports
within 90 days of the fiscal year end (June 30) unless an extension is granted.
All audit reports expressed unqualified opinions; however, one report was
not presented in accordance with generally accepted auditing standards.
Our review disclosed that all 15 community college audit reports for the fiscal
year ended June 30, 2019 contained unqualified opinions from their auditors. An
unqualified opinion is issued when the auditor states that the applicable financial
statements are presented fairly, in all material respects, in conformity with
accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America.
However, one community college’s audit report reviewed for fiscal year 2019 was
not presented in accordance with certain generally accepted auditing standards.
Specifically, the College of Southern Maryland’s audit report did not describe the
degree of responsibility taken for certain required supplementary information that
accompanied the College’s basic financial statements. In this regard, the
independent auditor’s report did not describe the degree of responsibility taken for
the “Schedule of the College’s Proportionate Share of the Net Pension Liability.”
MHEC advised us that it would notify the college of this deficiency and ensure
that the deficiency is corrected in future audits.
MHEC’s audit guidelines require the auditors to express opinions as to the
fairness of the presentation of the colleges’ financial statements and that the audits
be performed in accordance with generally accepted auditing standards.
4

--- Page 7 ---
Financial Statements
Six community colleges’ financial statements disclosed deficit balances in the
unrestricted portion of their net position at June 30, 2019.
Our review disclosed six colleges with deficit balances in the unrestricted
component of their net position as of June 30, 2019.
Colleges with Deficit Unrestricted Balances as of June 30, 2019
Unrestricted Net Position
College
Deficit
Anne Arundel Community College $54,089,774
Community College of Baltimore County $82,950,996
Carroll Community College $13,964,025
Howard Community College $5,188,059
Montgomery College $33,452,922
Prince George’s Community College $49,695,002
This situation was also noted in the financial statements for Anne Arundel
Community College, Community College of Baltimore County, and Carroll
Community College for each fiscal year since 2011, 2016, and 2009, respectively.
Howard Community College, Montgomery College, and Prince George’s
Community College have had a deficit unrestricted balance since fiscal year 2018.
An unrestricted net position deficit balance represents the cost of current or past
services that will need to be financed in the future periods and could indicate a
potential financial problem.
We did not perform a detailed analysis to determine the cause of these deficits;
nevertheless, the colleges’ financial statements and accompanying notes
contained certain pertinent information relative to the deficits. Specifically, our
review of the colleges’ financial statements disclosed that the unrestricted net
position could be attributed at least in part to other postemployment benefit
5

--- Page 8 ---
liabilities, which at June 30, 2019 totaled $38.0 million for Anne Arundel
Community College; $110.1 million for the Community College of Baltimore
County; $19.4 million for Carroll Community College; $34.2 million for Howard
Community College; $9.2 million for Montgomery College; and $84.8 million
for Prince George’s Community College.
Generally accepted accounting principles specify that liabilities for
postemployment benefits (such as healthcare benefits), which are deferred until
retirement or another future event, be recognized in the years in which the
employee provides services rather than during the postemployment period when
payments are made.
Management Letters and Compliance
Management letters for fiscal year 2019 included a total of 11
recommendations for improvement related to 5 colleges’ compliance with
requirements. One of these recommendations was considered a material
weakness.
We reviewed the management letters applicable to the audits of the community
colleges that were filed with MHEC for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2019. Our
review disclosed that 10 of the community colleges did not receive any
recommendations; the remaining 5 community colleges received a total of 11
recommendations. One of these recommendations was considered a material
weakness. The material weakness existed at Prince George’s Community College
and was related to accounting and financial reporting. Specifically, the College
duplicated the recording of certain payables resulting in the overstatement of
accounts payable and capital assets.
As required by the Education Article, Section 16-315(c) of the Annotated Code of
Maryland, MHEC evaluated the adequacy of the College’s response to the
material weakness, determined that appropriate corrective action was indicated,
and stated that it would continue to monitor corrective actions taken by the
College.
MHEC was not required to formally evaluate the adequacy of the colleges’
responses to the 10 other recommendations since, in accordance with MHEC’s
guidelines, comments and suggestions related to these non-material deficiencies
are not required. When auditors include such items in the letters, the colleges’
follow-up actions are subject to the auditors’ review during subsequent audits.
6

--- Page 9 ---
The following schedule provides a summary of the fiscal year 2019
recommendations by fiscal area. Two of the 11 recommendations were repeated
from the preceding year.
Management Letter Recommendations for Fiscal Year 2019
Number of
Fiscal Area of Recommendation Recommendations
Financial aid 4
Accounting and financial reporting 3
Student enrollment and residency 2
Grants and contracts 2
Total 11
7

--- Page 10 ---
A T
UDIT EAM
Bekana Edossa, CPA, CFE
Audit Manager
Catherine M. Easter
Senior Auditor
John Wachter, CFE
Staff Auditor