Title: Maryland Department of Transportation - Motor Vehicle Administration
Date: 09/23/2020
Type: Fiscal Compliance
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5f6b8d53a1ce580958d2dc8a
Extracted: 2025-06-19T11:44:13.672655
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Audit Report
Maryland Department of Transportation
Motor Vehicle Administration
May 2024
Public Notice
In compliance with the requirements of the State Government Article Section
2-1224(i) of the Annotated Code of Maryland, the Office of Legislative Audits
has redacted cybersecurity findings and related auditee responses
from this public report.
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Senator Clarence K. Lam, M.D. (Senate Chair) Delegate Jared Solomon (House Chair)
Senator Joanne C. Benson Delegate Steven J. Arentz
Senator Paul D. Corderman Delegate Andrea Fletcher Harrison
Senator Katie Fry Hester Delegate Steven C. Johnson
Senator Shelly L. Hettleman Delegate Mary A. Lehman
Senator Cheryl C. Kagan Delegate David Moon
Senator Cory V. McCray Delegate Julie Palakovich Carr
Senator Justin D. Ready Delegate Stephanie M. Smith
Senator Bryan W. Simonaire Delegate M. Courtney Watson
Senator Craig J. Zucker One Vacancy
To Obtain Further Information
Office of Legislative Audits
The Warehouse at Camden Yards
351 West Camden Street, Suite 400
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Phone: 410-946-5900
Maryland Relay: 711
TTY: 410-946-5401 ꞏ 301-970-5401
E-mail: webmaster@ola.state.md.us
Website: www.ola.state.md.us
To Report Fraud
The Office of Legislative Audits operates a Fraud Hotline to report fraud, waste, or abuse involving State
of Maryland government resources. Reports of fraud, waste, or abuse may be communicated anonymously
by a toll-free call to 1-877-FRAUD-11, by mail to the Fraud Hotline, c/o Office of Legislative Audits, or
through the Office’s website.
Nondiscrimination Statement
The Department of Legislative Services does not discriminate on the basis of age, ancestry, color, creed,
marital status, national origin, race, religion, gender, gender identity, sexual orientation, or disability in the
admission or access to its programs, services, or activities. The Department’s Information Officer has been
designated to coordinate compliance with the nondiscrimination requirements contained in Section 35.107
of the United States Department of Justice Regulations. Requests for assistance should be directed to the
Information Officer at 410-946-5400 or 410-970-5400.

--- Page 3 ---
May 15, 2024
Senator Clarence K. Lam, M.D., Senate Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Delegate Jared Solomon, House Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Members of Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Annapolis, Maryland
Ladies and Gentlemen:
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the Maryland Department of
Transportation (MDOT) – Motor Vehicle Administration (MVA) for the period
beginning June 3, 2019 and ending December 31, 2022. MVA’s primary purpose
is to oversee a variety of activities related to the ownership and operation of motor
vehicles, including the registration and titling of vehicles.
Our audit disclosed a cybersecurity-related finding. However, in accordance with
the State Government Article, Section 2-1224(i) of the Annotated Code of
Maryland, we have redacted the finding from this audit report. Specifically, State
law requires the Office of Legislative Audits to redact cybersecurity findings in a
manner consistent with auditing best practices before the report is made available
to the public. The term “cybersecurity” is defined in the State Finance and
Procurement Article, Section 3.5-301(b), and using our professional judgment we
have determined that the redacted finding falls under the referenced definition.
The specifics of the cybersecurity finding were previously communicated to those
parties responsible for acting on our recommendations.
Our audit also included a review to determine the status of the nine findings
contained in our preceding audit report. We call your attention to our
determination that MVA satisfactorily addressed all prior audit findings.
MDOT’s response to this audit, on behalf of MVA, is included as an appendix to
this report; however, consistent with the requirements of State law, we have
redacted all elements of MDOT’s response since they are related to a
cybersecurity finding. We reviewed the response to our finding and related
recommendations, and have concluded that the corrective actions identified are
sufficient to address all issues.

--- Page 4 ---
We wish to acknowledge the cooperation extended to us during the audit by
MVA. We also wish to acknowledge MDOT’s and MVA’s willingness to
address the audit issues and implement appropriate corrective actions.
Respectfully submitted,
Gregory A. Hook, CPA
Legislative Auditor
2

--- Page 5 ---
Background Information
Agency Responsibilities
The Motor Vehicle Administration (MVA) is part of the Maryland Department of
Transportation and functions under certain provisions of the Transportation
Article of the Annotated Code of Maryland. MVA has jurisdiction over a variety
of activities related to the ownership and operation of motor vehicles, including
the registration and titling of vehicles and the vehicle emissions inspection
program (VEIP). MVA maintains a headquarters location in Anne Arundel
County and 24 branch offices throughout the State with a total authorized
workforce of approximately 1,700 employees. Further, MVA maintains 18 VEIP
stations and an additional 10 self-service VEIP kiosks. According to MVA
records, during fiscal year 2023, MVA’s collections, which primarily consisted of
motor vehicle excise tax receipts and vehicle registration fees, totaled
approximately $1.8 billion. According to the State’s records, MVA’s
expenditures totaled approximately $241.7 million during fiscal year 2023 (see
Figure 1).
Figure 1
MVA Positions, Expenditures, and Funding Sources
Full-Time Equivalent Positions as of June 30, 2023
Positions Percent
Filled 1,565 91.7%
Vacant 142 8.3%
Total 1,707
Fiscal Year 2023 Expenditures
Expenditures Percent
Salaries, Wages and Fringe Benefits $140,768,035 58.2%
Technical and Special Fees 359,915 0.2%
Operating Expenses 100,571,524 41.6%
Total $241,699,474
Fiscal Year 2023 Funding Sources
Funding Percent
Special Fund $232,332,093 96.1%
Federal Fund 9,367,381 3.9%
Total $241,699,474
Source: State financial and personnel records
3

--- Page 6 ---
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report
Our audit included a review to determine the status of the nine findings contained
in our preceding audit report dated September 23, 2020. We determined that
MVA satisfactorily addressed these findings.
Findings and Recommendations
Information Systems Security and Control
We determined that Finding 1 related to “cybersecurity,” as defined by the State
Finance and Procurement Article, Section 3.5-301(b) of the Annotated Code of
Maryland, and therefore is subject to redaction from the publicly available audit
report in accordance with the State Government Article 2-1224(i). Consequently,
the specifics of the following finding, including the analysis, related
recommendations, along with MDOT’s response, have been redacted from this
report copy.
Finding 1
Redacted cybersecurity-related finding.
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the Maryland Department of
Transportation (MDOT) – Motor Vehicle Administration (MVA) for the period
beginning June 3, 2019 and ending December 31, 2022. The audit was conducted
in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards. Those
standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient,
appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and
conclusions based on our audit objectives. We believe that the evidence obtained
provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit
objectives.
As prescribed by the State Government Article, Section 2-1221 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, the objectives of this audit were to examine MVA’s financial
transactions, records, and internal control, and to evaluate its compliance with
applicable State laws, rules, and regulations.
4

--- Page 7 ---
In planning and conducting our audit, we focused on the major financial-related
areas of operations based on assessments of significance and risk. The areas
addressed by the audit included the titling and registration, licensing, license
suspension and revocation, and insurance compliance processes, as well as
procurements and disbursements for MVA’s operating expenses, cash receipts,
payroll, and information systems security and control. We also determined the
status of the findings contained in our preceding audit report.
Our audit did not include certain payroll support services (such as processing of
personnel transactions and maintenance of employee leave records) provided to
MVA by MDOT – The Secretary’s Office. These support services are included
within the scope of our audit of MDOT. Our audit also did not include an
evaluation of internal controls over compliance with federal laws and regulations
for federal financial assistance programs and an assessment of MVA’s
compliance with those laws and regulations because the State of Maryland
engages an independent accounting firm to annually audit such programs
administered by State agencies, including MVA.
Our assessment of internal controls was based on agency procedures and controls
in place at the time of our fieldwork. Our tests of transactions and other auditing
procedures were generally focused on the transactions occurring during our audit
period of June 3, 2019 to December 31, 2022, but may include transactions before
or after this period as we considered necessary to achieve our audit objectives.
To accomplish our audit objectives, our audit procedures included inquiries of
appropriate personnel, inspections of documents and records, tests of transactions,
and to the extent practicable, observations of MVA’s operations. Generally,
transactions were selected for testing based on auditor judgment, which primarily
considers risk, the timing or dollar amount of the transaction, or the significance
of the transaction to the area of operation reviewed. As a matter of course, we do
not normally use sampling in our tests, so unless otherwise specifically indicated,
neither statistical nor non-statistical audit sampling was used to select the
transactions tested. Therefore, unless sampling is specifically indicated in a
finding, the results from any tests conducted or disclosed by us cannot be used to
project those results to the entire population from which the test items were
selected.
We performed various data extracts of pertinent information from the State’s
Financial Management Information System (such as revenue and expenditure
data) and the State’s Central Payroll Bureau (payroll data), as well as from the
contractor administering the State’s Corporate Purchasing Card Program (credit
card activity). The extracts are performed as part of ongoing internal processes
5

--- Page 8 ---
established by the Office of Legislative Audits and were subject to various tests to
determine data reliability. We determined that the data extracted from these
sources were sufficiently reliable for the purposes the data were used during this
audit.
We also extracted data from MVA’s automated systems for the purpose of testing
the propriety of licenses issued and motor vehicle registration and titling, as well
as certain administrative actions such as license suspensions and revocations. We
performed various tests of the relevant data and determined that the data were
sufficiently reliable for the purposes the data were used during the audit. Finally,
we performed other auditing procedures that we considered necessary to achieve
our audit objectives. The reliability of data used in this report for background or
informational purposes was not assessed.
MVA’s management is responsible for establishing and maintaining effective
internal control. Internal control is a process designed to provide reasonable
assurance that objectives pertaining to the reliability of financial records;
effectiveness and efficiency of operations, including safeguarding of assets; and
compliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations are achieved. As
provided in Government Auditing Standards, there are five components of
internal control: control environment, risk assessment, control activities,
information and communication, and monitoring. Each of the five components,
when significant to the audit objectives, and as applicable to MVA, were
considered by us during the course of this audit.
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate.
Our reports are designed to assist the Maryland General Assembly in exercising
its legislative oversight function and to provide constructive recommendations for
improving State operations. As a result, our reports generally do not address
activities we reviewed that are functioning properly.
This report includes a finding relating to conditions that we consider to be
significant deficiencies in the design or operation of internal control that could
adversely affect MVA’s ability to maintain reliable financial records, operate
effectively and efficiently, and/or comply with applicable laws, rules, and
regulations. This finding is also considered a significant instance of
noncompliance with applicable laws, rules, or regulations. Other less significant
findings were communicated to MVA that did not warrant inclusion in this report.
6

--- Page 9 ---
State Government Article Section 2-1224(i) requires that we redact in a manner
consistent with auditing best practices any cybersecurity findings before a report
is made available to the public. This results in the issuance of two different
versions of an audit report that contains cybersecurity findings – a redacted
version for the public and an unredacted version for government officials
responsible for acting on our audit recommendations.
The State Finance and Procurement Article, Section 3.5-301(b), states that
cybersecurity is defined as “processes or capabilities wherein systems,
communications, and information are protected and defended against damage,
unauthorized use or modification, and exploitation.” Based on that definition, and
in our professional judgment, we concluded that the finding in this report falls
under that definition. Consequently, for the publicly available audit report all
specifics as to the nature of cybersecurity findings and required corrective actions
have been redacted. We have determined that such aforementioned practices, and
government auditing standards, support the redaction of this information from the
public audit report. The specifics of the cybersecurity finding have been
communicated to MVA and those parties responsible for acting on our
recommendations in an unredacted audit report.
The response from MDOT, on behalf of MVA, to our finding and
recommendations is included as an appendix to this report. Depending on the
version of the audit report, responses to any cybersecurity findings may be
redacted in accordance with State law. As prescribed in the State Government
Article, Section 2-1224 of the Annotated Code of Maryland, we will advise
MDOT regarding the results of our review of its response.
7

--- Page 10 ---
APPENDIX

--- Page 11 ---
Maryland Department of Transportation
Motor Vehicle Administration
Agency Response Form
Information Systems Security and Control
The Office of Legislative Audits (OLA) has determined that Finding 1 related to
“cybersecurity,” as defined by the State Finance and Procurement Article, Section 3.5-
301(b) of the Annotated Code of Maryland, and therefore is subject to redaction from the
publicly available audit report in accordance with the State Government Article 2-
1224(i). Although the specifics of the finding, including the analysis, related
recommendations, along with MDOT’s responses, have been redacted from this report
copy, MDOT’s responses indicated agreement with the finding and related
recommendations.
Finding 1
Redacted cybersecurity-related finding.
Agency Response has been redacted by OLA.
Page 1 of 1

--- Page 12 ---
A T
UDIT EAM
Mark S. Hagenbuch, CPA
Audit Manager
R.Brendan Coffey, CPA, CISA
Edwin L. Paul, CPA, CISA
Information Systems Audit Managers
David R. Fahnestock, CPA
Data Analytics Manager
Nicholas J. Caronna, CPA
Menachem Katz, CPA
Senior Auditors
Eric Alexander, CPA, CISA
Michael K. Bliss
Information Systems Senior Auditors
Charles H. Hinds, IV, CPA
Data Analytics Senior Auditor
Marcus J. Cheese
Ali A. Dayya
Owen M. Long-Grant
Kareem R. Jackson
Oluwafemi E. Ogundolie
Samantha J. Rhea
Staff Auditors
Vickey K. Micah
Joshua A. Nicodemus
Information Systems Staff Auditors