Title: Wicomico County Public Schools
Date: 10/08/2020
Type: Local School Systems
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5f7f984ea1ce580fcc2e50bc
Extracted: 2025-06-19T11:44:48.301515
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Financial Management Practices Audit Report
Wicomico County Public Schools
October 2020
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Senator Clarence K. Lam, M.D. (Senate Chair) Delegate Carol L. Krimm (House Chair)
Senator Malcolm L. Augustine Delegate Steven J. Arentz
Senator Adelaide C. Eckardt Delegate Mark S. Chang
Senator George C. Edwards Delegate Andrea Fletcher Harrison
Senator Katie Fry Hester Delegate Keith E. Haynes
Senator Cheryl C. Kagan Delegate Michael A. Jackson
Senator Benjamin F. Kramer Delegate David Moon
Senator Cory V. McCray Delegate April R. Rose
Senator Justin D. Ready Delegate Geraldine Valentino-Smith
Senator Craig J. Zucker Delegate Karen Lewis Young
To Obtain Further Information
Office of Legislative Audits
301 West Preston Street, Room 1202
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Phone: 410-946-5900 ꞏ 301-970-5900 ꞏ 1-877-486-9964 (Toll Free in Maryland)
Maryland Relay: 711
TTY: 410-946-5401 ꞏ 301-970-5401
E-mail: OLAWebmaster@ola.state.md.us
Website: www.ola.state.md.us
To Report Fraud
The Office of Legislative Audits operates a Fraud Hotline to report fraud, waste, or abuse involving State
of Maryland government resources. Reports of fraud, waste, or abuse may be communicated anonymously
by a toll-free call to 1-877-FRAUD-11, by mail to the Fraud Hotline, c/o Office of Legislative Audits, or
through the Office’s website.
Nondiscrimination Statement
The Department of Legislative Services does not discriminate on the basis of age, ancestry, color, creed,
marital status, national origin, race, religion, gender, gender identity, sexual orientation, or disability in the
admission or access to its programs, services, or activities. The Department’s Information Officer has been
designated to coordinate compliance with the nondiscrimination requirements contained in Section 35.107
of the United States Department of Justice Regulations. Requests for assistance should be directed to the
Information Officer at 410-946-5400 or 410-970-5400.

--- Page 3 ---
October 8, 2020
Senator Clarence K. Lam, M.D., Senate Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Delegate Carol L. Krimm, House Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Members of Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Annapolis, Maryland
Ladies and Gentlemen:
We conducted an audit of the financial management practices of the Wicomico
County Public Schools (WCPS) in accordance with the requirements of the State
Government Article, Section 2-1220(e) of the Annotated Code of Maryland. The
objectives of this audit were to evaluate whether WCPS’ procedures and controls
were effective in accounting for and safeguarding its assets and whether its
policies provided for the efficient use of financial resources.
Our audit disclosed that WCPS needs to improve internal controls and
accountability in certain areas, including payroll processing, information systems,
and procurement and disbursements. For example, adequate access controls had
not been established over its financial management system.
We also found that significant risks existed within WCPS’ computer network.
For example, monitoring of security activities over critical systems was not
sufficient and its computer network was not properly secured. In this regard,
publicly accessible servers were located in the WCPS internal network rather than
being isolated in a separate protected network zone to minimize security risks.
In addition, WCPS’ procurement policies were not sufficiently comprehensive
and WCPS did not always verify amounts billed with contract terms for
intergovernmental cooperative purchasing agreements. Furthermore, we
identified certain practices which, if implemented, could provide opportunities for
achieving cost savings in student transportation. Specifically, WCPS had not
performed a system-wide route analysis, and some bus routes were operating at
less than 50 percent of the desired capacity at the time of our review, which was
before the COVID-19 pandemic health crisis. We also found that certain
elements of the payments to bus contractors could not be supported and included

--- Page 4 ---
costs that should not have been reimbursed, resulting in higher payments than
necessary for student transportation services.
Finally, based on our current audit assessment of significance and risk to our audit
objectives, our audit included a review to determine the status of 13 of the 14
findings contained in our preceding audit report. We determined that WCPS
satisfactorily addressed 7 of these findings. The remaining 6 findings are
repeated in this report as 5 findings.
We conducted our audit fieldwork from October 7, 2019 to May 4, 2020. A
portion of our fieldwork included time in which the State’s local education
agencies were impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic health crisis. Specifically,
beginning on March 16, 2020, the State Superintendent of Schools decided to
close school and administrative buildings to employees and the public for a two-
week period. This was eventually extended for the remainder of the 2019-2020
school year with limited access by certain employees. Although all WCPS
buildings were closed for a portion of our fieldwork, the objectives and scope of
our audit were not significantly impacted. To the extent that the COVID-19 crisis
continues to impact WCPS operations, certain recommendations in this report
may need to be adjusted to ensure proper controls under the modified operations.
WCPS’ response to this audit is included as an appendix to this report. We
reviewed the response to our findings and related recommendations, and have
concluded that the corrective actions identified are sufficient to address all audit
issues. Finally, we have edited WCPS’ response to remove certain vendor names
or products, as allowed by our policy.
We wish to acknowledge the cooperation extended to us during the audit by
WCPS and its willingness to address the audit issues and implement appropriate
corrective actions.
Respectfully submitted,
Gregory A. Hook, CPA
Legislative Auditor
2

--- Page 5 ---
Table of Contents
Background Information 5
Statistical Overview 5
Oversight 6
External Audits 7
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report 8
Findings and Recommendations 10
Revenue and Billing Cycle 10
Federal Funds 11
Procurement and Disbursement Cycle
Finding 1 – Wicomico County Public Schools’ (WCPS) procurement 13
policies did not incorporate certain requirements of State law and
recognized best practices when evaluating the merits of participation
in intergovernmental cooperative purchasing agreements (ICPA). In
addition, ICPA invoices were not always properly approved and
verified to related price lists.
Human Resources and Payroll
Finding 2 – WCPS did not use available system reports to ensure that 15
electronic timesheets were validated and approved as required by its
policy. Our review identified numerous timesheets that were not
validated and/or approved as required.
Equipment Control and Accountability 16
Information Technology
 Finding 3 – WCPS did not ensure employee access to its automated 17
financial systems application was appropriate and adequately
controlled resulting in employees with unnecessary or incompatible
access.
* Denotes item repeated in full or part from preceding audit report
3

--- Page 6 ---
Finding 4 – Sensitive personally identifiable information was 18
maintained in a manner that did not provide adequate security
safeguards.
* Finding 5 – WCPS’ financial and student information system 19
applications lacked security activity monitoring, and password
controls for these applications and the internal computer network
were not sufficient.
 Finding 6 – Twelve publicly accessible servers were improperly located 20
within WCPS’ internal network.
Facilities Construction, Renovation, and Maintenance 20
Transportation Services
 Finding 7 – WCPS did not fully use its automated bus routing software 22
to identify alternative routes, or route and/or stop consolidations that
might reduce costs. Our review disclosed more than half of WCPS’
routes did not meet the minimum bus capacity goals.
 Finding 8 – Certain elements of the payments to bus contractors could 23
not be supported and included costs that should not have been
reimbursed, resulting in higher payments than necessary.
Food Services 25
School Board Oversight 26
Management of Other Risks 27
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology 28
Agency Response Appendix
* Denotes item repeated in full or part from preceding audit report
4

--- Page 7 ---
Background Information
Statistical Overview
Enrollment
According to student enrollment records compiled by the Maryland State
Department of Education (MSDE), Wicomico County Public Schools (WCPS)
ranks 15th in student enrollment among the 24 public school systems in Maryland.
Fiscal year 2019 full-time student enrollment was 14,949 students. WCPS had 27
schools, consisting of 16 elementary, 4 middle schools, 4 high schools, and 3
other types of schools (including alternative, vocational, and early learning).
Funding
WCPS revenues consist primarily of funds received from the State, Wicomico
County, and the federal government. According to WCPS’ audited financial
statements, revenues from all sources totaled approximately $249 million in fiscal
year 2019; including approximately $171 million from the State. See Figure 1
below for WCPS’ revenue sources per enrolled student in fiscal year 2019
according to its audited financial statements.
Figure 1
WCPS’ Revenue Sources Per Enrolled Student
Fiscal Year 2019
Source: WCPS’ Fiscal Year 2019 Audited Financial Statements and MSDE Data
5

--- Page 8 ---
Expenditures
According to WCPS’ audited financial statements, fiscal year 2019 expenditures
were approximately $250 million. The largest expenditure category was salaries
and wages, including benefits, which accounted for approximately 72 percent of
total expenditures during fiscal year 2019. According to MSDE records, during
the 2018-2019 school year, WCPS had 2,294 full-time equivalent positions,
which consisted of 1,650 instructional and 644 non-instructional positions (see
Figure 2).
Figure 2
WCPS Expenditures by Category and Selected Statistical Data
Fiscal Year 2019
(amounts in millions)
Source: WCPS' Fiscal Year 2019 Audited Financial Statements and MSDE Data
Oversight
WCPS is governed by a local school board, consisting of seven elected voting
members and four non-voting student members. In accordance with State law,
MSDE provides considerable oversight of WCPS through the establishment and
monitoring of various financial and academic policies and regulations. MSDE
also works with WCPS to comply with the requirements and mandates of federal
law. The Wicomico County government also exercises authority over WCPS
primarily through the review and approval of WCPS’ annual operating and capital
budgets.
6

--- Page 9 ---
External Audits
WCPS engages a certified public accounting firm to independently audit its
annual financial statements. The audit firm performs procedures to verify the
amounts and disclosures in the financial statements. The audit also evaluates the
appropriateness of accounting policies used and the reasonableness of significant
accounting estimates made by management. In the related audit reports, the firm
stated that the financial statements presented fairly, in all material respects, the
financial position of WCPS as of June 30, 2015, 2016, 2017, 2018, and 2019, and
the changes in its financial position and, where applicable, its cash flows for the
years then ended in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in
the United States of America.
Additionally, in accordance with Government Auditing Standards, as part of the
audited financial statements the accounting firm also issued separate reports on
WCPS’ control over financial reporting and its tests of WCPS’ compliance with
certain provisions of laws, regulations, contracts, grant agreements and other
matters. This report is an integral part of the annual independent audited annual
financial statements. Furthermore, the accounting firm also conducts the Single
Audit of WCPS’ federal grant programs. The Single Audit is intended to provide
assurance to the federal government that adequate internal controls are in place,
and the entity is generally in compliance with certain program requirements.
We reviewed the aforementioned financial statement audits for fiscal years 2015
through 2019, and examined the related work papers for the fiscal year 2019
audit. We also reviewed the Single Audit reports for fiscal years 2015 through
2018 and the related work papers for the fiscal year 2018 Single Audit, which was
the latest available during our audit fieldwork.
Certain work of the independent certified public accounting firm, which we
determined was reliable, covered areas included in the scope of our audit. As a
result, we did not conduct any audit work related to the following areas:
 State and local government revenues received via wire transfer
 Accounts receivables
 Federal grant activity
The independent accounting firm did not disclose any material deficiencies in
these areas.
7

--- Page 10 ---
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report
Based on our current assessment of significance and risk relative to our audit
objectives, our audit included a review to determine the status of 13 of the 14
findings contained in our preceding audit report dated March 5, 2014. As
disclosed in Table 1, we determined that WCPS satisfactorily addressed 7 of these
findings. The remaining 6 findings are repeated in this report as 5 findings.
8

--- Page 11 ---
Table 1
Status of Preceding Findings
Preceding Implementation
Finding Description
Finding Status
WCPS did not adequately restrict user access capabilities on Repeated
Finding 1
its automated procurement and accounts payable system. (Current Finding 3)
WCPS does not have a formal policy on acceptable uses of
Finding 2 Not repeated
corporate purchasing cards.
WCPS did not adequately restrict user access capabilities on
its automated human resources and payroll system and Repeated
Finding 3
certain payroll transactions were not independently (Current Finding 3)
reviewed.
Certain WCPS employees received pay increases larger than
Finding 4 Not repeated
provided for in the labor agreement.
Internal controls and procedures over equipment disposals, Not repeated
Finding 5
records, and access to records were not adequate. (Not followed up on)
Account, password, and monitoring controls over critical Repeated
Finding 6
systems were not adequate. (Current Finding 5)
WCPS did not have an Information Technology Disaster
Finding 7 Recovery Plan and certain backup files for critical network Not repeated
devices were not properly stored.
The WCPS computer network was not adequately secured Repeated
Finding 8
against intrusions. (Current Finding 6)
WCPS’ bus routing procedures were not comprehensive and
Repeated
Finding 9 automated routing software capabilities were not adequately
(Current Finding 7)
utilized to develop more efficient routes.
WCPS did not base certain elements used to determine
Repeated
Finding 10 payment amounts to bus contractors on market conditions or
(Current Finding 8)
actual costs.
WCPS did not adequately ensure the accuracy of data used
Finding 11 Not repeated
to compute certain payments to the bus contractors.
Food services invoices were not adequately verified prior to
Finding 12 Not repeated
payment.
WCPS did not competitively bid health care contracts for
Finding 13 Not repeated
administrative services and stop-loss coverage.
WCPS did not ensure the propriety of payments for certain
Finding 14 Not repeated
employee and retiree health care costs.
9

--- Page 12 ---
Findings and Recommendations
Revenue and Billing Cycle
Background
Wicomico County Public Schools (WCPS) revenues consist primarily of funds
received from the State, Wicomico County, and the federal government.
According to WCPS’ audited financial statements, revenues from all sources
totaled approximately $249 million in fiscal year 2019; including approximately
$171 million from the State.
External Audits
There were similarities between the work of the independent certified public
accounting firm that audited the WCPS financial statements and the objectives of
our audit of certain revenue activities. As a result, we relied on this work to
provide audit coverage for State and local government revenues received via wire
transfer and accounts receivable, for which the auditor’s procedural review and
testing disclosed no material weaknesses or significant deficiencies.
School Activity Funds
Schools collect funds for other purposes such as student activities, clubs, and
school publications. Because they are not considered school revenue, these
school activity funds are accounted for separately by each school, and reported in
summary in the audited financial statements. During fiscal year 2019, school
activity collections totaled $2.5 million and the June 30, 2019 fund balance was
$643,000.
WCPS’ Board of Education (the Board) has a fiduciary responsibility to ensure
that school activity funds were used only for intended purposes. WCPS contracts
with an independent certified public accountant (CPA) to conduct annual reviews
of the school activity funds at each of its schools. The reviews consisted of
evaluating and testing compliance with the WCPS Accounting Manual for
Bookkeepers. The Manual establishes standard procedures for all schools to
follow to ensure school activity funds are adequately safeguarded and accounted
for in a uniform manner. The results of the CPA’s reviews were provided to the
respective school’s principal and WCPS management to be addressed. Our
review of the CPA’s findings during fiscal years 2018 and 2019 generally found
the management of these funds to be adequate and that any control weaknesses
identified were not prevalent. The CPA’s testing did not identify any
improprieties in regards to the misuse of funds.
10

--- Page 13 ---
In addition to the annual reviews performed by the CPA, a finance department
employee conducts school activity fund reviews to determine compliance with the
Manual by testing collections and disbursements, and ensuring that funds have
been properly accounted for. These internal school activity fund reviews are
performed at all schools annually and the related findings are discussed with
school principals and bookkeepers. The resultant reports we reviewed disclosed
that internal controls weaknesses were not prevalent and that control weaknesses
at certain schools were addressed by school management.
Conclusion
Based on our current assessment of significance and risk relative to our audit
objectives, and the consideration of the work performed by the independent CPA
and reviews performed by WCPS’ finance department, we relied on this work to
provide audit coverage in this area including procedures and controls related to
the accounting for and safeguarding of cash receipts with respect to revenue and
billing.
Federal Funds
Background
WCPS receives funds pertaining to federal government programs that are
generally restricted for use for a specific program (such as the School Lunch
Program or Special Education). According to WCPS’ Single Audit, fiscal year
2019 expenditures of federal funds totaled $20.3 million, not including federally
funded fee-for-service programs such as Medicaid reimbursement for special
education services.
Single Audit Report Disclosed No Reportable Conditions Regarding Federal
Grant Management
There were similarities in the work performed by the independent certified public
accounting firm that conducted the Single Audit of WCPS’ federal grants and the
objectives of our audit in this area. In addition to expressing an opinion on
WCPS’ compliance with the terms of several grant programs, the auditor also
considered the existing internal control structure’s impact on compliance and
audited the required Schedule of Expenditures of Federal Awards (which includes
claimed and reported grant expenditures) for fiscal year 2019.
The related report stated that WCPS complied, in all material respects, with the
requirements applicable to its major federal programs. With respect to internal
controls over compliance with, and the operation of, major federal programs, the
auditors did not identify any material weaknesses or significant deficiencies.
11

--- Page 14 ---
Medicaid Funds for Eligible Services
WCPS has established a procedure to identify children eligible for Medicaid-
subsidized services and the services rendered. Medicaid is an entitlement
program for which certain service costs can be reimbursed to WCPS. Medicaid
activity is not covered by the Single Audit of federal grants.
The Maryland State Department of Education’s Interagency Medicaid Monitoring
Team issued a report in August 2019 of the results of its review of 51 student case
files for 72 criteria (including the correct billing of Medicaid for eligible
services). The report found that WCPS was 100 percent compliant with 71
criteria and 90 percent compliant with the remaining criteria. According to
WCPS records, fiscal year 2019 state and federal reimbursements for Medicaid-
subsidized services totaled approximately $2.9 million.
Conclusion
Based on our current assessment of significance and risk relative to our audit
objectives, our audit did not include a review of Medicaid subsidized services.
We relied on the work of the independent certified public accounting firm that
conducted the Single Audits for all other work in the federal funds area, including
policies, procedures, and controls with respect to federal grants and expenditures.
Procurement and Disbursement Cycle
Background
According to the audited financial statements and WCPS records, disbursements,
excluding payroll, totaled $69.4 million during fiscal year 2019. WCPS uses an
automated system for purchases and disbursements. Requisitions are created in
the system by departments and are subject to on-line departmental and purchasing
department approvals. Purchase orders are prepared on the system by the
purchasing department based on the approved requisitions. The purchasing
department also generally handles the solicitation, bid evaluation, and
establishment of contracts. The receipt of goods and services is entered into the
automated system by the receiving school or department. Payments are then
processed by the finance department through the automated system that matches
receiving reports to appropriate purchasing documents and then prints vendor
checks and posts the payment to the financial records.
WCPS’ written procurement policies require that procurements exceeding
$25,000 ($50,000 effective November 7, 2017) be competitively bid in
accordance with Section 5-112 of the Education Article of the Annotated Code of
12

--- Page 15 ---
Maryland. Contracts and agreements exceeding $50,000 are to be approved by
the Board.
Finding 1
WCPS procurement policies did not incorporate certain requirements of
State law and recognized best practices when evaluating the merits of
participation in intergovernmental cooperative purchasing agreements
(ICPA). In addition, ICPA invoices were not always properly approved and
verified to related price lists.
Analysis
WCPS procurement policies did not incorporate certain requirements of State law
and recognized best practices when evaluating the merits of an ICPA for
participation. Specifically, the following statutory requirement and critical best
practices were not included in WCPS’ policies and were not consistently used
when obtaining goods and services under an ICPA.
 Prepare a written assessment of the benefits of using an ICPA, as required
by State law
 Analyze all costs of conducting competitive solicitations
 Research, compare, and evaluate available ICPAs
 Verify the ICPA solicitation was competitively bid and publicly advertised
and obtain originating agency’s competitive procurement documentation
(including public advertisements and proposal evaluations)
 Verify terms, scope of services, specifications, and price meet the entity’s
needs
 Execute an addendum of participation with the lead contract agency and
remove or incorporate necessary local terms and conditions
 Obtain a copy of the ICPA and related price lists for invoice verification
We tested WCPS’ participation in 10 ICPAs during fiscal years 2015 through
2020 with contract awards totaling approximately $14 million (including 3
construction contracts totaling $4.8 million). Our review disclosed that WCPS
did not have a written assessment of the benefits of using an ICPA for any of the
ICPAs tested, as required by State law. In addition, two of the six best practices
(analyzing the costs of conducting competitive solicitations and researching,
comparing, and evaluating other available ICPAs) were not performed for any of
the ICPAs tested and at least one of the remaining four best practices was not
performed for any of the ten ICPAs.
Incorporating the statutory requirement and best practices into WCPS policies
could help ensure they are consistently used when goods and services are obtained
13

--- Page 16 ---
under an ICPA. In this regard, another best practice (allowing utilization by other
parties) that had been included in the WCPS policies was incorporated into all 10
of the ICPAs we reviewed.
In addition, WCPS did not ensure that amounts invoiced by ICPA vendors agreed
with the related contract pricing. Specifically, our test of 24 payments totaling
$3.4 million related to the 10 ICPAs reviewed above disclosed that for 15
payments totaling $2.8 million, WCPS had either not obtained the price lists from
the lead agency or had not obtained manufacturer price information to verify it
was being charged the rates, or receiving the discounts, stated in the governing
ICPA. In addition, the invoices for 11 payments totaling $1.9 million were not
sufficiently detailed or contained differing product descriptions and could not be
verified to inclusion in the ICPA. We also identified 2 payments totaling
$623,000 for computer equipment that were approved for payment by accounting
management personnel without knowledge that the items billed had been
received. Although the invoices for 11 of the 24 payments tested did not have
sufficient detail to verify that the prices charged were appropriate and in
accordance with the governing ICPA, we were able to determine the
reasonableness of the prices charged on the invoices for the remaining 13
payments through available price lists or internet searches of comparable items.
State law, which legal counsel to the Maryland General Assembly advised us is
applicable to local education agencies, allows the use of cooperative purchasing
arrangements or ICPAs only after the using entity has determined (or assessed) in
writing that the use of such arrangements will provide cost benefits, promote
administrative efficiencies, or promote intergovernmental cooperation1. Further,
the Institute for Public Procurement, formerly known as the “National Institute of
Government Purchasing", as well as other public and educational organizations
have published ICPA best practices that include comprehensive multi-step
checklists that require, among other things (as per the list above), that prospective
ICPA users verify that the contract allows other entities to participate, the contract
was awarded through a competitive procurement process, and requires that
1 Section 13-110 of the State Finance and Procurement Article, of the Annotated Code of
Maryland in part, defines an intergovernmental cooperative purchasing agreement (ICPA). As
defined, an ICPA is a contract that is entered into by at least one governmental entity in a certain
manner, that is available for use by the governmental entity entering the contract and at least one
additional governmental entity, and that is intended to promote efficiency and savings that can
result from intergovernmental cooperative purchasing. The aforementioned law applies to all
ICPAs regardless of the services, goods, or commodities purchased. In addition, Section 5-
112(a)(3) of the Education Article, of the Code provides that local education agencies do not
need to conduct competitive procurements for goods and commodities if they use a contract
awarded by public agencies or intergovernmental purchasing organizations and the originating
procuring agency followed public bidding procedures.
14

--- Page 17 ---
addendums be executed documenting their participation and incorporating local
required terms and conditions.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that WCPS establish and adhere to the aforementioned
statutory requirement and six key best practices when using ICPAs.
Human Resources and Payroll
Background
Payroll expense represents the largest single cost component in the WCPS budget.
According to WCPS records, fiscal year 2019 salary, wage, and benefit costs
totaled $180 million, representing approximately 72 percent of the total
expenditures. According to Maryland State Department of Education reports,
during the 2018-2019 school year WCPS had 2,294 full-time positions, which
consisted of 1,650 instructional positions and 644 non-instructional positions.
WCPS uses automated systems to maintain human resources information, record
employee time, track leave usage, and process and record payroll transactions.
An identification badge scanning system is used for most full-time employees to
create electronic bi-weekly timesheets for on-line supervisory approval, while
manual timesheets are used for the remaining employees. Employees are required
to use direct deposit which is processed by WCPS’ payroll system.
Finding 2
WCPS did not use available system reports to ensure that all electronic
timesheets were validated and approved as required by its policy. Our
review identified numerous timesheets that were not validated and/or
approved as required.
Analysis
WCPS did not use available reports to ensure that all electronic timesheets were
validated and approved as required by its policy. Our review of a system report
for the pay period ending May 31, 2019, generated by WCPS at our request,
disclosed that 144 of the 1,627 timesheets (9 percent) did not have supervisory
approval including 78 that also were not validated by the applicable employee.
Payroll payments for these 144 time sheets totaled $323,000. Our test of payroll
for other pay periods disclosed similar results.
The majority of WCPS employees (such as teachers, administrators, and hourly
employees) prepared their timesheets by using an identification badge scanning
15

--- Page 18 ---
system to create electronic bi-weekly timesheets. WCPS’ Employee Handbook
stipulates that all WCPS employees must record their time and attendance in the
electronic time keeping system. We were advised by payroll personnel that
employees must validate their electronic timesheet in the automated time keeping
system within one work day after the end of the pay period and the respective
direct supervisor must approve the timesheet within two work days. The failure
to validate and approve the time sheets results in a lack of assurance as to the
accuracy of the hours reported and could affect the amount of pay received by
certain employees.
Recommendation 2
We recommend that WCPS use available reports from the automated time
keeping system to ensure all timesheets are validated and approved,
including those noted above.
Equipment Control and Accountability
Background
According to WCPS’ notes to the audited financial statements, the undepreciated
value of its capital equipment was $38.5 million as of June 30, 2019. WCPS
maintains centralized automated records for equipment with a cost of $5,000 or
more (including assets capitalized for financial statement purposes). In addition,
WCPS’ Management Information Systems Department maintains inventory
records for all sensitive items that are susceptible to theft such as computers
(laptops, tablets) and small items (cameras, portable tools) regardless of cost.
Conclusion
Based on our current assessment of significance and risk relative to our audit
objectives, our audit did not include a review of policies, procedures, and controls
with respect to the equipment area of operations.
Information Technology
Background
WCPS’ Management Information Systems Department maintains and administers
the WCPS financial, payroll, human resources, and student information systems
applications. The WCPS Technology Infrastructure Services Department
maintains and administers the WCPS telecommunications networks and a data
center server room. The WCPS network provides for connections to its individual
schools or offices. The data center contains core networking equipment and
16

--- Page 19 ---
various servers used for supporting WCPS’ critical applications and broader
information technology operations.
Finding 3
WCPS did not ensure employee access to its automated financial systems
applications was appropriate and adequately controlled resulting in
employees with unnecessary or incompatible access.
Analysis
WCPS did not ensure employee access to its automated financial system
applications (such as, procurement, account payable, human resources, and
payroll) was appropriate and adequately controlled resulting in employees with
unnecessary or incompatible access. Although we were advised by WCPS
finance department personnel that they annually reviewed employee access, the
review did not include an assessment if employees had incompatible capabilities
or unnecessary access.
 Our review of access granted to 199 employees we deemed to have critical
capabilities on the procurement system (such as the ability to process purchase
orders or invoices) disclosed that 6 had incompatible capabilities, including
the ability to initiate and approve purchase orders or invoices without
independent review and approval. Two of these employees could also change
vendor data such as names and addresses.
 Our review of access granted to 21 employees we deemed to have critical
capabilities on the human resources and payroll systems (such as adding
employees and processing payroll transactions) disclosed that 9 had
unnecessary access. For example, 4 employees had access that allowed them
to add or make changes to salary schedules and we determined that such
access was not necessary for their job duties.
 Five other employees with critical procurement, human resources, and payroll
access capabilities also had system administrator functions that allowed them
to add or change employee access, including their own, and change system
settings without independent review and approval. Absent the ability to
restrict this access, WCPS should generate reports to independently monitor
any access changes or financial transactions processed by these employees. In
addition, we concluded that the access for one of these employees should be
deleted because it was not needed.
In response to our request, WCPS generated a report of transactions and
adjustments which disclosed that only one of the five employees with system
17

--- Page 20 ---
administrator access processed transactions. Our test of transactions and
adjustments, including certain of those processed by the aforementioned
employee, disclosed that for the items tested, they appeared proper. Similar
conditions regarding the assignment of system access capabilities were
commented upon in our preceding audit report.
Recommendation 3
We recommend that WCPS ensure that adequate controls are in place over
its automated financial systems. Specifically, we recommend that WCPS
a. periodically (such as annually) perform a documented review of system
capabilities assigned to employees to ensure critical functions are
assigned to employees who need those capabilities to perform their job
duties, ensure that critical functions are properly separated, and remove
any unnecessary employee access (repeat); and
b. generate a report to identify any access changes or financial transactions
processed by system administrators for independent supervisory review.
Finding 4
Sensitive personally identifiable information was maintained in a manner
that did not provide adequate security safeguards.
Analysis
Sensitive personally identifiable information (PII) was maintained in a manner
that did not provide adequate safeguards. WCPS used two significant computer
applications which contained sensitive PII and existed without adequate security
safeguards. As of December 2019, we noted that these applications’ databases
contained 59,460 and 16,068 unique sensitive information records respectively,
which were maintained in a manner that made the information vulnerable to
improper disclosure. WCPS personnel advised us that this sensitive PII was not
subject to other data transfer protection controls. Detailed sensitive aspects of this
finding were omitted from this report, however the related detailed information
was previously shared with WCPS for purposes of implementing the following
recommendation.
Best practices identified in the State of Maryland Information Technology
Security Manual require that agencies protect confidential data using adequate
safeguards and/or other substantial mitigating controls.
Recommendation 4
We recommend that WCPS implement appropriate information security
safeguards for its sensitive PII.
18

--- Page 21 ---
Finding 5
WCPS’ financial and student information system applications lacked
security activity monitoring, and password controls for these applications
and the internal computer network were not sufficient.
Analysis
WCPS’ financial and student information system applications lacked security
activity monitoring, and password controls for these applications and the internal
computer network were not sufficient.
 WCPS did not generate reports of security and audit events or non-production,
direct database changes for its student information system. Furthermore,
although reports of security and audit events, including direct database
changes, were generated for its financial system application, WCPS personnel
advised us that these reports were not reviewed. WCPS’ financial system
application contains critical information involving but not limited to payroll
and accounts payable, while the student information system contains student
grades and other significant demographic information. These conditions
precluded the effective monitoring of security events applicable to the
financial and student information systems.
Best practices identified in the State of Maryland Information Technology
Security Manual require that information systems generate reports of audit
records for all security-relevant events, including all security and system
administrator accesses. In addition, procedures must be developed to
routinely (for example daily or weekly) review reports of audit records for
indications of unusual activities, suspicious activities, or suspected violations,
and to report findings to appropriate officials for prompt resolution.
 Multiple password controls over WCPS’ internal network and its financial and
student information systems did not meet the minimum recommended settings
in the State’s Manual. For example, password aging, history, length, and
complexity control settings were either not enforced or did not provide a
sufficient level of security for various groups of accounts used for accessing
WCPS’ network or critical applications. A similar condition was commented
upon in our preceding audit report.
19

--- Page 22 ---
Recommendation 5
We recommend that WCPS
a. generate reports of all critical security and audit events for its financial
and student information system applications, regularly review these
reports, document these reviews, and retain this documentation for
future reference; and
b. establish password controls over its internal network, financial and
student information system applications that comply with the
recommended controls prescribed by the State’s Information Technology
Security Manual (repeat).
Finding 6
Twelve publicly accessible servers were improperly located within WCPS’
internal network.
Analysis
WCPS’ internal computer network was not adequately secured with respect to
public access. We noted that certain publicly accessible servers were located in
the WCPS internal network rather than being isolated in a separate protected
network zone to minimize security risks. These servers, if compromised, could
expose the broader internal network to attack from external sources. Best
practices, identified in the State’s Information Technology Security Manual
require that publicly accessible servers reside in an external protected network
zone to safeguard those servers as well as the entity’s internal network. A similar
condition was commented upon in our preceding audit report.
Recommendation 6
We recommend that WCPS relocate all publicly accessible servers to a
separate protected network zone to limit security exposures to the internal
network segment (repeat).
Facilities Construction, Renovation, and Maintenance
Background
WCPS employs a staff of 177 employees to maintain 27 schools (including
alternative, vocational, and early learning) and a number of other facilities (such
as administrative and support offices). According to its fiscal year 2020 Capital
Improvement Plan, necessary construction, major renovations, and systemic
improvements to WCPS’ facilities over the next six years are estimated to cost
approximately $399 million.
20

--- Page 23 ---
WCPS Capital Projects Were Properly Approved and Related Expenditures
Were Generally Properly Supported
Our review of 10 construction-related procurements awarded during fiscal years
2015 to 2019 totaling $31 million, which included 3 ICPAs totaling 4.8 million
(for air conditioning and roofing materials and labor), disclosed that all 10
contracts were properly approved by the Board. In addition, our test of 30
invoices totaling $6.9 million for these contracts disclosed that, generally, the
invoices were properly supported and the amounts invoiced were in accordance
with contract terms.
However, as commented upon in Finding 1, WCPS frequently did not comply
with governing State law for ICPAs or follow related best practices. In addition,
WCPS did not always obtain available ICPA price information, and the invoices
for ICPAs, including those for air conditioning equipment and roofing materials,
were often insufficiently detailed or contained differing descriptions to be able to
verify to ICPA price information, and the receipt of listed manufacturer discounts
were not verified.
Processes are in Place to Promote Ongoing Facility Maintenance and to
Minimize Energy Costs
WCPS has processes in place to promote ongoing facility maintenance and to
minimize energy costs. For example, WCPS provides preventive maintenance of
its buildings and equipment to prevent emergency repairs. In addition, WCPS
uses vendor energy metering systems to monitor heating and air conditioning
usage and related costs. WCPS also has written policies that encourage both
students and employees to be aware of and limit their energy use. WCPS also
makes use of solar alternative energy sources. Finally, WCPS participates in a
consortium with other Eastern Shore entities to purchase energy at the best
possible terms for members of the consortium. According to documents provided
by WCPS from the consortium (which we did not audit), WCPS saved over $3.7
million through energy cost avoidance from fiscal years 2001 to 2019.
Conclusion
Our audit did not disclose any significant deficiencies in the design or operation
of WCPS’ internal control over the facilities construction, renovation, and
maintenance financial-related areas of operations reviewed. Our audit also did
not disclose any significant instances of noncompliance with applicable laws,
rules, or regulations (other than the ICPA issues previously addressed in Finding
1).
21

--- Page 24 ---
Transportation Services
Background
According to statistics compiled by the Maryland State Department of Education
(MSDE), WCPS has approximately 13,000 students eligible to receive student
transportation service. WCPS reported that 2.1 million route miles were traveled
to transport students for the 2018-2019 school year. These students were
transported using 106 contractor-owned buses and 22 system-owned buses.
According to WCPS financial records, fiscal year 2019 transportation costs
totaled $9.2 million with $6.4 million (70 percent) representing payments for the
contracted bus services.
Payments to bus contractors consist of a per-vehicle allotment (PVA) intended as
reimbursement for the cost of purchasing a bus and a flat rate for return on
investment, hourly reimbursements for drivers, a per-mile maintenance fee, fuel
costs, and an annual administrative fee. WCPS bus contracts are for an initial 5-
year term subject to annual renewal over the 15-year useful life of the bus. The
contracts can be terminated by the Board at its discretion for cause or budgetary
restraints by giving 60 days’ notice, or by either party giving written notice 30
days prior to June 30 of the upcoming school year.
Finding 7
WCPS did not fully use its automated bus routing software to identify
alternative routes, or route and/or bus stop consolidations that might reduce
costs. Our review disclosed more than half of WCPS routes did not meet the
minimum bus capacity goals.
Analysis
WCPS did not fully use its automated bus routing software to identify alternative
routes, route consolidations, or bus stop consolidations that might reduce costs.
For example, the software could produce an optional system-wide report of
possible new routes based upon the existing bus stop system data. Instead, we
were advised that transportation department employees reviewed existing
individual bus routes annually and, as needed, throughout the year, and manually
made modifications to accommodate students’ school assignments and other
issues. Consequently, routes may be inefficiently designed and could result in
significantly underutilized capacity on individual buses and in operating more
buses than necessary to fulfill WCPS’ transportation needs.
Our review of routing system data for 83 of the 112 regular buses for the 2019-
2020 school year, disclosed that 53 of the 98 morning route portions were
22

--- Page 25 ---
designed to transport students at less than 75 percent of WCPS’ written bus
capacity goals2, including 17 routes that transported students at less than 50
percent of its bus capacity goals. While we recognize that Wicomico County
includes large rural areas, which can make it difficult to maximize ridership in all
cases, the aforementioned 53 morning bus routes included 38 routes that served
more densely populated urban regions and 15 routes that served rural regions,
based on destination schools.
Similar conditions were commented upon in our preceding audit report. In
response to our preceding audit report, WCPS agreed that utilizing its automated
routing software package would result in greater routing efficiency.
Recommendation 7
We recommend that WCPS use its automated bus routing software to
periodically perform a system-wide analysis of bus routes to maximize the
ridership on its bus routes (repeat).
Finding 8
Certain elements of the payments to bus contractors could not be supported,
and included costs that should not have been reimbursed, resulting in higher
payments than necessary for student transportation services.
Analysis
Certain elements of the payments to bus contractors could not be supported and
included costs that should not have been reimbursed, resulting in higher payments
than necessary for student transportation services. As a result, during the 2017-
2018 school year, the WCPS cost per mile for transporting students ($4.89) was
higher than the average cost per mile for four other similarly sized school systems
($3.90).
 The methodology used to calculate the PVA paid to the 48 bus contractors
could not be supported and may not have been in the best interest of WCPS.
A primary component of the PVA payment is the allowable return on
investment (ROI). There is no generally agreed upon formula or method for
determining ROI; however, a consultant hired by another school system in
2 For example, WCPS’ bus capacity goals for a 64-passenger bus or larger (manufacturer stated
capacity) were 48, 51, and 58 students for high school, middle school, and elementary school
routes, respectively.
23

--- Page 26 ---
2012 recommended the prime rate plus two percent as a reasonable ROI3.
WCPS used an ROI of 9.46 percent in its payment formula for the 44 buses
placed into service by contractors from fiscal years 2015 through 2020.
WCPS could not document the basis for the ROI used to enable an assessment
of whether the rate was in the best interest of WCPS. In this regard, if WCPS
would have used the prime rate plus two percent for the ROI calculation (at
the time the buses were initially placed into service), we estimate that WCPS
could have saved approximately $2.6 million over the 15-year life of those
buses. A similar condition was commented upon in our preceding report.
 WCPS could not document the basis for its payments for bus maintenance
costs ($0.849 per-mile during fiscal year 2019). Based on the number of
reported miles driven by contractor buses; we estimate that WCPS paid
approximately $1.4 million for these costs. A similar condition was
commented upon in our preceding report.
 WCPS reimbursed the bus contractors for federal fuel excise taxes and the
State motor fuel taxes even though the contractors are exempt from these
taxes under federal and State laws. Based on reported mileage during the
2018-2019 school year, we estimate that payments for these taxes totaled
approximately $139,000. Federal law provides that contractors are exempt
from the $0.244 per gallon federal excise tax and if paid, are able to receive a
credit for these taxes when they file their income tax returns. State law also
exempts contractors from State motor fuel taxes ($0.3605 per gallon during
fiscal year 2019) and allows them to claim a credit on their tax return for any
taxes paid. A similar condition was commented upon in our preceding report.
 The standard contract language used by WCPS for its bus contracts did not
include a right to audit provision. Such a provision would allow WCPS to
verify the contractor’s actual costs of purchasing and maintaining the buses
when negotiating the PVA, hourly reimbursements for drivers, the per-mile
maintenance fee, fuel costs, and the annual administrative fees. For example,
3 In 1975, an MSDE study recommended the prime rate as a reasonable ROI interest rate. The
prime rate is actually a lending rate that nearly always exceeds the available market investment
rate; therefore, it was deemed reasonable for the ROI calculation. The use of the prime interest
rate was again recommended in a November 1999 study commissioned by another local
Maryland school system. In 2012, another school system’s consultant’s report recommended the
prime rate plus 2 percent as a reasonable ROI, which serves as the basis for our calculations.
Finally, a May 2010 MSDE PVA Workgroup commented that the profit (or ROI) to be included
in the PVA should reflect what a reasonable investor or businessperson would expect on a long-
term investment, and not necessarily the prime rate. Under that assumption, we noted that as of
December 2019, current 10 and 30-year US Treasury Note rates, which could be reflective of a
reasonable long-term investment option, were 1.9 and 2.4 percent, respectively.
24

--- Page 27 ---
the State of Maryland has established a preference in regulation that all
contracts require contractors to make their records available for audit by
authorized representatives of the State at all reasonable times.
Recommendation 8
We recommend that WCPS reevaluate its method of establishing payment
amounts to bus contractors in future contracts (repeat). Specifically, we
recommend that WCPS
a. consider using an ROI to calculate the PVA payments to bus contractors
that provides a reasonable rate of return consistent with the
aforementioned past studies,
b. document the basis for maintenance costs paid to the bus contractors,
c. discontinue paying for fuel taxes and recover any amounts previously
paid, and
d. include provisions to audit the bus contractors in future contracts and use
the provisions to determine the actual cost of operating contractor buses.
Food Services
Background
According to the audited financial statements, food service operating expenditures
totaled $7.7 million in fiscal year 2019, which were funded with federal funds
totaling $6.6 million and food sales totaling $1.2 million. According to MSDE
records, in fiscal year 2019 WCPS had 76 food service positions for its 27
schools, consisting of 72 cafeteria positions and 4 administrative positions.
According to MSDE records, 60 percent of WCPS students qualified for free and
reduced-price meals as of October 31, 2018. Eight WCPS schools participate in
the federal Community Eligibility Provision (CEP)4, which is a meal service
option that allows schools in high poverty districts to serve meals to all students at
no cost without collecting applications for free and reduced-price meals. WCPS
is currently reimbursed for approximately 100 percent of the CEP food services
cost at these schools.
4 Through CEP, schools are reimbursed for meals using a formula based on the percentage of
students eligible for free meals because of their participation in other specific means-tested
programs (such as the Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program and Temporary Assistance
for Needy Families).
25

--- Page 28 ---
Conclusion
Based on our current assessment of significance and risk relative to our audit
objectives, our audit did not include a review of policies, procedures, and controls
with respect to the food services financial area of operations.
School Board Oversight
Background
The Wicomico County Board of Education (the Board) is composed of seven
elected members. In addition, one student government representative for each of
the four high schools is invited to attend meetings. As noted in the Background
Information section, the Board contracted with a certified public accounting firm
for independent audits of the WCPS financial statements and federal programs.
To assist in its oversight of various areas of WCPS operations and governance,
the Board has established several committees, such as Audit and Budget, Career
Technology Education, Curriculum, Policy Review, School Buildings, and School
Health. Additionally, the Board has established two advisory committees, the
Parent Advisory Council and the School Staff Representatives, which meet with
the Board at least twice a year and serve as channels for public concerns and
information.
WCPS Adopted an Ethics Policy that Met the Requirements of State Law
The WCPS Board has adopted a detailed ethics policy that conforms to State Law
and was approved by the State Ethics Commission. The policy is applicable to
both Board members and WCPS employees and includes provisions for conflicts
of interest and financial disclosures by Board members and certain employees.
Specifically, annual financial disclosure statements are required to be filed by
Board members, candidates for the Board, the Superintendent, and other
administrators (Assistant Superintendents, Chief Financial Officer, Director of
Procurement, and the Director of Human Resources) by April 30th of each year.
In accordance with the policy, WCPS established an Ethics Panel consisting of
five members appointed by the Board to interpret ethics policies and provide
advice on policy implementation. The Panel also reviews and rules on any
reported complaints of ethics violations. Our review of the records for Board
members and WCPS employees required to submit financial disclosure forms for
calendar year 2018 disclosed that all forms were submitted as required.
Conclusion
Our audit did not disclose any reportable conditions related to school board
oversight.
26

--- Page 29 ---
Management of Other Risks
Healthcare Background
WCPS is a member of the Wicomico County Public Entities Healthcare
Consortium (hereafter referred to as the Consortium) for employee and retiree
health care. The Consortium negotiates contracts with a third-party administrator
(TPA) firm for health care claims processing services for employee and retiree
medical, vision, dental, pharmacy costs, and for stop-loss insurance coverage.
WCPS is the largest member of the consortium as its claims represent 68 percent
of the consortium’s total claims for plan year 2018.
WCPS is self-insured and ultimately covers the cost of the medical services
received by its employees. WCPS pays the TPA a monthly subscription charge
based on the number of participants and their medical coverage, and an
administrative fee. The monthly payment also includes the stop-loss insurance,
which indemnifies WCPS against health insurance claim amounts that exceed
$250,000 per participant per plan year.
Medical providers submit claims to the TPA who pays them on behalf of WCPS.
In a year-end settlement process, which segregates the participating agencies for
the plan year ending August 31st, the TPA nets the amount of medical claims it
paid, and related fees, excess stop-loss amounts and rebates, against the monthly
subscription charges billed to and paid by WCPS to determine any excess amount
due from or to be reimbursed to either party.
The Consortium contracts with two consultants to help manage the health plans.
One consultant performs data analysis of the health services utilization and costs,
provides recommendations on potential rate changes, and evaluates the merits of
the health plan proposals. The other consultant audits medical claims processed
by the TPA for compliance with the health plans, reconciles paid claims to the
year-end settlements, and determines the reasonableness of stop-loss costs paid by
the TPA.
As of November 1, 2019, WCPS provided health insurance benefits to
approximately 5,750 enrolled employees, dependents, and retirees. According to
TPA records, during the 2017-2018 contract year health care payments totaled
$35.6 million, including $1.5 million for administrative fees and $882,000 for
stop-loss insurance coverage.
Conclusion
Our audit did not disclose any reportable conditions related to the management of
other risks area of operations reviewed.
27

--- Page 30 ---
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We conducted a performance audit to evaluate the effectiveness and efficiency of
the financial management practices of the Wicomico County Public Schools
(WCPS). We conducted this audit under the authority of the State Government
Article, Section 2-1220(e) of the Annotated Code of Maryland, and performed it
in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards. Those
standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient,
appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and
conclusions based on our audit objectives. We believe that the evidence obtained
provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit
objectives.
We had two broad audit objectives:
1. Evaluate whether the WCPS procedures and controls were effective in
accounting for and safeguarding its assets.
2. Evaluate whether the WCPS policies provided for the efficient use of
financial resources.
In planning and conducting our audit of WCPS, we focused on 11 major
financial-related areas of operations as approved on December 6, 2016 by the
Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee of the Maryland General Assembly in
accordance with the enabling legislation. The scope of the work performed in
each of these areas was based on our assessments of significance and risk.
Therefore, our follow-up on the status of findings included in our preceding audit
report on WCPS dated March 5, 2014, included those findings that were
applicable to the current audit scope for each of the 11 areas.
The audit objectives excluded reviewing and assessing student achievement,
curriculum, teacher performance, and other academic-related areas and functions.
Also, we did not evaluate the WCPS Comprehensive Education Master Plan or
related updates, and we did not review the activities, financial or other, of any
parent teacher association, group, or funds not under the local board of
education’s direct control or management.
To accomplish our objectives, we reviewed applicable State laws and regulations
pertaining to public elementary and secondary education, as well as policies and
procedures issued and established by WCPS. We also interviewed personnel at
WCPS and the Maryland State Department of Education (MSDE), and staff at
other local school systems in Maryland (as appropriate). Our audit procedures
28

--- Page 31 ---
included inspections of documents and records, and to the extent practicable,
observations of WCPS operations. We also tested transactions and performed
other auditing procedures that we considered necessary to achieve our objectives,
generally for the period from July 1, 2018 to September 30, 2019. Generally,
transactions were selected for testing based on auditor judgment, which primarily
considers risk. Unless otherwise specifically indicated, neither statistical nor non-
statistical audit sampling was used to select the transactions tested. Therefore, the
results of the tests cannot be used to project those results to the entire population
from which the test items were selected. For certain areas within the scope of the
audit, we relied on the work performed by the independent accounting firm that
annually audits WCPS’ financial statements and conducts the federal Single
Audit.
We used certain statistical data—including financial and operational—compiled
by MSDE from various informational reports submitted by the Maryland local
school systems. This information was used in this audit report for background or
informational purposes, and was deemed reasonable.
We also extracted data from the WCPS automated financial management system
for the purpose of testing expenditure and payroll transactions. We performed
various audit procedures on the relevant data and determined the data were
sufficiently reliable for the purposes the data were used during the audit.
WCPS’ management is responsible for establishing and maintaining effective
internal control. Internal control is a process designed to provide reasonable
assurance that objectives pertaining to the reliability of financial records;
effectiveness and efficiency of operations including safeguarding of assets; and
compliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations are achieved. As
provided in Government Auditing Standards, there are five components of
internal control: control environment, risk assessment, control activities,
information and communication, and monitoring. Each of the five components,
when significant to the audit objectives, and as applicable to WCPS, were
considered by us during the course of this audit.
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate. In addition
to the conditions included in this report, other findings were communicated to
WCPS that were not deemed significant and, consequently, did not warrant
inclusion in this report.
29

--- Page 32 ---
We conducted our audit fieldwork from October 7, 2019 to May 4, 2020. A
portion of our fieldwork included time in which the State’s local education
agencies were impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic health crisis. Specifically,
beginning on March 16, 2020, the State Superintendent of Schools decided to
close school and administrative buildings to employees and the public for a two-
week period. This was eventually extended for the remainder of the 2019-2020
school year with limited access by certain employees. Although all WCPS
buildings were closed for a portion of our fieldwork, the objectives and scope of
our audit were not significantly impacted. To the extent that the COVID-19 crisis
continues to impact WCPS operations, certain recommendations in this report
may need to be adjusted to ensure proper controls under the modified operations.
The WCPS response to our findings and recommendations is included as an
Appendix to this report. As prescribed in the State Government Article, Section
2-1224 of the Annotated Code of Maryland, we will advise WCPS regarding the
results of our review of its response.
30

--- Page 33 ---
APPENDIX
BOARD OF EDUCATION OF WICOMICO COUNTY
WICOMICO COUNTY P.O. Box I 538 DONALD L. FITZGERALD
2424 NORTHGATE DRIVE CHAIRMAN
SALISBURY, MD 2 I 802-1 538
N. EUGENE MALONE, .JR.
VICE CHAIRMAN
4 I 0-6 7 7-4400
FAX 4 I 0-677-4444 ALLEN C. BROWN, SR.
www. wc boe. org TONYA LAIRD LEWIS
MICHAEL G. MURRAY
PUBLIC SCHOOLS
.JOHN PALMER
DONNA C. HANLIN, Eo.O.
ANN B. SUTHOWSKI
SUPERINTENDENT OF SCHOOLS
September 29, 2020
Gregory A. Hook, CP A
Department of Legislative Services
301 West Preston Street, Room 1202
Baltimore, MD 21201
Dear Mr. Hook,
Please accept this letter and associated document as our response to the audit of Wicomico
County Public Schools (WCPS) as conducted by the Department of Legislative Services. This
audit was completed October 7, 2019 through May 4, 2020 in collaboration and cooperation with
WCPS staff. We value the input of the Department of Legislative Services and will move
forward with the recommendations made in this report. If you have any questions, please do not
hesitate to contact me at dhanlin@wcboe.org or 410-677-4495.
c__t-u,J
C~-
Donna C. Hanlin, Ed.O.
Superintendent
cc: Micah Stauffer, Ed.D.
Chief Finance and Operations Officer
Jesse Reid, CPA
Comptroller
WICOMICO COUNTY PUBLIC SCHOOLS (WCPS) PROHIBITS ILLEGAL DISCRIMINATION BASED ON RACE, ETHNICITY, COLOR, ANCESTRY, NATIONAL ORIGIN, RELIGION, IMMIGRATION STATUS, SEX,
GENDER, GENDER IDENTITY, GENDER EXPRESSION, SEXUAL ORIENTATION, FAMILY/PARENTAL STATUS, MARITAL STATUS, AGE, PHYSICAL OR MENTAL DISABILITY, POVERTY ANO SOCIOECONOMIC
STATUS, LANGUAGE, OR OTHER LEGALLY OR CONSTITUTIONALLY PROTECTED ATTRIBUTES OR AFFILIATIONS AND PROVIDES EQUAL ACCESS TO THE BOY SCOUTS ANO OTHER DESIGNATED YOUTH
GROUPS. DISCRIMINATION UNDERMINES OUR COMMUNITY'S LONG-STANDING EFFORTS TO CREATE, FOSTER, AND PROMOTE EQUITY, INCLUSION, AND N:;CEPTANCE FOR ALL.

--- Page 34 ---
Wicomico County Public Schools
Agency Response Form
Procurement and Disbursement Cycle
Finding 1
WCPS procurement policies did not incorporate certain requirements of State law and
recognized best practices when evaluating the merits of participation in intergovernmental
cooperative purchasing agreements (ICPA). In addition, ICPA invoices were not always
properly approved and verified to related price lists.
We recommend that WCPS establish and adhere to the aforementioned statutory
requirement and six key best practices when using ICPAs.
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide WCPS agrees with all of the background items as presented. WCPS
additional comments as agrees with this finding.
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 1 Agree Estimated Completion Date: 10/31/20
Please provide details of WCPS is committed to following best practices and requirements of
corrective action or State law when evaluating the merits of utilizing an ICPA. The
explain disagreement. Procurement Manager has always reviewed each ICPA to confirm
competitive solicitation and evaluation process were consistent with
Maryland laws prior to recommending their use.
The Procurement Manager will develop a more formal documentation of
this review and written determination. The Procurement Manager will
develop an ICPA review checklist that includes:
 Evaluation of WCPS’ expertise, and cost for conducting its own
competitive solicitation.
 Evaluation of staff availability for managing the competitive
solicitation.
 Research, compare, and evaluate available ICPAs.
 Verify the ICPA solicitation was competitively bid and publicly
advertised.
 Obtain originating agency’s competitive procurement
documentation. Such documentation includes Advertising,
Bidding Documents, Bid Tabs, Evaluation and Award.
 Verify that terms, scope of services, specifications and price meet
the entity’s needs.
Page 1 of 9

--- Page 35 ---
Wicomico County Public Schools
Agency Response Form
 Obtain a copy of the ICPA and related price lists for invoice
verification
 When appropriate, execute an addendum of participation with
lead contract agency and remove or incorporate necessary local
terms and conditions.
This ICPA review checklist will be maintained on file.
Human Resources and Payroll
Finding 2
WCPS did not use available system reports to ensure that all electronic timesheets were
validated and approved as required by its policy. Our review identified numerous
timesheets that were not validated and/or approved as required.
We recommend that WCPS use available reports from the automated time keeping system
to ensure all timesheets are validated and approved, including those noted above.
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide WCPS agrees with all of the background items as presented. WCPS
additional comments as agrees with this finding.
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 2 Agree Estimated Completion Date: 7/27/20
Please provide details of We now have all employees (including hourly employees) recording
corrective action or their time and attendance, and approving their timecard in the electronic
explain disagreement. time keeping system. We have also given all employees the ability to
clock in and review and approve their time via an app on their phone if
they choose to do so (for those employees who have limited access to a
computer or time clock). We now require all timekeeping editors to
review the timesheet approval report at the end of each pay period and
contact staff and supervisors that have not approved. Any unapproved
timecards after a second failed request by the timekeeping editor will be
printed by the timekeeping editor and signed by the employee and
supervisor.
Page 2 of 9

--- Page 36 ---
Wicomico County Public Schools
Agency Response Form
Information Technology
Finding 3
WCPS did not ensure employee access to its automated financial systems applications was
appropriate and adequately controlled resulting in employees with unnecessary or
incompatible access.
We recommend that WCPS ensure that adequate controls are in place over its automated
financial systems. Specifically, we recommend that WCPS
a. periodically (such as annually) perform a documented review of system capabilities
assigned to employees to ensure critical functions are assigned to employees who need
those capabilities to perform their job duties, ensure that critical functions are properly
separated, and remove any unnecessary employee access (repeat); and
b. generate a report to identify any access changes or financial transactions processed by
system administrators for independent supervisory review.
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide WCPS agrees with all of the background items as presented. WCPS
additional comments as agrees with this finding.
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 3a Agree Estimated Completion Date: 4/30/21
Please provide details of WCPS will annually perform a documented review of system
corrective action or capabilities assigned to employees to ensure that critical functions are
explain disagreement.
properly separated and that no employees have unnecessary access.
Recommendation 3b Agree Estimated Completion Date: 9/28/20
Please provide details of WCPS restricted the access for the 9 employees that had capabilities on
corrective action or the HR and payroll systems that they did not need. WCPS also created a
explain disagreement. report that lists critical HR, payroll, accounts payable, and purchasing
transactions created by system administrators that will be reviewed
monthly by the Comptroller. WCPS restricted access for the 3
employees that had purchase order receiving capabilities that they did
not need. WCPS created a report of purchase orders created and vendors
added or modified by purchasing staff that will be reviewed monthly by
the Comptroller.
Page 3 of 9

--- Page 37 ---
Wicomico County Public Schools
Agency Response Form
Finding 4
Sensitive personally identifiable information was maintained in a manner that did not
provide adequate security safeguards.
We recommend that WCPS implement appropriate information security safeguards for its
sensitive PII.
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide WCPS agrees with all of the background items as presented. WCPS
additional comments as acknowledges the finding and understands the risk.
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 4 Agree Estimated Completion Date: 1/1/21
Please provide details of a. In addition to scheduled reviews by the Technology Department,
corrective action or WCPS is forming a Data Governance cross-functional group, which
explain disagreement. can have some oversight on PII, including reviews.
b. A Data Governance Policy will be drafted by the to-be-formed Data
Governance Group. Once ratified, procedures will be developed for
each department on the creation/intake of PII, short-term
transactional management of the date, and long-term disposition.
c. WCPS has reached out to our SIS and ERP vendors requesting more
detailed architectural discussions on available protection options.
This would include options for segregating PII data. WCPS has
concerns that a solution may not be available or will be cost-
prohibitive.
Page 4 of 9

--- Page 38 ---
Wicomico County Public Schools
Agency Response Form
Finding 5
WCPS’ financial and student information system applications lacked security activity
monitoring, and password controls for these applications and the internal computer
network were not sufficient.
We recommend that WCPS
a. generate reports of all critical security and audit events for its financial and student
information system applications, regularly review these reports, document these
reviews, and retain this documentation for future reference; and
b. establish password controls over its internal network, financial and student information
system applications that comply with the recommended controls prescribed by the
State’s Information Technology Security Manual (repeat).
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide WCPS agrees with all of the background items as presented. WCPS
additional comments as acknowledges the finding and understands the risk.
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 5a Agree Estimated Completion Date: 9/1/20
Please provide details of  WCPS will review the logging tool configuration for optimal use.
corrective action or
 WCPS will establish a peer or external review of logs at a
explain disagreement.
recommended interval as practice.
 WCPS will enable auditing across the entire portfolio of servers and
establish one policy to apply to all environments.
Recommendation 5b Agree Estimated Completion Date: Ongoing
Please provide details of WCPS will implement strong controls over passwords and user
corrective action or accounts for its critical databases, applications and network domain.
explain disagreement.
 WCPS will consider a higher password history count.
 WCPS has, or plans to implement 2FA/MFA across critical
applications.
 Password maximum lifetime restriction has been modified.
 Some changes have already been implemented around the network
directory model.
Page 5 of 9

--- Page 39 ---
Wicomico County Public Schools
Agency Response Form
Finding 6
Twelve publicly accessible servers were improperly located within WCPS’ internal
network.
We recommend that WCPS relocate all publicly accessible servers to a separate protected
network zone to limit security exposures to the internal network segment (repeat).
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide WCPS agrees with all of the background items as presented. WCPS
additional comments as acknowledges the finding and understands the risk.
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 6 Agree Estimated Completion Date: Ongoing
Please provide details of The WCPS firewall has port-level services that monitor traffic, block
corrective action or ports that don’t need to be opened, and use of intrusion detection
explain disagreement. services. With our significant migration to Virtual Machine
architectures, this will be addressed and mitigate our risk. We will
continue to review the identified servers and reposition as appropriate.
Page 6 of 9

--- Page 40 ---
Wicomico County Public Schools
Agency Response Form
Transportation Services
Finding 7
WCPS did not fully use its automated bus routing software to identify alternative routes, or
route and/or bus stop consolidations that might reduce costs. Our review disclosed more
than half of WCPS routes did not meet the minimum bus capacity goals.
We recommend that WCPS use its automated bus routing software to periodically perform
a system-wide analysis of bus routes to maximize the ridership on its bus routes (repeat).
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide WCPS agrees with all of the background items as presented. WCPS
additional comments as agrees with this finding.
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 7 Agree Estimated Completion Date: 5/1/21
Please provide details of WCPS fully recognizes the importance of efficiency in routing practices.
corrective action or
explain disagreement. We acknowledge this finding as indicated to be “repeat” and provide
assurance that we will continue our work to schedule transportation
routes in the most effective and efficient manners possible within the
variables presented. The audits of our routing plans will include
documentation in all cases with specific attention to explanation when
routes are identified as under capacity. This audit will be ongoing with a
projected timeline to include completion for 50% of our routes during
the 2020-2021 school year (dependent upon variable associated with
pandemic requirements) and the remaining 50% of our routes during the
2021-2022 school year. Our routing practices will involve our use of the
bus-routing program and our analysis of historical data, all of which
would be included in documentation as appropriate.
Page 7 of 9

--- Page 41 ---
Wicomico County Public Schools
Agency Response Form
Finding 8
Certain elements of the payments to bus contractors could not be supported, and included
costs that should not have been reimbursed, resulting in higher payments than necessary
for student transportation services.
We recommend that WCPS reevaluate its method of establishing payment amounts to bus
contractors in future contracts (repeat). Specifically, we recommend that WCPS
a. consider using an ROI to calculate the PVA payments to bus contractors that provides
a reasonable rate of return consistent with the aforementioned past studies,
b. document the basis for maintenance costs paid to the bus contractors,
c. discontinue paying for fuel taxes and recover any amounts previously paid, and
d. include provisions to audit the bus contractors in future contracts and use the
provisions to determine the actual cost of operating contractor buses.
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide WCPS agrees with all of the background items as presented. WCPS
additional comments as agrees with this finding.
deemed necessary.
WCPS is committed to providing safe, adequate, efficient and
economical transportation services for students to access their
instruction. WCPS continually evaluates the school bus contractors’
table of rates by comparing its table of rates with that of the other sixteen
Maryland Public School systems using contracted school bus services.
WCPS transportation staff also monitors the Bureau of Labor Statistics
Consumer Price Index for vehicle parts, labor, maintenance and repair to
calculate the upcoming school year’s reimbursement rate for
maintenance. Because this information from the Bureau of Labor
Statistics CPI is not available until October, school bus contractors are
actually a year behind in their higher reimbursement, if warranted. The
impacts of the fluctuating fuel costs and federal emissions requirements
on the cost of equipment are also monitored on a regular basis.
With specific response to the recommendations accompanying this
finding, WCPS responses are detailed here:
Recommendation 8a Agree Estimated Completion Date: 12/31/20
Page 8 of 9

--- Page 42 ---
Wicomico County Public Schools
Agency Response Form
Please provide details of a. WCPS will plan to re-evaluate the 9.45% ROI and consider
corrective action or recommended changes to the calculation during the next budget
explain disagreement.
cycle.
Recommendation 8b Agree Estimated Completion Date: 12/31/20
Please provide details of b. WCPS will plan to collect and analyze documentation associated
corrective action or with maintenance costs incurred by contractors. This analysis
explain disagreement. may influence the maintenance cost funding in the next budget
cycle.
Recommendation 8c Agree Estimated Completion Date: 12/31/20
Please provide details of c. WCPS will review and consider the payment for fuel taxes in the
corrective action or next budget cycle.
explain disagreement.
Recommendation 8d Agree Estimated Completion Date: 12/31/20
Please provide details of d. WCPS will work with legal consultation to review the
corrective action or contractual language for possible inclusion of audit capacity in
explain disagreement. contracts.
WCPS has observed a marked decrease in new interest in community
members wanting to be school bus contractors and some of our existing
contractors are choosing to get out of the business for various reasons.
With these conditions as presented, it is important to WCPS that our
school bus contractors, who are small business operators within the
community, are profitable business owners. While WCPS will always
consider national industry standards when considering the table of rates,
some local industry dynamics will have to also be considered.
Page 9 of 9

--- Page 43 ---
A T
UDIT EAM
Raymond G. Burton Jr., CPA, CFE
Audit Manager
Edwin L. Paul, CPA, CISA
R. Brendan Coffey, CPA, CISA
Information Systems Audit Managers
Ken H. Johanning, CPA, CFE
Senior Auditor
Edward O. Kendall, CISA
Matthew D. Walbert, CISA
Information Systems Senior Auditors
Thomas J. Kraemer
Gary B. Staples
Staff Auditors
Dominick R. Abril
Malcolm J. Woodard
Information Systems Staff Auditors