Title: Presentation to the Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee - Maryland Department of Health - Efforts to Identify and Analyze Improper Medicaid Payments


Related Report Dated (6/23/2020)

Video Presentation (Medicaid Payments starts at 1:37:19)
Date: 10/20/2020
Type: Presentations to the Legislature
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5f8f1562a1ce580ce00d6ed6
Extracted: 2025-06-19T11:45:09.491480
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Maryland Department of Health (MDH)
Efforts to Identify and Analyze Improper Medicaid Payments
Performance Audit
Report Dated June 23, 2020
Presentation to Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Gregory A. Hook, CPA
Matthew L. Streett, CPA, CFE
David R. Fahnestock, CPA
October 20, 2020

--- Page 2 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Report Overview - Audit Scope and Objectives
We conducted a performance audit to determine if the Maryland Department of
Health (MDH) had a comprehensive approach to identify and analyze improper
Medicaid-related payments. Our audit had the following objectives
1. To determine if MDH had established a comprehensive documented risk-
based approach to focus the efforts of its program integrity operations on
areas of highest risk and applied industry best practices in its use of data
analytics to effectively identify improper Medicaid-related payments.
Additionally, to determine if MDH measured and reported quantifiable
benefits of its program integrity operations.
2. To determine if MDH’s operations were adequately identifying and
addressing potential improper Medicaid-related payments.
To accomplish our objectives, we obtained data extracts from the Medicaid
Management Information System (MMIS II) for the period beginning July 1,
2015 and ending June 30, 2018 and analyzed more than 290 million fee-for-
service claim payments and Managed Care Organization (MCO) encounter data
records (billed claims that providers submit to MCOs).
Performance Audit Page 2
MDH Efforts to Identify and Analyze Improper Medicaid Payments

--- Page 3 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Report Overview – Background Information
Improper Payments are defined by the federal government as “any payment
that should not have been made or that was made in an incorrect amount under
statutory, contractual, administrative, or other legally applicable requirements.”
Incorrect amounts include both overpayments and underpayments.
The MDH Office of the Inspector General (OIG) Division of Program Integrity (DPI)
is a key component of MDH’s efforts to identify and analyze improper Medicaid
payments. As of June 30, 2018, the OIG had 64 employees, including 37
employees assigned to DPI. DPI’s Surveillance and Utilization Review
Subsystem (SURS) unit performs various data analytics on Medicaid claims to
identify and analyze improper Medicaid-related payments. The data analytics
are performed primarily on an ad hoc basis or to follow up on investigations
initiated by others within DPI and MDH.
Performance Audit Page 3
MDH Efforts to Identify and Analyze Improper Medicaid Payments

--- Page 4 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Report Overview – Medicaid Spending
In FY 2018, $10.9 billion was spent
on Maryland Medicaid, including
$5.6 billion in payments to the
State’s nine MCOs. Approximately
27 percent of the State’s $41 billion
expenditures (from all funding
sources) during fiscal year 2018
were for Medicaid.
At the time of our audit, the federal
Centers for Medicare & Medicaid
Services (CMS) was projecting that
total nationwide spending for
Medicaid will rise an average of
5.5% per year from 2018 to 2027.
Performance Audit Page 4
MDH Efforts to Identify and Analyze Improper Medicaid Payments

--- Page 5 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Key Findings
Objective 1 - Effectiveness of Program Integrity Operations
 MDH had not established a comprehensive risk-based approach to focus the
efforts of its program integrity operations on areas of highest risk, did not
have robust data analytics, and did not fully address MCO encounter data.
MDH also did not take advantage of data analysis services available through
the federal government and did not implement a formal process to measure
and report quantifiable benefits of its program integrity operations.
Objective 2 - Operations to Identify and Address Potential Improper Payments
 MDH paid claims without ensuring the provider was properly enrolled and
qualified for Medicaid, as required.
 MDH did not ensure MCOs had not paid claims for excluded services. In
addition, MCOs did not include certain critical information in their encounter
data and did not perform required investigations of the encounter data.
 MDH’s controls were not adequate to identify and prevent improper Medicaid
payments (such as payments to incarcerated individuals and duplicate
payments).
Performance Audit Page 5
MDH Efforts to Identify and Analyze Improper Medicaid Payments

--- Page 6 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Program Integrity Operations (Finding 1)
MDH’s process to identify and analyze improper Medicaid payments through its
DPI was not comprehensive and did not incorporate certain best practices.
 DPI data analytics need improvement. Specifically, DPI efforts:
 lacked capabilities to cross-match between different datasets (such as
between MDH’s systems and external datasets) and did not include geo-
mapping and data visualization techniques (summary charts and tables) to
proactively highlight trends, patterns, and irregularities in Medicaid payment
activity that would warrant further investigation;
 were not tied to a risk-based approach or annual plan, which can enhance
the effectiveness of such activities; and
 did not include performing comprehensive analytics of MCO encounter data.
 Consequently, OLA performed its own advanced data analytics using available
commercial software that we determined was more comprehensive than the
software available through the DPI unit. As a result, in Findings 2, 3, 5, 8, and
9, our data analytics identified various potential improper payments, and we
analyzed data for trends, patterns, or irregularities in Medicaid payment activity
by provider.
Performance Audit Page 6
MDH Efforts to Identify and Analyze Improper Medicaid Payments

--- Page 7 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Program Integrity Operations (Finding 1) - continued
 DPI did not leverage available data matching resources provided through the
United States Treasury’s Do Not Pay (DNP) Center. The DNP Center is a free
robust analytic tool that helps agencies identify and prevent improper payments
by matching agency data to various federal databases, some of which are only
available through the federal government. Additionally, the DNP Center
provides pattern and trend analysis, detection of anomalies to identify high risk
areas, and detection of duplicates. Although MDH performed its own in-house
matches, we believe MDH could achieve better data matching results through
the DNP Center.
 According to a 2015 federal report, Maryland was one of seven states that
could not identify any steps taken to quantify improvements in the outcomes or
effectiveness of its program integrity efforts attributable to the use of
information systems. Such steps should include conducting a formal annual risk
assessment and tracking the measurable and quantifiable benefits of its
systems.
Performance Audit Page 7
MDH Efforts to Identify and Analyze Improper Medicaid Payments

--- Page 8 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Payments to Unenrolled Providers (Finding 2)
MDH did not ensure that prescribing physicians and referring providers were
enrolled in Medicaid prior to approving claims, as required by federal regulations.
 During the period FY 2016 to FY 2018, of the 17 million pharmacy and
laboratory claims totaling approximately $2 billion, MDH approved 1.6 million
claims totaling approximately $175 million submitted by prescribing
physicians and referring providers whose enrollment in Medicaid was not
validated.
 MDH allowed the claims to be processed in MMIS II with a general number
(known as a dummy number). The information identifying the provider
associated with these claims was not provided to DPI, preventing it from
performing data analysis of claim activity and to identify improper payments.
 Our cursory review of the laboratory providers with a dummy number and the
highest dollar amount of claims disclosed at least 5 laboratories, of the top
15, were subsequently under investigation or had settlements against them
for improper billing or claims (including 2 that were investigated by the federal
government, resulting in large settlements).
Performance Audit Page 8
MDH Efforts to Identify and Analyze Improper Medicaid Payments

--- Page 9 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Payments to Unenrolled Providers (Finding 3)
MDH did not ensure that rendering providers for certain group practices (physical,
occupational, and speech therapy) were enrolled in Medicaid, as required by
State regulations.
 Of the approximately 846,000 claims paid, totaling $46.2 million, during the
period from FY 2016 to FY 2018 for certain therapy group practices services,
MDH approved 835,000 claims totaling approximately $45.6 million that did
not identify the rendering providers. As a result, there was lack of assurance
as to whether the services were performed by properly qualified medical
practitioners enrolled in Medicaid.
 Claim amounts related to these therapy group practices increased by 89%
from FY 2016 to FY 2018. These claims were submitted by 125 practices, with
10 practices or 8% of the practices representing 67% of the claim activity.
 MDH management advised us that they were aware of this issue and
distributed a written notification in August 2017 stating the requirement that,
effective January 1, 2018, Medicaid claims were required to include the
rendering provider information on each claim.
Performance Audit Page 9
MDH Efforts to Identify and Analyze Improper Medicaid Payments

--- Page 10 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
MCO Encounter Data (Finding 4)
MDH accepted encounter data from MCOs that excluded necessary data
elements, which hindered its ability to perform effective oversight and identify
and analyze improper claim activity. Specifically, encounter data submitted
through December 31, 2017 did not include the following three critical
elements:
Since this information was excluded, DPI required assistance from each MCO to
manually research and obtain information for each claim it investigated.
Performance Audit Page 10
MDH Efforts to Identify and Analyze Improper Medicaid Payments

--- Page 11 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
MCO Encounter Data (Finding 5)
MDH did not perform a data match or have an alternative method to determine if
MCOs were paying claims for certain services that MDH had carved out from the
MCO contracts (such as behavioral health, dental, and HIV treatments) and were
covered directly by MDH as fee-for-service claims.
 Based on an OLA developed risk analysis, we performed a data match of fee-
for-service behavioral health claims to the encounter data reported by the
MCOs during the period from July 2015 through June 2018 which disclosed
approximately 1.1 million potential duplicate claims totaling $65.4 million.
According to MDH’s records, fee-for-service behavioral health claims totaled
$3.5 billion during this period.
 Due to the previously mentioned limitations in the MCO encounter data we
were unable to determine whether the encounters were paid and represented
improper payments.
Performance Audit Page 11
MDH Efforts to Identify and Analyze Improper Medicaid Payments

--- Page 12 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Oversight of MCOs (Finding 6)
MDH did not ensure MCO providers were enrolled as Medicaid providers, as
required by federal regulations.
 In November 2017, MDH estimated that there were approximately 10,000
MCO providers rendering services to Maryland Medicaid recipients whose
Medicaid enrollment needed to be verified. Based on our review of MDH
records, as of February 2019, MDH was maintaining a list that only tracked
the enrollment status of 2,928 of the estimated 10,000 MCO providers.
Additionally, the tracking records indicated that only 13% of these 2,928 MCO
providers had applied to become Medicaid providers, but did not identify how
many had been verified.
 As of February 2019, the MCOs self-reported that 75% to 85% of their
providers had been enrolled in Medicaid. However, no detailed support (such
as listings of the specific MCO providers who had been enrolled) was
provided to MDH by the MCOs to support these reported figures.
Performance Audit Page 12
MDH Efforts to Identify and Analyze Improper Medicaid Payments

--- Page 13 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Oversight of MCOs (Finding 7)
Summary of MCO Investigations
MDH did not ensure each MCO
for Fiscal Year 2018
conducted required investigations of
(payment amount in millions)
encounter claims activity to ensure
payments to providers are proper.
According to a 2017 CMS report, the
number of investigations conducted by
the MCOs was “extremely low” relative
to the size of Maryland’s Medicaid
managed care program.
The nine MCO’s reported that
investigations were conducted on at
least 409 providers during FY 2018
(see table).
Source: MDH records and MDH Enrollment Data published by the Hilltop Institute
Performance Audit Page 13
MDH Efforts to Identify and Analyze Improper Medicaid Payments

--- Page 14 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Oversight of MCOs (Finding 8)
MDH used incomplete data to identify incarcerated individuals in State
correctional facilities who were improperly enrolled in MCOs. Furthermore,
MDH’s data analytics did not include certain data needed to identify and prevent
improper fee-for-service payments for incarcerated individuals.
 MDH management advised us that it routinely received incomplete data from
the Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services (DPSCS) and that
although it had previously made attempts to improve the reliability of the data
with DPSCS, it had been unable to fully resolve the issues.
 OLA performed its own match using records directly obtained from DPSCS
which identified $9.6 million (consisting of $7.9 million in capitation
payments and $1.7 million in fee-for-service charges) in potential improper
Medicaid payments related to more than 3,200 individuals who were
incarcerated on the dates the medical services were provided.
 Our test of the 20 incarcerated individuals in our match with the highest
dollar value claims, totaling $912,000, confirmed improper claim payments
totaling $867,000 for 19 of these individuals.
Performance Audit Page 14
MDH Efforts to Identify and Analyze Improper Medicaid Payments

--- Page 15 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
MMIS Edits (Finding 9)
MMIS II claims processing edits were not properly implemented to prevent the
following:
 Payments to providers who were suspended due to credible allegation of
fraud against the providers. Our review of claims paid to suspended
providers between January 1, 2016 and June 30, 2018 identified 12,904
claims totaling $1.2 million that were improperly paid, based on federal
regulations, to 16 different providers after MDH’s OIG determined there were
credible allegations of fraud against these providers.
 Duplicate payments and overpayments for claims submitted by two different
providers for the same service and for claims involving both Medicaid and
Medicare reimbursements (known as Medicare crossover claims). Our
analysis of claims data for FY 2016 through FY 2018 disclosed 62,000
claims totaling $3.0 million that related to these scenarios. These claims
were submitted by 1,867 providers, including 15 providers that accounted for
$1.1 million of the $3.0 million claims.
Performance Audit Page 15
MDH Efforts to Identify and Analyze Improper Medicaid Payments

--- Page 16 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Conclusions
MDH should
• take steps to effectively identify and analyze improper Medicaid payments
through its program integrity operations;
• ensure that prescribing physicians, referring providers, and rendering
providers are enrolled in Medicaid;
• ensure MCO reported encounter data includes all federally required elements;
• ensure MCOs are not paying claims related to services that MDH pays as fee-
for-service;
• ensure MCO providers rendering services to Maryland recipients are
identified and enrolled as Medicaid providers;
• ensure MCOs conduct investigations of encounter claims activity and provide
details to MDH;
• ensure its incarceration data match is complete and accurate; and
• take corrective actions to fix system edits.
Performance Audit Page 16
MDH Efforts to Identify and Analyze Improper Medicaid Payments