Title: Financial Management Information System - Centralized Operations
Date: 11/10/2020
Type: Fiscal Compliance
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5faaefdca1ce58099cfa8e6c
Extracted: 2025-06-20T00:06:08.060576
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Audit Report
Financial Management Information System
Centralized Operations
March 2017
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
For further information concerning this report contact:
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
301 West Preston Street, Room 1202
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Phone: 410-946-5900 · 301-970-5900
Toll Free in Maryland: 1-877-486-9964
Maryland Relay: 711
TTY: 410-946-5401 · 301-970-5401
E-mail: OLAWebmaster@ola.state.md.us
Website: www.ola.state.md.us
The Office of Legislative Audits operates a Fraud Hotline to report fraud, waste, or abuse
involving State of Maryland government resources. Reports of fraud, waste, or abuse
may be communicated anonymously by a toll-free call to 1-877-FRAUD-11, by mail to the
Fraud Hotline, c/o Office of Legislative Audits, or through the Office’s website.
The Department of Legislative Services does not discriminate on the basis of age, ancestry, color,
creed, marital status, national origin, race, religion, gender, gender identity, sexual orientation,
or disability in the admission or access to its programs, services, or activities. The Department’s
Information Officer has been designated to coordinate compliance with the nondiscrimination
requirements contained in Section 35.107 of the Department of Justice Regulations. Requests for
assistance should be directed to the Information Officer at 410-946-5400 or 410-970-5400.

--- Page 3 ---
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
OFFICE Of LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY
Warren G. Deschenaux ThomasJ.BarnickelIII, CPA
Executive Director LegislativeAuditor
March 13, 2017
Senator Craig J. Zucker, Co-Chair, Joint Audit Committee
Delegate C. William Frick, Co-Chair, Joint Audit Committee
Members ofJoint Audit Committee
Annapolis, Maryland
Ladies and Gentlemen:
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit pertaining to information system
security and operational controls over the centralized operations ofthe Financial
Management Information System (fMIS) as administered by the Department of
Information Technology (DolT) and the Comptroller ofMaryland’s General
Accounting Division (GAD). fMIS is used to support the State’s purchasing,
accounting, and payment functions. According to the State’s accounting records,
expenditures processed through fMIS for fiscal year 2016 totaled approximately
$42 billion.
Our audit did not disclose any findings that warrant mention in this report.
We wish to acknowledge the cooperation extended to us during the audit by DolT
and GAD.
Respectfully submitted,
Thomas J. Barnickel III, CPA
Legislative Auditor
301 West Preston Street Room 1202 Baltimore, Maryland 21201
410-946-5900/301-970-5900 Fax 410-946-5999/301-970-5999
Toll Free in Maryland 877-486-9964 Fraud Hotline 877-FRAUD-li

--- Page 4 ---
2

--- Page 5 ---
Background Information
General Information
The Financial Management Information System (FMIS) is an integrated database
system that runs on the Comptroller of Maryland’s Annapolis Data Center’s
computers and supports individual agency and Statewide purchasing and
accounting operations. FMIS’s purchasing and accounting components are
operational in virtually all Executive Branch agencies, with the exception of the
University System of Maryland (USM) and the Maryland Department of
Transportation (MDOT). Because of unique requirements, USM and the
Maryland Judiciary process procurement, disbursement, and financial information
on in-house computer systems that interface certain financial information to FMIS
for recordation, payment processing, and reporting. An additional interface entity
is MDOT, which operates its own customized version of FMIS. With respect to
interfaced data, our centralized audit included a review of the controls and
processing of such data from the point of interface to FMIS through transaction
processing and recordation.
According to the State’s accounting records, expenditures processed through
FMIS for fiscal year 2016, before fiscal year-end closing adjustments, totaled
approximately $42 billion; this includes the aforementioned State agencies that
use their own computer systems that interface with FMIS.
Control Agency Responsibilities
FMIS supports purchasing functions through the Advanced Purchasing and
Inventory Control System (ADPICS) component, and supports the accounting
operations through the Relational Standard Accounting and Reporting System
(R*STARS) component. The integration of procurement and accounting
processing within FMIS results in two primary agencies, the Department of
Information Technology (DoIT) and the Comptroller of Maryland, having
responsibility for separate aspects of FMIS.
Specifically, DoIT is responsible for daily FMIS administration, including
maintenance, operation, security, and back-up of related database records and the
computer programs that perform online and overnight processing. The
Comptroller of Maryland’s General Accounting Division (GAD) is primarily
responsible for R*STARS operations, security, and reporting.
DoIT and GAD are separately audited by the Office of Legislative Audits with
respect to their agency-specific FMIS responsibilities. This audit of the
3

--- Page 6 ---
centralized FMIS operations included elements of FMIS operations relative to the
State’s overall internal control that are not included in the aforementioned agency
audits, such as database and security controls. For an expanded explanation of the
nature and purpose of this audit, see the Audit Scope, Objectives, and
Methodology section of this report.
Findings and Recommendations
Our audit did not disclose any significant deficiencies in the design or operation
of DoIT’s and GAD’s internal controls with respect to FMIS operations. Nor did
our audit disclose any significant instances of noncompliance with applicable
laws, rules, or regulations. A less significant finding was communicated to DoIT
and GAD that did not warrant inclusion in this report.
A draft copy of this report was provided to DoIT and GAD. Since there are no
recommendations in this report, written responses were not necessary.
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit pertaining to information system
security and operational controls over the centralized operations of the Financial
Management Information System (FMIS). Fieldwork associated with our audit
was conducted during the period from July 2016 to September 2016. The audit
was conducted in accordance with generally accepted government auditing
standards. Those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain
sufficient, appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and
conclusions based on our audit objectives. We believe that the evidence obtained
provides a reasonable basis for our finding and conclusions based on our audit
objectives.
The integration of procurement and accounting processing within FMIS results in
two primary agencies (that is, the Department of Information Technology [DoIT]
and the Comptroller of Maryland’s General Accounting Division [GAD]) having
responsibility for separate aspects of FMIS. As FMIS is a vital procurement and
accounting application in virtually all State agencies, internal control over FMIS
is critical to these State agencies. Since we are responsible for auditing these
agencies and evaluating their internal control, we periodically evaluate FMIS’s
internal control.
4

--- Page 7 ---
As prescribed by the State Government Article, Section 2-1221 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, the objectives of this audit were to examine the elements of
FMIS operations relative to the State’s overall internal controls (for example,
database and security controls) and to evaluate compliance with applicable State
laws, rules, and regulations not included in our individual audits of DoIT and
GAD.
In planning and conducting our audit, we focused on the major financial-related
areas of operations based on assessments of significance and risk. The areas
addressed by the audit included central FMIS security administration and
maintenance, and the component operations of the Advanced Purchasing and
Inventory Control System (ADPICS) and of the Relational Standard Accounting
and Reporting System (R*STARS).
The Maryland Department of Transportation (MDOT) maintains its own version
of FMIS, which is audited separately. In addition, certain State agencies—
including the Judiciary, University System of Maryland, and MDOT—process
procurement, disbursement, and financial information on in-house computer
systems that interface certain financial information to centralized FMIS for
recordation, payment processing, and reporting. With respect to interfaced data,
our centralized audit included a review of the controls and processing of such data
from the point of interface to FMIS through transaction processing and
recordation.
To accomplish our audit objectives, our audit procedures included inquiries of
appropriate personnel, inspections of documents and records, observations of
FMIS operations, and tests of transactions. Generally, transactions were selected
for testing based on auditor judgment, which primarily considers risk. Unless
otherwise specifically indicated, neither statistical nor non-statistical audit
sampling was used to select the transactions tested. Therefore, the results of the
tests cannot be used to project those results to the entire population from which
the test items were selected. Finally, we performed other auditing procedures that
we considered necessary to achieve our objectives. The reliability of data used in
this report for background or informational purposes was not assessed.
DoIT and GAD are responsible for establishing and maintaining effective internal
control over FMIS operations. Internal control is a process designed to provide
reasonable assurance that objectives pertaining to the reliability of financial
records, effectiveness and efficiency of operations including safeguarding of
assets, and compliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations are achieved.
5

--- Page 8 ---
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate.
Our reports are designed to assist the Maryland General Assembly in exercising
its legislative oversight function and to provide constructive recommendations for
improving State operations. As a result, our reports generally do not address
activities we reviewed that are functioning properly.
6

--- Page 9 ---
AUDIT TEAM
Stephen P. Jersey, CPA, CISA
Information Systems Audit Manager
Edwin L. Paul, CPA, CISA
Information Systems Senior Auditor
Robert H. Dean
Information Systems Staff Auditor
Daniel P. Nuccio, CPA, CFE
Staff Auditor