Title: Department of Human Services - Office of the Secretary and Related Units
Date: 11/17/2020
Type: Fiscal Compliance
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5fb4419da1ce580d703bac69
Extracted: 2025-06-20T00:06:33.862072
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Audit Report
Department of Human Services
Office of the Secretary and Related Units
February 2025
Public Notice
In compliance with the requirements of the State Government Article Section
2-1224(i), of the Annotated Code of Maryland, the Office of Legislative Audits
has redacted cybersecurity findings and related auditee responses
from this public report.
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Senator Shelly L. Hettleman (Senate Chair) Delegate Jared Solomon (House Chair)
Senator Joanne C. Benson Delegate Steven J. Arentz
Senator Benjamin T. Brooks, Sr. Delegate Andrea Fletcher Harrison
Senator Paul D. Corderman Delegate Steven C. Johnson
Senator Katie Fry Hester Delegate Mary A. Lehman
Senator Cheryl C. Kagan Delegate David H. Moon
Senator Clarence K. Lam, M.D. Delegate Julie Palakovich Carr
Senator Cory V. McCray Delegate Emily K. Shetty
Senator Justin D. Ready Delegate Stephanie M. Smith
Senator Bryan W. Simonaire Delegate M. Courtney Watson
To Obtain Further Information
Office of Legislative Audits
The Warehouse at Camden Yards
351 West Camden Street, Suite 400
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Phone: 410-946-5900
Maryland Relay: 711
TTY: 410-946-5401 · 301-970-5401
E-mail: webmaster@ola.state.md.us
Website: www.ola.state.md.us
To Report Fraud
The Office of Legislative Audits operates a Fraud Hotline to report fraud, waste, or abuse involving State
of Maryland government resources. Reports of fraud, waste, or abuse may be communicated anonymously
by a toll-free call to 1-877-FRAUD-11, by mail to the Fraud Hotline, c/o Office of Legislative Audits, or
through the Office’s website.
Nondiscrimination Statement
The Department of Legislative Services does not discriminate on the basis of age, ancestry, color, creed,
marital status, national origin, race, religion, gender, gender identity, sexual orientation, or disability in the
admission or access to its programs, services, or activities. The Department’s Information Officer has been
designated to coordinate compliance with the nondiscrimination requirements contained in Section 35.107
of the United States Department of Justice Regulations. Requests for assistance should be directed to the
Information Officer at 410-946-5400 or 410-970-5400.

--- Page 3 ---
February 28, 2025
Senator Shelly L. Hettleman, Senate Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Delegate Jared Solomon, House Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Members of Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Annapolis, Maryland
Ladies and Gentlemen:
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the Office of the Secretary and
related units of the Department of Human Services (DHS) for the period
beginning August 1, 2019 and ending July 15, 2023. DHS provides intervention
services to stabilize families and vulnerable adults, encourages financial
independence by providing temporary support and transition services, and
provides for the welfare of children at risk.
DHS is also responsible for certain aspects of the Maryland Total Human Services
Integrated Network (MD THINK) project implementation. During our audit an
independent accounting firm conducted a forensic audit of the system in response
to ongoing concerns with the implementation. Due to the ongoing forensic audit,
we did not review the MD THINK project but did include an informational
comment summarizing the forensic report findings which concluded that the
project was not developed effectively, leading to issues with the overall
functionality and the need for ongoing re-work of the system. The report also
identified numerous deficiencies regarding DHS’ oversight and monitoring of the
project. As of September 30, 2023, MD THINK costs totaled $618.5 million.
Our audit disclosed deficiencies in DHS’ procedures to account for federal fund
activity, including an inability to determine whether federal funds were recovered
for all State-funded expenditures. Specifically, DHS could not support that
federal fund reimbursement requests were properly calculated and recorded in the
State’s accounting records, and did not always verify that federal fund
reimbursement requests were subsequently received. Our audit also disclosed that

--- Page 4 ---
DHS lacked assurance that the balances of the revenue and expenditure accounts
related to federal fund activity were accurate. For example, we identified $292.1
million deficit balance in one account at June 30, 2023 that was caused by DHS
recording erroneous journal entries since fiscal year 2021.
In addition, our audit disclosed cybersecurity-related findings. However, in
accordance with the State Government Article, Section 2-1224(i) of the
Annotated Code of Maryland, we have redacted the findings from this audit
report. Specifically, State law requires the Office of Legislative Audits to redact
cybersecurity findings in a manner consistent with auditing best practices before
the report is made available to the public. The term “cybersecurity” is defined in
the State Finance and Procurement Article, Section 3.5-301(b), and using our
professional judgment we have determined that the redacted findings fall under
the referenced definition. The specifics of the cybersecurity findings were
previously communicated to those parties responsible for acting on our
recommendations.
Furthermore, our audit noted that DHS did not always publish contract awards on
eMaryland Marketplace Advantage (eMMA) within 30 days as required by State
procurement laws and regulations. DHS also did not ensure that employees who
were terminated or left State service were promptly removed from the payroll,
resulting in improper payments to at least 36 former employees totaling $109,000.
In addition, DHS did not ensure that corrective actions were implemented to
address findings from our Office’s fiscal compliance audits of other DHS units.
Our audit also included a review to determine the status of the five findings
contained in our preceding audit report. For the non-cybersecurity-related
findings, we determined that DHS satisfactorily addressed two of those three
findings. The remaining finding is repeated in this report.
DHS’ response to this audit is included as an appendix to this report. We have
edited DHS’ response to remove links to online documents, as allowed by our
policy. Consistent with State law, we have redacted the elements of DHS’
response related to the cybersecurity audit findings. We reviewed the response to
our findings and related recommendations, and have concluded that the corrective
actions identified are sufficient to address all audit issues.
2

--- Page 5 ---
We wish to acknowledge the cooperation extended to us during the audit by DHS
and its willingness to address the audit issues and implement appropriate
corrective actions.
Respectfully submitted,
Brian S. Tanen
Brian S. Tanen, CPA, CFE
Legislative Auditor
3

--- Page 6 ---
4

--- Page 7 ---
Table of Contents
Background Information 7
Agency Responsibilities 7
Maryland Total Human Services Integrated Network (MD THINK) Project 8
Residential Rehabilitation Rates 10
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report 11
Findings and Recommendations 13
Federal Funds
Finding 1 – The Department of Human Services (DHS) could not support 15
that federal fund drawdowns were properly calculated and journal
entries to allocate expenditures in the State’s accounting records were
not always supported and subject to supervisory review.
Finding 2 – DHS did not always verify that federal funds reimbursement 16
requests were subsequently received.
Finding 3 – DHS did not have procedures to ensure all federal fund 17
reimbursements were allocated to the proper account. As a result,
certain funds were improperly allocated without detection which raises
concerns about the accuracy of account balances and whether all federal
funds had been recovered.
Budgetary and Year-End Closing
Finding 4 – DHS could not provide documentation to support the propriety 18
of its accrued federal fund revenue entries or the subsequent recovery of
the funds.
Information Systems Security and Control
Finding 5 – Redacted cybersecurity-related finding 21
Finding 6 – Redacted cybersecurity-related finding 21
Procurements and Disbursements
* Finding 7 – DHS did not always publish contract awards on eMaryland 21
Marketplace Advantage as required by State procurement laws and
regulations.
* Denotes item repeated in full or part from preceding audit report
5

--- Page 8 ---
Payroll
Finding 8 – DHS did not have procedures to ensure that employees who 22
were terminated or left State service were promptly removed from the
payroll, resulting in improper payments to at least 36 former employees
totaling $109,000.
Executive Oversight
Finding 9 – DHS did not ensure that appropriate corrective actions were 23
implemented to address prior findings in our audits of DHS units.
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology 25
Exhibit 1 – Listing of Most Recent Office of Legislative Audits Fiscal 29
Compliance Audits of Department of Human Services Units as of
January 2025
Agency Response Appendix
6

--- Page 9 ---
Background Information
Agency Responsibilities
The Department of Human Services (DHS) provides intervention services to
stabilize families and vulnerable adults, encourages financial independence by
providing temporary support and transition services, and provides for the welfare
of children at risk. To deliver these services, DHS is organized into seven
budgetary units. This audit included the operations of the Office of the Secretary,
which provides overall direction and coordination for all DHS programs and
activities; the Operations Office, which provides core administrative services to
DHS units; and the Office of Technology for Human Services, which is
responsible for the overall management and direction of DHS’ information
systems. The remaining four units of DHS, listed below, are audited and reported
upon separately (see Exhibit 1).
 Child Support Administration
 Family Investment Administration
 Local Department Operations
 Social Services Administration
According to State records, during fiscal year 2023, expenditures for all of DHS’
seven budgetary units totaled approximately $3.9 billion, of which the majority
was for assistance programs such as the Supplemental Nutrition Assistance
Program. For the three units included in this audit, expenditures totaled
approximately $274.7 million during this period (see Figure 1 on the following
page).1 During the period of June 30, 2020 through June 30, 2023, these three
units of DHS had vacancy rates that ranged from 1 percent to 12 percent. As of
June 30, 2023, approximately 12 percent of the total 457 positions were vacant.
These vacancies may have contributed, at least in part, to the findings in this
report.
1 Our audit included the review of certain support services provided by DHS’ Office of the
Secretary and related units to other units of DHS, including purchasing services. As such,
contracts from each of DHS’ seven budgetary units were subject to review.
7

--- Page 10 ---
Figure 1
DHS Positions, Expenditures, and Funding Sources
Full-Time Equivalent Positions as of June 30, 2023
Positions Percent
Filled 401 87.8%
Vacant 55 12.0%
Frozen2 1 0.2%
Total 457
Fiscal Year 2023 Expenditures
Expenditures Percent
Salaries, Wages, and Fringe Benefits $ 51,151,228 18.6%
Technical and Special Fees 2,135,592 0.8%
Operating Expenses 221,416,203 80.6%
Total $274,703,023
Fiscal Year 2023 Funding Sources
Funding Percent
General Fund $115,979,656 42.2%
Special Fund 1,209,346 0.4%
Federal Fund 121,907,552 44.4%
Reimbursable Fund 35,606,469 13.0%
Total $274,703,023
Source: State financial and personnel records
Maryland Total Human Services Integrated Network (MD
THINK) Project
In fiscal year 2017, the Maryland Total Human Services Integrated Network (MD
THINK) project was initiated to modernize and integrate multiple State health and
human services information systems. The goal of MD THINK is to eliminate
redundancies in the benefit application process for individuals requiring services
from multiple agencies and help ensure applicants receive all needed services
regardless of which agency administers the program. Although several State
2 Prior to December 1, 2021, a hiring freeze resulted in certain positions being frozen. Agencies
were not authorized to fill frozen positions according to budgetary instructions from the
Department of Budget and Management. Any position that is currently marked as frozen has not
been filled since the freeze was lifted; however, these positions now are available to be filled.
8

--- Page 11 ---
agencies participated in MD THINK,3 funding for MD THINK has been included
in DHS’ budget since the project’s inception and DHS was designated as the
project host and has the primary responsibility for the development of these
coordinated systems. According to State records, MD THINK costs through
federal fiscal year 2023 totaled $618.5 million.
In response to numerous concerns with the implementation of MD THINK, DHS
contracted with an independent accounting firm to conduct a forensic audit of the
MD THINK project. On September 22, 2023, the firm issued its forensic audit
report which contained numerous observations and findings, including findings
that were specifically related to DHS’ oversight and monitoring of the project
including the following:
 MD THINK was not developed effectively, leading to issues with overall
functionality and the need for ongoing re-work.4 The project’s agile resource
staffing requirements did not require specific experience in the industry or
with the complex Eligibility & Enrollment system. Consequently, the firm
concluded that many of the complex MD THINK calculations and rules have
not been developed correctly and are not being fixed effectively, resulting in
prolonged deployment of programs with bugs.
 DHS did not maintain a complete and accurate record of service contracts
procured for MD THINK. The firm found that MD THINK maintained an
Acquisition Summary Report, but 168 executed work orders, task orders, and
modifications were not included in the report. In addition, supporting
documentation describing the purpose and key attributes did not exist for 175
work orders and modifications that were included in the Acquisition Summary
Report. Finally, the firm identified work orders, task orders, and modification
agreements that were missing execution signatures.
3 The original project plan established a State agency steering committee consisting of DHS, the
Department of Information Technology (DoIT), the Department of Juvenile Services (DJS), the
Maryland Department of Health (MDH), the Maryland Health Benefit Exchange (MHBE), the
Department of Budget and Management (DBM), and the Governor’s Office. In July 2021, the
MD THINK Executive Committee was established by the Governor’s Executive Order,
consisting of the same agencies (with the exception of MHBE). A second Executive Order in
April 2022 established the MD THINK Executive Director, a position appointed by the
Governor.
4 Projected MD THINK costs for Design, Development, and Implementation in federal fiscal years
2024 and 2025 totaled $116.5 million. DHS could not readily provide a breakdown between the
costs associated with addressing the deficiencies identified by the forensic report and costs for
additional planned enhancements for the MD THINK project.
9

--- Page 12 ---
 Although hardware, software, and general expenses tested by the firm were
determined to be for IT related costs, the firm noted that there was no
documentation that these expenditures specifically related to MD THINK.
 Reporting was not sufficiently detailed to provide for effective oversight. For
example, the periodic Portfolio, Steering, and Independent Verification and
Validation (IV&V) meetings contained specific and significant issues with the
program’s development and operation. However, only two summary reports
were provided to the Governor at the end of fiscal years 2021 and 2022 which
focused primarily on positive aspects of the program and did not provide
commentary or insight into any of the issues that were identified.
The firm also concluded that the IV&V reports routinely identified risks
across multiple programs and periods that did not seem to have been fully
addressed or resolved timely even when they globally impacted the MD
THINK platform. Additionally, the firm was not provided with any
documentation to support whether IV&V observations and issues negatively
impacting the project were tracked prior to January 2020.
 Documentation was not always available for the 336 individuals employed
under MD THINK contracts to support their eligibility to work on the project.
For example, the firm identified 58 individuals who lacked evidence that a
background check was performed, and background checks for 3 other
individuals disclosed issues that the firm concluded should have precluded
their involvement on the project.
The forensic report contained numerous recommended actions for DHS to
implement to address the conditions identified in the report. DHS generally
agreed with the forensic auditor’s recommendations.
Since the forensic audit was ongoing at the time of our fieldwork, we limited our
coverage of the MD THINK project to a review of the aforementioned forensic
report.
Residential Rehabilitation Rates
As noted in our two preceding DHS audit reports, in response to a U.S.
Department of Health and Human Services (HHS) audit5 in fiscal year 2011, the
5 The HHS audit concluded that the State’s use of a flat per diem rate for Medical Assistance
Program (Medicaid) claims for residential rehabilitiation services, regardless of the specific
services received by each client, made it unclear whether such services were eligible for
Medicaid reimbursement.
10

--- Page 13 ---
Maryland Department of Health (MDH), which administers the State’s Medicaid
program, agreed to pursue changes to the State’s methodology for setting per
diem rates for residential rehabilitation6 services and to ensure claims were
properly documented in accordance with that methodology.
In fiscal year 2015, the State’s Rate Setting Reform Stateholders Workgroup7
determined that most services that were reimbursed and included in the per diem
rates, such as residential rehabilitation room, board and recreation, were not
Medicaid-covered services. The Workgroup concluded that the small portion of
Medicaid-covered services (such as mental health counseling) should be
recovered directly by the providers as fee-for-service claims and a reduced State
per diem rate should be established for the non-Medicaid eligible service portion.
DHS continued to use the old rate through fiscal year 2015, at which point it
stopped recovering federal funds for these services until a new rate is developed
to avoid potential penalties.
In July 2022, DHS contracted with an actuarial vendor to develop a new rate
structure for residential rehabilitation service providers. DHS advised that the
vendor completed development of a new rate structure for certain providers in
December 2023 and that the remaining rates would be finalized by July 2025, but
that MDH needed to formally amend the Medicaid State Plan before the rates
could be used to request federal reimbursement. A DHS analysis of the impact of
the proposed rates on residential foster care service expenditures determined that
it could have recovered approximately $7.6 million in additional federal funds if
the new rates had been in place during fiscal year 2023.
Status of Findings from Preceding Audit Report
Our audit included a review to determine the status of the five findings contained
in our preceding audit report dated November 17, 2020. As disclosed in Figure 2
on the following page, for the non-cybersecurity-related findings, we determined
that DHS satisfactorily addressed two of those three findings. The remaining
finding is repeated in this report.
6 Residential rehabilitation services are provided under DHS’ foster care programs. Foster care is
administered by the DHS-Social Services Administration.
7 The Rate Setting Reform Stakeholders Workgroup was created under the State’s Interagency
Rates Committee and is comprised of the Departments of Health, Human Services, Juvenile
Services, Budget and Management, and Education; and the Governor’s Office for Children.
11

--- Page 14 ---
Figure 2
Status of Preceding Findings
Preceding Implementation
Finding Description
Finding Status
Sensitive personally identifiable information maintained by
Finding 1 Status Redacted8
DHS was stored without adequate safeguards.
DHS did not adequately address numerous significant
Finding 2 information technology security and operational issues for its Status Redacted8
Electronic Benefits Transfer System.
DHS did not modify the payment rates for residential
rehabilitation services, resulting in the use of State funds to
Finding 3 Not repeated
cover the cost of services that are potentially eligible for federal
reimbursement.
DHS did not always publish contract awards on eMaryland Repeated
Finding 4
Marketplace as required by State laws and regulations. (Current Finding 7)
DHS had not completed an annual physical inventory of
sensitive equipment since fiscal year 2016, and DHS’ equipment
Finding 5 Not repeated
records did not contain dollar values for numerous equipment
items.
8 Specific information on the current status of this cybersecurity–related finding has been redacted
from the publicly available report in accordance with State Government Article, Section 2-
1244(i) of the Annotated Code of Maryland.
12

--- Page 15 ---
Findings and Recommendations
Federal Funds
Background
According to State records, the Department of Human Services (DHS) federal
fund expenditures (excluding expenditures directly related to the COVID-19
public health emergency) during fiscal years 2020 through 2023 totaled
approximately $11.1 billion (see Figure 3). 9 These expenditures related to
various federal grant programs administered by DHS’ Family Investment
Administration (FIA), Social Services Administration (SSA), Child Support
Administration (CSA), and the Local Departments of Social Services (LDSSs).
For example, FIA administers the Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program
(SNAP) and Temporary Assistance for Needy Families (TANF) programs. Our
Office conducts separate audits of these DHS units. The scope of our current
audit included DHS’ procedures and controls to recover federal funds for
qualified expenditures made by these units, excluding SNAP.10
Figure 3
DHS Federal Fund Expenditures by Fiscal Year
($ in millions)
$4,000
$3,500
$3,000
$2,500
$2,000 $2,761
$2,001
$1,960
$1,500
$1,216
$1,000
$500 $800 $737 $737 $853
$0
2020 2021 2022 2023
Non-SNAP SNAP
Source: State accounting records
9 DHS’ receipt, expenditure, and accounting for these funds are subject to review and testing
during the annual federal Single Audit performed by independent auditors under contract with
the State of Maryland.
10 We excluded SNAP from our review because State general funds are not used to finance SNAP
expenditures. Rather, DHS contracts with a third-party vendor that disburses SNAP payments,
which are subsequently reimbursed directly to the vendor by the federal government.
13

--- Page 16 ---
As described in Figure 4 below, the federal fund accounting process includes four
distinct steps (a) payment for services, (b) request for federal reimbursement, (c)
receipt of the federal funds, and (d) allocation of the funds to the appropriate
accounts. Each of these steps is integral to ensure funds are properly expended
and recovered from the federal granting agency in a timely manner.
Figure 4
DHS Federal Fund Accounting Process
• DHS units (FIA, SSA, CSA) and the LDSSs process payments
for services and benefits to eligible individuals.
• Units record payments in the State's accounting system for
Pay
federal drawdown.
• DHS periodically submits reimbursement requests to the federal
government based on expenditures recorded in the State's
accounting system.
Request • Quarterly reconciliations are performed to ensure that all
payments were requested from the federal government.
• Funds received from the federal government are credited to
designated DHS accounts by the Office of the State Treasurer.
Receive
• DHS allocates funds from the designated accounts to the related
expenditure accounts (see Figure 5).
Allocate
Our current audit disclosed that DHS did not have comprehensive procedures and
controls over the request, receipt, and allocation of the federal funds. As a result,
there was a lack of assurance that DHS recovered all available federal funds.
14

--- Page 17 ---
Finding 1
DHS could not support that federal fund drawdowns were properly
calculated and journal entries to allocate expenditures in the State’s
accounting records were not always supported and subject to supervisory
review.
Analysis
DHS could not support that federal fund drawdowns were properly calculated and
journal entries to allocate expenditures in the State’s accounting records were not
always supported and subject to supervisory review. DHS’ process for recording
federal expenditures is highly complex and involves the periodic allocation of
expenditures between various accounts in the State’s accounting records via
journal entry. Our review of these processes disclosed the following:
Federal Fund Drawdowns Calculation Not Supported
DHS could not support that federal fund drawdown requests to obtain
reimbursement for various federal programs were properly calculated. DHS
initially funds expenditures for these programs using State funds and then seeks
reimbursement for a portion of these expenditures. Our test of 14 arbitrarily
selected drawdowns from fiscal year 2023 totaling $75.6 million disclosed that
DHS could not support the basis for the amounts requested for the drawdowns.
DHS advised that it calculated federal fund drawdowns based on the Cash
Management Improvement Act (CMIA) agreement between the State of
Maryland and the federal government. However, the CMIA does not specify the
percentage of total program expenditures eligible for federal reimbursement.
Rather, the CMIA provides certain guidelines (such as how indirect costs can be
charged) for submitting the reimbursement requests.
As a result, we were unable to determine whether drawdown requests were
properly calculated and that reimbursement for all eligible expenditures was
obtained.
Journal Entries Were Not Always Supported and Reviewed
Journal entries recorded to allocate federal fund expenditures were not always
properly supported and reviewed. Accurate recording of expenditures in the
State’s accounting records is critical because as noted above, the expenditure data
is used to calculate the related federal fund recoveries. According to State
accounting records, during fiscal year 2023 DHS recorded 2,383 entries totaling
$2.8 billion to allocate federal fund expenditures.
15

--- Page 18 ---
Our test of seven of these entries11 totaling $773.8 million recorded during fiscal
year 2023 disclosed that DHS could not support the basis for five entries that
allocated $763.7 million in expenditures. DHS advised us that the entries were
based on reports from the State’s accounting system but could not provide us with
copies of the reports to verify they were proper. In addition, four of the seven
entries that allocated $672.1 million were recorded without supervisory approval.
As a result of these conditions, there is a lack of assurance that the entries were
proper and that the resulting account balances were accurate.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that DHS
a. ensure federal fund reimbursement requests are properly calculated in
accordance with federal program requirements;
b. pursue the resolution of any improperly calculated federal fund
reimbursement requests to the extent possible, including the collection of
any unrecovered federal funds; and
c. ensure journal entries recorded in the State’s accounting records to
allocate federal fund expenditures are properly documented and
reviewed by a supervisory employee.
Finding 2
DHS did not always verify that federal funds reimbursement requests were
subsequently received.
Analysis
DHS did not always verify that federal fund reimbursement requests were
subsequently credited to the designated DHS account by the Office of the State
Treasurer (STO).12 Our test of the 14 fiscal year 2023 federal fund
reimbursement requests in Finding 1, disclosed that DHS did not document the
verification of receipt for 10 requests totaling $59.8 million. Although we
determined that DHS ultimately received the full amounts requested, given the
significant amount of funding DHS receives from the federal government and
STO acting as an intermediary for the collection of the funds, DHS should ensure
all federal funds requested are received.
11 Our selection of test items was based on materiality.
12 Although federal funds are requested by DHS, STO actually receives the funds from the federal
government, which is documented by STO posting the receipt activity to the appropriate
clearing account.
16

--- Page 19 ---
Recommendation 2
We recommend that DHS perform documented verifications to ensure that
all federal funds requested were received.
Finding 3
DHS did not have procedures to ensure all federal fund reimbursements
were allocated to the proper account. As a result, certain funds were
improperly allocated without detection which raises concerns about the
accuracy of account balances and whether all federal funds had been
recovered.
Analysis
DHS did not have procedures to ensure that all federal fund reimbursements were
properly allocated from the designated accounts to the related expenditure
accounts. We noted certain funds were either not allocated or allocated
improperly, resulting in inaccurate account balances dating back to at least fiscal
year 2021. Federal funds received from STO are initially recorded to designated
DHS accounts and then must be allocated to the appropriate accounts where the
related expenditures are recorded (see Figure 5).
Our analysis of DHS’ accounting records at June 30, 2023 disclosed one account
with a $292.1 million deficit balance that was caused by DHS recording year-end
journal entries since fiscal year 2021 that erroneously allocated revenue from the
account to offset expenditures in other unrelated accounts. We noted that all of
these entries were made without supervisory approval. Our analysis also
identified another account with a $151 million deficit balance, which DHS
management advised is the result of the failure to allocate federal fund revenues
to offset the expenditures recorded in the account.
17

--- Page 20 ---
The failure to properly allocate the federal revenue resulted in a lack of assurance
that DHS account balances were accurate, and the inability to determine whether
all federal funds were ultimately recovered. DHS advised that the deficit balances
in the aforementioned accounts were offset by surplus balances in other
expenditure accounts. However, as of November 2024, DHS could not readily
document the extent to which the balances were related.
These conditions occurred, at least in part, because DHS had not established
comprehensive and effective oversight of its federal fund accounting process to
ensure that all critical journal entries were timely and proper. In this regard,
DHS’ written procedures at the time of our audit did not specify how often journal
entries should be performed, the documentation requirements, and who was
responsible for performing supervisory reviews. Furthermore, no documented
comprehensive verifications were performed to ensure that revenues were
matched to the related expenditures and that DHS had recovered the cost of all
services.
Recommendation 3
We recommend that DHS
a. establish procedures and controls to ensure federal funds are allocated
timely, properly and accurately, and that the related transactions are
subject to supervisory reviews and approvals; and
b. investigate and resolve the aforementioned account balances.
Budgetary and Year-End Closing
Finding 4
DHS could not provide documentation to support the propriety of its accrued
federal fund revenue entries or the subsequent recovery of the funds.
Analysis
DHS could not provide documentation to support the propriety of its accrued
federal fund revenue entries or the subsequent recovery of the funds. The
Comptroller of Maryland – General Accounting Division (GAD) requires all
federal fund accounts to be zeroed out at year-end. To accomplish this, agencies
must record an accrued revenue for any amounts due from the federal government
or defer any balances to the next year (such as by recording a negative accrued
revenue transaction) as further described in Figure 6 on the following page. At
the end of fiscal year 2023, DHS recorded 21 accrued federal fund revenue entries
totaling $1.3 billion, consisting of 18 positive accrued revenue entries totaling
$781.4 million and 3 negative accrued revenue entries totaling $543.3 million.
18

--- Page 21 ---
Figure 6
Year-End Accrued Revenue Calculation
Starting
Current
Balance Revenues
Expenditures Amount
(Carry- Allocated
Recorded to Accrued
Over From to Account
Account
Prior Year)
Year-End Accrued
Explanation
Balance Revenue
 Expenditures exceed the revenue recorded in the account.
 A positive accrued revenue entry is recorded to close the
Deficit Positive
account at zero, with the expectation that the funds will be
received in the next fiscal year.
 Revenues exceed the expenditures recorded in the account.
 A negative accrued revenue entry is recorded to close the
Surplus Negative
account at zero, deferring the recognition of revenues, for funds
already received, to the next fiscal year.
DHS Could Not Support Accrued Revenue Entries
DHS maintains a database outside of the State’s accounting records to track
expenditures and revenues received for each of its federal grant programs. DHS
recorded accrued revenue entries in the State’s accounting records to bring each
federal account balance to zero, and advised us that these entries equaled the net
amount receivable for all of its federal grants according to this database.
However, DHS did not analyze the accrued revenue entries (which reflected
combined activity for multiple federal grants) to ensure the amounts were related
to current (fiscal year 2023) expenditures and to identify variances indicative of
errors in the underlying account balances.
An evaluation of the balances at year-end is critical because of the significant
amount of federal funds DHS receives each year, which may mask unrecovered
expenditures or errors in DHS’ accounting records. Specifically, we noted that
DHS did not identify certain questionable accrued revenue transactions, including
a $292.1 million entry to eliminate the deficit balance in an account that only had
expenditures of $22.2 million during fiscal year 2023. We compared this entry to
the accrued revenue entries for the account during prior years and noted that the
amount had increased from $10.9 million in fiscal year 2020 to $292.1 million in
fiscal year 2023, even though the annual expenditures for this account on DHS’
accounting records never exceeded $27 million.
19

--- Page 22 ---
DHS did not consider these questionable balances until we brought the matter to
its attention in November 2023. As noted in Finding 3 above, DHS advised that
the deficit balance in this account was the result of certain journal entries recorded
since fiscal year 2021 that erroneously allocated revenue from the account to
offset expenditures in other unrelated accounts. DHS further advised that it had
received the entire amount accrued and that the $292.1 million entry was offset by
one of the negative entries (surplus account balance) for another account.
However, as of November 2024, DHS could not readily document the extent to
which the underlying account balances were related and had not corrected the
erroneous journal entries.
DHS Could Not Document it Recovered the Recorded Accrued Revenue
DHS could not readily support that the June 30, 2023 fiscal year-end accrued
revenues were received in the subsequent fiscal year. DHS advised that
approximately half of the amount accrued was received in fiscal year 2024 and
the remaining accrued revenue was related to accrued expenditures recorded at
year end that will be recovered once the expenses are realized. As of December
2023, DHS had not allocated funds from the accounts where the revenues were
initially credited by STO to the accounts where the related accrued revenue
entries were recorded. As a result, we could not readily determine whether the
funds received in the subsequent year were related to the amounts accrued. While
some or all of these amounts may ultimately be recovered, to the extent that the
federal funds are not available, State general funds may be needed to cover any
related deficits.
Recording accrued revenues to eliminate deficit balances without regard to the
ultimate collectability of those revenues is not consistent with GAD policies.
Specifically, the GAD year-end closing instructions provide that accrued revenue
transactions should reflect amounts that are collectable within 60 days of the end
of the fiscal year and that revenue should be recognized in the same fiscal year the
expenditure is made. The closing instructions also require that detail
documentation to support the transactions be maintained. These conditions were
also disclosed in our report on the Statewide Review of Budget Closeout
Transactions for Fiscal Year 2023.13
Recommendation 4
We recommend that DHS
a. ensure that all year-end revenue transactions are properly supported as
required by GAD policies,
13 Similar conditions and additional issues were also disclosed in our report on the Statewide
Review of Budget Closeout Transactions for Fiscal Year 2024.
20

--- Page 23 ---
b. analyze the balances in the federal fund accounts to determine the
collectability of any deficit balances and proper disposition of any surplus
balances, and
c. properly report any amounts determined to be uncollectable and work
with the Department of Budget and Management to resolve any related
deficits.
Information Systems Security and Control
We determined that the Information Systems Security and Control section,
including Findings 5 and 6 related to “cybersecurity,” as defined by the State
Finance and Procurement Article, Section 3.5-301(b) of the Annotated Code of
Maryland, and therefore are subject to redaction from the publicly available audit
report in accordance with the State Government Article 2-1224(i). Consequently,
the specifics of the following findings, including the analysis, related
recommendations, along with DHS’ responses, have been redacted from this
report copy.
Finding 5
Redacted cybersecurity-related finding.
Finding 6
Redacted cybersecurity-related finding.
Procurements and Disbursements
Finding 7
DHS did not always publish contract awards on eMaryland Marketplace
Advantage (eMMA) as required by State procurement laws and regulations.
Analysis
DHS did not always publish contract awards on eMaryland Marketplace
Advantage (eMMA) as required by State procurement laws and regulations.
According to DHS’ records, DHS awarded procurements totaling $1.5 billion
during the audit period. We judgmentally14 reviewed 10 contracts awarded during
our audit period for various services (such as child placement and legal services)
14 We primarily selected contracts based on the materiality of the procurement and the related
method used for the procurement.
21

--- Page 24 ---
totaling $127.3 million, and noted that, as of December 2023, DHS had not
published the contract award for a $13.8 million contract awarded in April 2021.
In addition, DHS published the contract award for four other contracts totaling
$79.1 million between 3 months and 1 year late.
State procurement laws and regulations require awards for contracts greater than
$50,000 to be published on eMMA not more than 30 days after the execution and
approval of the contract. Publishing awards on eMMA provides transparency over
State procurements, including information about winning bidders and the amount
of the related awards.
A similar condition was commented upon in our preceding audit report. DHS’
response to that report indicated that, beginning in January 2021, the procurement
officer would complete a checklist to ensure that contract awards complied with
State procurement laws and regulations, including verification that awards were
published on eMMA. However, during our current audit we were advised that the
checklist was not implemented until August 2021 and it did not always include a
verification that the procurements were properly published in eMMA. In this
regard, four of the aforementioned contracts were procured before August 2021
and the one implemented after this date had a checklist that did not include an
eMMA verification.
Recommendation 7
We recommend that DHS comply with State procurement laws and
regulations by publishing contract awards on eMMA (repeat).
Payroll
Finding 8
DHS did not have procedures to ensure that employees who were terminated
or left State service were promptly removed from the payroll, resulting in
improper payments to at least 36 former employees totaling $109,000.
Analysis
DHS did not have procedures to ensure that employees who were terminated or
left State service were removed timely from the payroll, resulting in at least 36
employees continuing to be paid after they were terminated. DHS’ Payroll Unit
provides payroll services to all DHS units, including the Local Departments of
Social Services. According to State records for fiscal year 2023, DHS had 5,971
authorized positions across its seven budgetary units and during the period from
22

--- Page 25 ---
August 1, 2019 to July 15, 2023, there were 2,387 employees terminated from
DHS.
We obtained a report of all DHS employee terminations processed in the
Statewide Personnel System (SPS) during this period and compared the effective
date of the termination entered by DHS to the date DHS processed the termination
in SPS. Our analysis identified 528 of these terminations were processed in SPS
at least one day after the effective date of termination. We reviewed 55 of these
employees with the longest delays between the effective date of the termination
and the date the termination was processed in SPS, which ranged from 13 days to
22 months.
Our review disclosed that the untimely processing of terminations in SPS resulted
in 36 employees receiving improper payments totaling approximately $109,000
subsequent to their termination date. DHS was unaware of this condition until we
brought the matter to its attention in October 2023, and consequently, DHS had
not yet taken action to recover the improper payments.
Recommendation 8
We recommend that DHS
a. implement procedures to ensure timely posting in SPS of employees who
are terminated or leave State service; and
b. investigate payments to employees after they left State service, including
those noted above, and in consultation with legal counsel pursue recovery
of any improper payments as deemed appropriate.
Executive Oversight
Finding 9
DHS did not ensure that appropriate corrective actions were implemented to
address findings in our audits of DHS units.
Analysis
DHS did not ensure that appropriate corrective actions were implemented to
address findings from our Office’s fiscal compliance audits of the other DHS
units. DHS is responsible for providing executive oversight and guidance to the
individual units. As detailed in Exhibit 1, our Office conducts four separate
audits of DHS units. Our most recent audit reports of these units contained 26
findings.
23

--- Page 26 ---
DHS relied primarily on its Office of Inspector General (OIG) to ensure the units
implemented corrective actions to address these findings. Although the OIG has
established a corrective action monitoring process for the purpose of correcting
repeat audit findings, these efforts were not always sufficient to ensure that the
findings were satisfactorily addressed. Specifically, 17 of the aforementioned 26
findings (65 percent) were repeated from our preceding audit reports (see Exhibit
1). Furthermore, our most recent two audits of the Social Services Administration
(SSA), which included a significant number of repeat findings, concluded that
SSA’s accountability and compliance level was unsatisfactory (in accordance
with a rating process approved by the Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee).
Recommendation 9
We recommend that DHS establish proactive procedures to ensure
appropriate correction actions are implemented to address Office of
Legislative Audits report findings and that the implemented actions are
maintained to prevent recurrence of the findings.
24

--- Page 27 ---
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the Department of Human
Services (DHS) – Office of the Secretary and related units for the period
beginning August 1, 2019 and ending July 15, 2023. The audit was conducted in
accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards. Those
standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient,
appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and
conclusions based on our audit objectives. We believe that the evidence obtained
provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit
objectives.
As prescribed by the State Government Article, Section 2-1221 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, the objectives of this audit were to examine DHS’ financial
transactions, records, and internal control, and to evaluate its compliance with
applicable State laws, rules, and regulations.
In planning and conducting our audit, we focused on the major financial-related
areas of operations based on assessments of significance and risk. The areas
addressed by the audit included electronic benefit transfers, federal funds, legal
services, purchases and disbursements, corporate purchasing cards, equipment,
information systems security and control, and payroll. Our audit included various
support services (such as payroll, purchasing, maintenance of accounting records,
and related fiscal functions) provided by DHS’ Office of the Secretary and related
units to other units of DHS. We also determined the status of the five findings
contained in our preceding audit report.
DHS engaged an independent accounting firm to perform a forensic audit of the
MD THINK project. We have relied on the work of the independent accounting
firm to provide audit coverage pertaining to the oversight, operation, and financial
management of the MD THINK project. Our audit procedures in these areas were
generally limited, therefore, to obtaining a sufficient basis for that reliance. We
reviewed the audit report and related working papers and concluded that the audit
coverage of the independent accounting firm provided a sufficient basis for
reliance on the independent accounting firm’s work.
In addition, our audit did not include an evaluation of internal controls over
compliance with federal laws and regulations for federal financial assistance and
programs and an assessment of DHS’ compliance with those laws and regulations
because the State of Maryland engages an independent accounting firm to
annually audit such programs administered by State agencies, including DHS.
25

--- Page 28 ---
Our assessment of internal controls was based on agency procedures and controls
in place at the time of our fieldwork. Our tests of transactions and other auditing
procedures were generally focused on the transactions occurring during our audit
period of August 1, 2019 to July 15, 2023, but may include transactions before or
after this period as we considered necessary to achieve our audit objectives.
To accomplish our audit objectives, our audit procedures included inquiries of
appropriate personnel, inspections of documents and records, tests of transactions,
and to the extent practicable, observations of DHS’ operations. Generally,
transactions were selected for testing based on auditor judgment, which primarily
considers risk, the timing or dollar amount of the transaction, or the significance
of the transaction to the area of operation reviewed. As a matter of course, we do
not normally use sampling in our tests, so unless otherwise specifically indicated,
neither statistical nor non-statistical audit sampling was used to select the
transactions tested. Therefore, unless sampling is specifically indicated in a
finding, the results from any tests conducted or disclosed by us cannot be used to
project those results to the entire population from which the test items were
selected.
We also performed various data extracts of pertinent information from the State’s
Financial Management Information System (such as revenue and expenditure
data) and the State’s Central Payroll Bureau (payroll data), as well as from the
contractor administering the State’s Corporate Purchasing Card Program (credit
card activity). The extracts are performed as part of ongoing internal processes
established by the Office of Legislative Audits and were subject to various tests to
determine data reliability. We determined that the data extracted from this source
were sufficiently reliable for the purposes the data were used during the audit.
We also extracted data from DHS’ Payment Management System for the purpose
of testing federal drawdowns. We performed various tests of the relevant data
and determined that the data were sufficiently reliable for the purposes the data
were used during the audit. Finally, we performed other auditing procedures that
we considered necessary to achieve our audit objectives. The reliability of data
used in this report for background or informational purposes was not assessed.
DHS’ management is responsible for establishing and maintaining effective
internal control. Internal control is a process designed to provide reasonable
assurance that objectives pertaining to the reliability of financial records;
effectiveness and efficiency of operations, including safeguarding of assets; and
compliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations are achieved. As
provided in Government Auditing Standards, there are five components of
internal control: control environment, risk assessment, control activities,
information and communication, and monitoring. Each of the five components,
26

--- Page 29 ---
when significant to the audit objectives, and as applicable to DHS, were
considered by us during the course of this audit.
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate.
Our reports are designed to assist the Maryland General Assembly in exercising
its legislative oversight function and to provide constructive recommendations for
improving State operations. As a result, our reports generally do not address
activities we reviewed that are functioning properly.
This report includes findings relating to conditions that we consider to be
significant deficiencies in the design or operation of internal control that could
adversely affect DHS’ ability to maintain reliable financial records, operate
effectively and efficiently, and/or comply with applicable laws, rules, and
regulations. Our report also includes findings regarding a significant instance of
noncompliance with applicable laws, rules, or regulations. Other less significant
findings were communicated to DHS that did not warrant inclusion in this report.
State Government Article Section 2-1224(i) requires that we redact in a manner
consistent with auditing best practices any cybersecurity findings before a report
is made available to the public. This results in the issuance of two different
versions of an audit report that contains cybersecurity findings – a redacted
version for the public and an unredacted version for government officials
responsible for acting on our audit recommendations.
The State Finance and Procurement Article, Section 3.5-301(b), states that
cybersecurity is defined as “processes or capabilities wherein systems,
communications, and information are protected and defended against damage,
unauthorized use or modification, and exploitation.” Based on that definition, and
in our professional judgment, we concluded that certain findings in this report fall
under that definition. Consequently, for the publicly available audit report all
specifics as to the nature of cybersecurity findings and required corrective actions
have been redacted. We have determined that such aforementioned practices, and
government auditing standards, support the redaction of this information from the
public audit report. The specifics of these cybersecurity findings have been
communicated to DHS and those parties responsible for acting on our
recommendations in an unredacted audit report.
27

--- Page 30 ---
DHS’ response to our findings and recommendations is included as an appendix
to this report. Depending on the version of the audit report, responses to any
cybersecurity findings may be redacted in accordance with State law. As
prescribed in the State Government Article, Section 2-1224 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, we will advise DHS regarding the results of our review of its
response.
28

--- Page 31 ---
Exhibit 1
Listing of Most Recent Office of Legislative Audits
Fiscal Compliance Audits of Department of Human Services Units
As of January 2025
Number of
Most Recent
Name of Audit Total Findings Repeat
Report Date
Findings
Family Investment
1 10/21/2022 10 5
Administration
2 Local Department Operations 3/30/2022 6 5
3 Social Services Administration U 6/3/2021 8 7
4 Child Support Administration 5/13/2021 2 0
Total 26 17
U - This audit had an unsatisfactory rating.
29

--- Page 32 ---
APPENDIX
Wes Moore, Governor • Aruna Miller, Lt. Governor • Rafael López, Secretary
February 25, 2025
Mr. Brian S. Tanen, CPA, CFE
Legislative Auditor
Office of Legislative Audits
The Warehouse at Camden Yards,
351 West Camden Street, Suite 400
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Dear Mr. Tanen:
Enclosed is the Department of Human Services’ (DHS) response to the draft
Legislative Audit Report on the Department of Human Services – Office of the
Secretary and Related Units for the period beginning August 1, 2019 and ending
July 15, 2023.
The Department takes audit findings seriously and is committed to resolving the
findings identified in the audit report.
We are happy to answer any questions. Please contact Marva Sutherland, Inspector
General, at Marva.Sutherland@maryland.gov if you would like to continue the
conversation.
In service,
Carnitra White
Principal Deputy Secretary
Enclosures:
cc:
Gloria Brown Burnett, Deputy Secretary for Operations
Daniel Wait, Deputy Secretary for Talent & Customer Service
Webster Ye, Chief of Staff
Marva Sutherland, Inspector General
Shelly-Ann Dyer, Assistant Inspector General for Audits
25 S. Charles Street, Baltimore, MD 21201-3500
Tel: 1-800-332-6347 | TTY: 1-800-735-2258 | www.dhs.maryland.gov

--- Page 33 ---
Department of Human Services
Office of the Secretary and Related Units
Agency Response Form
Federal Funds
Finding 1
DHS could not support that federal fund drawdowns were properly
calculated and journal entries to allocate expenditures in the State’s
accounting records were not always supported and subject to supervisory
review.
We recommend that DHS
a. ensure federal fund reimbursement requests are properly calculated in
accordance with federal program requirements;
b. pursue the resolution of any improperly calculated federal fund
reimbursement requests to the extent possible, including the collection of
any unrecovered federal funds; and
c. ensure journal entries recorded in the State’s accounting records to
allocate federal fund expenditures are properly documented and
reviewed by a supervisory employee.
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 1a Agree Estimated Completion Date: 6/30/2025
Please provide details of DHS has reviewed and updated the allocation percentages to ensure the
corrective action or correct amount of federal fund reimbursement requests.
explain disagreement.
DHS has procured new cost-allocation software. This software provides
for more accurate cost allocation and federal fund determination for
drawdown purposes.
Effectiveness will be further confirmed at year end closeout (6/30/2025).
Recommendation 1b Agree Estimated Completion Date: 12/31/2024
Please provide details of DHS agrees with an explanation. Specifically, DHS cannot pursue
corrective action or previously unrecovered federal funds in prior federal fiscal years going
explain disagreement. back five years. Given the time period of the review, most of the grants
have expired, and for grants that may still be active, the remaining
Page 1 of 13

--- Page 34 ---
Department of Human Services
Office of the Secretary and Related Units
Agency Response Form
federal funds have been reallocated to existing grants for the current
state fiscal year’s budget.
However, our Federal Partners allow DHS up to a year after the
expiration of a grant to review costs and file for any unclaimed costs
against federal grants. DHS is engaging in that process now and plans to
review the last federal fiscal year (September 2024) during the closing
process (September 2025) to determine if any unclaimed funds can be
claimed. In addition, DHS is focused on maximizing federal fund
drawdown in federal fiscal years 2024 and 2025.
We have made significant changes in the finance office management
team in order to achieve maximum drawdown and are rapidly revising
internal processes. These changes include senior personnel changes, the
acquisition and implementation of budget allocation software, as
indicated above, and a reorganization of team structure and management.
We have been in discussions with the Department of Budget and
Management since early 2024 to improve these processes.
Recommendation 1c Agree Estimated Completion Date: 11/01/2024
Please provide details of DHS has implemented adequate management oversight to ensure that
corrective action or journal entries recorded in the State’s accounting records to allocate
explain disagreement. federal fund expenditures are properly documented and reviewed by a
supervisory employee. Specifically, journal entries are now approved
and signed by Accounting Director and CFO personnel before
processing. Management continues to monitor for compliance and will
further refine the process as needed.
Page 2 of 13

--- Page 35 ---
Department of Human Services
Office of the Secretary and Related Units
Agency Response Form
Finding 2
DHS did not always verify that federal funds reimbursement requests were
subsequently received.
We recommend that DHS perform documented verifications to ensure that
all federal funds requested were received.
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 2 Agree Estimated Completion Date: 6/30/2025
Please provide details of DHS is implementing a process to perform documented verifications to
corrective action or ensure that all federal funds requested were received. Specifically, on a
explain disagreement. quarterly basis, system-generated reports from the FMIS will be
reviewed to ensure receipt of the requested drawdown. Reviews will be
documented accordingly. Previously, DHS only monitored these receipts
during the year-end closing.
Page 3 of 13

--- Page 36 ---
Department of Human Services
Office of the Secretary and Related Units
Agency Response Form
Finding 3
DHS did not have procedures to ensure all federal fund reimbursements
were allocated to the proper account. As a result, certain funds were
improperly allocated without detection which raises concerns about the
accuracy of account balances and whether all federal funds had been
recovered.
We recommend that DHS
a. establish procedures and controls to ensure federal funds are allocated
timely, properly and accurately, and that the related transactions are
subject to supervisory reviews and approvals; and
b. investigate and resolve the aforementioned account balances.
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 3a Agree Estimated Completion Date: 11/01/2024
Please provide details of DHS is now utilizing the cost allocation results table to properly allocate
corrective action or the federal funds to the correct budgetary unit via journal entry in a
explain disagreement. timely manner. The journal entries and supporting documentation are
now reviewed and signed by the supervisor and/or manager.
Recommendation 3b Agree Estimated Completion Date: 6/30/2025
Please provide details of DHS will investigate and seek to resolve the aforementioned account
corrective action or balances by creating a database to monitor the drawdown and posting of
explain disagreement. the federal fund allocations.
Page 4 of 13

--- Page 37 ---
Department of Human Services
Office of the Secretary and Related Units
Agency Response Form
Budgetary and Year-End Closing
Finding 4
DHS could not provide documentation to support the propriety of its accrued
federal fund revenue entries or the subsequent recovery of the funds.
We recommend that DHS
a. ensure that all year-end revenue transactions are properly supported as
required by GAD policies,
b. analyze the balances in the federal fund accounts to determine the
collectability of any deficit balances and proper disposition of any surplus
balances, and
c. properly report any amounts determined to be uncollectable and work
with the Department of Budget and Management to resolve any related
deficits.
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 4a Agree Estimated Completion Date: 6/30/2025
Please provide details of DHS has identified this issue as standard practice in previous years
corrective action or under the previous administration and has moved to correct it. Going
explain disagreement. forward, related supervisors and/or managers will review all year-end
journal entries and supporting documents to ensure that year-end
revenue transactions are properly supported as required by GAD
policies.
Recommendation 4b Agree Estimated Completion Date: 6/30/2025
Please provide details of As part of our ongoing efforts to change previous practices, DHS is now
corrective action or reviewing prior quarter reports and balances to report adjustments such
explain disagreement. as refunds or unreported activity during the current quarter allocation
and reporting.
Recommendation 4c Agree Estimated Completion Date: 6/30/2025
Page 5 of 13

--- Page 38 ---
Department of Human Services
Office of the Secretary and Related Units
Agency Response Form
Please provide details of DHS will report any amounts determined to be uncollectable to the
corrective action or Department of Budget Management by adjusting the FMIS system
explain disagreement. accordingly.
Information Systems Security and Control
The Office of Legislative Audits (OLA) has determined that the Information
Systems Security and Control section, including Findings 5 and 6 related to
“cybersecurity,” as defined by the State Finance and Procurement Article, Section
3.5-301(b) of the Annotated Code of Maryland, and therefore are subject to
redaction from the publicly available audit report in accordance with the State
Government Article 2-1224(i). Although, the specifics of the following findings,
including the analysis, related recommendations, along with DHS’ responses,
have been redacted from this report copy, DHS’ responses indicated agreement
with the findings and related recommendations.
Finding 5
Redacted cybersecurity-related finding.
Agency Response has been redacted by OLA.
Finding 6
Redacted cybersecurity-related finding.
Agency Response has been redacted by OLA.
Page 6 of 13

--- Page 39 ---
Department of Human Services
Office of the Secretary and Related Units
Agency Response Form
Procurements and Disbursements
Finding 7
DHS did not always publish contract awards on eMaryland Marketplace
Advantage (eMMA) as required by State procurement laws and regulations.
We recommend that DHS comply with State procurement laws and
regulations by publishing contract awards on eMMA (repeat).
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 7 Agree Estimated Completion Date: 07/31/2025
Please provide details of DHS agrees with the recommendation and will ensure compliance with
corrective action or State procurement laws and regulations by publishing contract awards on
explain disagreement. eMMA. We acknowledge that the checklist alone is not always the best
mechanism to confirm eMMA postings were entered and
posted. Therefore, while the checklist will continue to be utilized, this
process will be enhanced with an eMMA Posting spreadsheet.
The aforementioned spreadsheet has been created and is currently in use
to track the eMMA postings. The spreadsheet will log eMMA contract
numbers and will 1) track contracts entered into eMMA and 2) provide
visibility to the workflow and posting of contracts within the 30-day
requirement.
Procurement leadership meets bi-weekly to review and/or update the
spreadsheet. The meeting consists of reviewing contracts that meet the
eMMA posting requirements. If the contract meets the eMMA posting
requirements, it is checked to see if it has been entered into eMMA, the
date the contract was approved is logged, as well as where it is in the
eMMA workflow. As needed, follow up communication is sent to those
responsible for posting the eMMA awards to ensure the posting is
completed in accordance with State procurement laws and regulations.
Page 7 of 13

--- Page 40 ---
Department of Human Services
Office of the Secretary and Related Units
Agency Response Form
Procurement leadership will continue to have on-going meetings to
review and monitor eMMA postings and provide on-going training and
support to staff, as needed.
Page 8 of 13

--- Page 41 ---
Department of Human Services
Office of the Secretary and Related Units
Agency Response Form
Payroll
Finding 8
DHS did not have procedures to ensure that employees who were terminated
or left State service were promptly removed from the payroll, resulting in
improper payments to at least 36 former employees totaling $109,000.
We recommend that DHS
a. implement procedures to ensure timely posting in SPS of employees who
are terminated or leave State service; and
b. investigate payments to employees after they left State service, including
those noted above, and in consultation with legal counsel pursue recovery
of any improper payments as deemed appropriate.
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 8a Agree Estimated Completion Date: 6/30/2025
Please provide details of
corrective action or In order to ensure timely posting in SPS of employees who are
explain disagreement. terminated, DHS will take the following steps:
1.Create a new, clear standard operating procedure that emphasizes the
requirements for management, supervisory, and human resource staff to
immediately report that an employee is leaving as soon as notice is
given, or the employee is terminated.
2.DHS will provide training to management, supervisory, and human
resources staff to ensure that they understand their roles in offboarding
staff promptly.
• DHS will use data provided by DLS to identify local jurisdictions
that need additional refresher training to ensure practice
compliance.
Page 9 of 13

--- Page 42 ---
Department of Human Services
Office of the Secretary and Related Units
Agency Response Form
3. The DHS Talent Engagement and Management group (TEAM) will
ensure that appropriate reports are available in Workday and monitor
those reports weekly to identify any issues with completing termination
transactions timely.
4. Appropriate personnel action may be taken when management,
supervisors, or human resources staff fail to take timely action to
complete a termination transaction in Workday.
Recommendation 8b Agree Estimated Completion Date: 9/30/2025
Please provide details of The Talent Engagement and Management group (TEAM) will work with
corrective action or the DHS Payroll and Timekeeping unit to review all transactions
explain disagreement. identified in the report from DLS and will follow established procedures
to seek the recovery of all overpayments.
Page 10 of 13

--- Page 43 ---
Department of Human Services
Office of the Secretary and Related Units
Agency Response Form
Executive Oversight
Finding 9
DHS did not ensure that appropriate corrective actions were implemented to
address findings in our audits of DHS units.
We recommend that DHS establish proactive procedures to ensure
appropriate correction actions are implemented to address Office of
Legislative Audits report findings and that the implemented actions are
maintained to prevent recurrence of the findings.
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 9 Agree Estimated Completion Date: 6/30/2025
Please provide details of
corrective action or DHS Executive Leadership takes audit findings seriously and is
explain disagreement. committed to strengthening our processes to enhance compliance
throughout the Department.
While the current Administration provided oversight for only the last six
months (January 2023 - July 2023) of the four-year period reviewed
(August 2019 - July 2023), DHS agrees with OLA’s recommendations.
We have taken proactive measures and continue to enhance and
implement procedures to ensure appropriate corrective actions are taken
and sustained to prevent recurrence of the findings.
Specifically, in addition to DHS OIG's corrective actions monitoring
procedures, immediately upon assuming responsibility of the
Department in January 2023, the DHS Executive team (Office of the
Secretary) has taken the following actions to prevent the recurrence of
findings:
1) Established Tone at the Top to Drive Accountability and
Reduce Repeat Findings: DHS Executive Leadership has
Page 11 of 13

--- Page 44 ---
Department of Human Services
Office of the Secretary and Related Units
Agency Response Form
placed a clear emphasis on changing DHS culture to address
repeat findings. Leadership demonstrates a strong commitment to
continuous improvement, accountability, and compliance,
especially concerning audits and corrective actions. For example,
upon the issuance of the Office of the Inspector General's internal
audit reports, the Office of the Secretary requires the Director of
the respective local department (auditee) to provide a detailed
corrective action plan. This plan should include a timeline for
addressing each finding and identify the responsible parties for
resolution. The Director is also asked to share any barriers that
may hinder the successful implementation of corrective actions.
Leadership has made it clear that repeat issues are unacceptable.
Staff at all levels are expected to participate in continuous
improvement and carry out their duties in accordance with
specific standards, policies, and procedures. This commitment is
supported through various mechanisms, including continuous
enhancements of policies, and procedures, and routine training.
For example, clear lines of delegated fiscal authority (effective
April 3, 2023) have been developed and shared with key
personnel. Additionally, DHS is in the process of substantially
revising its procurement tracking software, invoice tracking
process, and internal fiscal manual with best practices, and
holding employees accountable (effective March 4, 2024).
2) Regular Reporting to Leadership: The Office of the Secretary
conducts weekly check-ins with the DHS Office of Inspector
General (OIG) to discuss the progress of corrective actions. Based
on these discussions, the Office of the Secretary takes appropriate
actions. We have bi-weekly check-ins with DBM’s audit division
to discuss repeat audit status progress.
3) Cross-Divisional Executive Leadership Oversight Effort:
Effective November 2024, a monthly Cross-Divisional Executive
Leadership meeting, led by the Office of the Secretary, has been
instituted to ensure accountability for addressing audit findings.
Page 12 of 13

--- Page 45 ---
Department of Human Services
Office of the Secretary and Related Units
Agency Response Form
Key participants include, but are not limited to, Executive
Directors and the Office of the Inspector General.
This process provides the Office of the Secretary with a
comprehensive view of all open findings and the progress of
corrective actions, enabling informed decision-making and
prompt responses to any delays or obstacles. The inclusivity of
these meetings ensures a diverse range of perspectives and
expertise. This cross-functional collaboration leads to
comprehensive insights into the root causes of audit findings and
the identification of common issues. This allows DHS to address
systemic problems that contribute to audit findings across
multiple departments in a holistic manner.
Intra- Program Area Compliance Monitoring and Guidance:
DHS leadership continues to bolster the compliance teams within
each program area (Family Investment Administration, Social
Services Administration, Child Support Administration). The
compliance team’s focus is to ensure audit findings are
incorporated and addressed in ongoing program area compliance
reviews. Continuous oversight helps to identify issues early,
course correct if needed and maintain compliance over time. This
approach also allows for all process owners to be involved in the
audit resolution process. The teams also provide frequent
technical assistance and training to ensure compliance.
While the effectiveness of these efforts may require some time to
become fully evident, DHS remains committed and dedicated to
rectifying the repeat conditions identified. This proactive approach will
result in more effective and compliant operations across the Department,
including our 24 local departments of social services.
In addition, we intend to work with OLA and OIG to develop additional
best practices and procedures to further drive appropriate corrective
actions and actions to prevent recurrence of the findings in FY2025, and
to make continuous improvement as needed.
Page 13 of 13

--- Page 46 ---
A T
UDIT EAM
Edward A. Rubenstein, CPA
Audit Manager
R. Brendan Coffey, CPA, CISA
Edwin L. Paul, CPA, CISA
Information Systems Audit Managers
Matusala Y. Abishe
Patrick J. Cavanaugh, CPA
James J. Podhorniak, CPA, CFE
Senior Auditors
Eric Alexander, CPA, CISA
Michael K. Bliss, CISA
Information Systems Senior Auditors
Jammie A. Brown
Daniel G. Johnson, CFE
Jacob M. Kasten
Jillian A. Novak, CPA
Jennifer N. Sayre, CFE
Staff Auditors
Vickey K. Micah
Joshua A. Nicodemus, CISA
Christopher C. Pitre
Information Systems Staff Auditors