Title: Baltimore County Public Schools
Date: 11/19/2020
Type: Local School Systems
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5fb6cfeea1ce5812f4ffaf42
Extracted: 2025-06-20T00:06:52.058983
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Financial Management Practices Audit Report
Baltimore County Public Schools
November 2020
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Senator Clarence K. Lam, M.D. (Senate Chair) Delegate Carol L. Krimm (House Chair)
Senator Malcolm L. Augustine Delegate Steven J. Arentz
Senator Adelaide C. Eckardt Delegate Mark S. Chang
Senator George C. Edwards Delegate Andrea Fletcher Harrison
Senator Katie Fry Hester Delegate Keith E. Haynes
Senator Cheryl C. Kagan Delegate Michael A. Jackson
Senator Benjamin F. Kramer Delegate David Moon
Senator Cory V. McCray Delegate April R. Rose
Senator Justin D. Ready Delegate Geraldine Valentino-Smith
Senator Craig J. Zucker Delegate Karen Lewis Young
To Obtain Further Information
Office of Legislative Audits
301 West Preston Street, Room 1202
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Phone: 410-946-5900 ꞏ 301-970-5900 ꞏ 1-877-486-9964 (Toll Free in Maryland)
Maryland Relay: 711
TTY: 410-946-5401 ꞏ 301-970-5401
E-mail: OLAWebmaster@ola.state.md.us
Website: www.ola.state.md.us
To Report Fraud
The Office of Legislative Audits operates a Fraud Hotline to report fraud, waste, or abuse involving State
of Maryland government resources. Reports of fraud, waste, or abuse may be communicated anonymously
by a toll-free call to 1-877-FRAUD-11, by mail to the Fraud Hotline, c/o Office of Legislative Audits, or
through the Office’s website.
Nondiscrimination Statement
The Department of Legislative Services does not discriminate on the basis of age, ancestry, color, creed,
marital status, national origin, race, religion, gender, gender identity, sexual orientation, or disability in the
admission or access to its programs, services, or activities. The Department’s Information Officer has been
designated to coordinate compliance with the nondiscrimination requirements contained in Section 35.107
of the United States Department of Justice Regulations. Requests for assistance should be directed to the
Information Officer at 410-946-5400 or 410-970-5400.

--- Page 3 ---
November 19, 2020
Senator Clarence K. Lam, M.D., Senate Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Delegate Carol L. Krimm, House Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Members of Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Annapolis, Maryland
Ladies and Gentlemen:
We conducted an audit of the financial management practices of the Baltimore
County Public Schools (BCPS) in accordance with the requirements of the State
Government Article, Section 2-1220(e) of the Annotated Code of Maryland. The
objectives of this audit were to evaluate whether BCPS’ procedures and controls
were effective in accounting for and safeguarding its assets and whether its
policies provided for the efficient use of financial resources.
Our audit disclosed that BCPS needs to improve internal controls and
accountability in certain areas, including procurement and disbursements, payroll
processing, and information systems. For example, adequate access controls had
not been established over its financial management system, and BCPS did not
ensure certain personnel and payroll transactions were subject to independent
review and approval.
We also found that BCPS’ procurement policies were not sufficiently
comprehensive. Specifically, BCPS’ policies did not define the criteria for
necessary contract modifications and did not require a signed contract
modification to support changes to contract terms and conditions. For example,
BCPS paid an additional $1.2 million to purchase upgraded anti-theft devices on a
$140.0 million contract for laptop computers without executing a written contract
modification. Additionally, BCPS did not have a written policy for
documentation of receipt of goods and services prior to payment, as well as for
prepayment of services.
Furthermore, procurements were not always made in accordance with established
policies or applicable State law. Specifically, BCPS did not ensure that contracts
were properly executed prior to payment, as required by its policy and did not

--- Page 4 ---
publish the award of four contracts totaling $23.7 million on eMaryland
Marketplace, as required by State law. We also determined that BCPS used an
intergovernmental cooperative purchasing agreement (ICPA) to purchase 197
school buses totaling $19.5 million in a manner that was inconsistent with the
intent of the ICPA and limited competition. In addition, BCPS did not maintain
sufficient supporting documentation of those purchases to enable us to determine
whether BCPS received the best value. Due to the lack of available records from
both BCPS and the vendor and variability in the buses, we could not readily
determine whether the amounts paid were consistent with the pricing in the ICPA.
Significant risks existed within BCPS’ computer network. For example,
monitoring of security activities over critical systems was not sufficient and its
computer network was not properly secured. In this regard, publicly accessible
servers were located in the BCPS internal network rather than being isolated in a
separate protected network zone to minimize security risks.
In addition, we identified certain practices which, if implemented, could provide
opportunities for achieving cost savings in student transportation. Specifically,
BCPS had not performed a system-wide route analysis, and some bus routes were
operating at less than 50 percent of the desired capacity. BCPS also needs to
ensure the reasonableness of payment for employee healthcare, which totaled
$152.2 million during fiscal year 2019.
Finally, based on our current audit assessment of significance and risk to our audit
objectives, our audit included a review to determine the status of 11 of the 12
findings contained in our preceding audit report. We determined that BCPS
satisfactorily addressed six of these findings. The remaining five findings are
repeated in this report.
We conducted our fieldwork from May 2019 to February 2020. On March 16,
2020, due to the COVID-19 pandemic health crisis, the State Superintendent of
Schools decided to close school and administrative buildings to employees and
the public for a two-week period. This was eventually extended for the remainder
of the 2019-2020 school year with limited access by certain employees. All
BCPS buildings were open during the entire period of our fieldwork, so the
objectives and scope of our audit were not impacted. To the extent that the
COVID-19 crisis continues to impact BCPS operations, certain recommendations
in this report may need to be adjusted in the future to ensure proper controls under
the modified operations.
2

--- Page 5 ---
BCPS’ response to this audit is included as an appendix to this report. We
reviewed the response and noted general agreement to our findings and related
recommendations, and while there are other aspects of the response that will
require further clarification, we do not anticipate that these will require the Joint
Audit and Evaluation Committee’s attention to resolve. In accordance with our
policy, we have redacted the names of any private companies or products
mentioned by BCPS in this document.
We wish to acknowledge the cooperation extended to us during our audit by
BCPS and its willingness to address the audit issues and to implement appropriate
corrective actions.
Respectfully submitted,
Gregory A. Hook, CPA
Legislative Auditor
3

--- Page 6 ---
4

--- Page 7 ---
Table of Contents
Background Information 8
Statistical Overview 8
Oversight 9
External Audits 10
Indictment of Former Superintendent and Resulting Audit 11
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report 12
Findings and Recommendations 14
Revenue and Billing Cycle 14
Federal Funds 15
Procurement and Disbursement Cycle
Finding 1 – Procurements were not always made in accordance with 17
established policies or applicable State law.
Finding 2 – Baltimore County Public Schools’ (BCPS) written policy did 18
not define the criteria for what constitutes a contract modification and
did not require a signed contract modification to support changes to
contract terms and conditions.
Finding 3 – BCPS did not use an intergovernmental cooperative 20
purchasing agreement for purchasing school buses in a manner
intended and limited competition for these procurements. BCPS also
did not maintain supporting documentation to enable us to determine
whether it received the best value.
Finding 4 – BCPS does not have a written policy requiring the 22
documentation of the receipt of goods and services prior to making
the related payment and permitted the prepayment of vendors for
services without a formal policy. Further, BCPS did not ensure that
contracts were always properly executed prior to payment.
5

--- Page 8 ---
Human Resources and Payroll
 Finding 5 – BCPS did not ensure certain personnel and payroll 24
transactions processed were subject to independent review and
approval, resulting in overpayments to six employees totaling
$70,839 going undetected.
Equipment Control and Accountability 25
Information Technology
 Finding 6 – BCPS did not ensure that employee access to its automated 26
financial systems was appropriate and adequately controlled,
resulting in employees with unnecessary or incompatible access.
Finding 7 – Sensitive BCPS personally identifiable information was 27
maintained in a manner that did not provide adequate security
safeguards.
* Finding 8 – For two critical systems’ databases, security and audit 28
event logging and monitoring procedures were not adequate, and
unnecessary elevated system privileges were granted to numerous
user accounts.
 Finding 9 – Twenty-six publicly accessible servers were improperly 29
located within the internal network, intrusion detection prevention
system coverage did not exist for untrusted traffic, and BCPS network
resources were not secured against improper access from students
using wireless connections and high school computer labs.
Facilities Construction, Renovation, and Maintenance 31
Transportation Services
 Finding 10 – BCPS did not use its automated bus routing software 32
to periodically perform a system-wide analysis of routes and related
bus capacities to maximize efficiency and had not established
comprehensive bus routing procedures.
* Denotes item repeated in full or part from preceding audit report
6

--- Page 9 ---
Food Services 34
School Board Oversight 34
Management of Other Risks
Finding 11 – Claims payments totaling approximately $152.2 million 35
during fiscal year 2019 were not reviewed for propriety.
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology 37
Agency Response Appendix
7

--- Page 10 ---
Background Information
Statistical Overview
Enrollment
According to student enrollment records compiled by the Maryland State
Department of Education (MSDE), Baltimore County Public Schools (BCPS)
ranks 3rd in student enrollment among the 24 public school systems in Maryland.
Fiscal year 2019 full-time student enrollment was 113,814 students. BCPS has
171 schools, consisting of 107 elementary, 27 middle schools, 24 high schools,
and 13 other types of schools (including, vocational, alternative, and special
education).
Funding
BCPS revenues consist primarily of funds received from Baltimore County, the
State, and the federal government. According to the BCPS audited financial
statements, revenues from all sources totaled approximately $1.84 billion in fiscal
year 2019, including approximately $809 million from the State. See Figure 1
below for BCPS’ revenue sources per enrolled student in fiscal year 2019
according to its audited financial statements.
Figure 1
BCPS’ Revenue Sources Per Enrolled Student
Fiscal Year 2019
Miscellaneous
Federal
$286
$974
2%
6%
Local
State $7,830
$7,108 48%
44%
Source: BCPS’ Fiscal Year 2019 Audited Financial Statements and MSDE Data
8

--- Page 11 ---
Expenditures
According to BCPS’ audited financial statements, fiscal year 2019 expenditures
were approximately $1.88 billion. The largest expenditure category was salaries
and wages, including benefits, which accounted for 74 percent of total
expenditures during fiscal year 2019. According to MSDE records, during the
2018-2019 school year, BCPS had 15,052 full-time equivalent positions, which
consisted of 9,917 instructional and 5,135 non-instructional positions (see Figure
2).
Figure 2
BCPS Expenditures by Category and Selected Statistical Data
Fiscal Year 2019
(amounts in millions)
$1,041
Instruction
55%
Facilities & Capital $284
Projects 15%
$221 Enrollment
Special Education
12% 113,814
Administration & $199
Support 10% Employees
$72 15,052
Transportation
4%
$51 Cost Per Pupil
Food Service
3% $16,542
$15
Debt 1%
Source: BCPS’ Fiscal Year 2019 Audited Financial Statements and MSDE Data
Oversight
BCPS is governed by a local school board, consisting of seven elected voting
members, four appointed voting members, and one student member with limited
voting privileges. In accordance with State law, MSDE provides considerable
oversight of BCPS through the establishment and monitoring of various financial
and academic policies and regulations. MSDE also works with BCPS to comply
with the requirements and mandates of federal law. The Baltimore County
government exercises authority over BCPS primarily through the review and
approval of BCPS’ annual operating and capital budgets.
9

--- Page 12 ---
External Audits
BCPS engages a certified public accounting firm to independently audit its annual
financial statements. The audit firm performs procedures to verify the amounts
and disclosures in the financial statements. The audit also evaluates the
appropriateness of accounting policies used and the reasonableness of significant
accounting estimates made by management. In the related audit reports, the firm
stated that the financial statements presented fairly, in all material respects, the
financial position of BCPS as of June 30, 2017, 2018, and 2019, and the changes
in its financial position and its cash flows for the years then ended in accordance
with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America.
Additionally, in accordance with Government Auditing Standards, as part of the
audited financial statements the accounting firm also issued separate reports on
BCPS’ control over financial reporting and its tests of BCPS’ compliance with
certain provisions of laws, regulations, contracts, grant agreements, and other
matters. This report is an integral part of the annual independent audited annual
financial statements. Furthermore, the accounting firm also conducts the Single
Audit of BCPS’ federal grant programs. The Single Audit is intended to provide
assurance to the federal government that adequate internal controls are in place,
and the entity is generally in compliance with program requirements.
We reviewed the aforementioned financial statement audits and Single Audit
reports for fiscal years 2017 through 2019, and examined the related work papers
for fiscal year 2018, which were the latest available at the time we performed our
audit fieldwork.
Certain work of the independent certified public accounting firm, which we
determined was reliable, covered areas included in the scope of our audit. As a
result, we did not conduct audit work related to the following areas:
 State and local governments revenues received via wire transfer
 Accounts receivable
 Federal grant activity
 Food service revenues
The independent accounting firm did not disclose any material deficiencies in
these areas.
10

--- Page 13 ---
Indictment of Former Superintendent and Resulting Audit
In January 2018, the former BCPS Superintendent was indicted by a Baltimore
County Grand Jury on four counts of perjury. The indictment alleged that,
between 2012 and 2015, the former Superintendent accepted payments totaling
approximately $147,000 from various entities, including one doing business with
BCPS, without reporting these payments on the 2012, 2013 and 2015 financial
disclosure statements. In March 2018, the former Superintendent pled guilty to
the four counts and in April 2018, was sentenced to five years (with all but six
months suspended) in a correctional facility, two years of probation, and 700
hours of community service.
In response to the aforementioned issue, in May 2018, the Board approved a
$413,550 contract with a public accounting firm to conduct a comprehensive audit
of BCPS procurement-related activities, including travel, conference fees,
professional memberships and dues, and other charges. The audit was initially to
be conducted in accordance with generally accepted auditing standards set forth
by the American Institute of Certified Public Accountants (AICPA) as well as
other industry standards. However, prior to the contract award, the Board
approved an addendum that allowed the vendor to conduct the work under the
AICPA’s standards on consulting procedures, which is a less stringent standard.
The purpose of the consultant’s review was to provide the Board and the
Superintendent with information regarding the effectiveness of controls over
procurement, as well as compliance with applicable laws, rules, regulations, and
policies (such as annual financial disclosures). The contract required the
accounting firm to review procurement-related activities that occurred during the
period from January 1, 2012 through December 31, 2017 to address the following
four objectives:
1. If controls over BCPS procurement and contracting activities were
designed and operating effectively and to assess compliance with all
applicable federal, state, and local laws.
2. If BCPS employs best practices in its procurement and contracting
activities.
3. If the controls over expenditures made for Board members and BCPS
executive staff for travel reimbursements, conference fees, and
professional memberships and dues were designed and operating
effectively and to assess compliance with all applicable federal, state, and
local laws.
11

--- Page 14 ---
4. If controls over expenditures included as “other charges” in the budget of
the Office of the Superintendent were designed and operating effectively
and to assess compliance with all applicable federal, state, and local laws.
The contract included two phases. The first phase required the accounting firm to
review 19 contracts selected by the Board which, according to the related request
for proposal, were selected based on contract value or the nature of the contract.
At a minimum, the review was to include processes for vendor solicitation,
evaluation and selection, contract execution and award, contract management and
monitoring, and maintenance and retention of contract documents. The second
phase, which would only be performed at the request of the Board at the
conclusion of the first phase, was to include the review of approximately 180
additional contracts, each valued in excess of $1 million.
The accounting firm issued its report on the results of first phase in April 2019,
and BCPS published the report on its website. The report included one finding
that related to the lack of timely filing of employee financial disclosure
statements, as well as 12 less significant “observations.” These observations
included creating purchase orders after BCPS approved invoices for payment, not
maintaining proper procurement documents, the need to update procurement
policies, insufficient review and approval of purchasing card transactions and
certain travel arrangements, and splitting payment transactions to bypass approval
thresholds.
BCPS paid $219,800 for the first phase of the contract and the Board decided not
to perform the second phase of the contract, which expired in June 2019.
Given the significance of contract procurement and monitoring related to our
objectives for local education agency audits, we decided not to rely on the work
of the consultant to reduce the scope of our current audit.
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report
Based on our current assessment of significance and risk relative to our audit
objectives, our audit included a review to determine the status of 11 of the 12
findings contained in our preceding audit report dated July 2, 2015. We
determined that BCPS satisfactorily addressed six of these findings. The
remaining five findings are repeated in this report, as noted in the following table.
12

--- Page 15 ---
Table 1
Status of Preceding Findings
Preceding Implementation
Finding Description
Finding Status
BCPS did not adequately separate user duties on its Repeated
Finding 1
automated school procurement system. (Current Finding 6)
BCPS did not prepare written determinations that it was in
Finding 2 BCPS’ best interest to participate in intergovernmental Not repeated
cooperative purchasing agreements.
BCPS’ procurement policies did not require competitive
Finding 3 Not repeated
procurements for service contracts.
Independent reviews of certain payroll and personnel Repeated
Finding 4 transactions were lacking and access to the automated system (Current Findings 5
was not properly restricted. and 6)
Equipment policies, controls, and record keeping were not Not repeated
Finding 5
adequate. (Not followed up on)
Repeated
Finding 6 BCPS’ network was not adequately secured.
(Current Finding 9)
Workstations and servers were not sufficiently protected from
Finding 7 Not repeated
malware.
Controls over BCPS’ network domain accounts, passwords,
Finding 8 Not repeated
and administrative access were not sufficient.
Controls over the student information and financial databases Repeated
Finding 9
were inadequate. (Current Finding 8)
BCPS is paying a higher cost per square foot for roof
replacements compared to other local school systems, and
Finding 10 Not repeated
could not adequately justify the rationale for its practice of
using the same roofing contractor for a number of years.
BCPS was not using its automated routing software to Repeated
Finding 11
develop more efficient routes. (Current Finding 10)
BCPS did not ensure the reasonableness of payments for
Finding 12 Not repeated
employee and retiree health care costs.
13

--- Page 16 ---
Findings and Recommendations
Revenue and Billing Cycle
Background
Baltimore County Public Schools (BCPS) revenues consist primarily of funds
received from Baltimore County, the State, and the federal government.
According to BCPS’ audited financial statements, revenues from all sources
totaled $1.84 billion in fiscal year 2019; including approximately $809 million
from the State.
External Audits
There were similarities between the work of the independent certified public
accounting firm that audited the BCPS financial statements and the objectives of
our audit of certain revenue activities. As a result, we relied on this work to
provide audit coverage for State and local government revenues received via wire
transfer and accounts receivable, for which the auditor’s procedural reviews and
testing disclosed no material weaknesses or significant deficiencies.
School Activity Funds
Schools collect funds for other purposes, such as for student activities, clubs, and
school publications. Because they are not considered school revenue, these
school activity funds are accounted for separately by each school, and reported in
summary in the audited financial statements. During fiscal year 2019, school
activity fund collections totaled $12.5 million and the June 30, 2019 fund balance
was $7.4 million.
BCPS’ Board of Education (the Board) has a fiduciary responsibility to ensure
that school activity funds were used only for intended purposes. The BCPS
internal auditor audits school activity funds to determine whether proper controls
have been established over collections and disbursements, and whether funds
have been properly account for. The internal auditor audits all schools’ activity
funds on a rotating basis and reports its findings to the school principals and
central administrative staff. The findings are also summarized and discussed with
the Board’s Audit Committee. The resultant internal auditor’s reports we
reviewed disclosed that internal control weaknesses were not prevalent and were
being addressed by school management.
14

--- Page 17 ---
Conclusion
Based on our current assessment of significance and risk relative to our audit
objectives, and the consideration of the work performed by the independent
certified public accounting firm and BCPS’ internal auditor, we relied on this
work to provide audit coverage in this area including procedures and controls
related to the accounting for and safeguarding of cash receipts with respect to
revenue and billing.
Federal Funds
Background
BCPS receives funds pertaining to federal government programs that are
generally restricted for use for a specific program (such as the School Lunch
Program or Special Education). According to BCPS’ Single Audit, fiscal year
2019 expenditures totaled $102.9 million, not including federally funded fee-for-
service programs such as Medicaid reimbursement for special education services.
Single Audit Reports Disclosed No Material Weaknesses Regarding Federal
Grant Management
There were similarities in the work performed by the independent certified public
accounting firm that conducted the Single Audits of BCPS’ federal grants and the
objectives of our audit in this area. In addition to expressing an opinion on
BCPS’ compliance with the terms of several grant programs, the auditor also
considered the existing internal control structure’s impact on compliance and
audited the required Schedules of Expenditures of Federal Awards (which
includes claimed and reported grant expenditures) for fiscal years 2017, 2018, and
2019.
The related reports stated that BCPS complied, in all material respects, with the
requirements applicable to its major federal programs. With respect to internal
controls over compliance with, and the operation of, major federal programs, the
auditor identified one significant deficiency that was not considered a material
weakness for fiscal year 2017. BCPS generally agreed to take action to correct
the deficiency such as revising procedures for reviewing certain grant
applications.
Medicaid Funds for Eligible Services
BCPS has established a procedure to identify children eligible for Medicaid-
subsidized services and the services rendered. Medicaid is an entitlement
program for which certain service costs can be reimbursed to BCPS. Medicaid
activity is not covered by the Single Audit of federal grants.
15

--- Page 18 ---
The Maryland State Department of Education’s Interagency Medicaid Monitoring
Team issued a report in July 2018 of the results of its review of 60 student case
files for 24 criteria (including the correct billing of Medicaid for eligible
services). The report found that BCPS was 100 percent compliant with twenty
criteria, and 88 to 99 percent compliant with the remaining four criteria.
According to BCPS records, fiscal year 2019 state and federal reimbursements for
Medicaid-subsidized services totaled approximately $7.3 million.
Conclusion
Based on our current assessment of significance and risk relative to our audit
objectives, our audit did not include a review of Medicaid-subsidized services.
We relied on the work of the independent certified public accounting firm that
conducted the Single Audit for all other work in this area including policies,
procedures, and controls with respect to federal grants and expenditures.
Procurement and Disbursement Cycle
Background
According to the audited financial statements and BCPS records, non-payroll
disbursements totaled $480.1 million during fiscal year 2019. BCPS uses a
combination of automated and manual processes for requisitions and purchase
orders. Manual requisitions are prepared by departments and are subject to
departmental approval. The approved requisitions are sent to the Purchasing
Department which generally handles the solicitation, bid evaluation,
establishment of contracts, and creates the purchase order in the automated
system.
BCPS’ written procurement policies require that procurements exceeding $25,000
be competitively bid in accordance with Section 5-112 of the Education Article of
the Annotated Code of Maryland and approved by the Board. The policies further
require that all purchase orders must be manually approved by the Supervisor of
the Purchasing Department, and by the Superintendent for those purchase orders
exceeding $25,000.
Invoices are submitted by vendors directly to the Finance Office. BCPS
procedures require the manual comparison of vendor invoices by the Finance
Office to the related purchase order prior to payment. The Finance Office uses an
automated system to print vendor checks or transfer the funds electronically and
to post the payments to the financial records.
16

--- Page 19 ---
Finding 1
Procurements were not always made in accordance with established policies
or applicable State law.
Analysis
Procurements were not always made in accordance with established policies or
applicable State law. Our test of 12 contracts1 totaling $172.5 million procured
during the period from 2016 to 2018, disclosed the following conditions:
 BCPS obtained program evaluation services valued at $750,000 using a
contract from an Illinois school system, which did not have provisions for use
by other states and was not competitively procured by that school system. In
addition, BCPS negotiated pricing with the vendor that was not included in
the original contract. We were advised by BCPS management that they
treated this contract as an intergovernmental cooperative purchasing
agreement (ICPA). However, as noted above, the Illinois contract did not
include any provision for use by other states and therefore, this would not
qualify as an ICPA under Maryland State law. Further, without evidence of
an original competitive procurement, there was a lack of assurance that BCPS
received the best value for the services. BCPS paid this vendor approximately
$221,000 during the period May 2017 through June 2019, when BCPS
terminated the contract for convenience because of issues with the automated
system being evaluated by the vendor.
 BCPS did not document evaluations for two procurements of instructional
materials and related services totaling $1.5 million. For example, BCPS
advised us that the decision to award a $987,000 contract for a computer
science program at two magnet schools was based on its Procurement
Committee observing the selected vendor’s program at another school system.
However, the observation and assessment of the program and other
considerations such as a determination that the procurement purchase price
provided value was not documented as required. Specifically, the BCPS
Evaluation and Selection of Instructional Materials Policy requires
documentation of the Committee’s evaluation of the goods or services
considered for procurement, and the reason for selection of the instructional
materials. The Policy also requires that evaluations consider criteria such as
whether the procurement supports the approved curriculum, and provides
value in terms of purchase price.
1 Five instructional material procurements, four intergovernmental cooperative purchasing
agreements, and three competitive sealed bids or proposals.
17

--- Page 20 ---
 BCPS did not publish four contract awards totaling $23.7 million procured
using ICPAs on eMaryland Marketplace (eMM)2, as required by State law.
Publishing awards helps provide transparency over the procurements and
includes the winning bidders and the amount of the related awards. BCPS
management advised us they were not aware of the requirement to publish
contracts procured through an ICPA. According to BCPS records, 11 ICPA
contracts were awarded totaling approximately $10.8 million during fiscal
year 2018. State law requires local school administrations to publish a
procurement solicitation or notice of contract award greater than $50,000,
which would include items procured under an ICPA.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that BCPS comply with its established policies and State law
when procuring goods and services. Specifically, we recommend that BCPS
a. discontinue the practice of procurement from contracts that do not have
provisions for use by other entities, or were not competitively procured;
b. document the evaluations of potential vendors for procurements of
instructional materials; and
c. publish ICPA contract awards greater than $50,000, including those noted
above, in eMMA as required.
Finding 2
BCPS’ written policy did not define the criteria for what constitutes a
contract modification and did not require a signed contract modification to
support changes to contract terms and conditions.
Analysis
BCPS’ written policy did not define the criteria for what constitutes a contract
modification and did not require a signed contract modification to support
changes to contract terms and conditions. Our review of two contracts disclosed
BCPS did not execute written modifications for significant changes made to both
contracts, and did not obtain Board approval for changes to the terms of one of
these contracts as required by its policy.
In September 2016, BCPS obtained written approval from the Board to pursue
modifying a contract with a vendor providing educational services such as
streaming content, to also include the purchase of online textbooks, and to extend
the contract for two additional years. However, BCPS did not execute a written
2 eMM is an Internet-based, interactive procurement system managed by the Department of
General Services (DGS). Effective July 2019, the DGS replaced eMM with eMaryland
Marketplace Advantage (eMMA).
18

--- Page 21 ---
contract modification for these changes with the vendor. As a result, there was no
formal agreement for the cost of the new services or for the services to be
provided during the extended contract period. According to BCPS records, as of
July 2019, expenditures totaling approximately $1.9 million were made during the
period July 2018 through February 2019 (during the extended contract period).
In addition, BCPS changed the term of another contract for computer leases
without a formal contract modification and without obtaining the Board approval
as required by BCPS policy for contract changes that increase a contract’s value
by at least $25,000. Specifically, in April 2018, BCPS awarded a multi-year $140
million contract for leased computers. Shortly after the contract was awarded,
BCPS upgraded the antitheft device that was to be included on each computer
increasing the cost of the antitheft device from $3.50 per computer to $27.50 per
computer. During the period from July 2018 to January 2019, BCPS paid an
additional $1.2 million for the upgraded antitheft devices on 48,882 computers,
without modifying the terms of the contract. BCPS personnel advised us that it
did not execute a written contract modification or submit the modification to the
Board because it did not expect to use the entire allotment of computers during
the term of the contract and therefore it was not anticipating exceeding the $140
million contract value (over the term of the contract).
Our review of several other local school systems disclosed that their policies
define the criteria for a contract modification as any written alteration in
specifications, delivery point, date of delivery, period of performance, price,
quantity, or other provision of any contract accomplished by mutual action of the
parties to the contract. In addition, the other local school systems required a
signed contract modification to support significant changes to contract terms and
conditions.
Recommendation 2
We recommend that BCPS
a. amend its written policy to establish criteria for contract modifications
and require a signed contract modification for significant changes (as
defined in the amended policy) to the scope of an existing contract; and
b. present contract modifications to the Board for review and approval as
required by its policy, including the modification of the contract noted
above.
19

--- Page 22 ---
Finding 3
BCPS did not use an ICPA for purchasing school buses in a manner intended
and limited competition for those procurements. BCPS also did not maintain
supporting documentation to enable us to determine whether it received the
best value.
Analysis
BCPS used an ICPA to purchase school buses in a manner that limited
competition, and without sufficient supporting documentation to enable us to
determine whether it received the best value. On December 1, 2015, the Board
approved a contract through an ICPA3 to purchase at least 554 buses for $76.2
million over the eight-year period from December 2015 to September 2023. As
noted in the following table, we reviewed 197 school buses purchased under the
contract totaling $19.5 million during fiscal years 2016 through 2019.
Our review disclosed that BCPS did not use the pricing in the ICPA when
purchasing the buses nor document the rationale for not using the ICPA pricing.
In addition, although the Board had previously approved the use of this ICPA
(which included vendor prices), BCPS did not notify the Board of the change in
bus pricing. Specifically, in fiscal year 2016 BCPS requested bids directly from
each of the three vendors contracted with in the ICPA and awarded a bus order to
the vendor with the highest price, which exceeded the lowest bidder’s total price
by approximately $139,000 for the 39 buses purchased. In fiscal years 2017 to
2019, BCPS again solicited bids but the specifications were specific to the
manufacturer of the bus selected in fiscal year 2016 and, therefore, the bids were
awarded to the same vendor selected in 2016.
BCPS transportation management personnel advised us that it chose the buses
sold by the one vendor because it had experienced mechanical issues in the past
with the make of buses sold by one of the other vendors and the size of the buses
sold by the third vendor were too large to fit in their repair garages. However,
BCPS could not provide adequate documentation to support these assertions.
3 Frederick County Public Schools acting as the lead purchasing agency contracted with three
vendors that each represent one of the three principal school bus manufacturers in the United
States. The contract allows LEAs to purchase from any of those vendors at prices specified in
the contract. LEAs may customize their bus purchases since the three winning vendors provided
pricing for several specific types of buses (such as, 48, 64, and 70 passenger buses) and various
options on these buses.
20

--- Page 23 ---
Table 2
Summary of School Buses Purchased
Fiscal Year 2016 to Fiscal Year 2019
Number of Average
Bus Size Buses Total Cost Cost per
Purchased Bus
30 Passenger with AC & Wheelchair Lift 6 $617,616 $102,936
48 Passenger with AC & Wheelchair Lift 43 $4,540,654 $105,596
64 Passenger with Diesel Engine 95 $8,828,610 $92,933
64 Passenger with Gasoline Engine 3 $377,644 $125,881
64 Passenger with AC, Wheelchair Lift
8 $857,108 $107,139
& Diesel Engine
64 Passenger with AC, Wheelchair Lift
14 $1,554,928 $111,066
& Gasoline Engine
77 Passenger 28 $2,689,200 $96,043
197 $19,465,780 $98,811
Source: BCPS’ Records
Our review disclosed that the use of just one manufacturer may not have been cost
effective. Specifically, BCPS purchased 95 64-passenger buses ranging in price
from $89,952 to $94,645 during fiscal years 2016 through 2019. BCPS could not
explain the basis for these costs, such as the base price and the options received.
Due to the lack of available records from both BCPS and the vendor and
variability in the buses, we could not readily determine whether the amounts paid
were consistent with the pricing in the ICPA.
For example, BCPS paid an average of $93,000 for a 64-passenger bus when
based on our review of the ICPA price list, a 64-passenger bus from the selected
manufacturer had a base price of $80,505. BCPS could not document the specific
options and costs to account for the difference in cost. In addition, BCPS
purchased twenty-eight 77-passenger buses totaling $2.7 million ($96,043 per
bus) which were not included in the ICPA and could not support the basis for the
amount paid or the pricing specifications of the buses purchased.
Consequently, we are unable to determine any benefit of the ICPA to BCPS. It
appears the ICPA prices were not used, which would have been one of the
benefits of using the ICPA; and for subsequent bus purchases, BCPS simply
solicited bids for buses from the three principal bus manufactures. Nevertheless,
21

--- Page 24 ---
the lack of appropriate documentation, means that we could not determine
whether BCPS bus purchases provided the best value.
Recommendation 3
We recommend that BCPS
a. adhere to ICPA terms and conditions, including pricing;
b. document the justification of material changes to procurement methods
and the basis for procurement decisions (awards) and retain this
documentation for future reference; and
c. notify the Board of material changes to procurement methods.
Finding 4
BCPS did not have a written policy requiring the documentation of the
receipt of goods and services prior to making the related payment and
permitted the prepayment of vendors for services without a formal policy.
Further, BCPS did not ensure that contracts were always properly executed
prior to payment.
Analysis
BCPS did not have a written policy requiring the documentation of the receipt of
goods and services prior to making payments, as well as for prepayment of
services. Further, BCPS did not ensure that contracts were properly executed
prior to payment, as required by its policy. BCPS personnel advised us that it
documents the receipt of goods and services with the approval of certain invoices;
however, our test disclosed instances where there was a lack evidence to ensure
the good and services were documented as being received prior to approving the
invoices for payment. We tested 50 payments totaling $22.0 million made during
the period from 2016 to 2019 and noted the following conditions:
 Seven payments totaling $1.3 million lacked documentation that the related
goods or services were properly received. In addition, BCPS prepaid one
vendor $636,000 for professional development and support services at two
magnet schools and did not document that it verified the services were
subsequently provided. BCPS management advised us that staff at the schools
was responsible for ensuring that services were provided in accordance with
the contract. However, the two schools could not provide us with any
documentation to support monitoring or verification efforts or that the services
were provided.
 In certain instances, BCPS paid vendors before the related contracts were
finalized. Specifically, BCPS paid one vendor $270,000 for services rendered
22

--- Page 25 ---
eight months before the vendor signed the related contract. BCPS allowed
another vendor to provide research services approximately three months prior
to executing an agreement with the vendor, although no payments were made
prior the contract being executed.
BCPS policy states that no vendor, consultant, or contract manager shall initiate
work until a contract has been properly executed and a purchase order has been
issued.
Recommendation 4
We recommend that BCPS
a. develop written policies requiring the formal documentation of the receipt
of goods and services prior to making the related payments, as well as for
the condition(s) required to be met prior to making prepayments, if
prepayments are deemed necessary; and
b. ensure that contracts and related agreements are properly executed prior
to receiving services or making payments.
Human Resources and Payroll
Background
Payroll expense represents the largest single cost component in the BCPS budget.
According to BCPS records, fiscal year 2019 salary, wage, and benefit costs
totaled $1.4 billion, or 74 percent of the total operating expenditures. According
to Maryland State Department of Education reports, during the 2018-2019 school
year BCPS had 15,052 full-time positions, including 9,917 instructional and 5,135
non-instructional positions.
BCPS uses an automated system to maintain human resources information, record
employee time, track leave usage, and process and record payroll transactions.
Employees submit attendance reports bi-weekly and leave is recorded and
adjustments are processed on the system by central payroll personnel. The system
also generates payroll checks and direct deposit advices.
23

--- Page 26 ---
Finding 5
BCPS did not ensure certain personnel and payroll transactions processed
were subject to independent review and approval, resulting in overpayments
to six employees totaling $70,839 going undetected.
Analysis
BCPS did not ensure certain personnel and payroll transactions were subject to
independent review and approval, resulting in certain overpayments going
undetected.
 Although system reports of certain transactions, such as salary grade or step
changes, were generated each pay period for review, the report did not include
new employees added to the system. In addition, the reports were initially
received by an employee that processed the original transactions in the system
before being forwarded to an independent supervisory employee for review
and verification. Consequently, the reports could be subject to alteration to
conceal improper transactions.
Our test of 20 judgmentally selected payroll transactions during calendar years
2016 through 2019 noted 3 employees that had been overpaid. Two of these
employees had been demoted to lower paying positions, but their pay rate was
not properly adjusted4. Our expanded testing of payments made during
calendar years 2015 through 2018 to 13 other demoted employees identified 3
more overpayments. All 6 overpayments, totaling $70,839, were not detected
during the subsequent supervisory review, and were previously unknown to
BCPS prior to our test performed in November 2019. The overpayments were
made during March 2015 through June 2019. A similar condition regarding
the lack of review of personnel transactions was commented upon in our
preceding audit report.
 Time entered into the electronic timekeeping system by approximately 5,000
employees was not always approved by an employee’s immediate supervisor
as required by the BCPS Payroll Handbook. Specifically, our review of the
supervisory review of transactions during two pay periods in March and June
2019 disclosed that the immediate supervisor did not approve the hours
worked for 175 and 132 employees, respectively. Rather, BCPS payroll
personnel with no direct knowledge of the hours worked approved these
records, and the approved records were not subsequently verified by the
immediate supervisor. Consequently, assurance was lacking that the time
4 For example, an assistant principal demoted to a teacher.
24

--- Page 27 ---
reported was proper. Gross wages for these employees during the tested pay
periods totaled $311,848 and $238,260, respectively.
Recommendation 5
We recommend that BCPS
a. perform comprehensive independent reviews of all critical personnel and
payroll transactions (repeat);
b. review payroll transactions for potential overpayments and pursue
recovery of improper payroll payments, including the overpayments
noted above; and
c. ensure that appropriate supervisory approval of all electronic time
records is performed, as required.
Equipment Control and Accountability
Background
According to BCPS’ audited financial statements, the undepreciated value of its
capital equipment inventory totaled $83.3 million as of June 30, 2019. BCPS
maintains centralized automated records for equipment with a cost of $5,000 or
more (including assets capitalized for financial statement purposes). BCPS also
maintained a separate database of certain computer hardware assigned to schools5.
Conclusion
Based on our current assessment of significance and risk relative to our audit
objectives, our audit did not include a review of policies, procedures, and controls
with respect to the equipment area of operations.
Information Technology
Background
The BCPS Department of Information Technology (DoIT) maintains and
administers the BCPS computer network, computer operations, and certain
information systems applications. BCPS operates a wide area network, with
internet connectivity, which connects the individual schools’ local networks to the
computer resources located at the BCPS data center. DoIT supports instructional
software/web-services, the student information system, e-mail, data backup,
technology management tools, and application hosting. In addition, the BCPS
5 Laptop computers assigned to students are not recorded as equipment on BCPS’ records since
they are leased from a vendor.
25

--- Page 28 ---
Department of Administrative Services, Office of Business Management
Information Systems maintains and supports certain financial-related systems,
including the financial management information system.
Finding 6
BCPS did not ensure that employee access to its automated financial systems
was appropriate and adequately controlled, resulting in employees with
unnecessary or incompatible access.
Analysis
BCPS did not ensure employee access to its automated financial-related systems
(such as, procurement, account payable, human resources, and payroll) was
appropriate and adequately controlled, resulting in employees with unnecessary or
incompatible access. BCPS maintains several automated systems to process
critical financial activity that have the capability for online controls. Our review
disclosed that BCPS did not use these controls to adequately limit user access,
resulting in the following conditions:
 Our test of certain critical procurement and accounts payable access
capabilities assigned to 68 employees disclosed 8 employees had the ability to
process purchase orders without independent approval. Two of these
employees could also process disbursements, and one could also update vendor
information. Three other employees could process disbursements without
independent approval.
 Our test of certain critical access capabilities for the automated system
primarily used to order supplies for schools disclosed that 315 employees
could initiate and approve requisitions without independent approval. These
requisitions automatically generated purchase orders to the vendor without any
additional independent review or approvals. During the period from May 10,
2017 through June 18, 2019, 128 employees initiated and approved
requisitions for 3,203 purchase orders totaling approximately $1.1 million
without any independent review and approval. A similar condition was
commented upon in our preceding audit report.
 Our test of certain critical human resource and payroll access capabilities
assigned to 209 employees disclosed that 5 employees who processed payroll
transactions also had unnecessary access to human resources functions, (such
as adding employees). Additionally, 2 other employees had incompatible
human resource and payroll functions even though they did not require system
access to perform their job responsibilities. A similar condition regarding
26

--- Page 29 ---
incompatible system access to human resources and payroll capabilities has
been commented upon in our two preceding audit reports.
Recommendation 6
We recommend that BCPS
a. periodically review employee access capabilities to ensure all access is
appropriate and incompatible duties are segregated (repeat); and
b. correct any unnecessary or improper capabilities, including those noted
above.
Finding 7
Sensitive BCPS personally identifiable information was maintained in a
manner that did not provide adequate security safeguards.
Analysis
Sensitive personally identifiable information (PII) was maintained in a manner
that did not provide adequate safeguards. BCPS used a significant computer
application, which contained sensitive PII recorded within two separate databases,
which existed without adequate security safeguards. As of October 23, 2019, the
database with the largest such record volume contained 92,295 unique sensitive
information records, which were maintained in a manner that made the
information vulnerable to improper disclosure. BCPS personnel advised us that
this information was subject to certain data transfer controls. However, we
determined that the controls involving data transfer and other procedures did not
adequately safeguard the information. Detailed sensitive aspects of this finding
were omitted from this report; however, the related detailed information was
previously shared with BCPS for purposes of implementing the following
recommendation.
Best practices identified in the State of Maryland Information Technology
Security Manual require that agencies protect confidential data using adequate
safeguards and/or other substantial mitigating controls.
Recommendation 7
We recommend that BCPS implement appropriate information security
safeguards for its sensitive PII.
27

--- Page 30 ---
Finding 8
For two critical systems’ databases, security and audit event logging and
monitoring procedures were not adequate, and unnecessary elevated system
privileges were granted to numerous user accounts.
Analysis
For two critical systems’ databases, security and audit event logging and
monitoring procedures were not adequate, and unnecessary elevated system
privileges were granted to numerous user accounts.
 One system’s database configuration did not include logging of eight
categories of critical security and audit related events. For such activity
already recorded, we were advised that the associated logs were not retained
for adequate time periods, and that reviews of the logs were not performed on
a regular basis to identify unusual or improper activities. The second critical
system’s database configuration also did not include logging of the same eight
categories of critical security and audit related events. Furthermore, although
BCPS personnel advised us that reviews of other significant logged database
events were performed, BCPS was unable to provide documentation
substantiating the performance of these reviews.
 Neither of the systems’ databases were configured to log direct changes (such
as insert, update, and delete) made to critical system tables for subsequent
reporting and monitoring. Accordingly, effective monitoring did not exist
over sensitive activities related to these systems and their related databases.
 Numerous user accounts had unnecessary modification access to the
information within both systems’ databases. For both systems, improper
database roles were assigned to 34 user accounts, effectively granting the
highest possible administrative privilege level available to these accounts over
the respective databases.
These conditions could result in unauthorized or inappropriate activities (affecting
the integrity of the production databases’ information) going undetected by
management. Best practices identified in the State of Maryland Information
Technology Security Manual require that information systems must generate audit
records for all security-relevant events, and procedures must be developed to
routinely (for example, real-time or weekly) review audit records for indications
of inappropriate activities and report findings to appropriate officials for prompt
resolution.
28

--- Page 31 ---
Similar conditions regard controls for logging critical systems’ security and audit
event activity and direct changes to database information were commented upon
in our preceding audit report. A similar condition regarding assigned database
roles, for one of the two systems’ databases, was also commented upon in our
preceding audit report.
Detailed sensitive aspects of this finding were omitted from this report; however,
the related detailed information was previously shared with BCPS for purposes of
implementing the following recommendations.
Recommendation 8
We recommend that BCPS implement appropriate database monitoring
controls over the aforementioned critical systems. Specifically, we
recommend that BCPS
a. log all significant database security, audit related event, and processing
activities, including direct changes to critical database tables, and
generate reports that include this related database activity (repeat);
b. ensure that individuals perform regular, independent documented
reviews of the aforementioned reports and retain the information for
reference purposes (repeat); and
c. restrict assignment of critical database administration roles to only those
personnel requiring such access for their job responsibilities (repeat).
Finding 9
Twenty-six publicly accessible servers were improperly located within the
internal network, intrusion detection prevention system coverage for
untrusted traffic did not exist, and BCPS network resources were not
secured against improper access from students using wireless connections
and high school computer labs.
Analysis
The BCPS computer network was not adequately secured. We noted three
conditions affecting network security.
 Twenty-six publicly accessible servers were located within the BCPS internal
network rather than being isolated in a separate protected network zone to
minimize security risks. These publicly accessible servers, if compromised,
could expose the internal network to attack from external sources.
Recommended security procedures, as stated in the National Institute of
Standards and Technology Guidelines on Firewalls and Firewall Policy,
include placing publicly accessible servers in an external protected zone to
29

--- Page 32 ---
protect those servers, as well as the entity’s internal network. A similar
condition was commented upon in our preceding audit report.
 Intrusion detection prevention system (IDPS) coverage did not exist for
untrusted encrypted traffic entering the BCPS network. BCPS operated a
network appliance having integrated IDPS; however, the appliance was
configured to only analyze unencrypted traffic. Additionally, server host-
based intrusion prevention system coverage was not utilized for this untrusted
encrypted traffic. We identified 21 firewall rules that allowed encrypted
traffic from any source to 29 unique network destinations within BCPS’
internal network without IDPS coverage. The aforementioned absence of
IDPS coverage creates network security risk as such traffic could contain
undetected malicious data. Best practices in the State of Maryland
Information Technology Security Manual require protection against malicious
code and attacks by using IDPS to monitor system events, detect attacks, and
identify unauthorized use of information systems and/or confidential
information.
 BCPS did not adequately secure its critical internal network resources from
improper network-level access by BCPS students using wireless connections
and high school students using computer lab workstations. Wireless network
access existed for BCPS students within the various schools locations;
however, BCPS did not use adequate network-level traffic filtering to properly
limit such access. Additionally, within BCPS’ 24 high schools, the network
traffic originating from students using computer labs’ workstations was not
filtered to control such access. Accordingly, per the aforementioned wireless
and computer labs access, students were allowed unnecessary network-level
access to administrative servers within both BCPS’ data center and the
individual schools locations. Student BCPS network access via wireless
connections and from high schools computer labs should be limited via filters
to devices and ports necessary for these students to perform required
educational tasks. Best practices in the State of Maryland Information
Security Policy require that entities’ networks must ensure that only
authorized individuals have access to confidential information and that such
access is strictly controlled, audited, and that it supports the concepts of least
possible privilege and need to know.
Recommendation 9
We recommend that BCPS
a. relocate all publicly accessible servers to a separate protected network
zone to limit security exposures to the internal network segment (repeat);
30

--- Page 33 ---
b. perform a documented review and assessment of its network security
risks and identify how IDPS coverage should be applied to its network for
all untrusted traffic, including encrypted traffic, and implement this
coverage; and
c. limit student network-level access from wireless connections and high
school computer labs to only authorized local school and system
instructional network resources.
Facilities Construction, Renovation, and Maintenance
Background
BCPS employs a staff of 1,291 employees to maintain its 171 schools (including
vocational, alternative, and special education) and a number of other facilities
(such as administrative and support offices). According to its fiscal year 2019
Capital Budget Plan, necessary construction, major renovations, and systemic
improvements to BCPS’ facilities over the next six years (fiscal years 2019 to
2024) are estimated to cost approximately $835.5 million.
BCPS Capital Projects Were Competitively Procured and Related
Expenditures Were Generally Properly Supported
Our review of five construction-related procurements made during fiscal years
2016 through 2017, totaling $105 million, disclosed they were competitively
procured and the contracts were properly awarded. Our test of 10 invoices
totaling $11 million for these contracts disclosed that the invoices were properly
reviewed and approved, and the amounts invoiced were in accordance with the
related contract terms.
Processes Are in Place to Minimize Energy Costs
BCPS has processes in place to minimize energy costs. For example, BCPS
maintains an energy conservation office consisting of three full-time employees
and uses energy management systems to monitor heating and air conditioning
from a central location to control temperature settings. In addition, BCPS
participates in a consortium with other Baltimore-area entities to purchase energy
at the best possible terms for members of the consortium. BCPS also entered into
three energy savings performance contracts. The first contract began in 2013 and
covers 29 schools and facilities, and the other two contracts began in 2017 and
cover over 150 schools and facilities. These contracts are expected to generate
$154.9 million in energy savings through 2038. BCPS contracted with a third-
party firm to verify that the guaranteed savings from these contracts are realized.
31

--- Page 34 ---
Even with these efforts, BCPS energy usage increased by 3.7 percent from fiscal
years 2018 to 2019 according to reports prepared by BCPS (which we did not
audit). Based on discussions with BCPS employees, this increase could
potentially be attributed to the continued installation of air conditioning systems
in numerous BCPS schools. Further, BCPS had not yet received the maximum
benefit of the energy savings performance contracts since most of BCPS’
facilities were still in the installation phase during this period for two of the
contracts.
Conclusion
Our audit did not disclose any significant deficiencies in the design or operation
of BCPS’ internal control over the facilities construction, renovation, and
processes to promote energy efficiency. Our audit also did not disclose any
significant instances of noncompliance with applicable laws, rules, or regulations.
Based on our assessment of significance and risk relative to our objectives, we did
not review BCPS’ processes for promoting and performing facility maintenance.
Transportation Services
Background
According to statistics compiled by the Maryland State Department of Education
(MSDE), BCPS has approximately 84,000 students eligible to receive
transportation services. BCPS reported that 15.4 million route miles were
traveled to transport students for the 2018-2019 school year. These students were
transported on 670 system-owned buses and 138 contractor-owned buses. Since
the majority of BCPS’ transportation fleet is system-owned buses (over 80
percent), we did not perform a detailed review of contractor operations.
According to BCPS’ audited financial statements, fiscal year 2019 transportation
costs totaled $72.2 million.
Finding 10
BCPS did not use its automated bus routing software to periodically perform
a system-wide analysis of routes and related bus capacities to maximize
efficiency and had not established comprehensive bus routing procedures.
Analysis
BCPS had not used its automated bus routing software tool to perform a system-
wide analysis of bus routes and related bus capacities to maximize the efficiency
of its bus routes and address bus routes with low ridership. In addition, BCPS had
not established comprehensive bus routing procedures that specified target bus
32

--- Page 35 ---
capacities, ridership goals, and student ride-time limits providing BCPS with
parameters to design more efficient bus routes.
Although BCPS owns an automated bus routing software tool, it did not fully use
this tool to perform a periodic system-wide analysis to identify alternative routes,
route consolidations, or bus stop consolidations that might reduce costs. During
our audit fieldwork, BCPS contracted with the software vendor to perform a
partial system route analysis, consisting of one of its five transportation regions.
In lieu of a system-wide analysis, BCPS transportation department employees
advised us that its routine route analysis process primarily involved the manual
review of existing individual bus routes annually and, as needed, throughout the
year, and manual modifications to accommodate students’ school assignments and
to address road construction and other issues. Consequently, routes may be
inefficiently designed and could result in significantly underutilized capacity on
individual buses and in operating more buses than necessary to fulfill BCPS’
transportation needs.
Our review of the routing system data for 552 of the regular morning bus routes
on 185 buses for the 2018-2019 school year, disclosed that that 183 routes were
designed to transport students at less than 75 percent of customary capacity
goals6, including 38 routes that were designed to transport students at less than 50
percent of the bus capacity based on bus size. While we recognize that Baltimore
County includes some rural areas (such as, the northern section of the county),
which can make it difficult to maximize ridership in all cases, our analysis
primarily focused on more densely populated regions, based on destination
schools.
A similar condition has been commented upon in our preceding two audit reports.
Recommendation 10
We recommend that BCPS take steps to use its buses more efficiently.
Specifically, we recommend that BCPS
a. use automated bus routing software to periodically perform a system-
wide analysis of bus routes to maximize the ridership on its bus routes
(repeat); and
b. establish comprehensive bus routing procedures that specify target bus
capacities, ridership goals, and student ride-time limits.
6 It is customary for school systems to use bus capacities that are lower than the manufacturer
stated capacities and for these capacities to differ between school levels. For example, the
customary capacities we used for our calculation were 54 students for a 64-passenger
manufacturer stated capacity bus transporting elementary school students and 44 students for a
64-passenger bus transporting middle and high school students.
33

--- Page 36 ---
Food Services
Background
According to the audited financial statements, food service operating expenditures
totaled $50.7 million in fiscal year 2019, and were primarily funded with federal
funds totaling $35.6 million, food sales totaling $12.7 million, and State sources
totaling $1.5 million. According to MSDE records, in fiscal year 2019 BCPS had
623 food service positions for its 171 schools, consisting of 550 cafeteria
positions and 73 administrative positions.
According to MSDE records, 44 percent of BCPS’ students qualified for free and
reduced-price meals as of October 31, 2018. Four BCPS schools participate in
the federal Community Eligibility Provision (CEP)7, which is a meal service
option that allows schools that are in high poverty districts to serve meals to all
students at no cost without collecting applications for free and reduced-price
meals. In fiscal year 2019, BCPS was reimbursed for approximately 86 percent
of its cost related to its four participating schools through the CEP.
External Audits
There were similarities between the work of the independent certified public
accounting firm that audited the BCPS financial statements and the objectives of
our audit of food service activities.
Conclusion
Based on our current assessment of significance and risk to our audit objectives,
and the work performed by the independent certified public accounting firm, our
audit did not include a review of policies, procedures, and controls with respect to
the food services financial area of operations.
School Board Oversight
Background
The Baltimore County School Board (the Board) is composed of seven elected
members and four members appointed by the Governor serving four-year terms as
well as one student member with partial voting rights who serves a one-year term.
As noted in the Background Information section, the Board contracted with a
certified public accounting firm for independent audits of the BCPS financial
7 Through CEP, schools are reimbursed for meals using a formula based on the percentage of
students eligible for free meals because of their participation in other specific means-tested
programs (such as the Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program and Temporary Assistance
for Needy Families).
34

--- Page 37 ---
statements and federal programs. To assist in its oversight of various areas of
BCPS operations and governance, the Board has established five committees
(Audit, Building and Contracts, Curriculum, Legislative and Governmental
Relations, and Policy).
BCPS Adopted an Ethics Policy that Met the Requirements of State Law
The BCPS Board has a detailed ethics policy that conforms to State law and was
approved by the State Ethics Commission. The policy is applicable to both Board
members and BCPS employees and includes provisions for conflicts of interest
and financial disclosures by Board members and certain employees.
Specifically, annual financial disclosure statements are required to be filed by
Board members, candidates for the Board, the Superintendent, and other
administrators (such as Community Superintendents, Chief Financial Officer,
Purchasing Manager, Chief Human Resources Officer, and Principals) by April
30th of each year.
In accordance with the policy, BCPS established an Ethics Panel consisting of
five members appointed by the Board to interpret ethics policies and provide
advice on policy implementation. The Panel also reviews and rules on any
reported complaints of ethics violations. Our review of the records for Board
members and BCPS employees required to submit financial disclosure forms for
calendar years 2015 through 2018 disclosed that there were no significant issues
with the forms tested.
Management of Other Risks
Finding 11
Claims payments totaling approximately $152.2 million during fiscal year
2019 were not reviewed for propriety.
Analysis
Claim payments for employee, dependent, and retiree health care costs, which
totaled approximately $152.2 million during fiscal year 2019 were not reviewed
for propriety. BCPS participates in a contract between the Baltimore County
government and a health insurer that provides a self-insurance program for
employee, dependent, and retiree health insurance. As of June 30, 2019, health
insurance benefits were provided to approximately 40,000 enrolled BCPS
employees, dependents, and retirees through the County’s contract. Under the
current arrangement, BCPS paid for its share of health insurance, based on its
prior years’ claims and anticipated enrollment.
35

--- Page 38 ---
However, BCPS claims were not independently reviewed to ensure that the billed
services were actually provided or covered by the self-insured health plans, and
that services were appropriately priced. For example, neither BCPS nor the
County conducted, or contracted for, independent audits of paid claims.
Consequently, there is a lack of assurance regarding the propriety of billed
services.
Recommendation 11
We recommend that BCPS work with the County to ensure paid claims are
reasonable by independently verifying, or contracting for periodic
independent audits, to assess the accuracy and validity of claims.
36

--- Page 39 ---
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We conducted a performance audit to evaluate the effectiveness and efficiency of
the financial management practices of the Baltimore County Public Schools
(BCPS). We conducted this audit under the authority of the State Government
Article, Section 2-1220(e) of the Annotated Code of Maryland, and performed it
in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards. Those
standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient,
appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and
conclusions based on our audit objectives. We believe that the evidence obtained
provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit
objectives.
We had two broad audit objectives:
1. Evaluate whether the BCPS procedures and controls were effective in
accounting for and safeguarding its assets.
2. Evaluate whether the BCPS policies provided for the efficient use of
financial resources.
In planning and conducting our audit of BCPS, we focused on 11 major financial-
related areas of operations as approved on December 6, 2016 by the Joint Audit
and Evaluation Committee of the Maryland General Assembly in accordance with
the enabling legislation. The scope of the work performed in each of these areas
was based on our assessments of significance and risk. Therefore, our follow-up
on the status of findings included in our preceding audit report on BCPS dated
July 2, 2015 was limited to those findings that were applicable to the current audit
scope for each of the 11 areas.
The audit objectives excluded reviewing and assessing student achievement,
curriculum, teacher performance, and other academic-related areas and functions.
Also, we did not evaluate the BCPS Comprehensive Education Master Plan or
related updates, and we did not review the activities, financial or other, of any
parent teacher association, group, or funds not under the local board of
education’s direct control or management.
To accomplish our objectives, we reviewed applicable State laws and regulations
pertaining to public elementary and secondary education, as well as policies and
procedures issued and established by BCPS. We also interviewed personnel at
BCPS and the Maryland State Department of Education (MSDE), and staff at
other local school systems in Maryland (as appropriate). Our audit procedures
37

--- Page 40 ---
included inspections of documents and records, and observations of BCPS
operations. We also tested transactions and performed other auditing procedures
that we considered necessary to achieve our objectives, generally for the period
from July 1, 2015 to April 30, 2019. Generally, transactions were selected for
testing based on auditor judgment, which primarily considers risk. Unless
otherwise specifically indicated, neither statistical nor non-statistical audit
sampling was used to select the transactions tested. Therefore, the results of the
tests cannot be used to project those results to the entire population from which
the test items were selected. For certain areas within the scope of the audit, we
relied on the work performed by the independent accounting firm that annually
audits BCPS’ financial statements and conducts the federal Single Audit, as well
as the BCPS internal auditor.
We used certain statistical data—including financial and operational—compiled
by MSDE from various informational reports submitted by the Maryland local
school systems. This information was used in this audit report for background or
informational purposes, and was deemed reasonable.
We also extracted data from the BCPS automated financial management system
for the purpose of testing expenditure and payroll transactions. We performed
various audit procedures on the relevant data and determined the data were
sufficiently reliable for the purposes the data were used during the audit.
BCPS’ management is responsible for establishing and maintaining effective
internal control. Internal control is a process designed to provide reasonable
assurance that objectives pertaining to the reliability of financial records;
effectiveness and efficiency of operations including safeguarding of assets; and
compliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations are achieved. As
provided in Government Auditing Standards, there are five components of
internal control: control environment, risk assessment, control activities,
information and communication, and monitoring. Each of the five components,
when significant to the audit objectives, and as applicable to BCPS, were
considered by us during the course of this audit.
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate. In addition
to the conditions included in this report, other findings were communicated to
BCPS that were not deemed significant and, consequently, did not warrant
inclusion in this report.
38

--- Page 41 ---
We conducted our fieldwork from May 2019 to February 2020. On March 16,
2020, due to the COVID-19 pandemic health crisis, the State Superintendent of
Schools decided to close school and administrative buildings to employees and
the public for a two-week period. This was eventually extended for the remainder
of the 2019-2020 school year with limited access by certain employees. All
BCPS buildings were open during the entire period of our fieldwork, so the
objectives and scope of our audit were not impacted. To the extent that the
COVID-19 crisis continues to impact BCPS operations, certain recommendations
in this report may need to be adjusted to ensure proper controls under the
modified operations.
The BCPS response to our findings and recommendations is included as an
appendix to this report. As prescribed in the State Government Article, Section 2-
1224 of the Annotated Code of Maryland, we will advise BCPS regarding the
results of our review of its response.
39

--- Page 42 ---
APPENDIX

--- Page 43 ---
Baltimore County Public Schools
Agency Response Form
Procurement and Disbursement Cycle
Finding 1
Procurements were not always made in accordance with established policies or applicable
State law.
We recommend that BCPS comply with its established policies and State law when
procuring goods and services. Specifically, we recommend that BCPS
a. discontinue the practice of procurement from contracts that do not have provisions for
use by other entities, or were not competitively procured;
b. document the evaluations of potential vendors for procurements of instructional
materials; and
c. publish ICPA contract awards greater than $50,000, including those noted above, in
eMMA as required.
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 1a Agree Estimated Completion Date: 09/15/2020
Please provide details of BCPS will comply with this recommendation.
corrective action or The BCPS Office of Purchasing has already strengthened the internal
explain disagreement. documentation requirement for use of a cooperative contract. Procedure
3210.001 was revised in March 2015 to include contracted services. In
May 2016, the office began to work on the solicitation procedure to
ensure a standardized process for solicitations for services. The Due
Diligence Checklist was updated in October of 2018 to include all
documentation to support a piggybacking decision under established
policies and State law, and retain all associated documentation.
Recommendation 1b Agree Estimated Completion Date: 09/15/2020
Please provide details of BCPS has engaged in corrective procedures to ensure the
corrective action or documentation of the evaluations of potential vendors for
explain disagreement.
procurements of instructional materials. Specifically, there is now an
established shared resource in which the Curriculum and Instruction
team captures the process documents in accordance with our Policy and
Rule 6002. This shared resource is available to our purchasing team
agent as an added check-and-balance system. Our purchasing team agent
Page 1 of 13

--- Page 44 ---
Baltimore County Public Schools
Agency Response Form
verifies documentation prior to materials being placed on public display
or the development of a contract exhibit. The respective Executive
Director also utilizes a reference sheet referred to as our 4X4 that
summarizes the information within the shared resource documentation in
preparation for contract exhibits presentation. Lastly, training was
conducted with multiple levels of the Curriculum and Instruction
leadership in collaboration with the Office of Purchasing to level set
expectations, processes and accountability related to proper procedure
and documentation of procurement within the respective policy and rule.
Recommendation 1c Agree Estimated Completion Date: 03/31/2021
Please provide details of BCPS has posted all solicitations on eMaryland Marketplace and
corrective action or will also post a Notice of Award for awards as required in the State
explain disagreement. Finance and Procurement Article 17-502, except for Materials of
Instruction.
Page 2 of 13

--- Page 45 ---
Baltimore County Public Schools
Agency Response Form
Finding 2
BCPS’ written policy did not define the criteria for what constitutes a contract
modification and did not require a signed contract modification to support changes to
contract terms and conditions.
We recommend that BCPS
a. amend its written policy to establish criteria for contract modifications and require a
signed contract modification for significant changes (as defined in the amended policy)
to the scope of an existing contract; and
b. present contract modifications to the Board for review and approval as required by its
policy, including the modification of the contract noted above.
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 2a Agree Estimated Completion Date: 06/30/2021
Please provide details of BCPS will amend Purchasing Procedure 3240.002 to align with
corrective action or Board Policy 3215 and Superintendent Rule 3215 to provide clear
explain disagreement. guidance on contract modifications to the specifications, delivery
point, period of performance, price, quantity or other provision of a
contract.
Recommendation 2b Agree Estimated Completion Date: 09/15/2020
Please provide details of BCPS will comply with all Board policies, superintendent rules and
corrective action or purchasing procedures and advise the Board of the modification
explain disagreement. made to the above-referenced contract.
Page 3 of 13

--- Page 46 ---
Baltimore County Public Schools
Agency Response Form
Finding 3
BCPS did not use an ICPA for purchasing school buses in a manner intended and limited
competition for those procurements. BCPS also did not maintain supporting
documentation to enable us to determine whether it received the best value.
We recommend that BCPS
a. adhere to ICPA terms and conditions, including pricing;
b. document the justification of material changes to procurement methods and the basis
for procurement decisions (awards) and retain this documentation for future reference;
and
c. notify the Board of material changes to procurement methods.
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 3a Agree Estimated Completion Date: 04/15/2020
Please provide details of BCPS will improve review of procurement specification to maximize
corrective action or potential competition. The specifications for BCPS school bus
explain disagreement. purchases in FY2017-2019 were not well drafted and did limit
competition. The FY2020 procurement was properly conducted using
generic specifications and pricing directly from the ICPA to maximize
competition.
Recommendation 3b Agree Estimated Completion Date: 09/15/2020
Please provide details of BCPS does not anticipate any future changes to procurement
corrective action or methods and will document and retain any such changes for future
explain disagreement. reference if they were to occur.
Recommendation 3c Agree Estimated Completion Date: 09/15/2020
Please provide details of BCPS will notify the Board of material changes to procurement
corrective action or methods.
explain disagreement.
Page 4 of 13

--- Page 47 ---
Baltimore County Public Schools
Agency Response Form
Finding 4
BCPS did not have a written policy requiring the documentation of the receipt of goods
and services prior to making the related payment and permitted the prepayment of
vendors for services without a formal policy. Further, BCPS did not ensure that contracts
were always properly executed prior to payment.
We recommend that BCPS
a. develop written policies requiring the formal documentation of the receipt of goods and
services prior to making the related payments, as well as for the condition(s) required
to be met prior to making prepayments, if prepayments are deemed necessary; and
b. ensure that contracts and related agreements are properly executed prior to receiving
services or making payments.
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 4a Agree Estimated Completion Date: 09/15/2021
Please provide details of BCPS will develop a formal procedure to document the receipt of
corrective action or goods and services prior to payment and to formalize the current
explain disagreement.
guidelines for prepayments that correspond to generally accepted
accounting principles. Currently, all warehouse purchase orders (PO)
require a 3-way match of PO, invoice and delivery receipt. Due to the
lack of a central receiving facility for all schools and offices, these POs
have historically required a two-way system match between the PO and
invoice. Most school and office receipts are acknowledged by email or
written approval on the invoice.
The workflow being established in the ERP upgrade of the Accounts
Payable and Purchasing systems will require a 3-way match including a
PO, a receiving document that will be created by the school/office, and
the entry of an invoice.
Schools and offices will be trained to create a receiving document that
will be transmitted to Accounts Payable or, alternatively, will confirm
the receipt of goods/services and provide approval to pay through a
workflow email notification system.
Page 5 of 13

--- Page 48 ---
Baltimore County Public Schools
Agency Response Form
The procedures will be drafted to align with the workflow being
designed for the recently upgraded purchasing and accounts payable
systems which are in the final phase of development. All users will be
trained to implement the procedure.
Recommendation 4b Agree Estimated Completion Date: 09/15/2020
Please provide details of BCPS will ensure that where written contracts and related
corrective action or agreements are required, a contract will be properly executed prior
explain disagreement. to issuing a purchase order or making payments.
Page 6 of 13

--- Page 49 ---
Baltimore County Public Schools
Agency Response Form
Human Resources and Payroll
Finding 5
BCPS did not ensure certain personnel and payroll transactions processed were subject to
independent review and approval, resulting in overpayments to six employees totaling
$70,839 going undetected.
We recommend that BCPS
a. perform comprehensive independent reviews of all critical personnel and payroll
transactions (repeat);
b. review payroll transactions for potential overpayments and pursue recovery of
improper payroll payments, including the overpayments noted above; and
c. ensure that appropriate supervisory approval of all electronic time records is
performed, as required.
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 5a Agree Estimated Completion Date: 09/15/2020
Please provide details of BCPS has implemented a refined methodology by which salaries are
corrective action or calculated for administrative reassignments from 12-month to 10-
explain disagreement. month instructional positions and added a second level review by an
independent Human Resources administrator. The remainder of the
employee’s full 12-month salary to be earned will be entered into the pay
parameters of the Human Resources system software. The Department of
Fiscal Services/Office of Payroll will provide the Division of Human
Resources/Office of Certification with the subject employee’s year-to-date
earnings for the current fiscal year. This amount will be subtracted from the
employee’s current full negotiated salary and the remainder entered in the
pay parameters for a 10-month employee.
Recommendation 5b Agree Estimated Completion Date: 09/15/2020
Please provide details of BCPS has fully reviewed similar payroll transactions and found no
corrective action or other overpayments. The CASE Master Agreement prevents BCPS
explain disagreement. from recovering the overpayments under the terms of the
bargaining unit agreement.
Page 7 of 13

--- Page 50 ---
Baltimore County Public Schools
Agency Response Form
14.2 In the event of a salary error, neither the Board nor CASE may
claim salary adjustments for any more than the fiscal year in which the
error is detected. When an administrator has been overpaid, he/she must
be paid at the correct rate of pay for two (2) pay periods before
repayment deductions begin. However, at the teacher’s request,
repayment deductions may begin immediately.
Recommendation 5c Agree Estimated Completion Date: 02/01/2021
Please provide details of BCPS will regularly report timesheets to administrators with a list
corrective action or of timesheets that not been properly approved. Administrators and
explain disagreement. managers will be provided with regular reporting data to enforce
compliance in conjunction with existing employee performance
standards.
Page 8 of 13

--- Page 51 ---
Baltimore County Public Schools
Agency Response Form
Information Technology
Finding 6
BCPS did not ensure that employee access to its automated financial systems was
appropriate and adequately controlled, resulting in employees with unnecessary or
incompatible access.
We recommend that BCPS
a. periodically review employee access capabilities to ensure all access is appropriate and
incompatible duties are segregated (repeat); and
b. correct any unnecessary or improper capabilities, including those noted above.
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 6a Agree Estimated Completion Date: 09/15/2021
Please provide details of In 2015, it was expected that the ERP system upgrade would permit
corrective action or restricted individual access to certain employee compensation fields in
explain disagreement. the Human Resources Advantage system. This proved infeasible and so
in 2019, a position was transferred from the Office of Payroll in the
Department of Fiscal Services to the Office of Certification in the
Division of Human Resources. All data fields related to annual
salaries, hourly rates and stipends are now adequately segregated
between the two offices so that only Human Resources staff may modify
employee compensation.
BCPS will develop a Standard Operating Procedure for regularly
providing managers with a list of all employees, the employees’
system access, and the approvers of all functions. In addition to
regular reporting, an immediate notification system will be implemented
to require review by the system administrators for each employee hire,
transfer, termination, promotion and demotion to ensure that employee
system access is properly aligned with job responsibilities. A
transactional log will be provided to an independent administrator for
regular review.
Eighteen employees were identified by OLA with inappropriate
access. Eleven user profiles have been revised as recommended and
Page 9 of 13

--- Page 52 ---
Baltimore County Public Schools
Agency Response Form
the remaining 7 user profiles will be revised within 30 days. Broadly
defined user roles will be reviewed and restricted in accordance with
minimum requirements for each position with provisions for cross
training needed to provide continuity of operations.
Recommendation 6b Agree Estimated Completion Date: 9/15/2021
Please provide details of BCPS will conduct an immediate review of all employee system
corrective action or access. BCPS is phasing out the online catalogue product for purchasing
explain disagreement. school supplies. This system permitted 128 account managers to initiate
and approve purchases without secondary review and approval. An
internally hosted replacement catalogue is in development and will
require the use of procurement cards. A new procurement card program
is being simultaneously deployed that will require online documentation
and approval of every transaction and provide an electronic database of
same.
Page 10 of 13

--- Page 53 ---
Baltimore County Public Schools
Agency Response Form
Finding 7
Sensitive BCPS personally identifiable information was maintained in a manner that did
not provide adequate security safeguards.
We recommend that BCPS implement appropriate information security safeguards for its
sensitive PII.
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide BCPS is investigating ways to protect data that will allow for security as
additional comments as well as system responsiveness.
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 7 Agree Estimated Completion Date: 06/30/2022
Please provide details of BCPS will investigate potential, cost effective options to develop a
corrective action or plan to implement controls over sensitive PII.
explain disagreement.
Page 11 of 13

--- Page 54 ---
Baltimore County Public Schools
Agency Response Form
Finding 8
For two critical systems’ databases, security and audit event logging and monitoring
procedures were not adequate, and unnecessary elevated system privileges were granted to
numerous user accounts.
We recommend that BCPS implement appropriate database monitoring controls over the
aforementioned critical systems. Specifically, we recommend that BCPS
a. log all significant database security, audit related event, and processing activities,
including direct changes to critical database tables, and generate reports that include
this related database activity (repeat);
b. ensure that individuals perform regular, independent documented reviews of the
aforementioned reports and retain the information for reference purposes (repeat); and
c. restrict assignment of critical database administration roles to only those personnel
requiring such access for their job responsibilities (repeat).
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide BCPS has modified these database servers to comply with auditor
additional comments as recommendations by removing and disabling administrator account
deemed necessary. access. In addition, BCPS has enabled logging and created an SOP for
log review.
Recommendation 8a Agree Estimated Completion Date: 06/30/2020
Please provide details of BCPS enabled the recommended log entries.
corrective action or
explain disagreement.
Recommendation 8b Agree Estimated Completion Date: 06/30/2020
Please provide details of BCPS has created an SOP to direct log review.
corrective action or
explain disagreement.
Recommendation 8c Agree Estimated Completion Date: 06/30/2020
Please provide details of BCPS has removed unnecessary accounts.
corrective action or
explain disagreement.
Page 12 of 13

--- Page 55 ---
Baltimore County Public Schools
Agency Response Form
Finding 9
Twenty-six publicly accessible servers were improperly located within the internal
network, intrusion detection prevention system coverage for untrusted traffic did not exist,
and BCPS network resources were not secured against improper access from students
using wireless connections and high school computer labs.
We recommend that BCPS
a. relocate all publicly accessible servers to a separate protected network zone to limit
security exposures to the internal network segment (repeat);
b. perform a documented review and assessment of its network security risks and identify
how IDPS coverage should be applied to its network for all untrusted traffic, including
encrypted traffic, and implement this coverage; and
c. limit student network-level access from wireless connections and high school computer
labs to only authorized local school and system instructional network resources.
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 9a Agree Estimated Completion Date: 09/30/2021
Please provide details of BCPS has removed all the ‘no longer needed’ rules from the firewall
corrective action or and load balancer. BCPS is relocating publicly accessible servers
explain disagreement. into the DMZ as well as migrating some systems to cloud based
solutions.
Recommendation 9b Agree Estimated Completion Date: 09/30/2021
Please provide details of BCPS has budgeted for a thorough network review and will
corrective action or implement security measures based on those recommendations.
explain disagreement.
Recommendation 9c Agree Estimated Completion Date: 01/31/2022
Please provide details of BCPS is implementing network directory attribute assignment to
corrective action or route student traffic and preclude access to non-instructional
explain disagreement. internal resources.
Page 13 of 13

--- Page 56 ---
A T
UDIT EAM
Mark S. Hagenbuch, CPA
Audit Manager
Richard L. Carter, CISA
R. Brendan Coffey, CPA, CISA
Information Systems Audit Managers
Lauren E. Franchak, CPA
Nelson W. Hopkins, CPA
Senior Auditors
Edward O. Kendall, CISA
Edwin L. Paul, CPA, CISA
Information Systems Senior Auditors
Stephen R. Alexander
Thea A. Chimento
Daniel P. Nuccio, CPA, CFE
Kush C. Patel
Gary B. Staples
Staff Auditors
Dominick R. Abril
Peter W. Chong
Malcolm J. Woodard
Information Systems Staff Auditors