Title: Presentation to the Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee - Fraud Investigation Unit - Update and Results


The reports referenced in this presentation are listed below.

State Department of Assessment and Taxation - Allegation related to DAT improperly reducing tax credits for homeowners in Montgomery County (10/5/2020)

Department of Housing and Community Development - Allegation related to possible violations of State laws, regulations, and policies by DHCD involving the use of contracts (7/10/2020)

Maryland Department of Health - Spring Grove Hospital Center - Allegations regarding questionable procurement activity involving two SGHC employees (4/22/2020)

Video Presentation (Fraud Hotline Activity starts at 2:31:33)
Date: 12/08/2020
Type: Presentations to the Legislature
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5fd8e728a1ce5804f03b8075
Extracted: 2025-06-20T00:08:14.520688
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Fraud Investigation Unit
Update and Results
Presentation to Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Gregory A. Hook, CPA
Joshua S. Adler, CPA, CFE
Joseph E. McWilliams, CFE
December 8, 2020

--- Page 2 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Fraud Investigation Unit - History
 2002 – The Joint Audit Committee instructed OLA to implement a hotline and
web referral process for the reporting of allegations of fraud, waste, and
abuse in State government operations.
 2003 – OLA’s hotline and web referral process were launched with an
expected call volume of 200 calls per year but as noted on page 6, actual call
volume has consistently exceeded expectations.
 2016 – OLA dedicates a second employee to the hotline.
 2020 – OLA dedicates a third employee to the hotline and establishes the
Fraud Investigation Unit (FIU).
Fraud Investigation Unit
Page 2
Update and Results

--- Page 3 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Fraud Investigation Unit (FIU) – Responsibilities
FIU operations include both administrative and investigative activities as
depicted in the following tables.
Administrative Operations Investigative Operations
Fraud Hotline Administration Audit Support
• Call Intake • Allegation Approach Development
• Initial Research, Assessment, & Recommended Actions • Procedural & Testing Guidance
• Allegation Referrals • Finding Development
• Vendor & Employee Research
• Transaction Analyses
Allegation Due Diligence
• Specialized Reports
• Research
• Validity & Risk Assessment
Special Investigations
• Recommended Actions
• Approach Development • Planning & Conducting Investigations
• Referrals to Prosecutorial Agencies
Outreach & Education
Fraud Brainstorming & Risk Assessment
• Agency Outreach
• Training & Development • Brainstorming
• Presentations • Allegation Risk Assessment
• FIU Newsletter • Assessment of High-Risk Areas
Fraud Investigation Unit
Page 3
Update and Results

--- Page 4 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
FIU Administrative Operations - Hotline Administration
 Allegations are received by phone, web, referral, mail, and from OLA
auditors in the field.
 Callers are informed that the information provided is considered
confidential, and are provided with information about the State’s
“whistleblower” laws if reassurance is needed.
 Investigative auditors (certified fraud examiners) handle calls during
business hours in accordance with established procedures.
 All allegations are assessed for credibility, and due diligence is performed
before field investigations are initiated.
 Allegations are 1) investigated by OLA – either as part of a regularly
scheduled audit or as a special audit 2) referred to applicable State
agencies, or 3) not pursued.
Fraud Investigation Unit
Page 4
Update and Results

--- Page 5 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
FIU Administrative Operations - Referrals to State Agencies
Callers who report allegations that would be more appropriately handled by
other agencies are referred to the applicable agencies for assistance. Example
of these referrals include:
 Welfare Benefits – Department of Human Services, Office of the Inspector
General
 Unemployment Insurance – Maryland Department of Labor
 Medicaid Benefits – Maryland Department of Health, Office of the Inspector
General
 Identify Theft – Office of the Attorney General, Identify Theft Unit
 Income Tax – Comptroller of Maryland, Compliance Division
Fraud Investigation Unit
Page 5
Update and Results

--- Page 6 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
FIU Administrative Operations - Hotline Statistics
Call Volume Allegation Disposition
(Calendar Year Basis) (February 2003 through October 2020)
500
455 455
450 417 423
400 Investigations Completed by
18%
350 332 OLA or in Process
300
Referred to State Agencies
250
61%
(41% were related to Department
200
of Human Services benefits.)
150
100 Not Pursued 21%
50
0
Average 2017 2018 2019 2020
2003 to 2016 Actual Actual Actual Projected
The decrease in CY 2020 was deemed to be due to the
impact of COVID-19 restrictions on State operations.
Fraud Investigation Unit
Page 6
Update and Results

--- Page 7 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
FIU Administrative Operations - Hotline Awareness
The FIU promotes OLA’s hotline by displaying
fraud posters in State offices, including
biannual messages on State employee
payroll notices, and requesting that agencies
send annual emails to their employees with
OLA’s hotline information.
During the past year, certain Judicial and
Executive branch agencies have denied
OLA’s request to display fraud posters in
their offices and/or to send emails to their
employees with OLA’s hotline information.
Fraud Investigation Unit
Page 7
Update and Results

--- Page 8 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
FIU Investigative Operations – Results of Investigations
The results of investigations may be included in OLA’s fiscal compliance audit
reports or in separate special review reports. Several examples include:
 State Department of Assessment and Taxation (DAT) – Allegation related to
DAT improperly reducing tax credits for homeowners in Montgomery County.
(Report Dated November 5, 2020)
 Department of Housing and Community Development (DHCD) – Allegation
related to possible violations of State laws, regulations, and policies by
DHCD involving the use of contracts. (Report Dated July 10, 2020)
 Maryland Department of Health (MDH) – Spring Grove Hospital Center
(SGHC) – Allegations regarding questionable procurement activity involving
two SGHC employees. (Report Dated April 22, 2020)
Fraud Investigation Unit
Page 8
Update and Results

--- Page 9 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
FIU Investigative Operations – Results of Investigations
State Department of Assessments and Taxation (Finding 5)
DAT did not ensure HTCs were properly calculated. We received a referral on our
fraud, waste, and abuse hotline regarding improperly reduced HTCs and initiated
a review of the HTC process in 10 jurisdictions and noted the following:
 DAT did not periodically review programming of its automated system to
ensure HTCs were properly calculated.
 DAT did not properly segregate duties for manually processed HTCs or ensure
they were properly documented and adequately supported. We noted
numerous HTCs that lacked supporting documentation and that were
calculated improperly without detection.
 HTCs awarded to thousands of homeowners primarily in Montgomery County
(but also Baltimore City) were improperly reduced by at least $4.4 million,
• DAT received advice from its legal counsel on January 23, 2019 that
confirmed that its HTC calculation methodology was incorrect.
• DAT does not intend to refund homeowners for the amounts overpaid.
Fraud Investigation Unit
Page 9
Update and Results

--- Page 10 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
FIU Investigative Operations – Results of Investigations
Department of Housing and Community Development (Finding 2)
DHCD improperly used two marketing contracts totaling $5 million to obtain
goods and services that were outside the scope of the contracts. Certain of these
transactions appeared questionable.
 DHCD directed one of the contractors to purchase promotional supplies and
computer tablets totaling approximately $90,000 that were not included in the
scope of the contract.
 DHCD directed the second contractor to pay a vendor $50,000 for services
based on an unsolicited proposal from this vendor. In addition, we noted that:
• There was no formal agreement with the vendor.
• Payment was made before any services were provided.
• The vendor was not monitored by either the contractor or DHCD.
Fraud Investigation Unit
Page 10
Update and Results

--- Page 11 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
FIU Investigative Operations – Results of Investigations
MDH Spring Grove Hospital Center (Findings 1 and 2)
Significant deficiencies were identified relating to SGHC’s procurement and
monitoring processes, resulting in questionable activity. Similar findings were
noted in OLA’s 2008 special review of SGHC and involved some of the same
employees.
 Specifications prepared for one invitation for bid appeared to be tailored to the
equipment provided by the vendor that was awarded an $800,000 contract.
 SGHC artificially divided procurements to avoid competitive public solicitations
and MDH oversight. In addition, SGHC did not competitively procure or verify
amounts paid on certain purchases, resulting in certain questionable activity
and overpayments.
 OLA referred these matters to the Office of the Attorney General – Criminal
Division.
Fraud Investigation Unit
Page 11
Update and Results

--- Page 12 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
FIU Investigative Operations – Audit Support
The FIU provided support on 18 other OLA special reviews/audits, such as the
Opioid Operational Command Center, University of Maryland Medical System
Corporation, and Motor Vehicle Administration. This support included activities
such as:
 The development of audit procedures to address allegations and related risks.
 Preparation of electronic data matches to identify high-risk transactions.
 Analyses of agency transactions and documents to identify indicators of fraud
and noncompliance with laws and regulations.
 Comprehensive research into individuals and companies referenced in
allegations.
 Participation in fraud brainstorming sessions to identify high-risk areas and
develop an approach to address the risks.
Fraud Investigation Unit
Page 12
Update and Results

--- Page 13 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Conclusion
The FIU’s efforts have been invaluable to the OLA, and we believe to the
Legislature in exercising its oversight responsibility, and will continue to evolve
and expand to help prevent and detect fraud and abuse in State government.
 Significant efforts continue to be made to build awareness of the hotline.
 Hotline activity has continued to exceed initial expectations. Investigative
auditors provide a high level of customer service to the hundreds of hotline
callers.
 OLA continues to identify and report on significant findings, in both fiscal
compliance audit reports and special review reports, based on hotline
allegations.
 FIU future plans include:
 Processes for the proactive detection of fraudulent transactions
 Expanded support for ongoing audit efforts
 Additional initiatives to promote fraud awareness in State government.
Fraud Investigation Unit
Page 13
Update and Results

--- Page 14 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
__________________________
Fraud Investigation Unit
Update and Results
Handout
Excerpts from Audit Reports
Presentation to
Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Gregory A. Hook, CPA
Joshua S. Adler, CPA, CFE
Joseph E. McWilliams, CFE
December 8, 2020
__________________________

--- Page 15 ---
State Department of Assessments and Taxation (DAT)
Report Date: October 5, 2020
Homeowners’ Tax Credit
Background
According to the State’s records, during fiscal year 2019, DAT approved 45,822
homeowners’ tax credits (HTC) totaling approximately $65.5 million. HTCs are
awarded to homeowners with a combined household income up to $60,000,
allowing a credit against the homeowner’s property tax bill when the property
taxes exceed a fixed percentage of the household’s gross income. To receive the
HTC, homeowners must submit an application, along with supporting
documentation, to DAT by September 1 of the fiscal year for which the HTC is
being requested. For example, applications for the fiscal year 2019 property taxes
were due by September 1, 2018.
DAT headquarters staff process the HTC applications, determine the amount of
each credit, and notify the local jurisdictions which issue the credits on the tax
bills or as refunds, depending on when the application was received. State law
requires the local jurisdictions to submit reimbursement requests for redeemed
HTCs to DAT who is to certify to the Comptroller of Maryland that the requested
reimbursement is due. Homeowners that receive an HTC and then transfer
ownership of the property during the year of the award must return the HTC on a
prorated basis.
Finding 5
DAT did not ensure HTCs were properly calculated. As a result, HTCs
awarded to thousands of homeowners in certain jurisdictions were
improperly reduced by at least $4.4 million.
Analysis
DAT did not ensure HTCs were properly calculated. As a result, HTCs awarded
to thousands of homeowners in certain jurisdictions were improperly reduced by
at least $4.4 million in fiscal year 2019. Most HTCs are calculated automatically
by DAT’s automated system based on applicant income data entered in the system
by DAT employees. Certain HTCs are calculated manually by DAT employees
when a homeowner does not receive an individual real property tax bill (such as
in the case of a housing cooperative) or for new home purchases where the tax
credit must be prorated for less than a year.
The improper HTC calculations that we address in this finding were the result of
2

--- Page 16 ---
DAT’s incorrect treatment of certain additional tax credits offered by certain local
jurisdictions. Because each local jurisdiction may or may not provide its residents
with other tax credits, which are in addition to the HTC provided for in State law
and are paid for by the State, each jurisdiction could be impacted differently or
not at all by this finding.
We received a referral to our fraud, waste, and abuse hotline, regarding HTCs that
were improperly reduced for homeowners in one local jurisdiction (Montgomery
County). As a result, we reviewed the procedures and controls and conducted
testing of HTCs in this and nine other jurisdictions and noted the following
conditions:
Ineffective Controls Over HTC Calculations
DAT did not establish effective controls over automated and manually processed
HTC calculations.
 DAT did not periodically review the programming of its automated system to
verify that it was calculating HTCs in an accurate manner and in accordance
with the law. As a result, DAT was not aware that it had incorrectly
programmed the system and that HTCs for residents of at least one
jurisdiction (Montgomery County) were not being calculated consistent with
the law as further described below.
 DAT did not segregate duties for manually calculating, processing, and
approving HTCs and did not ensure the HTCs were properly documented and
adequately supported. Specifically, our test of 21 manually processed HTCs
from 8 jurisdictions disclosed that 5 HTCs totaling $11,282 were calculated
and processed by the same DAT management employee who was also
responsible for reviewing and approving manual calculations, and authorizing
the disbursement forms submitted to process the related payments. DAT
generated an output report of these transactions that was subject to a
supervisory review. However, the review did not include supporting
documentation for the calculations. We noted that two of these calculations
were not performed properly, resulting in excess tax payments by the
homeowners totaling $626. For 8 other HTCs totaling $18,500, DAT did not
document its calculations of the HTC or obtain and retain the documentation
necessary to support its calculations. As a result, we could not determine
whether these HTCs were properly calculated.
Automated and Manual Processing Errors in Calculating Certain HTCs
DAT improperly calculated HTCs in at least two jurisdictions (Montgomery
County and Baltimore City) resulting in thousands of homeowners paying
3

--- Page 17 ---
excessive property tax amounts. DAT administers the State HTC and certain
supplemental credits awarded to eligible homeowners by their local jurisdictions,
such as Montgomery County’s supplemental tax credit for senior citizens 65 or
older with limited incomes.
 DAT’s automated system improperly deducted the income tax offset credit
(ITOC) administered by Montgomery County from homeowners’ State and
County real property tax liabilities, resulting in the HTCs awarded to
homeowners in Montgomery County being improperly reduced.2 Specifically,
individual homeowners under the age of 65 had their State and County HTCs
improperly reduced by amounts up to a total of $692, and homeowners at least
65 years old had their HTCs reduced by amounts up to a total of $1,0383.
Based on our analysis of HTC applications processed in DAT’s automated
system for Montgomery County residents in fiscal year 2019, the improper
reduction of
homeowners’ tax
liabilities resulted in Example of Impact of Incorrect DAT Calculation
reduced HTCs awarded
OLA DAT
to 5,388 applicants Calculation Calculation
1 Tax liability (TL) $ 3,274 $ 3,274
totaling $4.4 million. 2 County ITOC N/A 692
We determined that, 3 TL Used for HTC (1-2) 3,274 2,582
4 Max Allowed Based on Income 1,610 1,610
based on the automated 5 Calculated HTC (3-4) 1,664 972
6 Homeowner Tax Liability (1-5)* $ 1,610 $ 2,302
system’s programming
Difference (OLA-SDAT) $ (692)
for Montgomery County, *Excludes other taxes and fees on the tax bill
DAT improperly
calculated HTCs dating back to at least 2005 in the same manner. We could
not readily determine the amount by which HTCs were improperly reduced
for years prior to fiscal year 2019.
 A similar condition was noted with HTCs manually processed by DAT
employees. Specifically, our test of 22 manually calculated HTCs for
homeowners that received property credits administered by Montgomery
County and 3 other jurisdictions disclosed that DAT employees had
improperly deducted these credits from the tax liabilities of 13 homeowners
from 2 jurisdictions (Montgomery and Baltimore City). It appears that the
manual calculations mirrored those programmed into the automated system
for Montgomery County. Consequently, the HTCs awarded to these 13
homeowners were improperly reduced by $6,500.
2 Since HTCs are calculated based on real property tax liabilities, the improper calculation resulted
in too low of a liability, which resulted in a too low of a credit.
3 Montgomery County homeowners that were at least 65 years old were eligible to receive a
supplemental tax credit equal to half of their State HTC amount.
4

--- Page 18 ---
DAT received advice from its legal counsel on January 23, 2019 that confirmed
our determination that DAT’s HTC methodology commented upon above was
incorrect.
Recommendation 5
We recommend that DAT
a. establish procedures to periodically review the programming of its
automated system to ensure that HTCs for all jurisdictions are being
processed accurately and in accordance with the law;
b. segregate duties over manually processed HTCs and ensure they are
properly calculated, documented, and supported;
c. comply with advice of legal counsel and discontinue the practice of
deducting other tax credits from applicants’ total property tax liabilities,
except as allowed by State law; and
d. consult with legal counsel on how to proceed regarding any refunds
resulting from the HTC miscalculations including the $4.4 million noted
above.
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide SDAT disagrees with the sentiment of impropriety in the
additional comments as statement “HTCs awarded to thousands of homeowners in
deemed necessary. certain jurisdictions were improperly reduced by at least $4.4
million.” Before OLA began their audit, SDAT made a policy
determination that increased the amount of tax credits received
by certain jurisdictions in future years. Subsequent conversations
with SDAT’s Assistant Attorney General confirmed that this is
the appropriate course of action moving forward, but the
Department does not feel as though prior year calculations were
inaccurate as they were consistent with the Department’s
practice at the time and implicitly upheld by PTAAB and
Maryland Tax Court decisions.
Auditor’s Comment: DAT’s statement that the PTAAB and the
Maryland Tax Court “implicitly upheld” the specific calculation method
we addressed in our report is not consistent with its position during our
audit fieldwork or subsequent to the audit when we discussed the finding
with DAT management. Furthermore, the statement is questionable since
the specific calculation method we addressed was demonstrably improper,
and our assessment that the calculation method was improper was
consistent with advice DAT received from its legal counsel in January
2019 as noted in our report.
5

--- Page 19 ---
Recommendation 5a Agree Estimated Completion Date: October, 2020
Please provide details of Local jurisdictions are required by law to inform SDAT of
corrective action or changes made to their programs. The Department verifies that
explain disagreement. the programming of its automated system is accurate annually
or whenever a change is made by a jurisdiction or OIT.
The annual process begins the day after the jurisdiction’s cut-
off date. The Program Manager is responsible for verifying that
the tax rate and calculations are accurate. When a change is
made to the system, OIT informs the Program Manager the day
after it has been implemented; and the Program Manager
manually verifies the program is making accurate calculations.
Beginning October 2020, the Department will establish
procedures to ensure each jurisdiction’s tax rate and
calculations are verified annually or when a change has been
made. A log will be created and an entry made whenever a
calculation is verified. Tax Credits’ new system will be
handling the calculations for each jurisdiction beginning 2021.
The programming will be reviewed annually to ensure the
homeowners’ tax credit is being calculated accurately and in
accordance with the law.
Recommendation 5b Agree Estimated Completion Date: September 2020
Please provide details of SDAT has enhanced its process of manually calculating,
corrective action or processing, and approving homeowners’ tax credits by
explain disagreement. including additional personnel in the initial calculations,
implementing multiple checks throughout the process, and
generating an output report for periodic review.
The processing supervisors and other appointed persons are
responsible for calculating all manually processed homeowners’
tax credit applications. Once the calculations are complete, the
application and all required supporting documentation is given
to the Office Secretary.
The Office Secretary enters data from the application into an
online spreadsheet and prepares a weekly transmittal.
The Office Secretary gives the Program Manager the transmittal
and applications along with all supporting documents and
calculations.
The Program Manager is responsible for ensuring all applicable
supplemental tax credits are included in the calculation. Upon
completion, the Program Manager will initial each document to
indicate it has been reviewed and verified accurate.
6

--- Page 20 ---
The Program Manager gives everything to the Office Secretary
who is responsible for ensuring all documentation is initialed
before submitting the transmittal to Accounting. The Office
Secretary will place a copy of the transmittal in a binder and
keep the original with the documents that will be taken to be
scanned. Upon return of the documents, the Office Secretary
will verify the transmittal and all pages of the documents have
been scanned.
Finally, the Department will generate an output report that will
be reviewed annually by the Deputy Program Manager or
member of the audit team.
Recommendation 5c Agree Estimated Completion Date: Complete
Please provide details of Prior to OLA completing their audit, the Department agreed
corrective action or upon a change in procedure on how it calculates the
explain disagreement. Homeowners’ Tax Credit, to be implemented in 2020.
Beginning with the 2020 application, property tax credit
calculations will consider only the Homestead Credit as a
deduction, and no other real property credits. OIT made the
necessary program changes to the automated system. In early
June, it was verified by the Program Manager that the only tax
credit being deducted is the Homestead Tax Credit. This has
also been relayed to those processing applications manually.
Subsequent conversations with SDAT’s Assistant Attorney
General confirmed that this is the appropriate course of action
moving forward, but the Department does not feel as though
prior year calculations were in accurate as they were consistent
with the Department’s practice at the time and implicitly upheld
by PTAAB and Maryland Tax Court decisions.
Recommendation 5d Disagree Estimated Completion Date:
Please provide details of As stated above, the Department does not feel as though prior
corrective action or calculations were inappropriate and therefore doesn’t plan on
explain disagreement. issuing any additional payments for prior-year tax credits.
These payments are also not appropriately classified as
“refunds”.
After discussing this policy change with SDAT’s Assistant
Attorney General, that office agreed that there was no legal
authority that compels the Department to issue additional
homeowners’ tax credit payments for prior years.
7

--- Page 21 ---
Department of Housing and Community Development
(DHCD)
Report Date: July 10, 2020
Contract Procurement and Monitoring
Finding 2
DHCD improperly used marketing and construction management services
contracts to obtain goods and services that were outside the scope of the
contracts. Certain of these purchases appeared questionable, and DHCD
could not document that these goods and services were received.
Analysis
DHCD improperly used contracts for marketing and construction management
services to obtain goods and services that were outside the scope of the contracts.
Certain of the goods and services purchased appeared questionable, and DHCD
could not document that these goods and services were received. We received an
allegation through our fraud, waste, and abuse hotline regarding possible
violations of State laws, regulations, and policies by DHCD involving the use of
contracts. Our review of the specific contract referenced in the allegation did not
identify any matters that warranted a referral to the Attorney General’s Criminal
Division. However, our review of the contract in the allegation and another
contract (included in Finding 1) disclosed the following conditions.
Marketing Contract
Certain of the transactions made under a marketing contract appeared
questionable and the disposition of items improperly procured under the contract
could not be readily determined. In April 2015, DHCD entered into two five-year
contracts (including a two-year renewal period) totaling $5 million, under a
solicitation to obtain marketing services for various housing and neighborhood
development advertising campaigns. The two vendors awarded a contract
provided services including marketing planning, media buying, creative design
services, and marketing analysis.
 DHCD had directed one of the marketing contractors to purchase promotional
supplies and computer tablets totaling approximately $90,000, during the
period between September 2015 and January 2018 that were not included in
the scope of the marketing contract. The promotional supplies were
essentially printed material obtained by the contractor from office supply
companies, although DHCD’s contract specially excluded printing services.
8

--- Page 22 ---
DHCD management advised us that these items were used as promotional
giveaways and raffle prizes for homebuyer education events, but could not
provide any documentation accounting for the disposition of the tablets
purchased and could not identify the specific educational events. We were
advised by DHCD that the individual who directed the contractor to purchase
these items was no longer employed by DHCD.
 DHCD directed the second marketing contractor to pay a vendor for other
services, without any formal agreement existing between either the contractor
or DHCD with the vendor, and could not document that the vendor provided
deliverables commensurate with the amounts paid. Specifically, in June 2017,
DHCD received an unsolicited proposal from an existing DHCD vendor to
develop a homebuyer education marketing campaign. Rather than enter into a
contract with this vendor, as required by State procurement regulations,
DHCD directed the marketing contractor to pay the vendor $50,000 for these
services. Neither DHCD nor its marketing contractor had a formal agreement
with the vendor describing the specific services that were to be provided. In
addition, the $50,000 payment was authorized by DHCD and made by the
contractor before any services were provided by the vendor, and the vendor
was not monitored by either party to ensure the services were provided.
Furthermore, the vendor’s marketing campaign proposal included a pledge
that the vendor would raise $50,000 from outside parties to help fund this
marketing campaign, but DHCD did not verify that these funds were raised.
At our request, DHCD obtained from the vendor a summary of services
provided as of May 2019. The summary showed that only $10,000 in
matching funds was raised. In addition, although print media and a website
had been developed listing DHCD as a sponsor of the program, DHCD was
unable to provide any documentation indicating its approval of these materials
and could not readily determine whether these services were commensurate
with the $50,000 paid to the vendor.
Construction Management Contract
DHCD circumvented State procurement regulations by authorizing three
construction management services vendors to do work that was not included in
the scope of the contract and paid one of these vendors overhead costs that were
not specified in the contract. In May 2017, DHCD entered into a five-year, $2.5
million contract for construction management services for multifamily housing
projects. The contract was awarded to three vendors for services including design
and construction document review, construction cost review, and field monitoring
during the construction phase. Under the contract, these construction-related
services were to be billed at rates ranging from $109 per hour to $132 per hour.
9

--- Page 23 ---
 DHCD authorized each of the construction management services vendors to
perform rental inspection services for a rental subsidy program—services that
were not included in the scope of the contract since the services were
unrelated to the construction phrase of the contract. DHCD management
advised us that it believed that this work was authorized because it was similar
to the construction management services. Work performed by the three
vendors for rental inspection services totaled approximately $76,000 as of
December 2018.
 DHCD authorized payment of approximately $16,200 to one of the
construction management services vendors for “project oversight charges” for
administrative tasks, such as tracking and ensuring that inspection reports
were delivered to DHCD, that were not provided for in the contract.
Furthermore, the amount charged appeared excessive. Although DHCD
questioned the charges and obtained an explanation from the vendor, the rate
billed by the vendor, and paid by DHCD, for these administrative tasks
primarily was the highest construction management rate established in the
contract ($132 per hour). We were advised by DHCD that it ceased doing
business with this vendor in July 2018.
The use of these contracts to procure unrelated goods and services and the
services of other vendors circumvents the public solicitation, competitive bidding,
and other procurement requirements established in State regulations.
Recommendation 2
We recommend that DHCD
a. discontinue the practice of using existing contracts to procure goods and
services not provided for in the contract and to process payments to
vendors not originally included in the contract,
b. ensure all service procurements are documented in formal agreements
and all services are provided, and
c. ensure that all billings are in accordance with the approved scope of work
and contract rates.
10

--- Page 24 ---
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide No additional comments
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 2a Agree Estimated Completion Date: 10/31/2019
Please provide details
of corrective action or The Department concurs with the recommendations. While the
explain disagreement.
Department believed that promotional materials purchased and
services utilized by contractors in connection to events where the
Department promoted its programs were appropriate uses of its
existing contracts, the Department has taken measures to ensure
that contracts are used as intended. Specifically, the Department
has instituted a contract monitor in October 2019, whose role is
to ensure that goods and services are procured within the scope
of the Department’s marketing contracts.
Recommendation 2b Agree Estimated Completion Date: 10/31/2019
Please provide details
of corrective action or Also in October 2019, the Department incorporated updated
explain disagreement.
language in its requests for proposal for future service contracts
in an effort to afford a more inclusive scope of work for vendors
to provide services under.
Recommendation 2c Agree Estimated Completion Date: 6/30/2018
Please provide details
of corrective action or As stated in the auditor’s finding, the Department ended its
explain disagreement. relationship with the vendor in question due to the billing issues
stated. Additionally, in June 2018, the Department also hired a
new construction manager and adopted a new task order process
to ensure that vendor billings are congruent with contract rates
and approved scopes of work.
11

--- Page 25 ---
MDH – Spring Grove Hospital Center
Report Date: April 22, 2020
Questionable Procurement Activity
Background
During our audit fieldwork, we were advised by Spring Grove Hospital Center
(SGHC) management that the Maryland Department of Health’s (MDH) Office of
the Inspector General (OIG) had received allegations of questionable procurement
activities involving two SGHC employees. OIG conducted a review of the
allegations and issued a report on its findings dated March 6, 2018. The OIG
report disclosed that SGHC employees violated State laws and regulations and
MDH policy when procuring certain goods and services. Specifically, the report
disclosed that a SGHC management employee authorized the award of a $1,800
contract to a company owned by a relative of a SGHC maintenance employee. In
addition, the report disclosed that the management employee circumvented State
procurement regulations and MDH policy by directing work and approving
payments totaling $18,600 to two other vendors without a competitive
procurement process. MDH did not refer these matters to the Office of the
Attorney General or the State Ethics Commission, and SGHC allowed both the
management and maintenance employees to resign in lieu of termination.
Our reading of the OIG report disclosed that this same management employee
was previously involved in
certain procurements that were
the subject of a special review
we conducted in 2008 in
response to allegations that we
received about SGHC through
our fraud, waste, and abuse
hotline. The allegations were
concerning possible improper
procurement activities related to
certain maintenance projects.
Our November 10, 2008 special
report (see cover page) included
four findings and resulted in a
referral of certain matters to the
Office of the Attorney General
– Criminal Division. This same
management employee
separated from State service
12

--- Page 26 ---
after the issuance of our special report. However, we noted that this management
employee was rehired in March 2017 by a SGHC senior management employee
who was also involved in the procurements included in our special review.
Given these circumstances, we expanded our review of SGHC’s procurements
during this fiscal compliance audit to include certain procurements involving
these SGHC employees as well as procurements under certain established
thresholds. Our expanded review identified procurement and monitoring
deficiencies and certain questionable activity described in Findings 1 and 2.
These current matters have been referred by us to the Office of the Attorney
General – Criminal Division. A referral to the Criminal Division does not mean
that a criminal act has actually occurred or that criminal charges will be filed.
Finding 1
The invitation for bid for the purchase of dietary equipment costing $800,000
appeared to be tailored to a particular vendor.
Analysis
Specifications in SGHC’s invitation for bid (IFB) for the purchase of dietary
equipment appeared to be tailored to a particular vendor. In April 2017, the
Department of General Services (DGS), on behalf of SGHC, publicly advertised
the IFB on eMaryland Marketplace (eMM). Although the procurement was
processed through DGS, preparation of the IFB and evaluation of the related bids
were performed by SGHC personnel, including one of the management
employees noted above.
Based on our review, we identified certain equipment design and physical
requirements in the IFB that favored the equipment of a specific vendor
(hereinafter referred to as the “questionable vendor”). For example, we noted that
the IFB included certain equipment size restrictions consistent with the
dimensions of the questionable vendor’s equipment that limited competition on
the procurement. Specifically, during the pre-bid process, one of the eventual
losing bidders questioned the equipment dimensions, noting that the restrictive
size requirements were not necessary for the equipment to fit in the designated
locations. In response, SGHC personnel stated that equipment within two to three
inches of the specified sizes included in the IFB would be considered, but that the
dimensions specified in the IFB would be preferred.
There was no documentation to justify the specified restrictive size requirement or
award preference for those original dimensions, given its potential impact on a
competitive procurement. Our review disclosed that the aforementioned senior
management employee corresponded directly with the questionable vendor
13

--- Page 27 ---
regarding the solicitation after publication of the IFB, but prior to the receipt of
bids. We found that the content of the correspondence between certain SGHC
employees and one vendor raised further questions about the validity of the
procurement.
Three bids were received in response to the IFB, but two of the vendors were
unable to meet the IFB requirements, including equipment dimensions, and were
deemed to be non-responsive. In October 2017, SGHC awarded a contract valued
at $800,000 to the questionable vendor, which had the second lowest cost bid, but
was the only responsive bidder. The equipment was subsequently installed and
the questionable vendor was paid in full.
State procurement law requires agencies to draft specifications to encourage
maximum competition and prohibits agencies from drafting specifications in
favor of a single prospective bidder. In addition, State law generally prohibits
agencies from disclosing information to outside parties, including prospective
bidders, after a solicitation is issued.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that SGHC
a. ensure future specifications are drafted to encourage maximum
competition and not be favorable to a single prospective bidder, as
required by State procurement law;
b. refrain from disclosing information to any interested outside party after
solicitations are issued beyond those specifically provided for in State
law; and
c. after consultation with the Office of the Attorney General – Criminal
Division, work with DGS and legal counsel to determine the appropriate
action to be taken regarding this procurement.
Agency Response
Background / Factually Accurate
Analysis
Please explain any
concerns with factual
accuracy.
Recommendation 1a Agree Estimated Completion Date: 08/30/2020
Please provide details As a result of the OIG investigation, management involved in the
of corrective action or procurement process at the time have since resigned and/or were
explain disagreement. terminated and are no longer employed by MDH.
14

--- Page 28 ---
SGHC has removed the procurement function from under the
senior manager’s division and has placed it under the Chief
Financial Officer’s (CFO) division where oversight and
management are much more vigilant.
In order to ensure the promotion of maximum competition, any
specifications obtained and incorporated into a solicitation will
be vetted through the appropriate workgroup that has reasonable
subject matter knowledge of or obtains subject matter
information through research or consultation.
The implementation of this process will be memorialized in a
written policy/guideline.
Recommendation 1b Agree Estimated Completion Date: 06/30/2020
Please provide details Currently all procurements go through a single procurement
of corrective action or department that is embodied in the CFO’s department. Revised
explain disagreement. written procedures and guidelines will be documented and
implemented to ensure the proper separations of duty are in place
to preclude any conflict of interests.
Recommendation 1c Agree Estimated Completion Date: 6/30/2020
Please provide details This agency has informed the AG’s office via email (dated
of corrective action or 12/30/2019) about findings #1.
explain disagreement.
Finding 2
SGHC circumvented State procurement regulations and MDH procurement
policies by artificially dividing procurements for goods and services to keep
them under certain solicitation and delegation thresholds. In addition,
SGHC did not always competitively procure or verify amounts paid on
certain purchases, resulting in certain questionable activity and
overpayments.
Analysis
SGHC circumvented procurement policies and State procurement regulations by
artificially dividing procurements for goods and services to keep them below
certain solicitation and delegation thresholds, and made payments without an
existing purchase order. In addition, our testing of such procurements found that
they were not always competitively procured or that SGHC did not always verify
the propriety of related invoices prior to payment. To the extent these
procurements were not publicly solicited, SGHC employees responsible for
15

--- Page 29 ---
procuring the goods or services were able to directly solicit, receive, and evaluate
bids, and select a vendor without involvement from the MDH Office of
Procurement and Support Services (OPASS) personnel.
Our review of State records disclosed that SGHC had a pattern of splitting
purchases into multiple purchase orders and made additional supplemental
payments to these vendors for which there were no purchase orders on file, as
described in Table 1.
TABLE 1
Summary of Split Purchases and Procurements Lacking Purchase Orders
Procurements Circumventing Public Solicitation Requirements
During the period from February 17, 2015 through December 31, 2018,
 SGHC issued 23 purchase orders in amounts between $14,000 and $15,000 to 19
vendors totaling $339,100, with related payments totaling $259,891; and
 SGHC made 299 additional payments totaling $237,600 to 13 of these vendors for
work performed during this same period that was not associated with any
corresponding purchase orders.
Procurements Circumventing MDH’s Office of Procurement and Support Services
(OPASS)
During the period from February 17, 2015 through September 30, 2017,1
 SGHC issued 30 purchase orders in amounts between $24,000 and $25,000 to 17
vendors totaling $749,100; and
 SGHC made 217 additional payments totaling $219,400 to 9 of these vendors for
work performed during the same period that was not associated with any
corresponding purchase orders.
Source: State Records
1Effective October 1, 2017, the procurement authority delegated to SGHC by the Maryland
Department of Health increased from $25,000 to $50,000.
We selected 10 vendors (including 6 from Table 1) with multiple purchases and
disbursements of $25,000 or less. These 10 vendors received payments totaling
$548,600 during the period from February 17, 2015 through December 31, 2018,
all of which were associated with purchase orders in amounts equal to or below
$25,000 or were not associated with any purchase order. For 7 of these vendors,
the circumstances suggest that SGHC may have intentionally avoided MDH
OPASS and DGS oversight and public solicitation requirements. The two
management employees from our aforementioned 2008 special review had roles
in certain procurements or payment activity associated with these 7 vendors.
16

--- Page 30 ---
Our testing identified procurements that were not competitively procured and
inadequate verifications and documentation to support invoices. As a result,
payments were not always consistent with contract terms, were processed after the
purchase orders had expired, or exceeded the related purchase order maximum
values. We further noted certain questionable activity and overpayments to
vendors. For example, our review disclosed the following conditions:
 SGHC issued several individual $25,000 purchase orders in fiscal years 2016,
2017, and 2018 for grounds maintenance services rather than consolidating
these services into one procurement. In addition, SGHC paid the vendor
$11,300 for services during a lapse between the fiscal year 2016 and 2017
purchase orders. Furthermore, although the invoices supporting the $11,300
in payments referenced the fiscal year 2016 purchase order, the daily rate paid
was $675 rather than the 2016 purchase order rate of $575, resulting in an
overpayment of $1,675.
For the fiscal year 2017 purchase order, SGHC paid the vendor a total of
$73,900, exceeding the awarded purchase order amount by $48,900.
Although the original $25,000 purchase order was competitively bid, SGHC
circumvented OPASS oversight and avoided certain requirements for
purchases greater than $25,000 such as DGS approval, and the use of a
competitive sealed bidding process.
 SGHC issued a $25,000 purchase order to another vendor for tree removal
services to be performed during fiscal year 2016, but paid the vendor a total of
$32,000. Although this procurement was competitively bid, similar to above,
SGHC circumvented OPASS oversight and avoided certain requirements for
purchases greater than $25,000. In addition, certain invoices submitted by the
vendor lacked sufficient details for SGHC to ensure their propriety (such as
the size of the tree removed which, per the contract, was the basis for differing
rates to be charged), and certain rates charged exceeded the rates in the
purchase order. For example, SGHC paid the vendor $1,300 to remove a tree
even though the purchase order rate for the largest sized tree was $600. The
invoices also included charges for certain landscaping services (such as
clearing vines) that were not within the scope of the purchase order.
 SGHC issued annual purchase orders, each totaling $24,960, to a former
employee for maintenance services to be provided in fiscal years 2015
through 2018 without soliciting any bids or publishing the awards. Payments
to the former employee during the period from February 17, 2015 through
June 30, 2018 totaled $100,400. Given the total amount paid to the former
employee, SGHC should have consolidated these procurements and,
17

--- Page 31 ---
accordingly, SGHC circumvented OPASS oversight and avoided certain
requirements for purchases greater than $25,000. SGHC also could not
provide documentation to support how it determined the hourly rate paid to
the former employee and had no process to verify the number of hours
reported on the related invoices.
 SGHC split a $23,286 purchase of four exterior building doors in June 2016
into four individual solicitations, and received bids ranging from $4,700 to
$7,650 per door. SGHC ultimately combined these solicitations into one
purchase order, without complying with the public solicitation requirements
for purchases expected to exceed $15,000.
In addition, although the procurement file indicated that only two bids were
received and the purchase order was awarded to the lower bidder, our review
disclosed that SGHC did not consider bids received from a third vendor for
two of the doors that were collectively $1,800 less than the winning bidder.
Specifically, we sighted quotes from this vendor, for the two doors, that were
maintained outside of the procurement file. Furthermore, the eventual
winning bidder submitted revised quotes for these two doors, increasing the
price by $516, on the same day that the only other recognized bid was
received. There was no change in the scope of work and no explanation from
the bidder for the increased cost. Finally, SGHC could not explain its
rationale for failing to consider the vendor with the lower priced bid for what
were at the time being treated as individual procurements.
State procurement regulations generally require a formal written competitive
procurement and publication of the solicitation and related awards on eMaryland
Marketplace, which was replaced by eMaryland Marketplace Advantage in July
2019, for procurements exceeding $15,000. State procurement regulations further
require contracts valued at more than $50,000 to be awarded through a
competitive sealed bidding process and prohibit procurements from being
artificially divided to circumvent procurement requirements.1 Finally, the MDH
Procurement Policy requires procurements exceeding $50,000 to be submitted to
MDH OPASS for processing.
Recommendation 2
We recommend that SGHC
a. discontinue the practice of artificially dividing procurements to
circumvent State procurement regulations and MDH’s Procurement
Policy;
1 Prior to October 2017, the threshold for competitive sealed bidding required by State
procurement regulations was $25,000.
18

--- Page 32 ---
b. comply with State procurement regulations for competitive
procurements, including publication of solicitations and awards when
required;
c. ensure that vendor invoices contain sufficient details to determine the
propriety and reasonableness of the services performed and amounts
billed, and verify the same prior to payment;
d. conduct thorough reviews of vendor invoices, including those related to
the aforementioned payments, investigate and resolve any discrepancies,
and recover any amounts that are determined to be improperly paid; and
e. consult with the Office of the Attorney General – Criminal Division
before taking any actions related to the questionable procurements noted.
Agency Response
Background / Factually Accurate
Analysis
Please explain any
concerns with factual
accuracy.
Recommendation 2a Agree Estimated Completion Date: 6/30/2020
Please provide details SGHC has discontinued the practice of artificially dividing
of corrective action or procurements. SGHC will comply with all State procurement
explain disagreement. regulations and policies including publication of solicitations and
awards.
SGHC has taken additional measures such as establishing a
procurement integrity committee to review the procurement and
to remain in compliance with OPASS regulations.
We are in the process of drafting policies and procedures that will
govern this committee.
Recommendation 2b Agree Estimated Completion Date: 6/30/2020
Please provide details SGHC will comply with the State procurement regulations for
of corrective action or competitive procurements, including publication of solicitations
explain disagreement. and awards on eMaryland Marketplace Advantage when
required.
Recommendation 2c Agree Estimated Completion Date: 06/30/2020
Please provide details SGHC will ensure that vendor invoices contain enough details to
of corrective action or determine the propriety and reasonableness of the services
explain disagreement. performed and amounts billed. The accounts payable supervisor
will verify that the vendor invoices agree with the contract prices
as indicated in the PO/contract prior to making the final
payments.
Recommendation 2d Agree Estimated Completion Date: 09/30/2020
19

--- Page 33 ---
Please provide details SGHC will make every effort to review the propriety of the
of corrective action or vendor invoices, including those related to the payments
explain disagreement. indicated in this finding, investigate and resolve any
discrepancies.
Recommendation 2e Agree Estimated Completion Date: 9/30/2020
Please provide details We will consult with the Criminal Division of the Attorney
of corrective action or General’s office and provide all informational and documentary
explain disagreement. support they request should they decide to pursue this matter.
SGHC will not take any action until it has received advisement
from the Criminal Division of the AG.
20