Title: Presentation to the Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee - Summary of Reports Issued and Recommended Committee Action - October 1, 2020 to November 30, 2020


The reports referenced in this presentation are listed below.

Comptroller of Maryland - Information Technology Division - Annapolis Data Center Operations (7/27/2020)

University System of Maryland - Frostburg State University (8/5/2020)

Maryland Department of Transportation - Motor Vehicle Administration (9/23/2020)

State Department of Assessments and Taxation (10/5/2020)
Date: 12/08/2020
Type: Presentations to the Legislature
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5fd8c3bba1ce5804f039f9b1
Extracted: 2025-06-20T00:07:34.824201
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Summary of Reports Issued and
Recommended Committee Action
October 1, 2020 to November 30, 2020
Presentation to Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Gregory A. Hook, CPA
Legislative Auditor
December 8, 2020

--- Page 2 ---
Reports Issued October 1, 2020 to November 30, 2020
Summary
Total Reports Issued 9
Reports Recommended for Action 4
Recommended
Agency Action
1. Comptroller of Maryland – Information Technology Division – JAEC Letter of Concern
Annapolis Data Center Operations
2. University System of Maryland – Frostburg State University JAEC Letter of Concern
3. Maryland Department of Transportation – Motor Vehicle JAEC Hearing
Administration
4. State Department of Assessments and Taxation JAEC Hearing
Summary of Recommended Action
Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee (JAEC) Hearing 2
JAEC Letter of Concern 2
Total 4
1

--- Page 3 ---
REPORTS ISSUED
OCTOBER 1, 2020 TO NOVEMBER 30, 2020
Number
Agency Report Date of Pages
State Department of Assessments and Taxation 10/05/20 29
Wicomico County Public Schools (Financial Management Practices Audit) 10/08/20 30
Garrett County – Office of the Clerk of Circuit Court 10/26/20 5
Total Number of Reports Issued: 63
Garrett County – Office of the Register of Wills 10/27/20 5
Comptroller of Maryland – General Accounting Division 11/09/20 8
Maryland Department of Health – Vital Statistics Administration 11/10/20 14
Financial Management Information System – Centralized Operations 11/10/20 7
Department of Human Services – Office of the Secretary and Related Units 11/17/20 16
Baltimore County Public Schools (Financial Managemen t Practices Audit) 11/19/20 39
Total Number of Reports Issued: 9
2

--- Page 4 ---
Reports Recommended for Committee Action
October 1, 2020 to November 30, 2020
1) Comptroller of Maryland – Information Technology Division (ITD) – Annapolis Data
Center Operations (7/27/20 – 11 pages – 4 findings, including 2 repeats)
This audit report contained several recommendations related to the four report findings.
Although ITD agreed to implement certain recommendations, ITD continues to disagree with
two recommendations. Since we believe all report recommendations are appropriate and
necessary, we attempted to obtain ITD concurrence on these two issues through the OLA’s
routine audit follow-up process. Unfortunately, OLA was unable to persuade ITD to implement
the recommended necessary controls.
State Government Article, Section 2-1224(g)(1)(v) of the Annotated Code of Maryland requires
the OLA to advise this Committee (JAEC) when the response by the agency is not considered
appropriate to carry out an audit recommendation. For that reason, OLA recommends, as a first
step, that the JAEC issue a letter of concern to ITD requesting implementation of the
recommended corrective action for the following items.
 ITD maintained sensitive personally identifiable information (PII) in a manner that did not
provide adequate safeguards (Finding 1). The audit report recommended that ITD
implement appropriate information security safeguards for sensitive PII it maintains. In a
recent follow-up letter response, ITD provided additional information regarding the cost to
provide adequate protection of PII. The response also stated that ITD feels a long-term
effort to implement encryption is the only viable alternative, and that the three types of
mitigating controls described in the State of Maryland Information Technology Security
Manual (ITSM) as possible alternatives would be more costly, time consuming, and
ultimately ineffective. We continue to believe that the PII should be adequately protected,
as public studies have concluded that the cost of data breaches involving PII can be
considerable, and potentially exceed the costs of preventive safeguards. We also believe
that if remediation costs via a preferred security option are proven to be excessive, that ITD
needs to pursue an alternative option, in a prioritized manner, to implement the three-part
substantial mitigating controls, as defined per the ITSM, with related communications
shared to customer agencies as necessary. ITD continued to disagree with our position.
 Security risks existed from information technology (IT) contractors having unnecessary
network-level access to the Comptroller’s network, despite certain indirect security
measures implemented (Finding 4). The audit report recommended that ITD restrict IT
contractors’ network-level access within the Comptroller network to only those servers and
workstations necessary for them to perform their duties. In a recent follow-up letter
response, ITD continued to disagree with the recommendation incorrectly stating that our
criteria was not policy, but rather an aspirational goal. The criteria cited in the audit report,
related to the principle of least privileged access, is formal Department of Information
Technology policy. This particular State IT security policy guidance has long required
limiting access to IT resources in accordance with the least privilege principle. Our position
that the ITSM’s least privilege security principles extends to network security is long-
standing and readily accepted by other State agencies, and we might add by ITD last audit.
Specifically, this is a repeat audit finding, and in response to the prior report ITD accepted
3

--- Page 5 ---
this criteria, and agreed to implement the similar recommendation of restricting the
Comptroller’s IT contractors’ network level access to only IT resources needing to be
accessed to fulfill their contractual requirements. In our opinion, ITD is not in compliance
with current State security policy and is placing its IT resources at risk by allowing its IT
contractors unnecessary network-level access to almost all of the Comptroller’s network.
Recommended Committee Action – Letter of Concern
4

--- Page 6 ---
Reports Recommended for Committee Action
October 1, 2020 to November 30, 2020
2) University System of Maryland (USM) – Frostburg State University (FSU) (8/5/20 – 13
pages – 5 findings, including 1 repeat)
This audit report contained several recommendations related to the five report findings.
Although FSU agreed to implement the majority of the recommendations, USM continues to
disagree with one of the recommendations. OLA attempted to obtain USM concurrence on this
issue through the OLA’s routine audit follow-up process, but was unable to persuade USM –
FSU to document its compliance with certain USM Board of Regents’ policies and procedures.
State Government Article, Section 2-1224(g)(1)(v) of the Annotated Code of Maryland requires
the OLA to advise this Committee (JAEC) when the response by the agency is not considered
appropriate to carry out an audit recommendation. For that reason, OLA recommends, as a first
step, that the JAEC issue a letter of concern to USM requesting implementation of the
recommended corrective action for the following item (audit report Finding 1).
 FSU lacked documentation of its compliance with USM Board of Regents procurement
policies and procedures regarding the use of contracts established by other organizations,
institutions, or agencies. In this instance, those policies allow a USM institution to use
contracts procured by others, if the institution concludes that it is in its best interest.
However, the applicable Board of Regents’ policy does not require an institution to
document how this determination was made; hence the disagreement. Consequently, OLA
was unable to assess compliance due to a lack of documentation and the audit report
recommended, in part, that FSU document for each applicable contract, the steps it took to
comply with the applicable USM Board of Regents’ policy and that the contracts were
properly procured.
In recent audit follow-up correspondence, USM, on behalf of FSU, stated that it felt strongly
that creating additional documentation requirements, beyond those specifically delineated in
the USM Procurement Policies and Procedures, is not in the best interest of USM. The
response further stated that USM, on behalf of FSU, respectfully disagrees with the
recommendation that additional documentation is necessary or would support a more
efficient and effective procurement process. Frankly, as noted in our finding, without such
documentation we are unable to ensure the use of these contracts is compliant with USM
policy and in the best interest of FSU. We draw the Committee’s attention to the higher
documentation standard required of other State agencies for similar types of procurements
by State Procurement Regulations (such as intergovernmental purchasing agreements).
Accordingly, implementing a process to document compliance with USM Board policies is
both appropriate and reasonable, and would not impose an onerous documentation
requirement on FSU. Accordingly, we continue to believe FSU should comply with this
fundamental control and document its efforts to comply with the USM policy.
Recommended Committee Action – Letter of Concern
5

--- Page 7 ---
Reports Recommended for Committee Action
October 1, 2020 to November 30, 2020
3) Maryland Department of Transportation – Motor Vehicle Administration (9/23/20 – 25
pages – 9 findings, including 1 repeat)
4) State Department of Assessments and Taxation (10/5/20 – 29 pages – 9 findings,
including 3 repeats)
Recommended Committee Action – JAEC Hearing
6