Title: Presentation to the Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee - Maryland Department of Transportation - Motor Vehicle Administration


Related Report Dated (9/23/2020)

Video Presentation (Motor Vehicle Administration starts at 2:44)
Date: 12/08/2020
Type: Presentations to the Legislature
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5fd8c3bba1ce5804f039f9b4
Extracted: 2025-06-20T00:07:06.395233
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Maryland Department of Transportation -
Motor Vehicle Administration (MVA)
Report Dated September 23, 2020
Presentation to Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Gregory A. Hook, CPA
Mark S. Hagenbuch, CPA
Catherine M. Clarke, CPA, CIA, CFE
December 8, 2020

--- Page 2 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Background
 MVA has jurisdiction over a variety of activities related to the ownership and
operation of motor vehicles, including the registration and titling of vehicles.
MVA is responsible for issuing commercial and non-commercial driver’s
licenses, license renewals, corrected licenses, learner’s permits, and
personal identification cards.
 During fiscal year 2019, MVA’s collections, which primarily consisted of motor
vehicle excise tax receipts and vehicle registration fees, totaled $1.8 billion
and MVA’s expenditures totaled $223.2 million. MVA processed
approximately 5.9 million licensing transactions, which included 931,000
new driver’s licenses, resulting in $48.9 million in revenue.
 The audit report covers activity during the period from December 15, 2015
and ending June 2, 2019. The report contains 9 findings, including 1 repeat
finding from our preceding audit report.
Maryland Department of Transportation – Page 2
Motor Vehicle Administration

--- Page 3 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Key Findings
 MVA lacked adequate procedures to:
• prevent, identify, investigate, and cancel products (including REAL IDs)
that were issued based on questionable documentation;
• apply points or suspend/revoke licenses for serious motor vehicle
convictions received in other states;
• ensure products issued using manual overrides of system controls were
proper; and,
• notify other states when it issued a non-commercial license to an
individual that had a license from another state, and update related
driving records for out-of-state traffic convictions.
 MVA did not provide adequate safeguards over personally identifiable
information.
Maryland Department of Transportation – Page 3
Motor Vehicle Administration

--- Page 4 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Licensing (Finding 1)
MVA did not always use available data to prevent, or identify, investigate, and
cancel products (including REAL IDs) that were issued based on questionable
documentation. As a result, products may have been issued to ineligible
individuals.
 Our analysis disclosed 106 addresses, each with 20 or more individuals
holding products using the same address, that appeared to be single-family
residential dwellings (such as single family house, townhouse, or an
individual apartment). For example, there were 26 individuals licensed at
one 910 square foot dwelling. As of July 2019, MVA records disclosed
5,879 addresses that were used as the primary address for 76,882
individuals.
 MVA identified ten individuals that used fraudulent documentation to
support their address in order to obtain products, but did not take
appropriate action until we brought it to their attention nine months after
their review.
Maryland Department of Transportation – Page 4
Motor Vehicle Administration

--- Page 5 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Licensing (Finding 1) - continued
 MVA processes to identify duplicate Social Security Numbers (SSNs) were
not working as intended. Our review of MVA records as of July 2019
disclosed 70 SSNs associated with what appeared to be 140 individuals
that were not detected by MVA’s data matches.
 MVA had not previously identified these as possible problems and could not
readily explain why these SSNs were not identified in its matches. MVA
subsequently conducted research on our results and determined that 12
SSNs were each used by two different individuals. The remaining 58 SSNs
were related to individuals with duplicate accounts on MVA’s system that
needed to be consolidated.
Maryland Department of Transportation – Page 5
Motor Vehicle Administration

--- Page 6 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Licensing (Finding 2)
MVA did not always apply points or suspend/revoke non-commercial Maryland
licenses as required for serious motor vehicle convictions received in other
states.
 MVA did not record the required points for 1,275 convictions related to
1,172 people. Because the required points were not recorded on the driving
records, MVA may not have been aware that the Maryland licenses of these
individuals should have been suspended or revoked.
 MVA did not always suspend or revoke the related Maryland license when
the required points were properly recorded on a licensee’s driving record.
Maryland Department of Transportation – Page 6
Motor Vehicle Administration

--- Page 7 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Licensing (Finding 2) - continued
 Our test of ten Maryland license holders with serious traffic offenses (five
with points recorded, five without points recorded) in other states found that
MVA did not suspend or revoke the license in all ten instances.
Maryland Department of Transportation – Page 7
Motor Vehicle Administration

--- Page 8 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Licensing (Findings 3, 4, and 5)
 Finding 3 - Supervisors approved products that were issued by customer
agents using manual overrides of system controls without adequate support,
and MVA did not document efforts to recover products issued due to improper
overrides. Our test of 20 overrides approved by supervisors including 10 for
reinstated and reissued licenses and 10 for other actions (such as provisional
or new license issuance), disclosed that 7 of the overrides lacked sufficient
documentation to support the override.
 Finding 4 - MVA did not make all the required notifications of license issuances
to other states, and did not update driving records. Our test of 21 licenses
issued to individuals from other states disclosed that 18 had active licenses in
both states as of October 2019.
 Finding 5 - MVA did not record convictions from other states for 3 of 21 tested
individuals that were previously licensed in another state. As of October 2019,
these 3 Maryland licenses had been active for between 147 and 274 days.
Maryland Department of Transportation – Page 8
Motor Vehicle Administration

--- Page 9 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Information Systems (Finding 6)
Sensitive personally identifiable information (PII) for millions of individuals was
stored in a manner that did not provide adequate safeguards, and licensing
information was accessible to numerous employees.
 MVA and the Office of the Secretary maintained PII for current and former
license and driving records in a manner that did not provide adequate
safeguards. As of August 28, 2019, two applications’ related databases
contained PII involving 10.4 million and 8.8 million records respectively, which
were maintained in a manner that made the information vulnerable to
improper disclosure.
 As of December 2019, more than 1,100 system users had the ability to view
sensitive personal information for approximately 4.8 million current licensees.
 MVA management advised us that its current legacy system had limitations
that precluded the ability to safeguard PII and restrict access to view PII, and
that a new system, under development, will have the ability to safeguard and
restrict access to view PII.
Maryland Department of Transportation – Page 9
Motor Vehicle Administration

--- Page 10 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Other Findings (Findings 7, 8, and 9)
Information Systems
 Finding 7 - MVA’s procedures were not sufficient for securing numerous
computers using installed outdated versions of malware protection software.
For example, 2,863 computers were running outdated versions of malware
protection software.
Contract Procurement and Monitoring
 Finding 8 - MVA did not obtain sufficient documentation to verify the
propriety of billings from two information technology services vendors. MVA
also did not always ensure that vendor employees were qualified or evaluate
the employee’s performance as required by the contracts.
 Finding 9 - MVA did not have adequate safeguards in place to secure
competitive bids that were electronically received and to document that two
employees were present for bid openings. Repeat Finding
Maryland Department of Transportation – Page 10
Motor Vehicle Administration

--- Page 11 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Conclusions
MVA should implement comprehensive procedures to:
• prevent, identify, investigate, and cancel products that were issued based
on questionable documentation;
• apply points and/or suspend/revoke licenses for serious motor vehicle
convictions received in other states;
• ensure products issued using manual overrides of system controls were
proper;
• notify other states when it issued a non-commercial license to an
individual that had a license from another state, and update driving
records for out-of-state convictions; and,
• ensure adequate safeguards exist over PII.
Maryland Department of Transportation – Page 11
Motor Vehicle Administration