Title: Department of Agriculture
Date: 12/14/2020
Type: Fiscal Compliance
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5fda6ae5a1ce5804348b6a17
Extracted: 2025-06-20T00:08:30.060641
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Audit Report
Department of Agriculture
December 2020
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Senator Clarence K. Lam, M.D. (Senate Chair) Delegate Carol L. Krimm (House Chair)
Senator Malcolm L. Augustine Delegate Steven J. Arentz
Senator Adelaide C. Eckardt Delegate Mark S. Chang
Senator George C. Edwards Delegate Andrea Fletcher Harrison
Senator Katie Fry Hester Delegate Keith E. Haynes
Senator Cheryl C. Kagan Delegate Michael A. Jackson
Senator Benjamin F. Kramer Delegate David Moon
Senator Cory V. McCray Delegate April R. Rose
Senator Justin D. Ready Delegate Geraldine Valentino-Smith
Senator Craig J. Zucker Delegate Karen Lewis Young
To Obtain Further Information
Office of Legislative Audits
301 West Preston Street, Room 1202
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Phone: 410-946-5900 ꞏ 301-970-5900 ꞏ 1-877-486-9964 (Toll Free in Maryland)
Maryland Relay: 711
TTY: 410-946-5401 ꞏ 301-970-5401
E-mail: OLAWebmaster@ola.state.md.us
Website: www.ola.state.md.us
To Report Fraud
The Office of Legislative Audits operates a Fraud Hotline to report fraud, waste, or abuse involving State
of Maryland government resources. Reports of fraud, waste, or abuse may be communicated anonymously
by a toll-free call to 1-877-FRAUD-11, by mail to the Fraud Hotline, c/o Office of Legislative Audits, or
through the Office’s website.
Nondiscrimination Statement
The Department of Legislative Services does not discriminate on the basis of age, ancestry, color, creed,
marital status, national origin, race, religion, gender, gender identity, sexual orientation, or disability in the
admission or access to its programs, services, or activities. The Department’s Information Officer has been
designated to coordinate compliance with the nondiscrimination requirements contained in Section 35.107
of the United States Department of Justice Regulations. Requests for assistance should be directed to the
Information Officer at 410-946-5400 or 410-970-5400.

--- Page 3 ---
December 14, 2020
Senator Clarence K. Lam, M.D., Senate Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Delegate Carol L. Krimm, House Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Members of Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Annapolis, Maryland
Ladies and Gentlemen:
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the Maryland Department of
Agriculture (MDA) for the period beginning August 21, 2015 and ending
December 15, 2019. MDA’s primary purpose is to supervise, administer, and
promote agricultural activities throughout the State of Maryland.
Our audit disclosed that MDA did not have comprehensive procedures for
inspecting farms that received grants under its Cover Crop Program, and did not
adequately monitor inspections of Cover Crop Program grantees conducted by
local Soil Conservation District offices. Furthermore, based on referrals received
through our fraud, waste, and abuse hotline, we identified instances where MDA
did not take required action when grantees were found to be noncompliant with
the terms of their grant agreements.
Our audit also disclosed that MDA had not established adequate controls over
cash receipts and certain related product registrations, and that MDA’s physical
inventory and recordkeeping procedures for equipment were inadequate and not
in accordance with State policy.
Finally, our audit included a review to determine the status of the two findings
contained in our preceding audit report. We determined that MDA did not
satisfactorily address these findings, both of which are repeated in this report. In
this regard, the lack of adequate controls over certain product registrations and
related fees, and inadequate physical inventory and recordkeeping procedures for
equipment, have been commented upon in our preceding audit reports dating back
to 2007 and 1990, respectively.

--- Page 4 ---
MDA’s response to this audit is included as an appendix to this report. We
reviewed the response to our findings and related recommendations, and have
concluded that the corrective actions identified are sufficient to address all audit
issues.
We wish to acknowledge the cooperation extended to us during the audit by MDA
and its willingness to address the audit issues and implement appropriate
corrective actions.
Respectfully submitted,
Gregory A. Hook, CPA
Legislative Auditor
2

--- Page 5 ---
Table of Contents
Background Information 4
Agency Responsibilities 4
Maryland Agricultural and Resource-Based Industry Development 4
Corporation
Law and Audit Scope Change – Maryland Agricultural Land Preservation 4
Fund
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Reports 5
Findings and Recommendations 6
Cover Crop Program
Finding 1 – The Maryland Department of Agriculture (MDA) had not 7
established comprehensive procedures for Soil Conservation Districts
to perform inspections of farms in the Cover Crop Program, did not
adequately monitor the inspections, and did not take required action
when inspections identified grantees that were noncompliant with the
related grant agreement.
Cash Receipts
* Finding 2 – MDA did not segregate duties for collections, and did not 10
ensure that certain product registrations were proper and the related
fees were collected and deposited.
Equipment
* Finding 3 – MDA’s physical inventory and equipment recordkeeping 12
procedures were inadequate and were not in accordance with State
policy.
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology 14
Agency Response Appendix
 Denotes item repeated in full or part from preceding audit report
3

--- Page 6 ---
Background Information
Agency Responsibilities
The Maryland Department of Agriculture (MDA) supervises, administers, and
promotes agricultural activities throughout the State of Maryland. Its mission is
to provide leadership and support agriculture and the citizens of Maryland by
conducting regulatory, service, and educational activities that assure consumer
confidence, protect the environment, and promote agriculture. MDA’s
responsibilities include providing planning assistance to farmers, protecting the
health of domestic animals (such as livestock), controlling insect pests, regulating
the use of pesticides, and implementing sound soil conservation methods. MDA
also inspects and grades agricultural commodities, oversees the practice of
veterinary medicine, and inspects the weighing and packaging of various
products. According to the State’s records, MDA’s expenditures for fiscal year
2019 totaled approximately $113.5 million.
Maryland Agricultural and Resource-Based Industry
Development Corporation
State law provides for an annual appropriation in MDA’s budget to fund the
Maryland Agricultural and Resource-Based Industry Development Corporation
(Corporation). The Corporation was created by State law as a public corporation
and an instrumentality of the State. In accordance with State law, the Corporation
engaged an independent public accounting firm to perform audits of its financial
statements for the fiscal years ended June 30, 2017, 2018, and 2019. In the
related audit reports, the firm stated that these financial statements presented
fairly, in all material respects, the financial position of the Corporation as of June
30, 2017, 2018, and 2019, and the changes in its net position and its cash flows
for the year then ended, in accordance with accounting principles generally
accepted in the United States of America. We relied on the work of the
independent accounting firm to provide audit coverage of certain aspects of the
Corporation’s operations as further described in our Audit Scope, Objectives, and
Methodology section beginning on page 14. Our audit procedures in these areas
were generally limited, therefore, to obtaining a sufficient basis for that reliance.
Law and Audit Scope Change – Maryland Agricultural Land
Preservation Fund
Our current audit included the activities of the Maryland Agricultural Land
Preservation Foundation (MALPF), which was previously audited by our Office
4

--- Page 7 ---
annually in accordance with State law. Chapter 49, Laws of Maryland, 2016,
effective July 1, 2016, eliminated the requirement for annual audits, and
established that MALPF shall be subject to audit at the same three to four year
interval established in the law for the audit of all units of State government. Our
last annual audit of MALPF was for the year ending June 30, 2015, and our report
was issued on April 18, 2016.
MALPF, which is governed by a Board of Trustees consisting of 13 members,
purchases land easements with General Obligation Bonds and Maryland
Agricultural Land Preservation Fund (Fund) revenue and places certain
restrictions on the use of the land. (For example, the land may be restricted from
subdivision for residential or commercial purposes.) The Fund, generally derives
revenues from State transfer taxes, agricultural transfer taxes, and local
subdivision matching funds. According to its records, since inception through
June 30, 2019, MALPF had purchased 2,347 easements on 318,216 acres of land
for a total cost of approximately $752.6 million.
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Reports
Our audit included a review to determine the status of the two findings contained
in our preceding audit report dated May 5, 2016. As disclosed in the following
table, we determined that MDA did not satisfactorily address these findings, both
of which are repeated in this report. The preceding audit report of MALPF dated
April 18, 2016 did not contain any findings.
Status of Preceding Findings
Preceding Implementation
Finding Description
Finding Status
Adequate controls were not established over cash receipts Repeated
Finding 1
and the related registrations issued in one unit. (Current Finding 2)
Finding 2 Control deficiencies exist over equipment records and Repeated
physical inventories. (Current Finding 3)
5

--- Page 8 ---
Findings and Recommendations
Cover Crop Program
Background
The Maryland Department of Agriculture (MDA) administers the State’s Cover
Crop Program which provides grants to farmers to help offset seed, labor, and
equipment costs to plant cover crops in fields following the harvest of summer
crops. A significant portion of the funding for the Cover Crop Program is
provided through MDA’s grant agreement with the Maryland Department of
Natural Resources (DNR). According to MDA, cover crops help improve soil
quality, manage soil erosion, and protect water quality by recycling unused
nutrients in the soil. For 2019-2020, the base payment under the Cover Crop
Program was $45 to $50 per acre, but payments may be higher based on factors
such as the seeding method used and when the crop is terminated the following
spring (see table below). According to MDA’s records, during the 2019-2020
planting season, approximately $26.6 million was paid to 1,460 grantees for cover
crops related to 485,206 acres.
SSoouurrccee:: MMDDAA’’ss 22001199--22002200 CCoovveerr CCrroopp bbrroocchhuurreeSource:MDA’s 2019-2020Cover Crop brochure
Farmers apply annually to their local Soil Conservation District (SCD) office for
participation in the Program. There are 24 SCD offices in Maryland, each of
which operate as independent entities under a local five-member board of
supervisors. SCDs are funded through a combination of federal, State, and local
assistance. For example, MDA’s Office of Resource Conservation provides the
State’s SCDs with operating funds and staffing support to help administer the
MDA’s conservation and water quality programs, such as the Cover Crop
6

--- Page 9 ---
Program. Program applications are initially processed at individual SCDs and
then forwarded to MDA for review and approval, resulting in a grant agreement
between the farmer (grantee) and MDA.
Grant requirements include the use of certain eligible crops and planting methods,
a specified volume of seed planted per acre, as well as compliance with planting
and crop termination schedules. MDA relies on each SCD to conduct on-site
inspections of grantee farms in the fall and spring and report the results. These
inspections are the primary means by which MDA ensures grantee compliance
with the terms of the grant agreement.
We received referrals to our fraud, waste, and abuse hotline regarding concerns
with MDA not taking sufficient action when grantees were noncompliant with the
terms of the Cover Crop grants. As a result, we reviewed the processes used by
MDA and the SCDs to monitor the Cover Crop grants and actions taken to
address deficiencies identified during inspections. Based on our review, we were
able to substantiate the concerns raised in the allegations, addressing a general
lack of Program monitoring. However, the results of our review of the allegation
did not identify any issues that warranted a referral to the Office of the Attorney
General – Criminal Division.
Finding 1
MDA had not established comprehensive procedures for SCDs to perform
inspections of farms in the Cover Crop Program, did not adequately monitor
the inspections, and did not take required action when inspections identified
grantees that were noncompliant with the related grant agreement.
Analysis
MDA had not established comprehensive written procedures for SCDs to perform
inspections of farms in the Cover Crop Program, did not adequately monitor the
inspections, and did not take required action when inspections identified grantees
that were noncompliant with the related grant agreement.
MDA Did Not Establish SCD Inspection Procedures or Adequately Monitor SCD
Inspections
MDA did not have written procedures governing the amount of farmland to be
examined by SCDs and the methodology to be used for SCD inspections, and did
not adequately monitor SCD inspections to ensure compliance with grant
requirements. Although MDA had certain processes in place for monitoring SCD
inspection results, these processes were not sufficient. For example, MDA’s
review of SCDs reports of inspection results did not always identify instances
when SCDs failed to inspect the required amount of farmland. Furthermore,
7

--- Page 10 ---
MDA did not verify the inspections reported by the SCDs through on-site
examinations of randomly selected farms. As a result, we noted several issues
with the SCD inspections, which were not identified and addressed by MDA, as
further described below.
SCD Inspections Were Inadequate and Inconsistent
We reviewed the procedures used for inspections by five SCDs, and analyzed
certain other inspection data reported by all SCDs for the fall of 2019. Our
review disclosed that the inspections were not sufficiently comprehensive, that the
methods used to conduct the inspections were not consistent between each SCD,
and that certain reported inspections appeared questionable.
 The amount of farmland inspected by each SCD was not consistent and not
always compliant with MDA’s agreement with DNR, which provides a
significant portion of the funding for the Cover Crop Program. Furthermore,
the agreement between MDA and each farmer was not consistent with the
DNR agreement. The DNR agreement requires that MDA provide for
inspection of 20 percent of each grantee’s total acres, while MDA’s agreement
with each farmer calls for inspection of an average of 20 percent of the
grantees’ farms/fields. Our review of the five SCDs disclosed the following:
o Two SCDs inspected 20 percent of each grantee’s total number of acres
o Two SCDs inspected 20 percent of each grantee’s total number of fields1
o One SCD inspected 20 percent of each grantee’s total farm(s)2.
 The method used to perform the inspections were not consistent. Specifically,
four SCDs advised us that inspections were typically performed from the
inspector’s vehicle while driving around the grantees’ field(s), and one SCD
stated that the inspector walked the field on foot (obtaining a more detailed
assessment of the grantees’ compliance).
 None of the five SCDs verified that all grantees inspected complied with the
seeding rate specified in the grant agreement. The required seeding rate
(pounds or bushels of seed per acre) differed based on the cover crop being
planted, and could range between 8 and 120 pounds per acre depending on the
crop. Seeding rates are a critical provision of each grant agreement, and
according to MDA, can be evaluated by examining the number of plants in a
given area.
 SCDs did not always expand the inspections when suspected noncompliance
was identified. Specifically, two SCDs advised us that they did not expand
1 A field is a specific area of land on a farm separated by boundaries from other parts of the farm.
2 A farm contains one or more fields in a particular area.
8

--- Page 11 ---
the amount of acres/farms inspected when they noted deficiencies during the
inspection if they felt that the grantee had made an honest mistake. However,
these SCDs could not document how they would determine whether the
deficiency noted was an honest mistake or intentional noncompliance. The
other three SCDs advised us that inspections were expanded to all of a
grantee’s fields when problems were identified. Inspectors may initially
question, for example, a farmer’s assertion of when the crop was planted
based on the level of growth observed, thereby prompting inspection of all
fields.
 The number of inspections and/or the amount of farmland inspected as
reported by certain SCDs appeared questionable. For example, one SCD
inspector reported inspecting 439 fields totaling 8,150 acres in a single day.
Another inspector examined 61 fields totaling 1,435 acres on a weekend day
for which no worktime was recorded on the inspector’s timesheet. Finally,
one inspector reported examining 73 fields totaling 1,255 acres on a day on
which the inspector was on leave according to the individual’s timesheet.
Although there may be legitimate explanations for these circumstances, such
explanations were not provided by the SCDs, and lacking that, it is incumbent
upon MDA to identify and investigate questionable inspections completed.
MDA Did Not Take Required Action for Noncompliant Grantees
MDA did not take corrective action when inspections identified noncompliance
with MDA/farmer grant requirements. The grant agreements require that MDA
cancel the grant for any instance of noncompliance. Our review of six 2019-2020
grants for which inspectors reported instances of noncompliance, such as a failure
to use the required seeding rate, disclosed that none of the respective grants were
cancelled. Instead, MDA took other actions, which were not provided for in the
grant agreement. For example, three of the six grantees failed to comply with
certain grant requirements and MDA negotiated lower per acre grant payments
instead of cancelling the grants. The agreements with these three grantees
initially provided for potential payments of $125,000 and MDA ultimately paid
these grantees $93,000. MDA could not provide us with any documentation to
support the revised payments for the noncompliant grantees, or legal justification
for varying from the penalty provision included in the agreements.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that MDA
a. establish comprehensive written procedures governing SCDs’
performance and reporting of Cover Crop Program inspections,
including instruction regarding the basis and method to be used for
conducting inspections, a requirement to address all critical grant
9

--- Page 12 ---
provisions when conducting inspections, and steps to take when
noncompliance is suspected;
b. ensure that its grant agreements with farmers are consistent with the
inspection requirements included in its agreement with DNR for Program
funding;
c. adequately monitor inspections conducted by SCDs by conducting, on a
test basis, on-site examinations of inspected farmland, identifying and
investigating questionable inspections including those noted above, and
ensuring that at least the minimum required amount of farmland is
inspected for each grantee; and
d. cancel grant agreements, as required, when inspections identify
noncompliance with critical grant provisions.
Cash Receipts
Finding 2
MDA did not segregate duties for collections, and did not ensure that certain
product registrations were proper and the related fees were collected and
deposited.
Analysis
MDA had not established adequate controls over cash receipts and certain product
registrations. Most of the collections received directly by MDA, which according
to State records totaled approximately $3.1 million during fiscal year 2019, were
received in other MDA units and then transferred to the Fiscal Services Office for
centralized deposit. We reviewed procedures and controls over cash receipts and
related registrations processed by the Office and at one MDA unit that received
collections totaling $270,000 during fiscal year 2019.
 The employee in the unit who received collections for product registrations,
such as for commercial feed and pesticides, also had the ability to issue the
related registrations on the automated system. According to MDA’s records,
during calendar year 2019, the unit issued 37,801 registrations.
 MDA did not independently reconcile the value of registrations issued by the
unit with the corresponding collections deposited by the Office to ensure that
the proper amounts were collected and deposited for all registrations issued by
the unit.
 MDA did not ensure all registrations issued by the unit were subject to
independent review and approval. Specifically, although a supervisor
10

--- Page 13 ---
reviewed and approved registration applications recorded in the system prior
to final issuance, MDA did not ensure that all registrations issued were subject
to supervisory review. Four employees, including the aforementioned
employee who received collections, had full system access to issue
registrations, and therefore it is critical that procedures be implemented to
ensure the propriety of issued registrations, such as an examination of output
reports of registrations issued.
 An employee in the Office who verified collections to deposit also processed
and remotely deposited collections.
The lack of an independent reconciliation of the total value of registrations issued
and fees collected has been commented upon in our four preceding audit reports
dating back to 2007. The lack of an independent process for supervisory review
and approval of registrations issued was commented upon in our two preceding
audit reports dating back to 2013. In its response to our preceding audit report,
MDA stated that steps had been taken to comply with our recommendations, and
that MDA would reconcile registrations issued with fees collected on a monthly
basis.
The Comptroller of Maryland’s Accounting Procedures Manual requires that the
total value of registrations issued should be reconciled with the total collections
received for those registrations. The Manual also requires that recorded
collections be reconciled to amounts deposited by an employee independent of the
collection process.
Recommendation 2
We recommend that MDA
a. establish a process for independent supervisory review and approval of
registrations issued by an employee independent of the registration and
cash receipts processes (repeat),
b. independently reconcile the total value of registrations issued and fees
collected according to its records with the related revenues deposited
(repeat), and
c. ensure that an employee independent of the collection process performs
the verification of collections to deposit.
We advised MDA how to achieve the necessary separation of duties using
existing personnel.
11

--- Page 14 ---
Equipment
Finding 3
MDA’s physical inventory and equipment recordkeeping procedures were
inadequate and were not in accordance with State policy.
Analysis
MDA’s physical inventory and equipment recordkeeping procedures were
inadequate and were not in accordance with the Department of General Services
(DGS) Inventory Control Manual. According to MDA’s records, its equipment
inventory as of June 30, 2019 totaled approximately $9.3 million.
 Physical inventories of certain sensitive and non-sensitive equipment were not
performed as required. Specifically, as of June 2019, there were 5,177
sensitive items with a recorded cost of approximately $4.6 million that had not
been inventoried within one year as required. Of this total, 3,020 items with a
recorded cost of $2.8 million had not been inventoried within the last three
years. In addition, as of June 2019, there were 4,722 non-sensitive items with
a recorded cost of $4.4 million that had not been inventoried within three
years as required.
 Equipment items were not always properly recorded in the detail equipment
records. Our test of 14 equipment purchases totaling approximately $407,000
made prior to August 2019, disclosed 13 purchases totaling $393,000, which,
as of December 2019, had not been recorded in the detail records. We also
noted 112 items totaling $56,000 that had been incorrectly classified in the
detail records as non-sensitive even though they met the criteria for sensitive
items. These items included cameras, computer monitors, and printers.
 An equipment control account was not maintained to provide a continuous
summary of transactions and a total dollar value control over amounts
included in the detail records.
The DGS Inventory Control Manual requires a control account to be maintained
and periodically reconciled to the related detail records, sensitive equipment to be
inventoried annually, and non-sensitive equipment to be inventoried every three
years. The Manual also requires detailed records be properly maintained.
Similar conditions regarding adequate accountability and control over equipment
have been commented on in our preceding audit reports dating back to 1990. In
its response to our preceding audit report, MDA noted that it had worked to set up
a new database, perform physical inventories, and establish a good control
12

--- Page 15 ---
account, and that work was continuing to ensure compliance with the DGS
Inventory Control Manual. Considering the number of years over which these
conditions have gone uncorrected, we believe MDA should consider seeking
specific assistance from DGS for establishing, monitoring, and maintaining
compliance with the aforementioned Manual requirements.
Recommendation 3
We recommend that MDA comply with the Inventory Control Manual
requirements (repeat), and if necessary seek specific assistance from DGS for
establishing, monitoring, and maintaining compliance with those
requirements.
13

--- Page 16 ---
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the Maryland Department of
Agriculture (MDA) for the period beginning August 21, 2015 and ending
December 15, 2019. The audit was conducted in accordance with generally
accepted government auditing standards. Those standards require that we plan
and perform the audit to obtain sufficient, appropriate evidence to provide a
reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives.
We believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings
and conclusions based on our audit objectives.
As prescribed by the State Government Article, Section 2-1221 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, the objectives of this audit were to examine MDA’s financial
transactions, records, and internal control, and to evaluate its compliance with
applicable State laws, rules, and regulations.
In planning and conducting our audit, we focused on the major financial-related
areas of operations based on assessments of significance and risk. The areas
addressed by the audit included disbursements, cash receipts, grants, payroll,
budgetary closeout transactions, corporate purchasing cards, and equipment. In
addition, we examined the Maryland Agricultural Land Preservation Fund. We
also determined the status of the findings included in our preceding audit report.
Our audit did not include an evaluation of internal controls over compliance with
federal laws and regulations for federal financial assistance programs and an
assessment of MDA’s compliance with those laws and regulations because the
State of Maryland engages an independent accounting firm to annually audit such
programs administered by State agencies, including MDA.
Our audit also did not include an examination of the Maryland Agricultural and
Resource-Based Industry Development Corporation (Corporation), which was
created by State law as a public corporation and an instrumentality of the State,
with a mission to promote the viability and profitability of Maryland’s agriculture,
forestry, and seafood industries through specialized economic development
assistance programming. The law provides for an annual appropriation in the
State budget to the Corporation and specifies that the books, records, and accounts
of the Corporation are subject to audit by the State and by an independent auditor.
The Corporation engaged an independent public accounting firm to perform
audits of its annual financial statements. In the related audit reports for the fiscal
years ended June 30, 2017, 2018, and 2019 the firm stated that these financial
statements presented fairly, in all material respects, the financial position of the
Corporation, and the changes in its net position and its cash flows for the years
14

--- Page 17 ---
then ended, in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the
United States of America. We have relied on the work of the independent
accounting firm to provide audit coverage of certain aspects of the Corporation’s
operations (loans receivable, payroll). Our audit procedures in these areas were
generally limited, therefore, to obtaining a sufficient basis for that reliance.
Our assessment of internal controls was based on agency procedures and controls
in place at the time of our fieldwork. Our tests of transactions and other auditing
procedures were generally focused on the transactions occurring during our audit
period of August 21, 2015 to December 15, 2019, but may include transactions
before or after this period as we considered necessary to achieve our audit
objectives.
To accomplish our audit objectives, our audit procedures included inquiries of
appropriate personnel, inspections of documents and records, tests of transactions,
and to the extent practicable, observations of MDA’s operations. Generally,
transactions were selected for testing based on auditor judgment, which primarily
considers risk. Unless otherwise specifically indicated, neither statistical nor non-
statistical audit sampling was used to select the transactions tested. Therefore, the
results of the tests cannot be used to project those results to the entire population
from which the test items were selected.
We also performed various data extracts of pertinent information from the State’s
Financial Management Information System (such as revenue and expenditure
data) and the State’s Central Payroll Bureau (payroll data), as well as from the
contractor administering the State’s Corporate Purchasing Card Program (credit
card activity). The extracts are performed as part of ongoing internal processes
established by the Office of Legislative Audits and were subject to various tests to
determine data reliability. We determined that the data extracted from these
sources were sufficiently reliable for the purposes the data were used during this
audit. We also extracted data from various key MDA internal systems, such as
the Cover Crop Program application database, for the purpose of testing awarding
and monitoring of Cover Crop Program grant awards. We performed various
tests of the relevant data and determined that the data were sufficiently reliable for
the purposes the data were used during the audit. Finally, we performed other
auditing procedures that we considered necessary to achieve our audit objectives.
The reliability of data used in this report for background or informational
purposes was not assessed.
MDA’s management is responsible for establishing and maintaining effective
internal control. Internal control is a process designed to provide reasonable
assurance that objectives pertaining to the reliability of financial records;
15

--- Page 18 ---
effectiveness and efficiency of operations, including safeguarding of assets; and
compliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations are achieved. As
provided in Government Auditing Standards, there are five components of
internal control: control environment, risk assessment, control activities,
information and communication, and monitoring. Each of the five components,
when significant to the audit objectives, and as applicable to MDA, were
considered by us during the course of this audit.
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate.
Our reports are designed to assist the Maryland General Assembly in exercising
its legislative oversight function and to provide constructive recommendations for
improving State operations. As a result, our reports generally do not address
activities we reviewed that are functioning properly.
This report includes findings related to conditions that we consider to be
significant deficiencies in the design or operation of internal control that could
adversely affect MDA’s ability to maintain reliable financial records, operate
effectively and efficiently, and/or comply with applicable laws, rules, and
regulations. Our report also includes findings regarding significant instances of
noncompliance with applicable laws, rules, or regulations. Other less significant
findings were communicated to MDA that did not warrant inclusion in this report.
MDA’s response to our findings and recommendations is included as an appendix
to this report. As prescribed in the State Government Article, Section 2-1224 of
the Annotated Code of Maryland, we will advise MDA regarding the results of
our review of its response.
16

--- Page 19 ---
(cid:36)(cid:51)(cid:51)(cid:40)(cid:49)(cid:39)(cid:44)(cid:59)

--- Page 20 ---
Maryland Department of Agriculture
Agency Response Form
Cover Crop Program
Finding 1
MDA had not established comprehensive procedures for SCDs to perform inspections of
farms in the Cover Crop Program, did not adequately monitor the inspections, and did not
take required action when inspections identified grantees that were noncompliant with the
related grant agreement.
We recommend that MDA
a. establish comprehensive written procedures governing SCDs performance and
reporting of Cover Crop Program inspections, including instruction regarding the basis
and method to be used for conducting inspections, a requirement to address all critical
grant provisions when conducting inspections, and steps to take when noncompliance is
suspected;
b. ensure that its grant agreements with farmers are consistent with the inspection
requirements included in its agreement with DNR for Program funding;
c. adequately monitor inspections conducted by SCDs by conducting, on a test basis, on-
site examinations of inspected farmland, identifying and investigating questionable
inspections including those noted above, and ensuring that at least the minimum
required amount of farmland is inspected for each grantee; and
d. cancel grant agreements, as required, when inspections identify noncompliance with
critical grant provisions.
Agency Response
Analysis Factually Accurate
Please provide Background:
additional
comments as As indicated in the audit report “Scope, Objectives and Methodology”
deemed necessary. section, this report does not address activities that are functioning properly.
Therefore, MDA respectfully provides the following additional comments
about Maryland’s “Gold Standard” Cover Crop Program.
Cover crops are the most cost-effective best management practices farmers
can implement to meet water quality goals identified by EPA and the
Chesapeake Bay Program. The Maryland Cover Crop Program is the most
heavily invested agricultural program available to farmers in the state and is
considered the gold standard across the nation. This annual program provides
farmers cost share assistance to implement cover crops that absorb nutrients
left over from previous cash crops that were not utilized primarily due to
environmental conditions. Although the Bay Model does not take into effect
Page 1 of 7

--- Page 21 ---
Maryland Department of Agriculture
Agency Response Form
those environmental conditions, this model does credit acres planted to cover
crops towards nutrient reductions to the Chesapeake Bay.
The audit provides analysis concerning the administration of the Cover Crop
Program and MDA concurs with the recommendations to improve the
program. However, the audit does not disclose the challenges faced by the
Cover Crop Program and the necessity to adjust the program during the
annual cycle due to environmental conditions. For example, the
unpredictability of the weather can significantly impact the overall results of
the Cover Crop Program from cycle to cycle.
In addition to the Cover Crop Program, the MDA, in coordination with the
twenty-four (24) Soil Conservation Districts (SCDs), is responsible for
providing administrative and technical assistance for many local, state, and
federal programs and every conservation program is given the highest priority
considering available resources. Each program provides the ability for
nutrient reductions within the Chesapeake Bay Watershed. The uniqueness
within the Maryland SCDs is the collaboration of many partners working
collectively to assist farmers and landowners.
The Cover Crop Program requires significant administrative assistance
throughout the year. Sign-ups are processed from mid-June to mid-July,
farmer certification from mid-Aug to early Nov, and spring certification from
early March to early June. During peak operational periods, the Cover Crop
program reassigns staff from other required duties to assist with the
administration of this program. Over the last 3 years, MDA has transitioned
to a new SQL database program that improves the administrative efficiency,
streamlines processes and provides better customer service.
Referrals to Fraud, Waste, and Abuse Hotline:
None of the allegations received by the hotline were recommended by the
auditor’s for referral to the Attorney General’s Office for further
investigation. In addition, MDA’s follow-up reviews of the concerns did not
disclose any potential criminal activity.
MDA Did Not Establish Inspection Procedures or Adequately Monitor
SCD Inspections
Each cycle, MDA holds several conference calls with SCDs prior to the fall
and spring certification period to provide guidance on inspection procedures.
To improve overall program accountability, MDA will develop program
Page 2 of 7

--- Page 22 ---
Maryland Department of Agriculture
Agency Response Form
oversite and establish comprehensive written procedures regarding, the
amount of farmland inspected, and the methodology to be used by SCD
inspectors.
SCD Inspections Were Inadequate and Inconsistent
The MOU with DNR requires inspection of 20% of acreage in each grant
agreement to verify planting in the fall and a random 10% field check of
acreage planted in each county in the spring. MDA’s past practice was to
perform the inspections based on planting tier dates. As a result, field
inspections could be conducted on as many as three separate occasions during
the fall certification period. MDA will make modifications to the grant
agreement to improve accountability, clarify the required total acreage to be
inspected, and improve monitoring and consistency within the SCDs as well
as MDA.
Due to the significant number of wide-ranging variables, the seeding rate
verification process presents challenges. Some of the variables include, field
planting method, weather conditions, and environmental conditions; all of
which impact germination results. The Cover Crop program is a practice-
based program and not a performance-based program. However, to maximize
performance, seeding rates are increased by 25% for broadcast aerial and for
the FY 21 Cover Crop Program, incentives are provided for incorporated seed
to enhance germination. The method of using a ring toss and counting plants
is time consuming and inefficient. MDA is researching other options to
determine a better method for verifying seed count to improve efficiencies.
MDA agrees there should be better documentation of fields with deficiencies.
Written procedures for field inspections will provide better consistency
related to the number of fields and acreages covered in a single day. In
addition, any inconsistency with workhours recorded on inspector timesheets
will be addressed by MDA with the SCDs to take corrective actions.
As indicated in the audit report scope section, neither statistical nor non-
statistical audit sampling was used to select the transactions tested.
Therefore, the deficiencies noted at the five (5) SCDs tested cannot be used to
project those results to the entire population of twenty-four (24) SCDs from
which the test items were selected.
MDA Did Not Take Required Action For Noncompliant Grantees.
Some grant agreements/applications were amended (instead of cancelled) on
a limited basis through an appeals process when the grantee documented the
Page 3 of 7

--- Page 23 ---
Maryland Department of Agriculture
Agency Response Form
reason for non-compliance was reasonable and not due to false, misleading or
fraudulent information. Agreements/applications were only amended for
acres that are in full compliance with the terms of the agreement. MDA will
consult with legal counsel and review the appeals and amendment process for
legal sufficiency and make the necessary adjustments to future grant
agreements.
Recommendation Agree Estimated Completion
1 May 2021
1a Date:
Please provide MDA concurs. Corrective action has been taken. Updated instructions were
details of provided to the SCD’s and applicants prior to the end of the Fall FY21
corrective action application cycle. In addition, prior to the start of the FY22 Program, MDA
or explain
will establish comprehensive written procedures for governing SCDs
disagreement.
performance and reporting of Cover Crop Program inspections, including
instruction regarding the basis and method to be used for conducting
inspections, a requirement to address all critical grant provisions when
conducting inspections, and steps to take when noncompliance is suspected.
Recommendation Agree Estimated Completion
1 May 2021
1b Date:
Please provide MDA concurs. Corrective action has been started and prior to the start of the
details of FY22 Program, language within grant agreements with farmers will be
corrective action modified to ensure consistency with the inspection requirements included in
or explain
MDA’s agreement with DNR for Program funding.
disagreement.
Recommendation Agree Estimated Completion
1 May 2021
1c Date:
Please provide MDA concurs. Corrective action has been taken. Updated oversight
details of instructions were provided to the SCD’s before the end of the Fall FY21
corrective action application cycle. In addition, prior to the start of the FY22 Program,
or explain
comprehensive written procedures will be established to provide oversight
disagreement.
and to adequately monitor inspections conducted by SCD’s by conducting, on
a test basis, on-site examinations of inspected farmland, identifying and
investigating questionable inspections including those noted above, and
ensuring that at least the minimum amount of farmland is inspected for each
grantee.
Recommendation Agree Estimated Completion
1 May 2021
1d Date:
Please provide MDA concurs. Corrective action has been started and prior to the start of the
details of FY22 Program, MDA will consult with legal counsel to revise the grant
corrective action agreement and add terms and conditions for an appeals and amendment
or explain
process. In addition, based on the revised terms and conditions, MDA will
disagreement.
cancel grant agreements, as required, when inspections identify non-
compliance with critical grant provisions.
Page 4 of 7

--- Page 24 ---
Maryland Department of Agriculture
Agency Response Form
Cash Receipts
Finding 2
MDA did not segregate duties for collections, and did not ensure that certain product
registrations were proper and the related fees were collected and deposited.
Recommendation 2
We recommend that MDA
a. establish a process for supervisory review and approval of registrations issued by an
employee independent of the registration and cash receipts processes (repeat),
b. independently reconcile the total value of registrations issued and fees collected
according to its records with the related revenues deposited (repeat), and
c. ensure that an employee independent of the collection process performs the verification
of collections to deposit.
We advised MDA how to achieve the necessary separation of duties using existing
personnel.
Agency Response
Analysis Factually Accurate
Please provide None.
additional comments
as deemed necessary.
Recommendation Agree Estimated Completion Date:
Immediately
2a
Please provide details MDA Concurs. Corrective action has been taken. The cash collection
of corrective action or function within the State Chemist Unit has been reassigned to an employee
explain disagreement. (Office Secretary) who no longer has the ability to access the system and
issue the related registrations. In addition, monthly a supervisor queries
the system and on a test basis reviews active registrations to ensure the
propriety of issued registrations. This review is documented by the
supervisor preparing an internal memo for record documenting their
review and the date performed. Due to the limitations of the current
system to generate output reports and program system edits to adequately
provide internal controls; MDA is in the process of implementing a new
registration system with a target start date sometime in FY22.
Page 5 of 7

--- Page 25 ---
Maryland Department of Agriculture
Agency Response Form
Recommendation Agree Estimated Completion Date:
June 30, 2021
2b
Please provide details MDA concurs. Corrective action has been taken. The State Chemist Unit
of corrective action or is working with the Fiscal Office to establish a formal periodic financial
explain disagreement. reconciliation and full implementation will occur prior to FY21 Closeout.
This reconciliation will include verifying that revenue deposited and
recorded in FMIS reconciles with the total value of registrations issued
through the State Chemist’s registration system.
Recommendation Agree Estimated Completion Date:
Immediately
2c
Please provide details MDA concurs. Corrective action has been taken. Effective 22 November
of corrective action or 2019, MDA implemented remote deposit procedures. These procedures
explain disagreement. included a periodic monthly independent verification of receipts (Wells
Fargo Banking System) to deposit (initial log of recordation) performed by
the Fiscal Office Accountant Supervisor starting December 2019.
Effective immediately, the periodic monthly verification will be performed
on a weekly or daily basis depending on the level of cash receipt activity.
Page 6 of 7

--- Page 26 ---
Maryland Department of Agriculture
Agency Response Form
Equipment
Finding 3
MDA’s physical inventory and equipment recordkeeping procedures were inadequate and
were not in accordance with State policy.
We recommend that MDA comply with the Inventory Control Manual requirements
(repeat), and if necessary seek specific assistance from DGS for establishing, monitoring,
and maintaining compliance with those requirements.
Agency Response
Analysis Factually Accurate
Please provide None.
additional comments
as deemed necessary.
Recommendation 3 Agree Estimated Completion Date: 30 June 2021
Please provide MDA Concurs. After last audit, MDA undertook an extensive re-
details of corrective inventorying of all of the assets of the Department. During the course
action or explain of this process procedures were developed to ensure assets were
disagreement.
appropriately accounted for and that the disposal and removal of assets
was performed in accordance with State Policy. Due to employee
turnover not all inventory procedures were fully implemented and
certain inventory items were not properly accounted for.
MDA concurs with the recommendation and we will review all of our
procedures to ensure compliance with the DGS Inventory Control
Manual. We are committed to having an up-to-date accounting of the
entire inventoried assets of the MDA and we will coordinate directly
with DGS for assistance where it is needed to ensure our goal of
complete accountability.
Page 7 of 7

--- Page 27 ---
A T
UDIT EAM
Robert A. Wells, Jr., CPA
Audit Manager
Lauren E. Franchak, CPA
Sandra C. Medeiros
Senior Auditors
Keli R. Edmonds
Samuel Hur, CPA
Oluwafemi E. Ogundolie
Staff Auditors