Title: St. Mary's College of Maryland
Date: 07/14/2020
Type: Fiscal Compliance
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=6001f6f0a1ce580334b791da
Extracted: 2025-06-19T11:42:33.454537
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Audit Report
St. Mary’s College of Maryland
December 2024
Public Notice
In compliance with the requirements of the State Government Article Section
2-1224(i), of the Annotated Code of Maryland, the Office of Legislative Audits
has redacted cybersecurity findings and related auditee responses
from this public report.
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Senator Clarence K. Lam, M.D. (Senate Chair) Delegate Jared Solomon (House Chair)
Senator Joanne C. Benson Delegate Steven J. Arentz
Senator Paul D. Corderman Delegate Andrea Fletcher Harrison
Senator Katie Fry Hester Delegate Steven C. Johnson
Senator Shelly L. Hettleman Delegate Mary A. Lehman
Senator Cheryl C. Kagan Delegate David H. Moon
Senator Cory V. McCray Delegate Julie Palakovich Carr
Senator Justin D. Ready Delegate Emily K. Shetty
Senator Bryan W. Simonaire Delegate Stephanie M. Smith
Senator Craig J. Zucker Delegate M. Courtney Watson
To Obtain Further Information
Office of Legislative Audits
The Warehouse at Camden Yards
351 West Camden Street, Suite 400
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Phone: 410-946-5900
Maryland Relay: 711
TTY: 410-946-5401 ꞏ 301-970-5401
E-mail: webmaster@ola.state.md.us
Website: www.ola.state.md.us
To Report Fraud
The Office of Legislative Audits operates a Fraud Hotline to report fraud, waste, or abuse involving State
of Maryland government resources. Reports of fraud, waste, or abuse may be communicated anonymously
by a toll-free call to 1-877-FRAUD-11, by mail to the Fraud Hotline, c/o Office of Legislative Audits, or
through the Office’s website.
Nondiscrimination Statement
The Department of Legislative Services does not discriminate on the basis of age, ancestry, color, creed,
marital status, national origin, race, religion, gender, gender identity, sexual orientation, or disability in the
admission or access to its programs, services, or activities. The Department’s Information Officer has been
designated to coordinate compliance with the nondiscrimination requirements contained in Section 35.107
of the United States Department of Justice Regulations. Requests for assistance should be directed to the
Information Officer at 410-946-5400 or 410-970-5400.

--- Page 3 ---
December 18, 2024
Senator Clarence K. Lam, M.D., Senate Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Delegate Jared Solomon, House Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Members of Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Annapolis, Maryland
Ladies and Gentlemen:
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of St. Mary’s College of Maryland
(the College) for the period beginning August 26, 2019 and ending July 15, 2023.
The College is a public, liberal arts honors college that offers undergraduate and
graduate degree programs in various disciplines. The College is governed by a
Board of Trustees as authorized by the Education Article, Title 14, Subtitle 4 of
the Annotated Code of Maryland.
Our audit disclosed several concerns with the procurement and/or monitoring of
three contracts for the implementation of a new enterprise resource planning
(ERP) system. For example, the College could not justify and did not properly
document significant increases to the cost of a project implementation contract.
As of October 31, 2023, payments on the contract were $1.4 million (or 40
percent) more than the base contract cost of $3.5 million. In addition, we noted
certain questionable activity related to the College’s procurement of a contract
with a vendor affiliated with a State university to assist with the ERP
implementation, which raised questions about the propriety of the award. The
College also did not adequately monitor this contract and could not justify or
support modifications to the contract payment terms and pricing.
Our audit also noted that a management employee’s secondary employment with
a vendor raised questions about the propriety of the procurements and related
payments and potentially violated State ethics law. Specifically, our review of the

--- Page 4 ---
procurements for the two athletic contracts awarded to the vendor totaling
$187,700 disclosed that there was no competitive procurement for one contract
totaling $90,100, and for the other contract totaling $97,600, there was no public
solicitation of the bids.
Our audit also disclosed that the College did not collect all required fees from the
Historic St. Mary’s City Commission and did not have a written agreement or
receive audited financial statements from the Boat Foundation, as required by the
College’s Policy on Affiliated Entities. The College also did not use available
output reports of residency changes made on its automated student accounts
system to ensure changes were properly supported. In addition, the College did
not have sufficient procedures and controls over collections, such as ensuring all
amounts received were deposited. Furthermore, the College permitted students
with outstanding balances totaling $691,000 to register for classes without
adequate justification and did not refer delinquent student accounts to the State’s
Central Collection Unit timely.
Furthermore, our audit disclosed cybersecurity-related findings. However, in
accordance with the State Government Article, Section 2-1224(i) of the
Annotated Code of Maryland, we have redacted the findings from this audit
report. Specifically, State law requires the Office of Legislative Audits to redact
cybersecurity findings in a manner consistent with auditing best practices before
the report is made available to the public. The term “cybersecurity” is defined in
the State Finance and Procurement Article, Section 3.5-301(b), and using our
professional judgment we have determined that the redacted findings fall under
the referenced definition. The specifics of the cybersecurity findings were
previously communicated to those parties responsible for acting on our
recommendations.
Finally, our audit included a review to determine the status of the six findings
contained in our preceding audit report. For the non-cybersecurity-related
findings, we determined that the College satisfactorily addressed one of the four
findings. The remaining three findings are repeated in this report.
The College’s response to this audit is included as an appendix to this report. We
have edited the College’s response to remove certain vendor names or products
and a link to a website, as allowed by our policy. Consistent with State law, we
have redacted the elements of the College’s response related to the cybersecurity
audit findings.
In addition, we reviewed the response and noted agreement to our findings and
related recommendations, and while there are other aspects of the College’s
2

--- Page 5 ---
response which will require further clarification, we do not anticipate that these
will require the Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee’s attention to resolve.
We wish to acknowledge the cooperation extended to us during the audit by the
College and its willingness to address the audit issues and implement appropriate
corrective actions.
Respectfully submitted,
Brian S. Tanen
Brian S. Tanen, CPA, CFE
Legislative Auditor
3

--- Page 6 ---
4

--- Page 7 ---
Table of Contents
Background Information 7
Agency Responsibilities 7
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report 9
Findings and Recommendations 10
Enterprise Resource Planning System
Finding 1 – The College did not adequately monitor and could not justify 11
or support significant contract modifications to the project
implementation contract, which was $1.4 million over budget as of
October 2023.
* Finding 2 – Certain aspects of the procurement of the contract with a 13
vendor affiliated with a State university raise questions about the
propriety of the award. In addition, the College could not support
changes to the contract terms and did not adequately monitor the
contract resulting in cost overruns.
Finding 3 – The College could not document its use of a contract 16
procured by a third party for training services totaling approximately
$627,000 complied with the College’s procurement policies and
procedures.
Potential Ethics Violations
Finding 4 – A management employee’s secondary employment with a 17
vendor raised questions about the propriety of the procurements and
related payments and potentially violated State ethics law.
Affiliated Entities
Finding 5 – The College did not collect all required fees from the 20
Historic St. Mary’s Commission. In addition, the College had no
written agreement with and did not receive audited financial
statements from the Boat Foundation, both of which are
requirements in the College’s Policy on Affiliated Entities.
* Denotes item repeated in full or part from preceding audit report
5

--- Page 8 ---
Student Residency
* Finding 6 – The College did not use available output reports of residency 21
changes made on its automated student accounts system to ensure that
only authorized and supported changes were made.
Cash Receipts
* Finding 7 – The College did not perform verifications of collections 22
to deposit, did not always deposit collections in a timely manner, and
did not segregate duties as required.
Student Accounts Receivable
Finding 8 – The College did not prevent students with outstanding 24
balances from registering for classes and did not refer delinquent
student accounts to the State’s Central Collection Unit timely.
Information Systems Security and Control
Finding 9 – Redacted cybersecurity-related finding 25
Finding 10 – Redacted cybersecurity-related finding 25
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology 26
Agency Response Appendix
* Denotes item repeated in full or part from preceding audit report
6

--- Page 9 ---
Background Information
Agency Responsibilities
St. Mary’s College of Maryland (the College) is a public, liberal arts honors
college that offers undergraduate degree programs in various disciplines and a
graduate degree in Masters of Arts in Teaching. The College is governed by a
Board of Trustees as authorized by the Education Article, Title 14, Subtitle 4 of
the Annotated Code of Maryland. This law provides the Board with broad
authority in managing the affairs of the College, and specifies that the Board may
not be superseded in its authority by any State agency or office except as
expressly provided in law. Furthermore, the law provides for the College to
receive State general funds in the form of an annual grant.
According to the State’s records, fiscal year 2023 revenues totaled approximately
$85.7 million, which included a State general fund appropriation of approximately
$31.5 million (see Figure 1 on the following page). According to the College’s
records, student enrollment for the Fall 2022 semester totaled 1,536.
7

--- Page 10 ---
Figure 1
College Positions, Expenditures, and Funding Sources
Full-Time Equivalent Positions as of June 30, 2023
Positions Percent
Filled 387 87.0%
Vacant1 58 13.0%
Total 445
Fiscal Year 2023 Expenditures
Expenditures Percent
Salaries, Wages, and Fringe Benefits $39,998,500 46.7%
Technical and Special Fees 4,648,748 5.4%
Operating Expenses 41,020,148 47.9%
Total $85,667,396
Fiscal Year 2023 Funding Sources
Funding Percent
Unrestricted
General Fund $31,505,771 36.8%
Tuition and Fees 25,065,295 29.3%
Other University Revenues2 22,651,094 26.4%
79,222,160 92.5%
Restricted
Federal Grants and Contracts 3,982,950 4.6%
Other Gifts, Grants, and Contracts 2,462,286 2.9%
6,445,236 7.5%
Total $85,667,396
Source: State financial records and College personnel records
1 The majority of the vacancies were for positions that would not have a direct impact on the
findings in this report.
2 Includes revenues from Auxiliary Services ($18.1 million) and from the Higher Education
Investment Fund ($2.5 million).
8

--- Page 11 ---
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report
Our audit included a review to determine the status of the six findings contained
in our preceding audit report dated July 14, 2020. As disclosed in Figure 2, for
the non-cybersecurity-related findings, we determined that the College
satisfactorily addressed one of the four findings. The remaining three findings are
repeated in this report.
Figure 2
Status of Preceding Findings
Preceding Implementation
Finding Description
Finding Status
The College did not accurately report the cost of its
Enterprise Resource Planning System contract to the
Repeated
Finding 1 Board of Public Works, and lacked documentation to
(Current Finding 2)
support critical elements of and changes to the
contract terms.
The College did not ensure the propriety of labor
Finding 2 charges billed by its food services vendor, which Not Repeated
totaled $2.1 million in fiscal year 2019.
Collections were not always safeguarded, deposited
Repeated
Finding 3 timely, or verified to subsequent deposit; and certain
(Current Finding 7)
collection duties were not segregated as required.
Changes to student residency to in-state status
recorded in the College’s automated records were not Repeated
Finding 4
subject to independent review and approval, and were (Current Finding 6)
not always supported.
The College maintained a significant computer
Finding 5 application which contained sensitive personally Status Redacted3
identifiable information, without adequate safeguards.
The College broadly granted non-information
technology employees local administrative rights on
Finding 6 Status Redacted3
their computer workstations, increasing malware
security risk.
3 Specific information on the current status of this cybersecurity-related finding has been redacted
from the publicly available report in accordance with State Government Article, Section 2-
1224(i) of the Annotated Code of Maryland.
9

--- Page 12 ---
Findings and Recommendations
Enterprise Resource Planning (ERP) System
Background
During the period from October 2018 to June 2022 the College awarded three
contracts totaling approximately $4 million (see Figure 3) related to the
replacement of its legacy financial system with a comprehensive cloud-based
enterprise resource planning (ERP) system to manage its admissions, academic,
financial, and human resource activities.
 In October 2018, the
College procured a
project implementation
contract after a
competitive procurement
process. The vendor was
responsible for project
management and
implementation of the
various modules, integration of data and other systems, consultation services,
and housing and support/maintenance of the necessary software for the new
ERP system. Concerns with certain aspects of the procurement of the contract
and contract modifications were included in our preceding audit report of the
College. In addition, certain issues with this vendor were included in our
August 20, 2024 audit of the University of Maryland Global Campus
(UMGC) in which we noted the vendor was a subcontractor to a High Impact
Economic Development Activities (HIEDA)4 company created by UMGC.5
Our current review identified concerns with the College’s monitoring of this
contract and with certain payments as further described in Finding 1.
 In November 2019, the College determined that it did not have the necessary
staff to implement the ERP and would need additional outside resources. In
December 2019, the College entered into a contract with the aforementioned
HIEDA (hereafter referred to as the UMGC HIEDA) to assist in the
implementation by providing professional consulting information technology
4 HIEDA entities are initiatives which, according to State law, may be established by designated
institutions of higher education, including USM, to promote the economic interests of the State in
areas such as job creation and workforce development, technology transfer, commercialization,
and entrepreneurship.
5 The vendor was working on an information technology project that was determined to be
unusable and abandoned and resulted in UMGC losing $25.7 million.
10

--- Page 13 ---
services including a project manager and was responsible for initiation,
planning, design, execution, monitoring, control, and implementation of the
ERP system. Our review identified concerns with the procurement and
monitoring of this contract as further described in Finding 2.
 In June 2022, the College used a contract procured by a third party to obtain
training materials and support for the ERP system at a cost of $141,280
(hereafter referred to as training services vendor). In June 2023, the College
processed a contract modification increasing the contract amount to $313,526
and entered into a second contract with the vendor at a cost of $313,775 to
retain this vendor as needed for training services as the ERP system was being
implemented. Our review identified concerns with the procurement of these
contracts as further described in Finding 3.
Finding 1
The College did not adequately monitor and could not justify or support
significant contract modifications to the project implementation contract,
which was $1.4 million over budget as of October 2023.
Analysis
The College did not adequately monitor and could not justify or support
significant contract modifications to the project implementation contract.
Increases in Contract Costs Were Not Justified, Documented, and Approved
The College could not justify and did not properly document significant increases
to the cost of the contract. As of October 31, 2023, payments on the contract
totaled approximately $4.9 million, which was $1.4 million (or 40 percent) more
than the base contract cost of $3.5 million. The College could not document the
basis for the increased costs and did not execute any contract modifications as
required by College policy. The College also did not obtain Board of Public
Works (BPW) approval for these additional costs. Although BPW personnel
subsequently advised that they did not require approval for additional costs,
College policy requires BPW approval for modifications over $1 million.
Concerns with the procurement of this contract noted in our prior report may also
have contributed to the increased costs. Specifically, our prior report noted that
during the procurement, the College changed the contract terms from exclusively
fixed cost to a contract with time and materials and fixed cost components. In
addition, we noted that the contract did not include a maximum or ceiling price
that the contractor exceeds at its own risk as required by College policies and
procedures for time and materials contracts.
11

--- Page 14 ---
The College Did Not Monitor the Contract
The College did not monitor the contract to ensure the project was progressing on
schedule. The contract provided that the vendor was to provide the College with
a project schedule, risk assessment plan, and project management plan to help
monitor the progress of the project. Our review disclosed that the College did not
obtain this information and accordingly was unable to properly monitor the
contract.
College management advised us that it received information regarding project
status and work performed through periodic vendor meetings and data
accompanying invoices. However, the vendor meetings were not documented and
the data supporting the invoices was not sufficient to monitor the progress of the
contract. Specifically, the invoices only included total hours by employee and a
brief description of the tasks being worked. It did not provide a cost by task or an
estimated cost to complete, milestones, or a timeline to complete the project.
The lack of adequate monitoring is significant because the original contract
completion date for all modules was February 2022, but according to College
management the final modules (student accounts receivable, registrar services,
and financial aid) were not implemented until October 2024. The contract with
the vendor did not include any provisions for liquidated damages which may
preclude any recourse against the vendor for the delayed implementation.
The College Did Not Ensure Labor Hours Invoiced Were Proper
The College did not obtain available documentation to support the propriety of
labor hours invoiced by the vendor. Although invoices submitted by the vendor
included certain status reports, actual hours charged were not supported by time
records of hours billed. For example, a July 2023 invoice totaling $51,910
included 283 hours billed with labor rates ranging from $161.50 to $190 per hour.
The College did not obtain any employee time records to support the hours
charged. At our request, the College obtained time records for one selected
invoice from the vendor. Our review of the support disclosed that the labor
charges appeared reasonable.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that the College
a. ensure that contract costs do not exceed the related contract, process
formal contract modifications for any additional costs, and obtain BPW
approvals as required by its policy;
b. obtain required monitoring reports from the vendor, establish
procedures to review the reports, and take appropriate corrective action
when project schedules and deadlines are not met;
12

--- Page 15 ---
c. consult with legal counsel to determine the feasibility of assessing
liquidated damages for the delays in system implementation and include
provisions for liquidated damages in future contracts; and
d. obtain support for amounts invoiced to ensure they were proper and take
appropriate action for any amounts that are not supported.
Finding 2
Certain aspects of the procurement of the contract with the UMGC HIEDA
entity raise questions about the propriety of the award. In addition, the
College could not support changes to the contract terms and did not
adequately monitor the contract resulting in cost overruns.
Analysis
Certain aspects of the procurement of the contract with the UMGC HIEDA raise
questions about the propriety of the award. In addition, the College could not
support changes to the contract terms and did not adequately monitor the contract
resulting in cost overruns. As of October 2023, payments for the contract totaled
approximately $1.2 million, which was $825,000 (or more than 200 percent)
above the initial contract cost of $348,000.
Questionable Procurement of the Contract
Certain aspects of the procurement of the contract with the UMGC HIEDA raise
questions about the propriety of the award. Our review disclosed that prior to
issuing the request for proposal, the College communicated with the UMGC
HIEDA, and received data regarding the expected number of hours the work
would require and the expected cost of $304,000. This is significant because the
College subsequently issued the request for proposal (RFP) with an estimated
value between $300,000 and $350,000. In addition, based on correspondence in
the procurement file, the College and the UMGC HIEDA discussed several
options for obtaining their services prior to issuing the RFP, including a sole
source contract or adding the UMGC HIEDA as a subcontractor to the project
implementation contract.6 Furthermore, one of the employees who communicated
with the UMGC HIEDA subsequently participated in the evaluation of vendor
proposals submitted for this contract.
6 The UMGC HIEDA suggested this approach after talking to the project implementation vendor
and stated it “would create an SOW [Statement of Work] with them [the project implementation
vendor] to provide the services to you [the College] as part of the project. You [the College]
would pay them [the project implementation vendor] (but work with me [the UMGC HIEDA])
and they [the project implementation vendor] would pass the money through.”
13

--- Page 16 ---
We further noted that the College awarded the contract to the UMGC HIEDA for
$44,000 more than the HIEDA’s financial proposal. College management could
not provide written justification for the increase but advised us that it was
necessary because the UMGC HIEDA’s proposal omitted four months of work
for one of the three positions in its proposal. The change in price is significant,
since the UMGC HIEDA was selected because its proposed cost of $304,000 was
‘substantially less’ than the $350,000 bid by a second bidder rated equally
capable. The increased amount was not submitted for reevaluation by the
committee; therefore, it is unknown what impact, if any, it would have had on the
final award since the difference between the two vendors price was no longer
substantial (only a $2,000 difference).
The College’s pre-proposal communication with the UMGC HIEDA, the
employees’ subsequent involvement in evaluating the proposals, and the
undocumented basis for the increase of the contract award raises questions
regarding the transparency and propriety of the award. State law (from which the
College is exempt) provides that an individual who assists in the drafting of
specifications, an invitation for bids, a request for proposals for a procurement, or
a person that employs the individual during the period of assistance, may not
submit a bid or proposal for that procurement or assist or represent another
person, directly or indirectly, who is submitting a bid or proposal for that
procurement.
Furthermore, counsel to the Board of Public works advised us that a State agency
should not be attempting to communicate with only one particular vendor to find
out total project hours, or other potential specifications/requirements that may
eventually end up in a request for proposal (RFP). We were further advised that a
State agency should not be taking part in altering a proposal, including
unilaterally increasing a vendor’s price proposal based on an assumption that the
proposal failed to include specific costs. Rather, the agency must request ‘best
and final offers’ from all remaining offerors to allow any one vendor to revise its
price proposal to include pricing for costs that may have not been included in the
original price proposal. If a bid/proposal is not corrected or updated under these
permitted ways, then the bid/proposal must be evaluated as originally submitted;
the State agency should not be increasing a vendor's pricing on its own.
Based on our review and the conditions noted above, we brought this matter to the
attention of the Office of the Attorney General – Criminal Division. Bringing this
matter to the Criminal Division’s attention does not mean that a criminal act has
actually occurred or that criminal charges will be filed.
14

--- Page 17 ---
Lack of Documentation Supporting Significant Changes in Contract Terms
The College could not provide documentation to support its decision to change
the payment terms of the UMGC HIEDA contract from a fixed cost (as specified
in the RFP and the original contract) to a time and materials contract. The
College’s policies and procedures stipulate that a fixed price contract is ordinarily
in the best interest of the College. The policies further provide that a time and
materials contract may only be used if the College’s procurement officer
determines that no other contract is available but the College had no
documentation of such a determination. In addition, the contract did not include a
maximum or ceiling price as required by the procurement policies and procedures
for time and materials contracts. This change to the contract and lack of a
contract maximum may have contributed, at least in part, to the significant
increases in the contract costs.
A similar condition regarding not documenting its justification for changing
contract terms from fixed cost to a time and materials contract was commented
upon in our preceding audit report (regarding the vendor in Finding 1). In
response to that report the College noted it would create a document outlining the
justification. We noted the College took the corrective action for the contract
identified in the preceding audit report, but did not ensure procedures were in
place for other contracts such as the one in this finding.
The College Did Not Monitor the UMGC HIEDA Contract
The College did not obtain ongoing progress and status reports, or quality
assurance and risk management plans required under the contract to ensure the
vendor was providing the services required by the contract. In addition, the
College did not ensure hours billed were consistent with the related contract
estimates. We analyzed all 43 invoices totaling $1.1 million submitted between
May 2020 and June 2023 and noted that for 27 invoices totaling $885,000, the
UMGC HIEDA billed the College 1,498 hours totaling $138,000 in excess of the
estimated amount. The College could not document that it questioned the
excessive hours.
The failure to properly monitor the contract and ensure the propriety of amounts
invoiced is significant because as noted in Finding 1 the project implementation
was significantly behind schedule. In addition, the College ultimately had to
process three contract modifications increasing the cost of the UMGC HIEDA
contract from the original cost of $348,000 to $1.5 million ($150,000 in August
2020; $476,000 in April 2021; and $501,000 in April 2022).
15

--- Page 18 ---
Recommendation 2
We recommend that the College
a. ensure that contract award amounts are consistent with the vendor cost
proposal;
b. ensure that future contracts are procured in a transparent manner;
c. as required by its procurement policies and procedures, document
determinations justifying the use of time and material contracts, and
ensure that such contacts clearly include a ceiling price that the
contractor exceeds at its own risk (repeat); and
d. obtain required monitoring reports from the vendor, review the reports,
and take corrective action when hours billed exceeds estimated hours.
Finding 3
The College could not document that its use of a contract procured by a third
party for training services totaling approximately $627,000 complied with the
College’s procurement policies and procedures.
Analysis
The College could not document that its use of a contract procured by a third
party to obtain training services totaling approximately $627,000 complied with
its procurement policies and procedures. Our review disclosed that the College
procured two contracts under a consultant services contract for insurance and risk
management that was procured by a third party. The College did not document
that using this third-party contract to procure the training services was in the
College’s best interest and subject to a procurement process. The failure to
document these efforts and the unrelated nature of the third-party contract
(consultant services for insurance and risk management) raises concerns about
whether the use of the contract was appropriate and in the College’s best interest.
The College’s procurement policies and procedures provide for the use of
contracts established by other institutions or agencies provided that use of the
contract is in the best interest of the institution, and the established contract was
awarded after a procurement process (including sole source or negotiated
procurement).
Recommendation 3
We recommend that the College document its compliance with its
procurement policies and procedures and verify that its use of third-party
contracts is appropriate and in the best interest of the College and that the
contract was subject to a procurement process.
16

--- Page 19 ---
Potential Ethics Violations
Background
While reviewing disbursements related to a management employee with
significant expense reimbursements, we identified concerns with certain
procurements. In response to these concerns, our Special Investigation Unit
conducted an expanded review which identified that the management employee
had secondary employment with a vendor that supplied certain athletic equipment
to the College. During the period from August 26, 2019 through July 15, 2023,
the vendor was awarded two contracts from the College totaling approximately
$187,700. Our review also disclosed that the management employee previously
had secondary employment with another vendor that supplied athletic equipment
to the College prior to August 2019. We did not review transactions involving
this other vendor because of the length of time since the contracts were awarded.
Our review of the management employee’s secondary employment with the
current vendor did not identify any matters that warranted a referral to the Office
of the Attorney General’s Criminal Division. However, we did identify potential
violations of State ethics law that should be referred to the State Ethics
Commission by the College.
Finding 4
A management employee’s secondary employment with a vendor raised
questions about the propriety of the procurements and related payments and
potentially violated State ethics law.
Analysis
A management employee’s secondary employment with a vendor raised questions
about the propriety of the procurements and related payments and potentially
violated State ethics law. Specifically, our review of the procurements of the two
athletic contracts disclosed that the management employee supervised the
employees who processed the procurements and we were advised was involved in
various discussions with these employees during the procurements. In this regard,
there was no competitive procurement for one of these contracts totaling $90,100,
and for the other contract totaling $97,600, there was no public solicitation of the
bids.7 Rather, the bids were directly solicited from three vendors, one of which
declined to submit a bid and the other had a history of providing poor quality
products to the College.
7 Intercollegiate athletic contracts are excluded from the procurement requirements in the
College’s Procurement Policies and Procedures.
17

--- Page 20 ---
In addition, we identified two payments totaling $1,800 made to the vendor on the
management employee’s corporate purchasing card. The management
employee’s involvement in the procurements and payments, combined with the
lack of a public solicitation for this equipment, raises questions as to the propriety
of the awards.
Although the employee disclosed the secondary employment on their financial
disclosure forms filed with the State Ethics Commission, the employee indicated
that they were not involved in transactions between the College and the vendor.
Senior management personnel at the Commission advised us that the management
employee’s secondary employment and participation in these transactions could
potentially violate certain provisions of State ethics law. Specifically, Section 5-
502 of the General Provisions Article of the Annotated Code of Maryland
prohibits an employee from having secondary employment with a business entity
that has entered into a contract with the employee’s agency. Section 5-501 of the
Article prohibits an employee from participating in matters involving a business
entity if the employee has secondary employment with the business entity.
This condition was caused, at least in part, because the College’s conflict of
interest policy was limited to employees participating in certain federally funded
research projects. As such, the employee was not required to report the secondary
employment to the College. We could not determine if the relationship had been
disclosed to the employee’s supervisor because the supervisor had resigned from
the College prior to the start of our audit.
Recommendation 4
We recommend that the College
a. refer the potential violations of State ethics laws to the Commission and
take action to comply with any decisions that the Commission provides on
these matters,8 and
b. develop a more comprehensive policy to identify and address potential
conflicts of interest for all College employees.
Affiliated Entities
Background
The College has working relationships with the Historic St. Mary’s City
Commission, the St. Mary’s College of Maryland Foundation, and the St. Mary’s
8 Referral of a matter to the Commission does not mean that a violation has taken place, and any
final decision as to whether a violation occurred would ultimately be made by the Commission.
18

--- Page 21 ---
College of Maryland Boat Foundation, Inc. These are independent entities that
provide a variety of services as described below.
The Historic St. Mary’s City Commission (Commission) is an independent unit
of State government that consists of 17 members. The Commission is responsible
for preserving and protecting archaeological and historical records of Maryland’s
first colonial capital and for appropriately developing and using this historic and
scenic site for the education, enjoyment, and the general benefit of the public.
The College provides support services such as procurement, payment and payroll
processing, maintenance of personnel and accounting records, and other related
fiscal functions to the Commission. The College received approximately
$179,000 from the Commission during the audit period for these support services.
The April 2022 Joint Chairmen’s Report noted concerns about the financial
management practices at the Commission and required a certified public
accounting firm to conduct a performance audit to evaluate the efficiency and
effectiveness of the financial management practices including procurement by the
Commission. Subsequently, Chapter 129, Laws of Maryland, 2023 effective June
1, 2023 made numerous changes to the governance of the Commission and
required the Commission to develop and publish written policies regarding the
Commission’s operating procedures.
The St. Mary’s College of Maryland Foundation (Foundation) is a tax-exempt
charitable organization as defined by the Internal Revenue Service. Established in
1971, the purpose of the Foundation is to provide certain financial support to the
students, faculty, and staff of the College when warranted. The College’s
agreement with the Foundation provides that in exchange for such support, the
College will provide staff, equipment, space, and utilities to the Foundation.
According to their records, the Foundation had fiscal year 2022 expenditures of
$4.9 million.
The St. Mary’s College of Maryland Boat Foundation, Inc. (Boat
Foundation) is a tax-exempt charitable organization as defined by the Internal
Revenue Service. Established in 1998, the purpose of the Boat Foundation is to
support the boating and sailing program of the College and to provide resources
for related education and training. Such resources are obtained through the
donation and subsequent sale of power and sail boats. According to its records,
the Boat Foundation had fiscal year 2022 expenditures of approximately
$298,000.
19

--- Page 22 ---
Finding 5
The College did not collect all required fees from the Commission. In
addition, the College had no written agreement with and did not receive
audited financial statements from the Boat Foundation, both of which are
requirements in the College’s Policy on Affiliated Entities (Policy).
Analysis
The College did not collect all required fees from the Commission. In addition,
the College had no written agreement with and did not receive audited financial
statements from the Boat Foundation, as required.
Commission
The College did not collect all required fees from the Commission as provided for
in its Letter of Agreement (LOA) with the Commission. The LOA provided for a
monthly fee of $4,454 to be paid by the Commission to the College for support
services, and for that fee to be adjusted annually after the first five years of the
agreement for changes in the Consumer Price Index. Our review disclosed that
the College has not adjusted the fee, and based on our estimate, the Commission
should have paid the College an additional $370,610 since 2002.
The College advised us that approximately six years into the LOA, the College
stopped providing information technology support services to the Commission
and reduced the monthly fee by approximately $1,000 a month. However, the
LOA, which was prepared in 1997, was never updated for the change. The
College also advised us in November 2024, that it decided not to seek any of the
outstanding fees owed by the Commission because the support services provided
to the Commission that were the basis for the original monthly fee had changed
over the years.
Boat Foundation
The College did not have a formal written agreement with the Boat Foundation.
The Policy requires annual written agreements between affiliated entities and the
College to address, for example, any cost reimbursement for providing support
services to the entity or the use of College facilities by the entity. In addition, the
College did not obtain audited financial statements from the Boat Foundation as
required by the Policy, and based on our review, the Boat Foundation’s financial
statements were unaudited for fiscal year 2022.
20

--- Page 23 ---
Recommendation 5
We recommend that the College
a. consult with legal counsel to determine how to proceed regarding the
aforementioned fees owed by the Commission,
b. annually adjust the monthly fee paid by the Commission in accordance
with the College’s agreement with the Commission,
c. ensure that the agreement with the Commission is updated on a timely
basis for any significant changes, and
d. enter into a written agreement with the Boat Foundation and obtain and
review its audited financial statements as required by the College’s
Policy.
Student Residency
Finding 6
The College did not use available output reports of residency changes made
on its automated student accounts system to ensure that only authorized and
supported changes were made.
Analysis
The College did not use available output reports of residency changes made on its
automated student accounts system to ensure that only authorized and supported
changes were made. During the period from July 2, 2019 through July 17, 2023
there were 86 residency status changes from out-of-state to in-state. Proper
verification of student residency changes is important because of the significant
differences between in-state and out-of-state student tuition rates. For example,
the College’s undergraduate tuition rate for Maryland residents was $6,058 for the
Fall 2022 semester, whereas the undergraduate tuition rate for out-of-state
students was $14,096.
Although residency change petitions are reviewed and approved prior to
recording, the College did not use an output report to ensure that all changes were
accurately recorded and supported by an approved petition. Our arbitrary test of
10 residency status changes during the audit period disclosed that there was no
supporting documentation for one of the changes tested.
A similar condition was commented upon in our preceding audit report. In
response to that report, the College indicated that as of September 2020 output
reports would be run and reviewed periodically and that all documentation related
to residency changes would be maintained in a central location. College
21

--- Page 24 ---
personnel advised us that the system could not easily generate an output report of
changes; however, as noted above, we were able to obtain a report for our testing.
Recommendation 6
We recommend that the College
a. ensure that changes to student residency status are authorized and valid
by verifying available output reports of all residency status changes
posted to student accounts to supporting documentation (repeat), and
b. obtain support for the aforementioned residency change and take any
appropriate corrective action.
Cash Receipts
Finding 7
The College did not perform verifications of collections to deposit, did not
always deposit collections in a timely manner, and did not segregate duties as
required.
Analysis
The College did not perform verifications of collections to deposit, did not always
deposit collections in a timely manner, and did not segregate duties as required.
According to State records, the College’s collections during fiscal year 2023
totaled approximately $16.8 million.
 The College did not perform verifications of recorded collections to deposit.
This condition was commented upon in our preceding audit report. In its
response to that report, the College agreed with our recommendation to
conduct the verifications. During our current audit, College management
advised us that verifications were not being performed because it made a
change in the bank it used, and no longer received validated deposit
documentation from the bank. However, the College could have used bank
records to confirm the recorded collections were deposited.
 Collections were not being deposited timely as required. For example, our
test of 24 days of collections between January 2022 and June 2023 totaling
approximately $9.6 million9 disclosed that collections for 8 days, totaling $1.2
million, were deposited 4 to 5 business days after receipt. A similar condition
was commented upon in our preceding audit report. In its response to that
report, the College stated it would utilize an armored car service to pick up
9 Test selection was focused on the busier semester dates.
22

--- Page 25 ---
and transport its deposits. While the College began using the armored car
service, the pickups were only being done weekly.
 Three employees with access to collections could also manually record non-
cash credits in student account receivable records, which were not subject to
any independent review and approval using an output report. As a result,
collections could be misappropriated and the related accounts could be
adjusted to avoid detection. During fiscal year 2023, non-cash credit
adjustments manually posted to student accounts totaled approximately
$112,500.
A similar condition was commented upon in our preceding audit report. In its
response to that report, the College stated that by September 2020 a report to
identify non-cash credits would be created and a quarterly review of these
reports would be performed. However, as of October 2023, the College had
not created the reports to perform the review.
The Comptroller of Maryland’s Accounting Procedures Manual requires
independent verifications of collections to deposit and timely deposit of
collections within one working day of receipt. The Manual also requires
segregation of collections and accounts receivable functions.
Recommendation 7
We recommend that the College
a. ensure that an independent verification of recorded collections to deposit
is performed and documented when deposits are made (repeat);
b. deposit all collections in a timely manner (repeat);
c. ensure employees with access to collections do not have the ability to
adjust accounts receivable records; and
d. ensure that all non-cash credits are subject to independent review and
approval by, for example, establishing system generated output reports of
non-cash credits processed for verification to valid supporting
documentation (repeat).
23

--- Page 26 ---
Student Accounts Receivable
Finding 8
The College did not prevent students with outstanding balances from
registering for classes and did not refer delinquent student accounts to the
State’s Central Collection Unit (CCU) timely.
Analysis
The College removed account holds10 and permitted students with outstanding
Spring 2023 semester balances to register for Fall 2023 semester classes without
adequate justification and did not refer delinquent accounts to CCU timely.
According to the College’s records, outstanding student accounts receivable
totaled $864,182 as of June 30, 2003, with $669,999 being greater than 180 days
past due.
 The College removed holds from at least 89 students with outstanding Spring
2023 balances totaling $691,459 (ranging from $1,144 to $28,102) without
adequate justification, such as proof that a payment plan had been established.
This allowed these students to register for the Fall 2023 semester with
significant unpaid balances. At the time of our review, the College did not
have a formal policy for establishing and releasing holds. We noted that other
State universities have a policy that precludes students from registering for
classes if they have outstanding balances unless the student is covered by a
specific exemption.
 The College did not timely refer delinquent student accounts to CCU as
required. Our test of 10 material accounts totaling $88,512 that had been
referred to CCU disclosed that 8 were referred approximately 6 to 11 months
after they were eligible for referral. CCU regulations, as amended for the
College, generally require that each semester’s delinquent accounts be
transferred to CCU in September for the preceding spring semester, or January
for the preceding summer and fall semesters.
Recommendation 8
We recommend that the College
a. implement a formal policy for establishing and releasing account holds
that includes required justification and documentation; and
b. ensure that delinquent accounts are referred to CCU, in accordance with
CCU regulations as amended for the College.
10 An account hold generally prohibits subsequent transactions, such as registering for classes and
ordering transcripts.
24

--- Page 27 ---
Information Systems Security and Control
We determined that the Information Systems Security and Control section,
including Findings 9 and 10 related to “cybersecurity,” as defined by the State
Finance and Procurement Article, Section 3.5-301(b) of the Annotated Code of
Maryland, and therefore are subject to redaction from the publicly available audit
report in accordance with the State Government Article 2-1224(i). Consequently,
the specifics of the following findings, including the analysis, related
recommendations, along with the College’s responses, have been redacted from
this report copy.
Finding 9
Redacted cybersecurity-related finding.
Finding 10
Redacted cybersecurity-related finding.
25

--- Page 28 ---
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the St. Mary’s College of
Maryland (the College) for the period beginning August 26, 2019 and ending July
15, 2023. The audit was conducted in accordance with generally accepted
government auditing standards. Those standards require that we plan and perform
the audit to obtain sufficient, appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis
for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives. We believe that
the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and
conclusions based on our audit objectives.
As prescribed by the State Government Article, Section 2-1221 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, the objectives of this audit were to examine the College’s
financial transactions, records, and internal control, and to evaluate its compliance
with applicable State laws, rules, and regulations.
In planning and conducting our audit, we focused on the major financial-related
areas of operations based on assessments of significance and risk. The areas
addressed by the audit included procurements and disbursements, student
accounts receivable, cash receipts, payroll, student financial aid, and information
systems security and control. Our audit included certain support services (such as
payment processing, payroll processing, maintenance of personnel and accounting
records, and related fiscal functions) provided by the College to the Historic St.
Mary’s City Commission. We also determined the status of the six findings
contained in our preceding audit report.
Our audit did not include an evaluation of internal controls over compliance with
federal laws and regulations for federal financial assistance programs and an
assessment of the College's compliance with those laws and regulations because
the State of Maryland engages an independent accounting firm to annually audit
such programs administered by State agencies, including the College.
Our assessment of internal controls was based on agency procedures and controls
in place at the time of our fieldwork. Our tests of transactions and other auditing
procedures were generally focused on the transactions occurring during our audit
period of August 26, 2019 to July 15, 2023, but may include transactions before
or after this period as we considered necessary to achieve our audit objectives.
To accomplish our audit objectives, our audit procedures included inquiries of
appropriate personnel, inspections of documents and records, tests of transactions,
and to the extent practicable, observations of the College’s operations. Generally,
transactions were selected for testing based on auditor judgment, which primarily
26

--- Page 29 ---
considers risk, the timing or dollar amount of the transaction, or the significance
of the transaction to the area of operation reviewed. As a matter of course, we do
not normally use sampling in our tests, so unless otherwise specifically indicated,
neither statistical nor non-statistical audit sampling was used to select the
transactions tested. Therefore, unless sampling is specifically indicated in a
finding, the results from any tests conducted or disclosed by us cannot be used to
project those results to the entire population from which the test items were
selected.
We also performed various data extracts of pertinent information from the State’s
Financial Management Information System (such as revenue and expenditure
data) and the State’s Central Payroll Bureau (payroll data). The extracts are
performed as part of ongoing internal processes established by the Office of
Legislative Audits and were subject to various tests to determine data reliability.
We determined that the data extracted from these sources were sufficiently
reliable for the purposes the data were used during this audit.
We also extracted data from the College’s financial systems for the purpose of
testing certain areas, such as financial aid and student accounts receivable. We
performed various tests of the relevant data and determined that the data were
sufficiently reliable for the purposes the data were used during the audit. Finally,
we performed other auditing procedures that we considered necessary to achieve
our audit objectives. The reliability of data used in this report for background or
informational purposes was not assessed.
The College’s management is responsible for establishing and maintaining
effective internal control. Internal control is a process designed to provide
reasonable assurance that objectives pertaining to the reliability of financial
records; effectiveness and efficiency of operations, including safeguarding of
assets; and compliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations are achieved.
As provided in Government Auditing Standards, there are five components of
internal control: control environment, risk assessment, control activities,
information and communication, and monitoring. Each of the five components,
when significant to the audit objectives, and as applicable to the College, were
considered by us during the course of this audit.
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate.
Our reports are designed to assist the Maryland General Assembly in exercising
its legislative oversight function and to provide constructive recommendations for
27

--- Page 30 ---
improving State operations. As a result, our reports generally do not address
activities we reviewed that are functioning properly.
This report includes findings relating to conditions that we consider to be
significant deficiencies in the design or operation of internal control that could
adversely affect the College’s ability to maintain reliable financial records,
operate effectively and efficiently, and/or comply with applicable laws, rules, and
regulations. Our report also includes findings regarding significant instances of
noncompliance with applicable laws, rules, or regulations. Other less significant
findings were communicated to the College that did not warrant inclusion in this
report.
State Government Article Section 2-1224(i) requires that we redact in a manner
consistent with auditing best practices any cybersecurity findings before a report
is made available to the public. This results in the issuance of two different
versions of an audit report that contains cybersecurity findings – a redacted
version for the public and an unredacted version for government officials
responsible for acting on our audit recommendations.
The State Finance and Procurement Article, Section 3.5-301(b), states that
cybersecurity is defined as “processes or capabilities wherein systems,
communications, and information are protected and defended against damage,
unauthorized use or modification, and exploitation.” Based on that definition, and
in our professional judgment, we concluded that certain findings in this report fall
under that definition. Consequently, for the publicly available audit report all
specifics as to the nature of cybersecurity findings and required corrective actions
have been redacted. We have determined that such aforementioned practices, and
government auditing standards, support the redaction of this information from the
public audit report. The specifics of these cybersecurity findings have been
communicated to the College and those parties responsible for acting on our
recommendations in an unredacted audit report.
The College’s response to our findings and recommendations is included as an
appendix to this report. Depending on the version of the audit report, responses to
any cybersecurity findings may be redacted in accordance with State law. As
prescribed in the State Government Article, Section 2-1224 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, we will advise the College regarding the results of our review
of its response.
28

--- Page 31 ---
APPENDIX
December 17, 2024
Brian S. Tanen, CPA, CFE
Legislative Auditor
Department of Legislative Service
Office of Legislative Audits
Maryland General Assembly
351 West Camden Street, Suite 400
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Dear Mr. Tanen:
St. Mary’s College of Maryland is in receipt of your correspondence dated December 3, 2024
requesting responses to the audit report comments and recommendations. Per your request, we are
pleased to submit our responses to each of the 10 findings. Please contact me at 240-895-4413, or
via email at ahmohammadi@smcm.edu with any questions, or if further information is needed.
Sincerely,
Amir Mohammadi, PhD
Interim Vice President for Business and Chief Financial Officer
cc: Dr. Tuajuanda C. Jordan, President

--- Page 32 ---
St. Mary’s College of Maryland
Agency Response Form
Enterprise Resource Planning (ERP) System
Finding 1
The College did not adequately monitor and could not justify or support significant contract modifications to the project
implementation contract, which was $1.4 million over budget as of October 2023.
We recommend that the College
a. ensure that contract costs do not exceed the related contract, process formal contract modifications for any additional
costs, and obtain BPW approvals as required by its policy;
b. obtain required monitoring reports from the vendor, establish procedures to review the reports, and take appropriate
corrective action when project schedules and deadlines are not met;
c. consult with legal counsel to determine the feasibility of assessing liquidated damages for the delays in system
implementation and include provisions for liquidated damages in future contracts; and
d. obtain support for amounts invoiced to ensure they were proper and take appropriate action for any amounts that are not
supported.
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide
additional comments
as deemed necessary.
Recommendation 1a Agree Estimated Completion Date: June 2025
Please provide details SMCM will ensure all contract costs do not exceed the related contract, process formal contract modifications
of corrective action for any additional costs, and obtain BPW approvals in accordance with policies, as required.
or explain
disagreement. The SMCM Procurement Officer will review contracts in accordance with the college policies to make sure
that contracts do not exceed the contract value without proper modifications. These reviews will be done
monthly. All contract modifications will be executed in a timely manner and in accordance with college
policies.
Additionally, the College is updating the Colleges Procurement Policy section 1.1.5 as it pertains to BPW
approval to align with Advisory 1995-1 and State Finance and Procurement Article (SFP) 11-203 (e).
Recommendation 1b Agree Estimated Completion Date: February 2025
Please provide details SMCM will obtain all required monitoring reports, establish procedures to monitor the reports and take
of corrective action corrective actions when project schedules and deadlines are not met.
or explain
disagreement.
Recommendation 1c Agree Estimated Completion Date: December 2024
Please provide details SMCM has consulted with legal counsel to determine if it is feasible to assess liquidated damages related to
of corrective action delays in system implementation.
or explain
disagreement. SMCM will include, when appropriate, provisions for liquidated damages in future contracts.
Recommendation 1d Agree Estimated Completion Date: December 2024
Please provide details Invoices shall contain support for amounts invoiced. SMCM has implemented additional measures to ensure
of corrective action copies of timesheet documents are provided for review with invoice submission. SMCM will seek appropriate
or explain action for any amounts not supported.
disagreement.
Finding 2
Certain aspects of the procurement of the contract with the UMGC HIEDA entity raise questions about the propriety of the
award. In addition, the College could not support changes to the contract terms and did not adequately monitor the contract
resulting in cost overruns.
We recommend that the College
a. ensure that contract award amounts are consistent with the vendor cost proposal;
b. ensure that future contracts are procured in a transparent manner;
c. as required by its procurement policies and procedures, document determinations justifying the use of time and material
contracts, and ensure that such contacts clearly include a ceiling price that the contractor exceeds at its own risk (repeat);
and
d. obtain required monitoring reports from the vendor, review the reports, and take corrective action when hours billed
exceeds estimated hours.
Page 1 of 6

--- Page 33 ---
St. Mary’s College of Maryland
Agency Response Form
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 2a Agree Estimated Completion Date: December 2024
Please provide details of SMCM will ensure that all contract award amounts are consistent with vendor cost proposal.
corrective action or
explain disagreement. SMCM Procurement Officer will review all cost proposals for vendors that receive a rating of acceptable
or higher for accuracy during the initial RFP review process. Any inconsistency will be addressed prior
to any final determination of award.
Recommendation 2b Agree Estimated Completion Date: December 2024
Please provide details of SMCM will ensure that all future contracts are procured in a transparent manner.
corrective action or
explain disagreement. SMCM Procurement Officer will follow all college procurement policies as outlined in Section 3 of the
college’s procurement policy. Additionally, the Procurement Officer will make sure that any person
involved in market research, or drafting of specifications for proposals are not permitted to submit
proposals or participate in the review process.
Recommendation 2c Agree Estimated Completion Date: December 2024
Please provide details of SMCM Procurement Officer will follow all college procurement policies and procedures as outlined in
corrective action or Section 4.6 of the college’s procurement policy for documenting determinations and justifications for the
explain disagreement. use of time-and-materials contracts.
Additionally, the Procurement Officer will include a ceiling price that the contractor exceeds at its own
risk as indicated in section 4.6.6 of the college’s procurement policies.
Recommendation 2d Agree Estimated Completion Date: December 2024
Please provide details of SMCM OIT Management will require monitoring reports with all submitted invoices. SMCM will
corrective action or review the reports and take any corrective actions for hours exceeding or insufficient to support the
explain disagreement. amount invoiced for the estimated contract hours.
Finding 3
The College could not document that its use of a contract procured by a third party for training services totaling
approximately $627,000 complied with the College’s procurement policies and procedures.
We recommend that the College document its compliance with its procurement policies and procedures and verify that its use
of third-party contracts is appropriate and in the best interest of the College and that the contract was subject to a
procurement process.
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide additional
comments as deemed
necessary.
Recommendation 3 Agree Estimated Completion Date: December 2024
Please provide details of SMCM Procurement Officer will perform a comprehensive review of all third-party contracts and will
corrective action or confirm that each contract is prepared in a way that is in the best interest of the College and is prepared in
explain disagreement. accordance with all procurement policies and procedures.
SMCM Procurement Officer has now implemented an internal control: when using a third-party contract
there is an internal justification form that must be completed prior to award.
Page 2 of 6

--- Page 34 ---
St. Mary’s College of Maryland
Agency Response Form
Potential Ethics Violations
Finding 4
A management employee’s secondary employment with a vendor raised questions about the propriety of the procurements
and related payments and potentially violated State ethics law.
Recommendation 4
We recommend that the College
a. refer the potential violations of State ethics laws to the Commission and take action to comply with any decisions that the
Commission provides on these matters,1 and
b. develop a more comprehensive policy to identify and address potential conflicts of interest for all College employees.
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide additional
comments as deemed
necessary.
Recommendation 4a Agree Estimated Completion Date: November 2024
Please provide details of SMCM has referred the potential violation to the State Ethics Commission (SEC). SMCM VP for
corrective action or Business/CFO will comply with any decision that the SEC provides on this matter.
explain disagreement.
Recommendation 4b Agree Estimated Completion Date: June 2025
Please provide details of SMCM will develop a comprehensive policy to identify and address potential conflicts of interest for all
corrective action or College employees. This policy will be reviewed and presented for Board of Trustee approval at the May
explain disagreement. 2025 meeting.
Upon the recommendation by SEC, SMCM has implemented a Non-Participation Plan for the
management employee’s secondary employment with a vendor when a potential conflict of interest exists.
The Plan requires the VP for Business/CFO to approve all potential procurements or related payments.
Affiliated Entities
Finding 5
The College did not collect all required fees from the Commission. In addition, the College had no written agreement with and
did not receive audited financial statements from the Boat Foundation, both of which are requirements in the College’s Policy
on Affiliated Entities (Policy).
We recommend that the College
a. consult with legal counsel to determine how to proceed regarding the aforementioned fees owed by the Commission,
b. annually adjust the monthly fee paid by the Commission in accordance with the College’s agreement with the Commission,
c. ensure that the agreement with the Commission is updated on a timely basis for any significant changes, and
d. enter into a written agreement with the Boat Foundation and obtain and review its audited financial statements as
required by the College’s Policy.
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide additional
comments as deemed
necessary.
Recommendation 5a Agree Estimated Completion Date: February 2025
Please provide details of SMCM VP for Business/CFO has consulted with legal counsel to determine how to proceed regarding the
corrective action or aforementioned fees owed by the Commission.
explain disagreement.
One of the solutions discussed is merging the existing seven MOU’s consolidated to one MOU with clear
expectations from both parties.
Recommendation 5b Agree Estimated Completion Date: March 2025
Please provide details of SMCM will adjust annually the monthly fee paid by the Commission in accordance with the College’s
corrective action or agreement with the Commission.
explain disagreement.
1 Referral of a matter to the Commission does not mean that a violation has taken place, and any final decision as to whether a violation occurred would
ultimately be made by the Commission.
Page 3 of 6

--- Page 35 ---
St. Mary’s College of Maryland
Agency Response Form
Recommendation 5c Agree Estimated Completion Date: March 2025
Please provide details of SMCM will ensure that the agreement with the Commission is updated, and any future changes updated
corrective action or on a timely basis.
explain disagreement.
SMCM VP for Business/CFO and AVP of Finance, in conjunction with the HSMCC Executive Director
and Chief Operating Officer, are in the process of updating the agreement to reflect changes from the
existing agreement.
Recommendation 5d Agree Estimated Completion Date: December 2024
Please provide details of SMCM has entered into a written agreement with the Boat Foundation. This agreement will be reviewed
corrective action or and affirmed every five years or earlier at the request of either party as stated in the agreement. SMCM
explain disagreement. will ensure that the Boat Foundation’s financial statements are audited in accordance to College policies,
as required.
SMCM VP for Business/CFO and AVP of Finance will obtain copies of the Boat Foundation’s audited
annual financial statements to include in the College’s independent annual financial audit.
Student Residency
Finding 6
The College did not use available output reports of residency changes made on its automated student accounts system to
ensure that only authorized and supported changes were made.
We recommend that the College
a. ensure that changes to student residency status are authorized and valid by verifying available output reports of all
residency status changes posted to student accounts to supporting documentation (repeat), and
b. obtain support for the aforementioned residency change and take any appropriate corrective action.
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide additional
comments as deemed
necessary.
Recommendation 6a Agree Estimated Completion Date: November 2024
Please provide details of SMCM will ensure that changes to student residency status are authorized and valid by verifying available
corrective action or output reports for residency changes posted to student accounts with the supporting documentation.
explain disagreement.
SMCM VP for Enrollment Management has established a residency committee to review error reports
regarding inconsistencies between student addresses and residency status to ensure accuracy.
Recommendation 6b Agree Estimated Completion Date: December 2024
Please provide details of SMCM agrees and the College will require supporting documentation for all residency change requests.
corrective action or
explain disagreement.
Cash Receipts
Finding 7
The College did not perform verifications of collections to deposit, did not always deposit collections in a timely manner, and
did not segregate duties as required.
We recommend that the College
a. ensure that an independent verification of recorded collections to deposit is performed and documented when deposits are
made (repeat);
b. deposit all collections in a timely manner (repeat);
c. ensure employees with access to collections do not have the ability to adjust accounts receivable records; and
d. ensure that all non-cash credits are subject to independent review and approval by, for example, establishing system
generated output reports of non-cash credits processed for verification to valid supporting documentation (repeat).
Page 4 of 6

--- Page 36 ---
St. Mary’s College of Maryland
Agency Response Form
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide additional
comments as deemed
necessary.
Recommendation 7a Agree Estimated Completion Date: January 2025
Please provide details of SMCM will access the deposit account through online banking and print the transaction log to verify
corrective action or deposits within 48 hours after the bank receives the deposit from the armor truck. This process will be
explain disagreement. signed off on by the Assistant Comptroller/Director of Accounts Management. This process will be
performed to provide independent verification of the recorded collections to deposits are performed and
documented when deposits are made.
Recommendation 7b Agree Estimated Completion Date: April 2025
Please provide details of SMCM has taken necessary steps to have collections deposited in a timely manner. The Assistant
corrective action or Comptroller/Director of Accounts Management has contacted the State Treasurer’s office to assist us with
explain disagreement. getting more frequent armor truck deposit pick up. Additionally, with the implementation of the new ERP
system, the College will investigate the compatibility of the remote check deposit system and implement
this process if compatible.
Recommendation 7c Agree Estimated Completion Date: January 2025
Please provide details of SMCM will ensure that employees with access to collections do not have the ability to adjust accounts
corrective action or receivable records. In the absence of the Cashier, collections will be either collected by an employee with
explain disagreement. no access to adjust accounts receivable records or put in the afterhours drop box to be receipted by the
Cashier the following business day.
Recommendation 7d Agree Estimated Completion Date: June 2025
Please provide details of SMCM student accounts will review all non-cash credits submissions and process accordingly with review
corrective action or and signoff verification required by two independent staff members not associated with, or having access
explain disagreement. to, student accounts. SMCM is currently creating an output report in the new student ERP system for
verification to validate supporting documents.
Student Accounts Receivable
Finding 8
The College did not prevent students with outstanding balances from registering for classes and did not refer delinquent
student accounts to the State’s Central Collection Unit (CCU) timely.
We recommend that the College
a. implement a formal policy for establishing and releasing account holds that includes required justification and
documentation, and
b. ensure that delinquent accounts are referred to CCU, in accordance with CCU regulations as amended for the College.
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide additional
comments as deemed
necessary.
Recommendation 8a Agree Estimated Completion Date: January 2024
Please provide details of SMCM implemented a formal policy for establishing and releasing account holds. This formal policy can
corrective action or be found on SMCM’s website.
explain disagreement.
Recommendation 8b Agree Estimated Completion Date: March 2024
Please provide details of SMCM will ensure that delinquent accounts are referred to CCU in accordance with CCU regulations as
corrective action or amended for the College.
explain disagreement.
SMCM Fiscal Administrator/Accounts Receivable receives a monthly report from the Assistant
Comptroller/Director of Accounts Management for all delinquent accounts of graduated students. Any
account that is 30, 60, or 90 days past due are sent a letter from the College’s Office of Business and
Finance and are provided an opportunity to set-up in-house payment plans. All accounts over 90 days
past due are sent to CCU in accordance with the CCU regulations as amended for the College.
Page 5 of 6

--- Page 37 ---
St. Mary’s College of Maryland
Agency Response Form
Information Systems Security and Control
The Office of Legislative Audits (OLA) has determined that the Information Systems Security and Control section, including Findings
9 and 10 related to “cybersecurity,” as defined by the State Finance and Procurement Article, Section 3.5-301(b) of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, and therefore are subject to redaction from the publicly available audit report in accordance with the State
Government Article 2-1224(i). Although the specifics of the following findings, including the analysis, related recommendations,
along with the College’s responses, have been redacted from this report copy, the College’s responses indicated agreement with the
findings and related recommendations.
Finding 9
Redacted cybersecurity-related finding.
Agency Response has been redacted by OLA.
Finding 10
Redacted cybersecurity-related finding.
Agency Response has been redacted by OLA.
Page 6 of 6

--- Page 38 ---
A T
UDIT EAM
Adam J. Westover, CPA
Audit Manager
R. Brendan Coffey, CPA, CISA
Edwin L. Paul, CPA, CISA
Information Systems Audit Managers
Sandra C. Medeiros
Senior Auditor
Peter W. Chong, CISA
Malcolm J. Woodard
Information Systems Senior Auditors
Kevin M. Billard
Mia W. Foelster
Thomas J. Kraemer
John E. Rooney
Staff Auditors
Charles O. Price
Information Systems Staff Auditor