Title: University System of Maryland - Towson University
Date: 08/06/2020
Type: Fiscal Compliance
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=6001f5a1a1ce580334b70cfb
Extracted: 2025-06-19T11:43:15.193183
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Audit Report
University System of Maryland
Towson University
March 2024
Public Notice
In compliance with the requirements of the State Government Article Section
2-1224(i), of the Annotated Code of Maryland, the Office of Legislative Audits
has redacted cybersecurity findings and related auditee responses
from this public report.
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Senator Clarence K. Lam, M.D. (Senate Chair) Delegate Jared Solomon (House Chair)
Senator Joanne C. Benson Delegate Steven J. Arentz
Senator Paul D. Corderman Delegate Andrea Fletcher Harrison
Senator Katie Fry Hester Delegate Steven C. Johnson
Senator Shelly L. Hettleman Delegate Mary A. Lehman
Senator Cheryl C. Kagan Delegate David Moon
Senator Cory V. McCray Delegate Julie Palakovich Carr
Senator Justin D. Ready Delegate Stephanie M. Smith
Senator Bryan W. Simonaire Delegate M. Courtney Watson
Senator Craig J. Zucker One Vacancy
To Obtain Further Information
Office of Legislative Audits
The Warehouse at Camden Yards
351 West Camden Street, Suite 400
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Phone: 410-946-5900
Maryland Relay: 711
TTY: 410-946-5401 ꞏ 301-970-5401
E-mail: webmaster@ola.state.md.us
Website: www.ola.state.md.us
To Report Fraud
The Office of Legislative Audits operates a Fraud Hotline to report fraud, waste, or abuse involving State
of Maryland government resources. Reports of fraud, waste, or abuse may be communicated anonymously
by a toll-free call to 1-877-FRAUD-11, by mail to the Fraud Hotline, c/o Office of Legislative Audits, or
through the Office’s website.
Nondiscrimination Statement
The Department of Legislative Services does not discriminate on the basis of age, ancestry, color, creed,
marital status, national origin, race, religion, gender, gender identity, sexual orientation, or disability in the
admission or access to its programs, services, or activities. The Department’s Information Officer has been
designated to coordinate compliance with the nondiscrimination requirements contained in Section 35.107
of the United States Department of Justice Regulations. Requests for assistance should be directed to the
Information Officer at 410-946-5400 or 410-970-5400.

--- Page 3 ---
March 19, 2024
Senator Clarence K. Lam, M.D., Senate Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Delegate Jared Solomon, House Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Members of Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Annapolis, Maryland
Ladies and Gentlemen:
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the University System of
Maryland (USM) – Towson University (TU) for the period beginning June 25,
2019 and ending January 31, 2023. TU is a comprehensive public institution and
provides a broad range of baccalaureate, graduate, and doctoral programs in the
liberal arts and sciences.
Our audit disclosed a cybersecurity-related finding. However, in accordance with
the State Government Article, Section 2-1224(i) of the Annotated Code of
Maryland, we have redacted the finding from this audit report. Specifically, State
law requires the Office of Legislative Audits to redact cybersecurity findings in a
manner consistent with auditing best practices before the report is made available
to the public. The term “cybersecurity” is defined in the State Finance and
Procurement Article, Section 3.5-301(b), and using our professional judgment we
have determined that the redacted finding falls under the referenced definition.
The specifics of the cybersecurity finding were previously communicated to those
parties responsible for acting on our recommendations.
Our audit also included a review to determine the status of the three findings
contained in our preceding audit report. We determined that TU satisfactorily
addressed those findings.
The USM Office’s response to this audit, on behalf of TU, is included as an
appendix to this report; however, consistent with the requirements of State law,
we have redacted all elements of the USM Office’s response since they are related
to the cybersecurity audit finding. We reviewed the response and noted general
agreement to our finding and related recommendations. Subsequent to the
response receipt, but prior to the issuance of the final report, we contacted TU

--- Page 4 ---
management and obtained additional clarification that satisfactorily resolved an
outstanding issue. Consequently, we have concluded that the written response
and additional clarification together indicate that TU’s corrective actions
identified are sufficient to address all audit issues.
We wish to acknowledge the cooperation extended to us during the audit by TU.
We also wish to acknowledge USM’s and TU’s willingness to address the audit
issues and implement appropriate corrective actions.
Respectfully submitted,
Gregory A. Hook, CPA
Legislative Auditor
2

--- Page 5 ---
Background Information
Agency Responsibilities
Towson University (TU) is a comprehensive public institution of the University
System of Maryland (USM) and operates under the jurisdiction of the USM Board
of Regents. TU provides a broad range of undergraduate programs in both
traditional arts and sciences and applied professional fields, as well as select
professionally-oriented graduate and doctoral programs. According to TU's
records, student enrollment for the fall 2022 semester totaled 19,793, including
16,861 undergraduate students and 2,932 graduate students.
TU’s budget is funded by unrestricted revenues, such as tuition and fees and a
State general fund appropriation, and restricted revenues, such as federal grants
and contracts. According to the State’s accounting records, TU’s revenues for
fiscal year 2022 totaled approximately $528.6 million, including a State general
fund appropriation of approximately $135 million (See Figure 1 on the following
page).
3

--- Page 6 ---
Figure 1
TU Positions, Expenditures, and Funding Sources
Full-Time Equivalent Positions as of June 30, 2022
Positions Percent
Filled 2,120 83.2%
Vacant 428 16.8%
Total 2,548
Fiscal Year 2022 Expenditures
Expenditures Percent
Salaries, Wages, and Fringe Benefits $233,515,690 44.2%
Technical and Special Fees 45,524,828 8.6%
Operating Expenses 249,601,232 47.2%
Total $528,641,750
Fiscal Year 2022 Funding Sources
Funding Percent
Unrestricted
General Fund $134,985,039 25.5%
Tuition and Fees 181,300,596 34.3%
Other University Revenues1 143,345,244 27.1%
459,630,879 86.9%
Restricted
Federal Grants and Contracts 60,900,056 11.6%
Other Gifts, Grants, and Contracts 8,110,815 1.5%
69,010,871 13.1%
Total $528,641,750
Source: State financial records and TU personnel records
Financial Management System
In July 2022, TU implemented a new cloud-based financial management system.
The system is used to maintain TU’s general ledger and perform other critical
fiscal functions such as budgeting, purchasing, and disbursements.
1 Includes revenues from Auxiliary Services ($118.8M) and from the Higher Education
Investment Fund ($12.4M).
4

--- Page 7 ---
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report
Our audit included a review to determine the status of the three findings contained
in our preceding audit report dated August 6, 2020. We determined that TU
satisfactorily addressed these findings.
Findings and Recommendations
Information Systems Security and Control
We determined that Finding 1 related to “cybersecurity,” as defined by the State
Finance and Procurement Article, Section 3.5-301(b) of the Annotated Code of
Maryland, and therefore is subject to redaction from the publicly available audit
report in accordance with the State Government Article 2-1224(i). Consequently,
the specifics of the following finding, including the analysis, related
recommendation(s), along with the USM Office’s responses, have been redacted
from this report copy.
Finding 1
Redacted cybersecurity-related finding.
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the University System of
Maryland (USM) – Towson University (TU) for the period beginning June 25,
2019 and ending January 31, 2023. The audit was conducted in accordance with
generally accepted government auditing standards. Those standards require that
we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient, appropriate evidence to
provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit
objectives. We believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for
our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives.
As prescribed by the State Government Article, Section 2-1221 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, the objectives of this audit were to examine TU’s financial
transactions, records, and internal control, and to evaluate its compliance with
applicable State laws, rules, and regulations.
In planning and conducting our audit, we focused on the major financial-related
areas of operations based on assessments of significance and risk. The areas
5

--- Page 8 ---
addressed by the audit included procurements and disbursements, student
accounts receivable, cash receipts, student financial aid, payroll, corporate
purchasing cards, and information systems security and control. We also
determined the status of the findings contained in our preceding audit report.
Our audit did not include certain support services provided to TU by the USM
Office, such as bond financing, and by the University of Maryland, Baltimore
(UMB), such as processing certain construction vendor payments and capital
project management. These support services are included within the scope of our
audits of the USM Office and UMB, respectively. In addition, our audit did not
include an evaluation of internal controls over compliance with federal laws and
regulations for federal financial assistance programs and an assessment of TU’s
compliance with those laws and regulations because the State of Maryland
engages an independent accounting firm to annually audit such programs
administered by State agencies, including the components of the USM.
Our assessment of internal controls was based on agency procedures and controls
in place at the time of our fieldwork. Our tests of transactions and other auditing
procedures were generally focused on the transactions occurring during our audit
period of June 25, 2019 to January 31, 2023, but may include transactions before
or after this period as we considered necessary to achieve our audit objectives.
To accomplish our audit objectives, our audit procedures included inquiries of
appropriate personnel, inspections of documents and records, tests of transactions,
and to the extent practicable, observations of TU’s operations. Generally,
transactions were selected for testing based on auditor judgment, which primarily
considers risk, the timing or dollar amount of the transaction, or the significance
of the transaction to the area of operation reviewed. As a matter of course, we do
not normally use sampling in our tests, so unless otherwise specifically indicated,
neither statistical nor non-statistical audit sampling was used to select the
transactions tested. Therefore, unless sampling is specifically indicated in a
finding, the results from any tests conducted or disclosed by us cannot be used to
project those results to the entire population from which the test items were
selected.
We also performed various data extracts of pertinent information from the State’s
Financial Management Information System (such as revenue and expenditure
data) and the State’s Central Payroll Bureau (payroll data), as well as from the
contractor administering the State’s Corporate Purchasing Card Program (credit
card activity). The extracts are performed as part of ongoing internal processes
established by the Office of Legislative Audits and were subject to various tests to
determine data reliability. We determined that the data extracted from these
6

--- Page 9 ---
sources were sufficiently reliable for the purposes the data were used during this
audit.
We also extracted data from TU’s financial systems for the purpose of testing
certain areas such as student financial aid and student accounts receivable. We
performed various tests of the relevant data and determined that the data were
sufficiently reliable for the purposes the data were used during the audit. Finally,
we performed other auditing procedures that we considered necessary to achieve
our audit objectives. The reliability of data used in this report for background or
informational purposes was not assessed.
TU’s management is responsible for establishing and maintaining effective
internal control. Internal control is a process designed to provide reasonable
assurance that objectives pertaining to the reliability of financial records;
effectiveness and efficiency of operations, including safeguarding of assets; and
compliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations are achieved. As
provided in Government Auditing Standards, there are five components of
internal control: control environment, risk assessment, control activities,
information and communication, and monitoring. Each of the five components,
when significant to the audit objectives, and as applicable to TU, were considered
by us during the course of this audit.
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate.
Our reports are designed to assist the Maryland General Assembly in exercising
its legislative oversight function and to provide constructive recommendations for
improving State operations. As a result, our reports generally do not address
activities we reviewed that are functioning properly.
This report includes a finding relating to conditions that we consider to be
significant deficiencies in the design or operation of internal control that could
adversely affect TU’s ability to maintain reliable financial records, operate
effectively and efficiently, and/or comply with applicable laws, rules, and
regulations. This finding is also considered a significant instance of
noncompliance with applicable laws, rules, or regulations. Other less significant
findings were communicated to TU that did not warrant inclusion in this report.
State Government Article Section 2-1224(i) requires that we redact in a manner
consistent with auditing best practices any cybersecurity findings before a report
7

--- Page 10 ---
is made available to the public. This results in the issuance of two different
versions of an audit report that contains cybersecurity findings – a redacted
version for the public and an unredacted version for government officials
responsible for acting on our audit recommendations.
The State Finance and Procurement Article, Section 3.5-301(b), states that
cybersecurity is defined as “processes or capabilities wherein systems,
communications, and information are protected and defended against damage,
unauthorized use or modification, and exploitation.” Based on that definition, and
in our professional judgment, we concluded that the finding in this report falls
under that definition. Consequently, for the publicly available audit report all
specifics as to the nature of the cybersecurity finding and required corrective
actions have been redacted. We have determined that such aforementioned
practices, and government auditing standards, support the redaction of this
information from the public audit report. The specifics of this cybersecurity
finding have been communicated to TU and those parties responsible for acting
on our recommendations in an unredacted audit report.
The response from the USM Office, on behalf of TU, to our finding and
recommendations is included as an appendix to this report. Depending on the
version of the audit report, responses to any cybersecurity findings may be
redacted in accordance with State law. As prescribed in the State Government
Article, Section 2-1224 of the Annotated Code of Maryland, we will advise the
USM Office regarding the results of our review of its response.
8

--- Page 11 ---
APPENDIX
3300 METZEROTT ROAD // ADELPHI, MD 20783
WWW.USMD.EDU // 301.445.1923
OFFICE OF ADMINISTRATION AND FINANCE
February 29, 2024
Mr. Gregory A. Hook, CPA
Legislative Auditor
Office of Legislative Audits
The Warehouse at Camden Yards
351 West Camden Street, Suite 400
Baltimore, MD 21201
Re: University System of Maryland – Towson University
Period of Audit: June 25, 2019 through January 31, 2023
Dear Mr. Hook,
Thank you for the work of your team and the recommendations you provided. I have enclosed the
University System of Maryland’s responses to your draft report covering the examination of the accounts
and records of the University System of Maryland – Towson University. Our comments refer to the
individual items in the report.
Sincerely,
Ellen Herbst
Senior Vice Chancellor for Administration and Finance
Enclosures
cc: Dr. Mark R. Ginsberg, President, TU
Ms. Linda R. Gooden, Chair, University System of Maryland Board of Regents
Mr. Louis M. Pope, University System of Maryland Board of Regents
Dr. Jay A. Perman, Chancellor, University System of Maryland
Ms. Celeste Denson, Associate Vice Chancellor for Financial Affairs, USM Office
Mr. David Mosca, Vice Chancellor for Accountability, USM Office
Mr. Michael C. Eismeier, Associate Vice Chancellor and CIO, USM Office
Ms. Samantha Norris, Director, Financial Planning and Analysis, USM Office
Mr. Benjamin Lowenthal, Vice President and Chief Financial Officer, Administration and Finance, TU
Mr. Vasu Bhatt, Director, Management Advisory and Compliance Services, TU

--- Page 12 ---
University System of Maryland
Towson University
Agency Response Form
Information Systems Security and Control
The Office of Legislative Audits (OLA) has determined that Finding 1 related to “cybersecurity,”
as defined by the State Finance and Procurement Article, Section 3.5-301(b) of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, and therefore is subject to redaction from the publicly available audit report
in accordance with the State Government Article 2-1224(i). Although the specifics of the
finding, including the analysis, related recommendation(s), along with the USM Office’s
responses, have been redacted from this report copy, the USM Office’s responses indicated
agreement with the finding and related recommendations.
Finding 1
Redacted cybersecurity-related finding.
Agency Response has been redacted by OLA.
Page 1 of 1

--- Page 13 ---
A T
UDIT EAM
Robert A. Wells, Jr., CPA
Audit Manager
R. Brendan Coffey, CPA, CISA
Edwin L. Paul, CPA, CISA
Information Systems Audit Managers
Amanda M. Jones
Senior Auditor
Edward O. Kendall, CISA
Matthew D. Walbert, CISA
Information Systems Senior Auditors
Keli R. Edmonds
Paul A. McGrew
Etai D. Stern
John B. Wachter, CFE
Garrett A. White
Staff Auditors
Joshua A. Nicodemus
Christopher C. Pitre
Neha S. Tirkey
Information Systems Staff Auditors