Title: Public Service Commission
Date: 01/15/2021
Type: Fiscal Compliance
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=6001b12ea1ce580334b564d9
Extracted: 2025-06-19T11:47:06.172882
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Audit Report
Public Service Commission
March 2025
Public Notice
In compliance with the requirements of the State Government Article Section
2-1224(i), of the Annotated Code of Maryland, the Office of Legislative Audits
has redacted cybersecurity findings and related auditee responses
from this public report.
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Senator Shelly L. Hettleman (Senate Chair) Delegate Jared Solomon (House Chair)
Senator Joanne C. Benson Delegate Steven J. Arentz
Senator Benjamin T. Brooks, Sr. Delegate Andrea Fletcher Harrison
Senator Paul D. Corderman Delegate Steven C. Johnson
Senator Katie Fry Hester Delegate Mary A. Lehman
Senator Cheryl C. Kagan Delegate David H. Moon
Senator Clarence K. Lam, M.D. Delegate Julie Palakovich Carr
Senator Cory V. McCray Delegate Emily K. Shetty
Senator Justin D. Ready Delegate Stephanie M. Smith
Senator Bryan W. Simonaire Delegate M. Courtney Watson
To Obtain Further Information
Office of Legislative Audits
The Warehouse at Camden Yards
351 West Camden Street, Suite 400
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Phone: 410-946-5900
Maryland Relay: 711
TTY: 410-946-5401 ꞏ 301-970-5401
E-mail: webmaster@ola.state.md.us
Website: www.ola.state.md.us
To Report Fraud
The Office of Legislative Audits operates a Fraud Hotline to report fraud, waste, or abuse involving State
of Maryland government resources. Reports of fraud, waste, or abuse may be communicated anonymously
by a toll-free call to 1-877-FRAUD-11, by mail to the Fraud Hotline, c/o Office of Legislative Audits, or
through the Office’s website.
Nondiscrimination Statement
The Department of Legislative Services does not discriminate on the basis of age, ancestry, color, creed,
marital status, national origin, race, religion, gender, gender identity, sexual orientation, or disability in the
admission or access to its programs, services, or activities. The Department’s Information Officer has been
designated to coordinate compliance with the nondiscrimination requirements contained in Section 35.107
of the United States Department of Justice Regulations. Requests for assistance should be directed to the
Information Officer at 410-946-5400 or 410-970-5400.

--- Page 3 ---
March 17, 2025
Senator Shelly L. Hettleman, Senate Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Delegate Jared Solomon, House Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Members of Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Annapolis, Maryland
Ladies and Gentlemen:
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the Public Service Commission
(PSC) for the period beginning March 12, 2020 and ending February 29, 2024.
PSC regulates public utilities (such as gas, electric, water, and telephone
companies) operating within the State. PSC also regulates common carriers
engaged in the public transportation of passengers in the State.
Our audit disclosed that PSC did not have adequate controls over accounts
receivables. For example, two employees with access to the accounts receivable
records could post payments and credits without independent approval.
In addition, our audit disclosed cybersecurity-related findings. However, in
accordance with the State Government Article, Section 2-1224(i) of the
Annotated Code of Maryland, we have redacted the findings from this audit
report. Specifically, State law requires the Office of Legislative Audits to redact
cybersecurity findings in a manner consistent with auditing best practices before
the report is made available to the public. The term “cybersecurity” is defined in
the State Finance and Procurement Article, Section 3.5-301(b), and using our
professional judgment we have determined that the redacted findings fall under
the referenced definition. The specifics of the cybersecurity findings were
previously communicated to those parties responsible for acting on our
recommendations.

--- Page 4 ---
Finally, our audit included a review to determine the status of the three findings
contained in our preceding audit report. We determined that PSC satisfactorily
addressed two of these findings. The remaining finding is repeated in this report.
PSC’s response to this audit is included as an appendix to this report. Consistent
with State law, we have redacted the elements of PSC’s response related to the
cybersecurity audit findings. We reviewed the response and noted general
agreement to our findings and related recommendations. Based on our review of
the written responses and additional clarification obtained from PSC, we believe
the corrective actions identified are sufficient to address all audit issues.
We wish to acknowledge the cooperation extended to us during the audit by PSC
and its willingness to address the audit issues and implement appropriate
corrective actions.
Respectfully submitted,
Brian S. Tanen
Brian S. Tanen, CPA, CFE
Legislative Auditor
2

--- Page 5 ---
Table of Contents
Background Information 4
Agency Responsibilities 4
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report 6
Findings and Recommendations 7
Accounts Receivable
* Finding 1 – PSC did not establish adequate controls over accounts 7
receivables.
Information Systems Security and Control
Finding 2 – Redacted cybersecurity-related finding. 8
Finding 3 – Redacted cybersecurity-related finding. 8
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology 9
Agency Response Appendix
* Denotes item repeated in full or part from preceding audit report
3

--- Page 6 ---
Background Information
Agency Responsibilities
The Public Service Commission (PSC), which functions under the provisions of
the Public Utilities Article of the Annotated Code of Maryland, regulates public
utilities (such as gas, electric, water, and telephone companies) operating within
the State. PSC also regulates common carriers engaged in the public
transportation of passengers in the State and has jurisdiction over taxicabs as well
as transportation network companies throughout the State. PSC consists of five
members who are appointed by the Governor, with the advice and consent of the
Senate.
In accordance with State law, the operating expenses of PSC are paid for by
annual assessments which are calculated and issued by PSC to regulated
companies. These annual assessments also pay the operating expenses of the
Office of People’s Counsel (OPC). OPC, which we audit separately, is
responsible for protecting the interests of residential and non-commercial users of
these regulated services relating to matters and proceedings before PSC and the
courts. According to State records, during fiscal year 2023, the operating
expenses of PSC and OPC totaled $22.8 million (as shown in Figure 1 on the
following page) and $6.9 million, respectively.
4

--- Page 7 ---
Figure 1
Public Service Commission
Positions, Expenditures, and Funding Sources
Full-Time Equivalent Positions as of June 30, 2023
Positions Percent
Filled 131 92.9%
Vacant 10 7.1%
Total 141
Fiscal Year 2023 Expenditures
Expenditures Percent
Salaries, Wages, and Fringe Benefits $18,185,670 79.8%
Technical and Special Fees 304,271 1.3%
Operating Expenses 4,314,526 18.9%
Total $22,804,467
Fiscal Year 2023 Funding Sources
Funding Percent
Special Fund $21,955,956 96.3%
Federal Fund 848,511 3.7%
Total $22,804,467
Source: State financial and personnel records
5

--- Page 8 ---
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report
Our audit included a review to determine the status of the three findings contained
in our preceding audit report dated January 15, 2021. As disclosed in Figure 2,
we determined that PSC satisfactorily addressed two of these findings. The
remaining finding is repeated in this report.
Figure 2
Status of Preceding Findings
Preceding Implementation
Finding Description
Finding Status
The Public Service Commission (PSC) did not have
Finding 1 an adequate process to ensure that utility companies Not repeated
complied with certain requirements of merger orders.
PSC did not obtain required control agency approval
Finding 2 for three sole source contracts for consulting services Not repeated
totaling approximately $605,000.
PSC did not establish adequate controls over cash Repeated
Finding 3
receipts and accounts receivable. (Current Finding 1)
6

--- Page 9 ---
Findings and Recommendations
Accounts Receivable
Finding 1
PSC did not establish adequate controls over accounts receivables.
Analysis
PSC did not establish adequate controls over accounts receivables. PSC
maintained accounts receivable records for assessments, permits, and other fees
due from regulated entities. According to PSC records, as of June 2023 the
accounts receivable balance was approximately $28.9 million.
 Two of the five employees with access to the accounts receivable records
could post payments and credits without independent approval, and three
employees could delete account information without independent approval.
We were unable to obtain a system report of adjustments or deletions to
determine whether any such transactions processed by these employees were
proper.
 PSC did not maintain an accounts receivable control account. PSC
historically relied on a control account to monitor the accounts receivable
transactions, but the control account was discontinued in December 2019.
Consequently, errors or other discrepancies could occur without timely
detection.
The Comptroller of Maryland’s Accounting Procedures Manual1 requires
accounts receivable adjustments to be approved by supervisory personnel. In
addition, the Manual requires the maintenance of an accounts receivables control
account and for it to be reconciled with the aggregate balance of the detailed
records.
Similar conditions were noted in our preceding audit report. In response to that
report, PSC agreed to implement our recommendations by January 15, 2021.
During our current audit, PSC was unable to explain why the recommendations
were not implemented.
1The updated Accounting Policies and Procedures Manual, effective June 2024, has the same
requirements.
7

--- Page 10 ---
Recommendation 1
We recommend that PSC
a. ensure all accounts receivable transactions are subject to independent
review and approval (repeat),
b. determine the feasibility of creating system reports of adjustments and
deletions to enable oversight of such transactions, and
c. maintain an independent control account and periodically reconcile it to
the detailed records (repeat).
Information Systems Security and Control
We determined that the Information Systems Security and Control section,
including Findings 2 and 3 related to “cybersecurity,” as defined by the State
Finance and Procurement Article, Section 3.5-301(b) of the Annotated Code of
Maryland, and therefore are subject to redaction from the publicly available audit
report in accordance with the State Government Article 2-1224(i). Consequently,
the specifics of the following findings, including the analysis, related
recommendations, along with PSC’s responses, have been redacted from this
report copy.
Finding 2
Redacted cybersecurity-related finding.
Finding 3
Redacted cybersecurity-related finding.
8

--- Page 11 ---
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the Public Service Commission
(PSC), for the period beginning March 12, 2020 and ending February 29, 2024.
The audit was conducted in accordance with generally accepted government
auditing standards. Those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to
obtain sufficient, appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our
findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives. We believe that the
evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions
based on our audit objectives.
As prescribed by the State Government Article, Section 2-1221 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, the objectives of this audit were to examine PSC’s financial
transactions, records, and internal control, and to evaluate its compliance with
applicable State laws, rules, and regulations.
In planning and conducting our audit, we focused on the major financial-related
areas of operations based on assessments of significance and risk. The areas
addressed by the audit included procurements and disbursements, payroll, cash
receipts, accounts receivable, assessments charged to regulated utilities, and
PSC’s distribution and oversight of federal relief funding. In addition, we
reviewed PSC’s oversight of certain provisions of several mergers and
information systems security and control. We also determined the status of the
findings contained in our preceding audit report.
Our assessment of internal controls was based on agency procedures and controls
in place at the time of our fieldwork. Our test of transactions and other auditing
procedures were generally focused on the transactions occurring during our audit
period of March 12, 2020 to February 29, 2024, but may include transactions
before or after this period as we considered necessary to achieve our audit
objectives.
To accomplish our audit objectives, our audit procedures included inquiries of
appropriate personnel, inspections of documents and records, tests of transactions
and to the extent practicable, observations of PSC’s operations. Generally,
transactions were selected for testing based on auditor judgment, which primarily
considers risk, the timing or dollar amount of the transaction, or the significance
of the transaction to the area of operation reviewed. As a matter of course, we do
not normally use sampling in our tests, so unless otherwise specifically indicated,
neither statistical nor non-statistical audit sampling was used to select the
transactions tested. Therefore, unless sampling is specifically indicated in a
finding, the results from any tests conducted or disclosed by us cannot be used to
9

--- Page 12 ---
project those results to the entire population from which the test items were
selected.
We also performed various data extracts of pertinent information from the State’s
Financial Management Information System (such as revenue and expenditure
data) and the State’s Central Payroll Bureau (payroll data), as well as from the
contractor administering the State’s Corporate Purchasing Card Program (credit
card activity). The extracts are performed as part of ongoing internal processes
established by the Office of Legislative Audits and were subject to various tests to
determine data reliability. We determined that the data extracted from these
sources were sufficiently reliable for the purposes the data were used during this
audit. Finally, we performed other auditing procedures that we considered
necessary to achieve our audit objectives. The reliability of data used in this
report for background or informational purposes was not assessed.
PSC’s management is responsible for establishing and maintaining effective
internal control. Internal control is a process designed to provide reasonable
assurance that objectives pertaining to the reliability of financial records;
effectiveness and efficiency of operations, including safeguarding of assets; and
compliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations are achieved. As
provided in Government Auditing Standards, there are five components of
internal control: control environment, risk assessment, control activities,
information and communication, and monitoring. Each of the five components,
when significant to the audit objectives, and as applicable to PSC, were
considered by us during the course of this audit.
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate.
Our reports are designed to assist the Maryland General Assembly in exercising
its legislative oversight function and to provide constructive recommendations for
improving State operations. As a result, our reports generally do not address
activities we reviewed that are functioning properly.
This report includes findings relating to conditions that we consider to be
significant deficiencies in the design or operation of internal control that could
adversely affect PSC’s ability to maintain reliable financial records, operate
effectively and efficiently, and/or comply with applicable laws, rules, and
regulations. Our report also includes findings regarding significant instances of
10

--- Page 13 ---
noncompliance with applicable laws, rules, or regulations. Other less significant
findings were communicated to PSC that did not warrant inclusion in this report.
State Government Article Section 2-1224(i) requires that we redact in a manner
consistent with auditing best practices any cybersecurity findings before a report
is made available to the public. This results in the issuance of two different
versions of an audit report that contains cybersecurity findings – a redacted
version for the public and an unredacted version for government officials
responsible for acting on our audit recommendations.
The State Finance and Procurement Article, Section 3.5-301(b), states that
cybersecurity is defined as “processes or capabilities wherein systems,
communications, and information are protected and defended against damage,
unauthorized use or modification, and exploitation.” Based on that definition, and
in our professional judgment, we concluded that certain findings in this report fall
under that definition. Consequently, for the publicly available audit report all
specifics as to the nature of cybersecurity findings and required corrective actions
have been redacted. We have determined that such aforementioned practices, and
government auditing standards, support the redaction of this information from the
public audit report. The specifics of these cybersecurity findings have been
communicated to PSC and those parties responsible for acting on our
recommendations in an unredacted audit report.
PSC’s response to our findings and recommendations is included as an appendix
to this report. Depending on the version of the audit report, responses to any
cybersecurity findings may be redacted in accordance with State law. As
prescribed in the State Government Article, Section 2-1224 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, we will advise PSC regarding the results of our review of its
response.
11

--- Page 14 ---
APPENDIX
COMMISSIONERS STATE OF MARYLAND
___________
FREDERICK H. HOOVER, JR.
CHAIR
MICHAEL T. RICHARD
KUMAR P. BARVE
BONNIE A. SUCHMAN
PUBLIC SERVICE COMMISSION
March 12, 2025
Mr. Brian S. Tanen, CPA, CFE
Legislative Auditor
Office of Legislative Audits
The Warehouse at Camden Yards
351 West Camden Street, Suite 400
Baltimore, MD 21201
Dear Mr. Tanen,
Thank you for providing the draft legislative audit report on the Public Service Commission
(PSC) for the period beginning March 12, 2020 and ending February 29, 2024. Please find the
PSC’s response enclosed.
The PSC appreciates the time and effort of the Office of Legislative Audits on this matter and is
committed to resolving the findings identified in the audit report. If you have any questions
regarding this matter, please do not hesitate to contact Ms. Amanda Best at
amanda.best@maryland.gov.
Sincerely,
Frederick H. Hoover, Jr.
Chair
WILLIAM DONALD SCHAEFER TOWER • 6 ST. PAUL STREET • BALTIMORE, MARYLAND 21202-6806
410-767-8000 • Toll Free: 1-800-492-0474 • FAX: 410-333-6495
MDRS: 1-800-735-2258 (TTY/Voice) • Website: www.psc.state.md.us

--- Page 15 ---
Public Service Commission
Agency Response Form
Accounts Receivable
Finding 1
PSC did not establish adequate controls over accounts receivables.
We recommend that PSC
a. ensure all accounts receivable transactions are subject to independent
review and approval (repeat),
b. determine the feasibility of creating system reports of adjustments and
deletions to enable oversight of such transactions, and
c. maintain an independent control account and periodically reconcile it to
the detailed records (repeat).
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide The PSC agrees with the finding but would like to clarify that it did
additional comments as attempt to address the finding in the previous audit. As a result of the
deemed necessary. previous audit finding, the PSC procured a new accounts receivable
system that was custom made for the agency. Unfortunately, the system
did not work as intended and was never fully completed by the vendor to
address the issues outlined in the previous audit. The PSC is currently
setting up a new accounts receivable system that will have proper
controls in place.
Recommendation 1a Agree Estimated Completion Date: 6/30/2025
Please provide details of The agency is in the process of setting up a new accounts receivable
corrective action or system. The new system has clear user roles and will be set to require
explain disagreement. review and approval by other division members.
Recommendation 1b Agree Estimated Completion Date: 6/30/2025
Please provide details of The new accounts receivable system can generate reports to account for
corrective action or adjustments and voiding transactions. This function will be utilized upon
explain disagreement. the new system being completed to enable oversight of these
transactions.
Recommendation 1c Agree Estimated Completion Date: 6/30/2025
Please provide details of The agency will set up a control account procedure to reconcile its
corrective action or records and maintain an independent record of the account transactions.
explain disagreement. The agency anticipates the issue identified here will be resolved upon the
completion of the new accounts receivable system.
Page 1 of 2

--- Page 16 ---
Public Service Commission
Agency Response Form
Information Systems Security and Control
The Office of Legislative Audits (OLA) has determined that the Information
Systems Security and Control section, including Findings 2 and 3 related to
“cybersecurity,” as defined by the State Finance and Procurement Article, Section
3.5-301(b) of the Annotated Code of Maryland, and therefore are subject to
redaction from the publicly available audit report in accordance with the State
Government Article 2-1224(i). Although the specifics of the following findings,
including the analysis, related recommendations, along with PSC’s responses,
have been redacted from this report copy, PSC’s responses indicated agreement
with the findings and related recommendations.
Finding 2
Redacted cybersecurity-related finding.
Agency Response has been redacted by OLA.
Finding 3
Redacted cybersecurity-related finding.
Agency Response has been redacted by OLA.
Page 2 of 2

--- Page 17 ---
A T
UDIT EAM
Michael J. Murdzak, CPA
Audit Manager
Michael K. Bliss, CISA
R. Brendan Coffey, CPA, CISA
Information Systems Audit Managers
Patrick J. Cavanaugh, CPA
Senior Auditor
Charles O. Price
Information Systems Senior Auditor
Albert S. Kim
Staff Auditor