Title: Department of Veterans Affairs
Date: 01/05/2021
Type: Fiscal Compliance
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=6001f3f4a1ce580334b5e79d
Extracted: 2025-06-19T11:46:52.176777
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Audit Report
Department of Veterans Affairs
January 2021
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Senator Clarence K. Lam, M.D. (Senate Chair) Delegate Carol L. Krimm (House Chair)
Senator Malcolm L. Augustine Delegate Steven J. Arentz
Senator Adelaide C. Eckardt Delegate Mark S. Chang
Senator George C. Edwards Delegate Andrea Fletcher Harrison
Senator Katie Fry Hester Delegate Keith E. Haynes
Senator Cheryl C. Kagan Delegate Michael A. Jackson
Senator Benjamin F. Kramer Delegate David Moon
Senator Cory V. McCray Delegate April R. Rose
Senator Justin D. Ready Delegate Geraldine Valentino-Smith
Senator Craig J. Zucker Delegate Karen Lewis Young
To Obtain Further Information
Office of Legislative Audits
301 West Preston Street, Room 1202
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Phone: 410-946-5900 ꞏ 301-970-5900 ꞏ 1-877-486-9964 (Toll Free in Maryland)
Maryland Relay: 711
TTY: 410-946-5401 ꞏ 301-970-5401
E-mail: OLAWebmaster@ola.state.md.us
Website: www.ola.state.md.us
To Report Fraud
The Office of Legislative Audits operates a Fraud Hotline to report fraud, waste, or abuse involving State
of Maryland government resources. Reports of fraud, waste, or abuse may be communicated anonymously
by a toll-free call to 1-877-FRAUD-11, by mail to the Fraud Hotline, c/o Office of Legislative Audits, or
through the Office’s website.
Nondiscrimination Statement
The Department of Legislative Services does not discriminate on the basis of age, ancestry, color, creed,
marital status, national origin, race, religion, gender, gender identity, sexual orientation, or disability in the
admission or access to its programs, services, or activities. The Department’s Information Officer has been
designated to coordinate compliance with the nondiscrimination requirements contained in Section 35.107
of the United States Department of Justice Regulations. Requests for assistance should be directed to the
Information Officer at 410-946-5400 or 410-970-5400.

--- Page 3 ---
January 5, 2021
Senator Clarence K. Lam, M.D., Senate Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Delegate Carol L. Krimm, House Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Members of Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Annapolis, Maryland
Ladies and Gentlemen:
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the Department of Veterans
Affairs (DVA) for the period beginning March 7, 2016 and ending April 2, 2020.
DVA assists veterans and their families and survivors in obtaining federal, State,
and local benefits provided by law in recognition of their service to the State and
country. DVA also manages five veterans’ cemeteries, maintains four veterans’
war memorials, and operates and manages the Charlotte Hall Veterans Home.
Our audit disclosed that DVA did not adequately control and account for
collections as initial records of collection were not agreed to validated deposit
documentation, certain cash handling and recordkeeping responsibilities were not
adequately segregated, and required monthly reconciliations between the State’s
records and the corresponding bank records were not performed. We also noted
that DVA did not invoke a contract provision that would have enabled it to reduce
payments to the vendor operating the Charlotte Hall Veterans Home when
required staffing was not provided, and did not document its rationale for not
taking that action. We estimated that DVA could have collectively reduced
vendor payments by $277,000 due to certain staffing positions remaining vacant
for periods of 2 to 28 months.
Finally, our audit included a review to determine the status of the six findings
contained in our preceding audit report. We determined that DVA satisfactorily
addressed four of these findings. The remaining two findings are repeated in this
report.

--- Page 4 ---
DVA’s response to this audit is included as an appendix to this report. We
reviewed the response and noted general agreement to our findings and related
recommendations, and while there are other aspects of DVA’s response which
will require further clarification, we do not anticipate that these will require the
Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee’s attention to resolve.
We wish to acknowledge the cooperation extended to us during the audit by DVA
and its willingness to address the audit issues and implement appropriate
corrective actions.
Respectfully submitted,
Gregory A. Hook, CPA
Legislative Auditor
2

--- Page 5 ---
Background Information
Agency Responsibilities
The Department of Veterans Affairs (DVA) delivers services and administers
programs to assist veterans, their families, and survivors in obtaining federal,
State, and local benefits provided by law in recognition of their service to the
State and country. DVA provides administrative services through numerous
veterans’ service centers throughout the State, the United States Department of
Veterans Affairs Medical Center, and the Charlotte Hall Veterans Home (CHVH),
and operates and maintains five veterans’ cemeteries, four veterans’ war
memorials, and offices in Annapolis and Baltimore. CHVH provides care for
Maryland veterans who are unable to care for themselves due to disability or
advancing age, or who have the need for skilled nursing care. According to the
State’s records, DVA’s expenditures for fiscal year 2020 totaled approximately
$47 million.
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report
Our audit included a review to determine the status of the six findings contained
in our preceding audit report dated December 1, 2016. As disclosed in the
following table, we determined that DVA satisfactorily addressed four of these
findings. The remaining two findings are repeated in this report.
3

--- Page 6 ---
Status of Preceding Findings
Preceding Implementation
Finding Description
Finding Status
The Department of Veterans Affairs (DVA) did not use
certain funds as intended and improperly retained funds
Finding 1 Not repeated
totaling $126,000 at the end of fiscal year 2015 that
should have been reverted to the State’s General Fund.
Unsupported federal fund revenue transactions totaling
Finding 2 $1 million were recorded to offset deficit balances as of Not repeated
June 30, 2015.
DVA did not request federal fund allowances for
veterans’ burials from the U.S. Department of Veterans
Finding 3 Affairs (USDVA) in a timely manner. In addition, DVA Not repeated
has experienced significant delays in recovering $2.7
million in burial funds from the USDVA.
DVA did not always use the appropriate payment
method for disbursement transactions and did not always
Finding 4 Not repeated
document that the goods or services were received prior
to payment.
DVA did not reduce payments to the vendor operating
Repeated
Finding 5 the Charlotte Hall Veterans Home, as permitted by the
(Current Finding 2)
contract, when required staffing was not provided.
DVA did not always record collections upon receipt, and
deposit verifications either were not performed or were Repeated
Finding 6
performed by individuals who processed or had access to (Current Finding 1)
the related collections.
4

--- Page 7 ---
Findings and Recommendations
Cash Receipts and Accounts Receivable
Finding 1
The Department of Veteran’s Affairs (DVA) did not adequately control and
account for collections and certain accounts receivable.
Analysis
DVA did not adequately control and account for collections and certain accounts
receivable. Specifically, DVA did not perform an adequate verification of
collections to deposit since the initial record of collections received was not
agreed to validated deposit documentation from the bank. In addition, the
employee who received certain collections was responsible for recording those
collections in the related accounts receivable records. Furthermore, collections
recorded by DVA in the State’s accounting records were not reconciled to the
corresponding bank records. Consequently, there was a lack of assurance that all
collections had been deposited and properly recorded.
The majority of DVA’s collections, which totaled approximately $6.4 million
during fiscal year 2020, were received, recorded on check logs, and deposited
(remotely as of December 30, 2019) at the Charlotte Hall Veterans Home
(CHVH), and at DVA’s five veterans’ cemeteries located throughout the State.
These locations subsequently submitted the related documentation, such as
collection records and deposit summaries to DVA’s Annapolis fiscal office for
further processing, including recordation in the State’s accounting records.
We examined procedures over collections received at CHVH and one of the five
cemeteries. We found that a verification of the initial record of collections (check
logs) to validated deposit documentation received from the bank was not
performed. In addition, the cemetery employee who received payments for
reimbursement of interment costs, also recorded those payments in the related
accounts receivable records. Furthermore, there was no reconciliation of
collections recorded in the State’s records for these locations to the corresponding
bank records. In fiscal year 2020, CHVH received approximately $3.1 million
which primarily represented certain lease payments from the vendor responsible
for managing CHVH. The cemetery we examined received $2.6 million for
interment costs, primarily from the federal government.
Similar conditions regarding the failure to perform adequate deposit verifications
were noted in our three preceding audit reports dating back to 2010. The
Comptroller of Maryland’s Accounting Procedures Manual requires an
5

--- Page 8 ---
independent verification of collections from the initial point of recordation to
deposit. The Manual also requires the separation of cash receipts and accounts
receivable duties. Furthermore, the State Treasurer’s Policy on the Use of Remote
Deposit Services by Maryland State Agencies requires that State agencies perform
monthly reconciliations that ensure that the deposits recorded in the State’s
accounting records agree with the corresponding bank records.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that DVA
a. ensure that the initial record of collections received is independently
agreed to validated bank deposit documentation (repeat),
b. adequately separate collection and accounts receivable record keeping
duties, and
c. perform monthly reconciliations of deposits recorded in the State’s
accounting records to the corresponding bank records.
We advised DVA on accomplishing the necessary separation of duties using
existing personnel.
Charlotte Hall Veterans Home Contract
Finding 2
DVA did not invoke a contract provision that would have enabled it to
reduce payments to the vendor operating CHVH when required staffing was
not provided, and did not document its rationale for not taking that action.
Analysis
DVA did not invoke a contract provision that would have enabled it to reduce
payments to the vendor operating CHVH when required staffing was not
provided, and did not document its rationale for not taking that action. According
to the February 2020 staffing report provided by the vendor, as of February 29,
2020, seven nursing positions had been vacant for periods ranging between 2 and
12 months, and another four positions (for example, maintenance staff) had been
vacant for periods ranging between 7 and 28 months. Based on the hourly rate for
the vacant positions noted above and a 40-hour week, we estimated that DVA
could have collectively reduced payments to the vendor by approximately
$277,000 because of these vacancies.
The current four-year contract with the vendor, which was effective October
2017, includes certain minimum staffing requirements and provides that DVA
would pay the vendor a per diem for each eligible individual served. Because the
6

--- Page 9 ---
level of service is largely dependent upon qualified and capable staff at the levels
proposed by the vendor, the contract also provides for DVA to reduce the
vendor’s payments for the prorated salaries of positions that are vacant for more
than 45 days. DVA management advised us that vendor staffing reports were
reviewed to identify vacant positions, but payments had never been reduced.
DVA’s position is that the inability to fill vacant positions does not represent a
failure on the part of the contractor to timely perform resident care and services, a
failure to operate reliably, or a delay or failure in the provision of services to
CHVH or its residents. Further DVA believes the contractor is doing all in its
power to fill vacancies, citing a nationwide shortage of nursing staff. The
contract allows for exceptions to be approved by DVA based on circumstances in
which a position could not be filled within the 45-day allowable period; however,
DVA could not provide documentation of any approved exceptions.
DVA paid the vendor approximately $26 million during fiscal year 2020, which
included $20.3 million in per diem payments. The remaining vendor payments
included an unrestricted State grant and reimbursement for other costs associated
with the operation of CHVH and other resident activities and services.
Similar conditions were commented upon in our preceding audit report. In its
response to that report, DVA concurred with our recommendations and indicated
that it would conduct a review of required staffing at the facility and, to the extent
possible, identify inappropriate vacancies and seek to recover any payments made
to the contractor relating to such vacancies. Subsequent to the issuance of our
report, the 2017 Joint Chairmen’s Report (JCR) requested that DVA submit a
report of certain data relating to vacancy rates at the facility, as well as salary
information and payments made to the vendor attributable to identified vacancies.
DVA submitted the required report in September 2017. However, according to
the Department of Legislative Services’ Analysis of the FY 2019 Maryland
Executive Budget, the resultant report was unresponsive, and none of the requests
listed in the JCR were met. For example, historical vacancy rates and vacancy
dates that had been requested were not provided. The Analysis further stated that
DVA had concluded that the contractor met its contractual obligations in good
faith during the duration of the contract.
Recommendation 2
We recommend that DVA
a. in the future, reduce vendor payments, as permitted by its contract, for
staff vacancies unless DVA adequately documents an exception to this
provision as allowed; and
b. recover any amounts due for staff vacancies that have occurred since
inception of the current contract, including those noted above (repeat).
7

--- Page 10 ---
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the Department of Veterans
Affairs (DVA) for the period beginning March 7, 2016 and ending April 2, 2020.
The audit was conducted in accordance with generally accepted government
auditing standards. Those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to
obtain sufficient, appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our
findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives. We believe that the
evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions
based on our audit objectives.
As prescribed by the State Government Article, Section 2-1221 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, the objectives of this audit were to examine DVA’s financial
transactions, records, and internal control, and to evaluate its compliance with
applicable State laws, rules, and regulations.
In planning and conducting our audit, we focused on the major financial-related
areas of operations based on assessments of significance and risk. The areas
addressed by the audit included purchases and disbursements, cash receipts,
federal fund reimbursements, payroll, and equipment. We also determined the
status of the findings contained in our preceding audit report.
Our audit did not include an evaluation of internal controls over compliance with
federal laws and regulations for federal financial assistance programs and an
assessment of DVA’s compliance with those laws and regulations because the
State of Maryland engages an independent accounting firm to annually audit such
programs administered by State agencies, including DVA.
Our assessment of internal controls was based on agency procedures and controls
in place at the time of our fieldwork. Our test of transactions and other auditing
procedures were generally focused on the transactions occurring during our audit
period of March 7, 2016 to April 2, 2020, but may include transactions before or
after this period as we considered necessary to achieve our audit objectives.
To accomplish our audit objectives, our audit procedures included inquiries of
appropriate personnel, inspections of documents and records, tests of transactions,
and to the extent practicable, observations of DVA’s operations. Generally,
transactions were selected for testing based on auditor judgment, which primarily
considers risk. Unless otherwise specifically indicated, neither statistical nor non-
statistical audit sampling was used to select the transactions tested. Therefore, the
results of the tests cannot be used to project those results to the entire population
from which the test items were selected.
8

--- Page 11 ---
We also performed various data extracts of pertinent information from the State’s
Financial Management Information System (such as revenue and expenditure
data) and the State’s Central Payroll Bureau (payroll data), as well as from the
contractor administering the State’s Corporate Purchasing Card Program (credit
card activity). These extracts are performed as part of ongoing internal processes
established by the Office of Legislative Audits and were subject to various tests to
determine data reliability. We determined that the data extracted from these
sources were sufficiently reliable for the purposes the data were used during this
audit. Finally, we performed other auditing procedures that we considered
necessary to achieve our audit objectives. The reliability of data used in this
report for background or informational purposes was not assessed.
DVA’s management is responsible for establishing and maintaining effective
internal control. Internal control is a process designed to provide reasonable
assurance that objectives pertaining to the reliability of financial records;
effectiveness and efficiency of operations, including safeguarding of assets; and
compliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations are achieved. As
provided in Government Auditing Standards, there are five components of
internal control: control environment, risk assessment, control activities,
information and communication, and monitoring. Each of the five components,
when significant to the audit objectives, and as applicable to DVA, were
considered by us during the course of this audit.
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate.
Our reports are designed to assist the Maryland General Assembly in exercising
its legislative oversight function and to provide constructive recommendations for
improving State operations. As a result, our reports generally do not address
activities we reviewed that are functioning properly.
This report includes findings relating to conditions that we consider to be
significant deficiencies in the design or operation of internal control that could
adversely affect DVA’s ability to maintain reliable financial records, operate
effectively and efficiently, and/or comply with applicable laws, rules, and
regulations. Our report also includes findings regarding significant instances of
noncompliance with applicable laws, rules, or regulations. Other less significant
findings were communicated to DVA that did not warrant inclusion in this report.
9

--- Page 12 ---
DVA’s response to our findings and recommendations is included as an appendix
to this report. As prescribed in the State Government Article, Section 2-1224 of
the Annotated Code of Maryland, we will advise DVA regarding the results of our
review of its response.
10

--- Page 13 ---
APPENDIX
Maryland Department of Veterans Affairs LARRY HOGAN
GOVERNOR
BOYD K. RUTHERFORD
LT. GOVERNOR
Office of the Secretary
GEORGE W. OWINGS III
SECRETARY
December 30, 2020
Office of Legislative Audits
301 W. Preston St., Room 1202
Baltimore, MD 21201
To Whom It May Concern:
Upon authorization by Secretary George Owings, I am submitting herewith MDVA’s responses to
the recommendations made in your draft legislative audit report received from OLA on December
17, 2020.
Sincerely,
Peter Pantzer
Director of Finance and Administration
THE WINELAND BUILDING, FOURTH FLOOR
16 FRANCIS STREET, ANNAPOLIS, MARYLAND 21401
TOLL FREE: 866-793-1577  ANNAPOLIS: 410-260-3838  FAX: 410-216-7928
veterans.maryland.gov
TTY USERS CALL VIA MD RELAY

--- Page 14 ---
Department of Veterans Affairs
Agency Response Form
Cash Receipts and Accounts Receivable
Finding 1
The Department of Veteran’s Affairs (DVA) did not adequately control and account for
collections and certain accounts receivable.
We recommend that DVA
a. ensure that the initial record of collections received is independently agreed to validated
bank deposit documentation (repeat),
b. adequately separate collection and accounts receivable record keeping duties, and
c. perform monthly reconciliations of deposits recorded in the State’s accounting records
to the corresponding bank records.
We advised DVA on accomplishing the necessary separation of duties using existing
personnel.
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide Two unusual factors played a significant role in the causes of this
additional comments as finding. MDVA adopted new remote deposit procedures in December
deemed necessary. 2019, and MDVA adopted drastically revised plot allowance claim
procedures mandated by the US Department of Veterans Affairs
(USDVA) during the audit period.
Recommendation 1a Agree Estimated Completion Date: 9/1/2020
Please provide details of Having adopted remote deposit scanning in early 2020, we are now
corrective action or receiving deposit scanner confirmations and using them in the deposit
explain disagreement. verification process.
Recommendation 1b Agree Estimated Completion Date: 3/31/2021
Please provide details of The employee noted in the audit report has been pivotal in maintaining
corrective action or new accounts receivable records during the transition to new USDVA
explain disagreement. procedures. When that transition is complete, we can impose the
recommended separation of duties. Until that happens, the Fiscal Unit
will use static downloads of the internal accounts receivable records as a
4th data point in our independent deposit review process.
Recommendation 1c Agree Estimated Completion Date: 11/1/2020
Please provide details of We have already implemented this recommendation.
corrective action or
explain disagreement.
Page 1 of 3

--- Page 15 ---
Department of Veterans Affairs
Agency Response Form
Charlotte Hall Veterans Home Contract
Finding 2
DVA did not invoke a contract provision that would have enabled it to reduce payments to
the vendor operating CHVH when required staffing was not provided, and did not
document its rationale for not taking that action.
We recommend that DVA
a. in the future, reduce vendor payments, as permitted by its contract, for staff vacancies
unless DVA adequately documents an exception to this provision as allowed; and
b. recover any amounts due for staff vacancies that have occurred since inception of the
current contract, including those noted above (repeat).
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide The 2016 audit finding of which current finding 2b is a repeat was based
additional comments as largely on erroneous information from the contractor which overstated
deemed necessary. the vacancy situation, a fact reported in our JCR response in 2017.
The management contractor incurred overtime expense to provide
services that should have been filled by staff in positions that were
vacant. MDVA’s position is that the inability to fill vacant positions did
not represent a failure on the part of the contractor to timely perform
resident care and services, a failure to operate reliably, or a delay or
failure in the provision of services to the Home or its residents.
Nonetheless, MDVA acknowledges its responsibility under the contract
to document exceptions made to the liquidated damages provision.
Recommendation 2a Agree Estimated Completion Date: 3/31/2021
Please provide details of DVA will reduce vendor payments, as permitted by its contract, for staff
corrective action or vacancies unless DVA adequately documents an exception to this
explain disagreement. provision as allowed. Factors related to the COVID pandemic, may well
have the effect of slowing implementation, resulting in the estimated
completion date of 3/31/2021.
Recommendation 2b Agree Estimated Completion Date: 3/31/2021
Page 2 of 3

--- Page 16 ---
Department of Veterans Affairs
Agency Response Form
Please provide details of DVA will reduce vendor payments, as permitted by its contract, for staff
corrective action or vacancies since inception of the current contract unless DVA adequately
explain disagreement. documents an exception to this provision as allowed. Factors related to
the COVID pandemic may well have the effect of slowing the review,
resulting in the estimated completion date of 3/31/2021.
Page 3 of 3

--- Page 17 ---
A T
UDIT EAM
Robert A. Wells, Jr., CPA
Audit Manager
W. Thomas Sides
Senior Auditor
Oluwafemi E. Ogundolie
Staff Auditor