Title: Presentation to the Senate Budget and Taxation and the House Appropriations Subcommittees - Maryland Department of Health - Office of the Secretary and Other Units


Related Report Dated (7/14/2020)
Date: 02/22/2021
Type: Presentations to the Legislature
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=603520c6a1ce580b68f7fb18
Extracted: 2025-06-19T11:48:17.802550
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Maryland Department of Health (MDH) –
Office of the Secretary and Other Units
Report Dated July 14, 2020

--- Page 2 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Audit Overview
 This audit report includes six Maryland Department of Health (MDH)
budgetary units associated with the Secretary and five Deputy Secretaries
that provide administrative infrastructure and oversight to MDH and health
providers throughout the State. During fiscal year 2019, expenditures for
these units totaled approximately $72.7 million.
 The report included six findings of which four findings were repeated from the
preceding audit report and appear in the current report as three findings.
 Our prior audit reported that MDH’s accountability and compliance level was
unsatisfactory in accordance with the rating system we established in
conformity with State law. Based on the results of the current audit, we have
concluded that MDH has made improvements in its fiscal and compliance
operations and its compliance level is no longer deemed unsatisfactory.
MDH - Maryland Department of Health Page 2

--- Page 3 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Key Findings
 MDH did not provide adequate oversight of its administrations' use of
interagency agreements with State universities.
 MDH did not always comply with certain State procurement regulations.
 MDH’s Office of the Inspector General audits of local health departments did
not always include an adequate review of contracts, payroll, and user access
to automated systems.
 MDH had not established adequate controls to ensure the propriety of its
payroll.
 MDH did not institute certain security measures and controls over its
information systems.
MDH - Maryland Department of Health Page 3

--- Page 4 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Interagency Agreements (Finding 1) Repeat Finding
 MDH did not provide adequate oversight over 192 interagency agreements
(IAs) valued at $210.2 million that MDH administrations entered into with
State agencies of which the majority were State institutions of higher
education.
 Our review of 20 IAs totaling $41.6 million disclosed:
 MDH administrations used 11 IAs to inappropriately augment staff beyond
budgeted positions. These IAs included 62 positions which were for non-
health specific duties, such as, policy analysts.
 Two IAs totaling $2.8 million had administrative rates which exceeded the
maximum allowed under MDH policy and appeared excessive. For
example, one of these IAs had an administrative rate of 55 percent.
 Three IAs with a State university totaling $1.3 million appeared to have
been artificially divided, circumventing the Department of Budget and
Management approval process.
 MDH could not support five payments on five IAs totaling $1.2 million.
MDH - Maryland Department of Health Page 4

--- Page 5 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Procurement (Finding 2) Repeat Finding
MDH did not always comply with State procurement requirements related to
sole source and emergency procurements and publishing contract awards.
 MDH could not adequately justify the use of the sole source procurement
method for two sole source contracts tested totaling $3.2 million that were
awarded to the incumbent vendors.
 MDH did not negotiate pricing or notify the Board of Public Works for one
emergency procurement totaling $561,560.
 Five contract awards totaling $235.5 million that were awarded between
May 2016 and March 2019 were not published on eMaryland Marketplace
(eMM) as of June 2019. State law and regulations require contract awards
to be published on eMM not more than 30 days after the execution and
approval of the contract.
MDH - Maryland Department of Health Page 5

--- Page 6 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Office of the Inspector General (Finding 3)
The Office of the Inspector General (OIG) did not always conduct
comprehensive reviews during its audits of local health departments (LHDs).
During fiscal year 2018, payments to the 24 LHDs subject to audit totaled
approximately $294.9 million, of which $120.7 million was for contractual
services and $174.2 million was for payroll.
Our test of five OIG audits during fiscal year 2018 disclosed the following
conditions:
 OIG audits of LHDs did not always include a comprehensive review of
contracts and related expenditures. For four of the audits tested, the OIG did
not verify that the LHDs properly procured the contracts and did not verify
the propriety of the related expenditures.
 Two of the OIG audits did not review certain LHD payroll activity to support
the related expenditures and five audits did not include a review of user
access to MDH’s automated systems.
MDH - Maryland Department of Health Page 6

--- Page 7 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Payroll (Finding 4)
MDH had not established adequate controls to ensure the propriety of its
payroll payments, leave balances, and timesheets. MDH’s payroll expenditures
totaled $521.7 million in calendar year 2018.
 Adjustments to employee pay and leave balances were not adequately
reviewed for propriety and to ensure proper processing.
 MDH’s Central Payroll Unit approved timesheets for employees without
verifying that the employees worked the recorded time.
 Biweekly payroll payments from the State’s Central Payroll Bureau were not
reconciled, in the aggregate, to the payroll payments reflected in reports
generated by the State’s Statewide Personnel System.
MDH - Maryland Department of Health Page 7

--- Page 8 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Information Systems (Findings 5 and 6)
Finding 5
 MDH’s network intrusion detection prevention system was not configured to
prevent identified malicious traffic from entering the network from untrusted
sources.
Finding 6 Repeat Finding
 Information technology (IT) contractors had unnecessary network-level
access to numerous critical MDH network devices because their network
traffic was not subject to traffic filtering.
 We were advised by MDH personnel that it did not maintain a centralized
schedule of all IT contractors and therefore, MDH was unaware of details
concerning the presence of these contractors and the extent of unnecessary
network-level access.
MDH - Maryland Department of Health Page 8

--- Page 9 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Conclusion
MDH should:
• provide oversight of interagency agreements executed by its administrations,
• ensure that State procurement laws and regulations are complied with,
• ensure that all appropriate contract awards are published not more than 30
days after the execution and approval of the contract,
• ensure the scope of future local health department audits includes
comprehensive reviews over critical areas,
• implement adequate controls over payroll functions, and
• configure the network’s intrusion detection prevention system to prevent
malicious traffic and limit information contractors’ network-level access.
MDH - Maryland Department of Health Page 9