Title: Historic St. Mary's City Commission
Date: 02/23/2021
Type: Fiscal Compliance
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=6035823ba1ce580b68f8572b
Extracted: 2025-06-19T11:48:36.709753
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Audit Report
Historic St. Mary’s City Commission
April 2025
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Senator Shelly L. Hettleman (Senate Chair) Delegate Jared Solomon (House Chair)
Senator Joanne C. Benson Delegate Steven J. Arentz
Senator Benjamin T. Brooks, Sr. Delegate Andrea Fletcher Harrison
Senator Paul D. Corderman Delegate Steven C. Johnson
Senator Katie Fry Hester Delegate Mary A. Lehman
Senator Cheryl C. Kagan Delegate David H. Moon
Senator Clarence K. Lam, M.D. Delegate Julie Palakovich Carr
Senator Cory V. McCray Delegate Emily K. Shetty
Senator Justin D. Ready Delegate Stephanie M. Smith
Senator Bryan W. Simonaire Delegate M. Courtney Watson
To Obtain Further Information
Office of Legislative Audits
The Warehouse at Camden Yards
351 West Camden Street, Suite 400
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Phone: 410-946-5900
Maryland Relay: 711
TTY: 410-946-5401 ꞏ 301-970-5401
E-mail: webmaster@ola.state.md.us
Website: www.ola.state.md.us
To Report Fraud
The Office of Legislative Audits operates a Fraud Hotline to report fraud, waste, or abuse involving State
of Maryland government resources. Reports of fraud, waste, or abuse may be communicated anonymously
by a toll-free call to 1-877-FRAUD-11, by mail to the Fraud Hotline, c/o Office of Legislative Audits, or
through the Office’s website.
Nondiscrimination Statement
The Department of Legislative Services does not discriminate on the basis of age, ancestry, color, creed,
marital status, national origin, race, religion, gender, gender identity, sexual orientation, or disability in the
admission or access to its programs, services, or activities. The Department’s Information Officer has been
designated to coordinate compliance with the nondiscrimination requirements contained in Section 35.107
of the United States Department of Justice Regulations. Requests for assistance should be directed to the
Information Officer at 410-946-5400 or 410-970-5400.

--- Page 3 ---
April 18, 2025
Senator Shelly L. Hettleman, Senate Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Delegate Jared Solomon, House Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Members of Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Annapolis, Maryland
Ladies and Gentlemen:
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the Historic St. Mary’s City
Commission for the period July 1, 2020 and ending August 16, 2024. The
Commission is responsible for preserving and protecting archaeological and
historic records of Maryland’s first colonial capital and for appropriately
developing and using this historic and scenic site for the education, enjoyment,
and general benefit of the public.
Our audit disclosed that the Commission’s agreement with its affiliated
foundation was not comprehensive, as it did not address policies and procedures
for key areas such as purchases, ethics, and investments.
The Commission’s response to this audit is included as an appendix to this report.
We reviewed the response to our finding and related recommendations, and have
concluded that the corrective actions identified are sufficient to address all audit
issues.
We wish to acknowledge the cooperation extended to us during the audit by the
Commission.
Respectfully submitted,
Brian S. Tanen
Brian S. Tanen, CPA, CFE
Legislative Auditor

--- Page 4 ---
2

--- Page 5 ---
Background Information
Agency Responsibilities and Financial Information
The Historic St. Mary’s City Commission, an independent unit of state
government, is responsible for preserving and protecting archaeological and
historical records of Maryland’s first colonial capital and for appropriately
developing and using this historic and scenic site for the education, enjoyment,
and general benefit of the public. The Commission operates an outdoor museum
and archeological park.1 The Commission is governed by a board that consists of
eighteen members with 14 members appointed by the Governor with the advice
and consent of the Senate. For the remaining four members, the President of the
Senate and Speaker of the House each appoint one member, and there are also
two ex officio members.2
The Commission also maintains the Historic St. Mary’s City Fund which consists
of general fund appropriations, any fees collected, and any additional money
received or paid to the Commission. The Fund is used to pay all expenses by the
Commission as appropriated by the General Assembly. As of June 30, 2024, the
Fund’s balance was $81,388.
According to State records, during fiscal year 2024, the Commission’s
expenditures totaled $6.9 million (see Figure 1). The majority of the
Commission’s expenditures represent payroll costs for its full-time employees and
technical and special fees for seasonal and contractual employees.
1 The Commission had also operated a bed and breakfast but it is currently not operational. The
Commission is planning to use it as staff offices and for special events (such as weddings).
2 Effective June 1, 2023, Chapter 129, Laws of Maryland 2023, increased the membership for the
Commission from seventeen members to eighteen members.
3

--- Page 6 ---
Figure 1
Commission Positions, Expenditures, and Funding Sources
Full-Time Equivalent Positions as of June 30, 2024
Positions Percent
Filled 29 90.6%
Vacant 3 9.4%
Total 32
Fiscal Year 2024 Expenditures
Expenditures Percent
Salaries, Wages, and Fringe Benefits $3,159,158 45.8%
Technical and Special Fees 1,610,299 23.3%
Operating Expenses 2,131,026 30.9%
Total $6,900,483
Fiscal Year 2024 Funding Sources
Funding Percent
General Fund $6,382,132 92.5%
Special Fund 472,390 6.8%
Federal Fund 45,961 0.7%
Total $6,900,483
Source: State financial records and Commission personnel records
According to the Department of Budget & Management’s fiscal year 2025 Capital
Budget White Book, the Commission had authorized capital improvement projects
with budgeted funds totaling approximately $25.8 million during the period from
July 2020 to June 2024. The largest authorized capital budget totaled $12 million
in fiscal year 2022 for the design and construction of the Maryland Heritage
Interpretive Center, which will feature exhibits, an auditorium, and galleries.
Construction of the Center began in 2022 and was originally expected to be
completed by the end of calendar year 2024, but is now scheduled to be
completed later in calendar year 2025.
In accordance with a July 2007 memorandum of understanding between the
Commission, St. Mary’s College (College), and the Department of General
Services regarding the capital project for the Center, the College was responsible
for the Center’s construction, including procuring, monitoring, and paying
contractors. Therefore, the scope of our audit of the Commission did not include
4

--- Page 7 ---
reviewing the Center’s construction. According to the State’s records, fiscal year
2024 capital expenditures totaled approximately $5.8 million.
Commission’s Agreement with St. Mary’s College of Maryland
for Support Services
The Commission has a longstanding Letter of Agreement (LOA) with the College
that has not been updated since it was initially prepared in 1997.3 According to
the LOA, the College provides support services, such as for procurement,
payment and payroll processing, maintenance of personnel and accounting
records, and other related fiscal functions, to the Commission. Additionally, the
LOA provides for the Commission to request additional services, and the
Commission obtained assistance with capital projects from the College over the
years. For example, as noted above, the Commission and the College executed a
memorandum of understanding for the Maryland Heritage Interpretive Center
capital project.
Performance Audit Report and Law Change
The April 2022 Joint Chairmen's Report (JCR) noted concerns about the financial
management practices at the Commission and required a certified public
accounting firm to conduct a performance audit to evaluate the efficiency and
effectiveness of the financial management practices including procurement by the
Commission. The performance audit report was submitted to the Maryland
General Assembly’s Senate Budget and Taxation Committee and the House
Appropriations Committee in March 2023 and identified several deficiencies,
including:
 No documented policies and procedures over procurement, disbursements,
purchasing cards, human resources, payroll, cash management, fleet
management, property management, and community events which align
operating procedures to applicable State laws and regulations.
 No detailed analysis over key performance indicators in critical operating
areas, such as property management, onsite bed and breakfast operations,
community events, fleet and property management, and deferred maintenance
on the Commission’s assets.
 No updated operating agreements with critical partners, such as the Historic
St. Mary's City Foundation (Foundation) and the College.
3 Our audit of the College dated December 18, 2024 and the financial management practices
performance audit of the Commission recommended that the Commission should update the
LOA with the College.
5

--- Page 8 ---
 No coordinated and cooperative efforts with key constituents, such as the
College, critical to assisting the Commission to achieve its strategic
objectives.
As a result of the performance audit, Chapter 129, Laws of Maryland, 2023
effective June 1, 2023 made numerous changes to the governance of the
Commission including altering the Commission’s membership, requiring the
Commission to develop and publish written policies regarding its operating
procedures, and authorizing and establishing rules for the Commission to
collaborate with affiliated nonprofit organizations, including the Foundation.
Additionally, the April 2024 JCR required the Commission to prepare a report
detailing the progress toward full implementation of all performance audit report
recommendations, examples of how each recommendation is being implemented,
and a timeline for implementing all recommendations. According to the
Commission report, it had addressed the recommendations except for updating an
agreement with the Foundation, which we comment on in Finding 1.
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report
Our audit included a review to determine the status of the finding contained in our
preceding audit report dated February 23, 2021. We determined that the
Commission did not satisfactorily address the finding, which is repeated in this
report.
Findings and Recommendations
Affiliated Foundation
Finding 1
The Historic St. Mary’s City Commission’s (Commission) memorandum of
agreement (MOA) with its affiliated foundation was not comprehensive, as it
did not address policies and procedures for key areas such as purchases,
ethics, and investments.
Analysis
The Commission’s MOA with its affiliated foundation was not comprehensive, as
it did not address policies and procedures for key areas such as purchases, ethics,
and investments. The affiliated foundation was created in October 1982 solely to
support the work of the Commission through fundraising and administering
6

--- Page 9 ---
grants. According to the foundation's fiscal year 2023 audited financial
statements, revenues and expenditures totaled approximately $276,000 and
$291,000, respectively. Additionally, as of June 30, 2023, the foundation’s assets
totaled approximately $508,000, which primarily consisted of investments of
$343,000 and cash totaling $158,000.
The Commission’s MOA with the foundation was created in January 20014 and
defines the roles and responsibilities of the Commission and the foundation. Our
review of the MOA disclosed the following conditions.
 The MOA did not address the foundation’s purchases of goods and services
on behalf of the Commission. During the period from July 2020 to August
2024, the foundation’s support of the Commission was primarily through the
purchase of goods and services related to programs and supporting operations.
The MOA did not include any requirements for these purchases to ensure they
were procured in accordance with State procurement regulations or the
procurement policies and procedures of St. Mary’s College of Maryland
(College), which the Commission advised us that it followed. The College’s
procurement policies require that three proposals be obtained for contracts
between $10,000 and $50,000.
 The MOA did not require the foundation to adopt an ethics policy, approved
by the State Ethics Commission (SEC), to address standards of conduct, ethics
training, reporting of potential ethics violations, and completing annual
financial disclosures by board members and officers. Such a policy would
ensure the integrity of the foundation’s board and its processes and should
include a requirement to advise the Commission of conflicts of interest issues.
As of September 2024, the affiliated foundation had 12 board members, who
were collectively responsible for managing the foundation’s business and
fiscal affairs which included fundraising, administering grant funds it
receives, and approving expenditures to support the Commission’s
programing services and events.
 The MOA did not require the foundation to establish an investment policy for
funds collected on behalf of the Commission. An investment policy would
address controls over collected funds including proper collateralization of
funds, the use of interest-bearing accounts, and procedures for the accounting
and reporting of fund balances. The policy would also address the maximum
4 In accordance with Chapter 129, Laws of Maryland 2023, effective June 1, 2023, the Education
Article, Section 24-508, of the Annotated Code of Maryland was revised to require the
Commission to renew and/or update its MOA with the Foundation at least once every three
years.
7

--- Page 10 ---
amount of unrestricted funds the foundation could retain before transferring
the funds to the Commission. The existing MOA allows the Commission to
use unrestricted funds (not designated for a specific purpose by the
foundation’s board or donors) it receives from the foundation for projects at
its discretion. As of June 30, 2023, unrestricted funds held by the foundation
totaled approximately $155,000.
Similar conditions were noted in our preceding audit report. In its response to
that report, the Commission stated it would revise its MOA with the affiliated
foundation by December 2021 for the areas noted above. However, at the time of
our audit, the Commission had not yet implemented the changes and advised us
that it was in the process of updating its MOA which were discussed by its board
in September 2024.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that the Commission revise its MOA with its affiliated
foundation to, at the least,
a. ensure goods and services purchased on behalf of the Commission by the
foundation are procured in a manner consistent with the College’s
procurement policies and procedures (repeat),
b. establish an ethics policy approved by the SEC and require periodic
monitoring of foundation board members’ compliance with the policy
and reporting to the Commission (repeat), and
c. establish an investment policy that ensures funds collected by the
foundation are properly collateralized and safeguarded and that
addresses when unrestricted funds should be transferred to the
Commission (repeat).
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the Historic St. Mary’s City
Commission for the period beginning July 1, 2020 and ending August 16, 2024.
The audit was conducted in accordance with generally accepted government
auditing standards. Those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to
obtain sufficient, appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our
findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives. We believe that the
evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions
based on our audit objectives.
8

--- Page 11 ---
As prescribed by the State Government Article, Section 2-1221 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, the objectives of this audit were to examine the Commission’s
financial transactions, records, and internal control, and to evaluate its compliance
with applicable State laws, rules, and regulations.
In planning and conducting our audit, we focused on the major financial-related
areas of operations based on assessments of significance and risk. The areas
addressed by the audit included cash receipts, the affiliated foundation, and
disbursements. We also determined the status of the finding contained in our
preceding audit report.
Our audit did not include certain support services provided to the Commission by
St. Mary’s College of Maryland. These support services (such as payment
processing, payroll processing, maintenance of personnel and accounting records
and related fiscal functions) are included within the scope of our audit of the
College.
Our assessment of internal controls was based on the Commission’s procedures
and controls in place at the time of our fieldwork. Our tests of transactions and
other auditing procedures were generally focused on the transactions occurring
during our audit period of July 1, 2020 to August 16, 2024, but may include
transactions before or after this period as we considered necessary to achieve our
audit objectives.
To accomplish our audit objectives, our audit procedures included inquiries of
appropriate personnel, inspections of documents and records, tests of transactions,
and to the extent practicable observations of the Commission’s operations.
Generally, transactions were selected for testing based on auditor judgment,
which primarily considers risk, the timing or dollar amount of the transaction, or
the significance of the transaction to the area of operation reviewed. As a matter
of course, we do not normally use sampling in our tests, so unless otherwise
specifically indicated, neither statistical nor non-statistical audit sampling was
used to select the transactions tested. Therefore, unless sampling is specifically
indicated in a finding, the results from any tests conducted or disclosed by us
cannot be used to project those results to the entire population from which the test
items were selected.
We also performed various data extracts of pertinent information from the State’s
Financial Management Information System (such as revenue and expenditure
data) and the State’s Central Payroll Bureau (payroll data), as well as from the
contractor administering the State’s Corporate Purchasing Card Program (credit
card activity). The extracts are performed as part of ongoing internal processes
9

--- Page 12 ---
established by the Office of Legislative Audits and were subject to various tests to
determine data reliability. We determined that the data extracted from these
sources were sufficiently reliable for the purposes the data were used during this
audit. Finally, we performed other auditing procedures that we considered
necessary to achieve our audit objectives. The reliability of data used in this
report for background or informational purposes was not assessed.
The Commission’s management is responsible for establishing and maintaining
effective internal control. Internal control is a process designed to provide
reasonable assurance that objectives pertaining to the reliability of financial
records; effectiveness and efficiency of operations, including safeguarding of
assets; and compliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations are achieved.
As provided in Government Auditing Standards, there are five components of
internal control: control environment, risk assessment, control activities,
information and communication, and monitoring. Each of the five components,
when significant to the audit objectives, and as applicable to the Commission,
were considered by us during the course of this audit.
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate.
Our reports are designed to assist the Maryland General Assembly in exercising
its legislative oversight function and to provide constructive recommendations for
improving State operations. As a result, our reports generally do not address
activities we reviewed that are functioning properly.
This report includes a finding relating to conditions that we consider to be
significant deficiencies in the design or operation of internal control that could
adversely affect the Commission’s ability to maintain reliable financial records,
operate effectively and efficiently, and/or comply with applicable laws, rules, and
regulations. Our audit did not disclose any significant instances of
noncompliance with applicable laws, rules, or regulations. Other less significant
findings were communicated to the Commission that did not warrant inclusion in
this report.
The Commission’s response to our finding and recommendations is included as
an appendix to this report. As prescribed in the State Government Article,
Section 2-1224 of the Annotated Code of Maryland, we will advise the
Commission regarding the results of our review of its response.
10

--- Page 13 ---
APPENDIX
18 April 2025
Brian S. Tanen, CPA, CFE
Legislative Auditor
Department of Legislative Service
O(cid:431)ice of Legislative Audits
Maryland General Assembly
351 West Camden Street, Suite 400
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Dear Mr. Tanen:
The Historic St. Mary’s City Commission is in receipt of your correspondence dated March
27, 2025, requesting the agency’s responses to draft audit report on the Commission for
the period beginning July 1, 2020 and ending August 16, 2024. Per your request, we are
pleased to submit our response to the findings.
The Commission does not dispute the finding and is already in the process of revising its
MOU with the Historic St. Mary’s City Foundation to comply with audit recommendations. It
is our hope to have these revisions completed no later than July 30, 2025.
Should you have any questions or need additional information, please don’t hesitate to
contact ne. It has been a pleasure to work with your o(cid:431)ice.
Sincerely,
John L. Seidel, Ph.D.
CEO/Executive Director
Attachments
cc: Admiral Tim Heely, Chair, Historic St. Mary’s City Commission
Douglas M. Hunter, Director, Finance HSMCC
P.O. BOX 39, ST. MARY’S CITY, MARYLAND 20686
Wes Moore, Governor John L. Seidel, Ph.D., Executive Director Rear Admiral Tim Heely, USN (retired), Chairman

--- Page 14 ---
Historic St. Mary’s City Commission
Agency Response Form
Affiliated Foundation
Finding 1
The Historic St. Mary’s City Commission’s (Commission) memorandum of
agreement (MOA) with its affiliated foundation was not comprehensive, as it
did not address policies and procedures for key areas such as purchases,
ethics, and investments.
We recommend that the Commission revise its MOA with its affiliated
foundation to, at the least,
a. ensure goods and services purchased on behalf of the Commission by the
foundation are procured in a manner consistent with the College’s
procurement policies and procedures (repeat),
b. establish an ethics policy approved by the SEC and require periodic
monitoring of foundation board members’ compliance with the policy
and reporting to the Commission (repeat), and
c. establish an investment policy that ensures funds collected by the
foundation are properly collateralized and safeguarded and that
addresses when unrestricted funds should be transferred to the
Commission (repeat).
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide None.
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 1a Agree Estimated Completion Date: July 30, 2025
Please provide details of HSMCC has added the language concerning procurement to the draft
corrective action or MOU with the Foundation, with intent to move this through approvals
explain disagreement. for adoption by the end of July 2025.
Recommendation 1b Agree Estimated Completion Date: July 30, 2025
Please provide details of HSMCC has added the language concerning conflict of interest policy
corrective action or to the draft MOU with the Foundation, with intent to move this through
explain disagreement. approvals for adoption by the end of July 2025.
Recommendation 1c Agree Estimated Completion Date: July 30, 2025
Page 1 of 2

--- Page 15 ---
Historic St. Mary’s City Commission
Agency Response Form
Please provide details of HSMCC has added the language concerning investment policy and the
corrective action or transfer of unrestricted funds to the draft MOU with the Foundation,
explain disagreement. with intent to move this through approvals for adoption by the end of
July 2025.
Page 2 of 2

--- Page 16 ---
A T
UDIT EAM
Adam J. Westover, CPA
Audit Manager
Patrick J. Cavanaugh, CPA
Senior Auditor
Jessica G. McRobie
Staff Auditor