Title: Presentations to the Senate Budget and Taxation and the House Appropriations Subcommittees - Department of Information Technology


Related Report Dated (5/1/2020)
Date: 03/05/2021
Type: Presentations to the Legislature
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=6041467fa1ce5811348f0313
Extracted: 2025-06-19T11:48:57.088198
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Department of Information Technology (DoIT)
Report Dated May 1, 2020

--- Page 2 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Background
 DoIT is responsible for the State’s information technology policies,
procedures, and standards, and for overseeing the implementation of major
information technology development projects (MITDPs) for most of the State’s
Executive Branch agencies. DoIT also develops the Statewide Information
Technology Master Plan; manages the MITDP Fund; and coordinates,
purchases, and manages information technology and telecommunications
services to State agencies.
 Our audit report covers activity during the period from July 1, 2015, and
ending May 6, 2018. The report contains nine findings, including two
findings regarding DoIT’s oversight of MITDPs that were repeated from our
preceding audit report.
Maryland Department of Information Technology Page 2

--- Page 3 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Key Findings
 DoIT did not have sufficient procedures to:
• effectively monitor major information technology development projects,
• ensure that the vendor for the statewide communications interoperability
program complied with the related contract terms,
• ensure adequate security existed over its information systems, and
• restrict personally identifiable information (PII) in the State’s Financial
Management Information System.
 DoIT did not have written agreements with State agencies whose IT services
it supported.
Maryland Department of Information Technology Page 3

--- Page 4 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
MITDPs - Background
 MITDPs are IT development projects that meet one or more the following
criteria:
• has an estimated total cost of at least $1 million;
• supports a critical business function associated with the public health,
education, safety, or financial well-being of the citizens of Maryland;
and/or
• the DoIT Secretary determines the project requires special attention.
 DoIT’s oversight responsibilities for MITDPs generally include (1) reviewing
critical project documents; (2) reviewing agency project status reports; and
(3) determining the necessity of Independent Verification and Validation
(IV&V) assessments.
 As of June 30, 2018, there were 47 MITDPs with an estimated cost at
completion of approximately $1.6 billion.
Maryland Department of Information Technology Page 4

--- Page 5 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
MITDPs (Finding 1) Repeat Finding
DoIT lacked sufficient documentation that it effectively monitored MITDPs and
did not always accurately report estimated project costs.
 There was no documented review and approval process for agencies’ annual
project status reports (ITPRs). Our test of four projects ($645 million)
disclosed that DoIT did not document the review and approval of ITPRs
submitted in fiscal year 2018 for any of these projects.
 Critical information for three of the four projects had not been updated from
the prior year. For example, for one project (MD THINK), the fiscal year 2019
estimated cost of completion ($314.1 million) had increased by $141.1
million (81.5 percent) from the fiscal year 2018 estimated cost and no
explanation was provided for the increase.
Maryland Department of Information Technology Page 5

--- Page 6 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
MITDPs (Finding 1) - continued
 DoIT did not require its vendor-supplied oversight project managers (OPMs)
to document their review and verification of the accuracy of information
provided in monthly project monitoring reports.
 Required monthly status reports did not always include actions to be taken
to address identified risks (such as project delays) and DoIT did not
document that methods to address these risks were discussed in the related
meetings.
 DoIT understated the total estimated project costs for the MD THINK and
Unemployment Insurance Modernization projects by $64.4 million in it its
report to the Governor, Department of Budget and Management (DBM), and
the General Assembly budget committees.
Maryland Department of Information Technology Page 6

--- Page 7 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
MITDPs (Finding 2) Repeat Finding
DoIT had not established a process to independently evaluate the performance
of the vendor-supplied oversight project managers (OPMs).
 OPMs are a critical part of the monitoring processes as they are responsible
for reviewing and assessing MITDP documentation (such as ITPRs),
communicating with project teams and stakeholders, contributing to DoIT’s
MITDP reports, and attending project status report meetings.
 DoIT did not conduct performance evaluations of the OPMs to independently
assess whether they were properly performing their duties and meeting
expectations. Consequently, assurance was lacking that the OPMs were
effectively monitoring the development and implementation of the MITDPs.
Maryland Department of Information Technology Page 7

--- Page 8 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Statewide Communications Interoperability Program - Background
The Maryland First Responders Interoperable Radio System Team (Maryland
FiRST), is a statewide radio system designed to allow voice and data
communications between State, county, and local users of the system for day-
to-day operations and in the event of an emergency. Beginning in November,
2010, DoIT has contracted with a vendor that has been responsible for the
design, implementation, maintenance, and operation of Maryland FiRST.
 As of February 2018, the total amended contract value was $406 million,
comprised of a base period through November 2022 ($331 million),
maintenance during the base period ($55 million), and a one-year option for
operations and maintenance ($20 million).
 As of December 31, 2018, four out of five geographic phases had been
completed, and work was in progress for the fifth phase.
 According to State records, Maryland FiRST contract expenditures totaled
$286.3 million as of January 2019.
Maryland Department of Information Technology Page 8

--- Page 9 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Statewide Communications Interoperability Program (Findings 3 & 4)
Finding 3
DoIT did not ensure that the Maryland FiRST vendor met certain contractual
requirements related to radio coverage nor did it ensure contract milestones
regarding radio coverage testing were completed prior to payment. Our test of
two vendor payments totaling $3.9 million disclosed that DoIT accepted coverage
testing results at a rate lower than required by the contract. Additionally, DoIT did
not document that it received and approved required test plans, and waived
certain radio coverage testing.
Finding 4
DoIT did not adequately monitor the construction of a tower and ensure that the
related payments totaling $1.4 million were proper. For example, DoIT did not
ensure that the vendor completed the required work in a timely and satisfactory
manner prior to approving invoices for payments.
Maryland Department of Information Technology Page 9

--- Page 10 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Information Systems Security and Control (Findings 5, 6, & 7)
Finding 5
Network device based intrusion detection and prevention coverage was not
adequate, resulting in an increased network security risk.
Finding 6
DoIT could not provide evidence that it had performed reviews of available
independent security review reports (SOC 2 audit reports) related to certain of
its systems.
Finding 7
DoIT, in conjunction with DBM and the Comptroller of Maryland, did not ensure
that access to vendor PII stored in the State’s Financial Management
Information System (FMIS) was adequately restricted and that this PII was
otherwise safeguarded. Specifically, certain PII, available to system users, was
displayed in FMIS in plain text on-line or in reports generated by FMIS.
Maryland Department of Information Technology Page 10

--- Page 11 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Enterprise Technology Support Services Initiative (Finding 9)
 DoIT began its Enterprise Technology Support Services Initiative in fiscal year
2015. As of February 2019, DoIT was providing services under the Initiative
to 29 State agencies. The Initiative supports fundamental day-to-day IT
operations, including Internet and Statewide Intranet access, email,
computer server operations, and file sharing for Executive Branch agencies
authorized in law who have chosen to participate.
 DoIT did not enter into formal memorandums of understanding (MOUs) with
participating agencies whose IT services it supported to clarify and obtain
agreement regarding each agency’s IT responsibilities, including the
associated costs.
Maryland Department of Information Technology Page 11

--- Page 12 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Other Findings
Contracts (Finding 8)
 DoIT did not adequately monitor a vendor contracted to provide
management and operations services for networkMaryland (high-speed data
network for public sector use operated by DoIT). DoIT paid the vendor
without first verifying deliverables were met, and did not monitor task orders.
We identified 14 task orders for which DoIT paid $159,400 in excess of the
approved amounts.
Equipment (Finding 10)
 DoIT did not have adequate procedures and controls over its equipment
inventory and did not maintain accurate records.
Maryland Department of Information Technology Page 12

--- Page 13 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Conclusions
DoIT should
• effectively monitor MITDPs by improving the documentation of monitoring
activities, and conducting performance evaluations of the vendor-supplied
oversight project managers;
• improve its monitoring of the vendor for the statewide communications
interoperability program;
• ensure adequate security controls exist over its networks and systems,
and restrict and safeguard PII in FMIS;
• enter into formal agreements with all agencies for which it provides
services;
• ensure compliance with the related contracts for the State’s high-speed
data network vendors; and
• ensure equipment inventory is appropriately controlled.
Maryland Department of Information Technology Page 13