Title: Harford County Public Schools
Date: 03/24/2021
Type: Local School Systems
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=605b32a7a1ce580fc8ceb512
Extracted: 2025-06-19T11:49:08.289647
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Financial Management Practices Audit Report
Harford County Public Schools
March 2021
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Senator Clarence K. Lam, M.D. (Senate Chair) Delegate Carol L. Krimm (House Chair)
Senator Malcolm L. Augustine Delegate Steven J. Arentz
Senator Adelaide C. Eckardt Delegate Mark S. Chang
Senator George C. Edwards Delegate Nicholas P. Charles II
Senator Katie Fry Hester Delegate Andrea Fletcher Harrison
Senator Cheryl C. Kagan Delegate Keith E. Haynes
Senator Benjamin F. Kramer Delegate David Moon
Senator Cory V. McCray Delegate April R. Rose
Senator Justin D. Ready Delegate Geraldine Valentino-Smith
Senator Craig J. Zucker One Vacancy
To Obtain Further Information
Office of Legislative Audits
301 West Preston Street, Room 1202
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Phone: 410-946-5900 ꞏ 301-970-5900 ꞏ 1-877-486-9964 (Toll Free in Maryland)
Maryland Relay: 711
TTY: 410-946-5401 ꞏ 301-970-5401
E-mail: OLAWebmaster@ola.state.md.us
Website: www.ola.state.md.us
To Report Fraud
The Office of Legislative Audits operates a Fraud Hotline to report fraud, waste, or abuse involving State
of Maryland government resources. Reports of fraud, waste, or abuse may be communicated anonymously
by a toll-free call to 1-877-FRAUD-11, by mail to the Fraud Hotline, c/o Office of Legislative Audits, or
through the Office’s website.
Nondiscrimination Statement
The Department of Legislative Services does not discriminate on the basis of age, ancestry, color, creed,
marital status, national origin, race, religion, gender, gender identity, sexual orientation, or disability in the
admission or access to its programs, services, or activities. The Department’s Information Officer has been
designated to coordinate compliance with the nondiscrimination requirements contained in Section 35.107
of the United States Department of Justice Regulations. Requests for assistance should be directed to the
Information Officer at 410-946-5400 or 410-970-5400.

--- Page 3 ---
March 24, 2021
Senator Clarence K. Lam, M.D., Senate Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Delegate Carol L. Krimm, House Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Members of Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Annapolis, Maryland
Ladies and Gentlemen:
We conducted an audit of the financial management practices of the Harford
County Public Schools (HCPS) in accordance with the requirements of the State
Government Article, Section 2-1220(e) of the Annotated Code of Maryland. The
objectives of this audit were to evaluate whether HCPS’ procedures and controls
were effective in accounting for and safeguarding its assets and whether its
policies provided for the efficient use of financial resources.
Our audit disclosed that HCPS needs to improve internal controls and
accountability in certain areas, including payroll processing, information systems,
procurement and disbursements, equipment, student transportation, and health
care claims and fee processing. For example, HCPS did not ensure that employee
access to its automated financial management system applications, such as
procurement, accounts payable, human resources, and payroll, was properly
restricted resulting in numerous employees with unnecessary or incompatible
access capabilities. Additionally, HCPS did not ensure critical human resources
and payroll transactions were independently reviewed for propriety. Specifically,
the processing of new hires, other earnings transactions (including leave payouts),
and rate increases were not subject to independent review and comparison to
supporting documentation.
We also identified significant security and control risks that existed within HCPS’
computer network. For example, HCPS had not adequately safeguarded sensitive

--- Page 4 ---
information in one of its applications which held approximately 102,500 records
containing sensitive electronic personally identifiable information. Additionally,
HCPS lacked assurance that proper security existed for an online data backup
service, used to hold production data that was hosted, operated, and maintained by
a third-party service provider. Furthermore, certain servers were not adequately
protected and an intrusion detection prevention system was not properly
configured to protect the HCPS network.
In addition, we identified certain practices which, if implemented, could provide
opportunities for achieving cost savings in student transportation. Specifically,
we found that certain components of the payments to bus contractors could not be
supported and included costs that should not have been reimbursed, resulting in
higher payments than necessary for student transportation services.
Finally, based on our current audit assessment of significance and risk to our audit
objectives, our audit included a review to determine the status of the 15 findings
contained in our preceding audit report. We determined that HCPS satisfactorily
addressed 7 of these findings. The remaining 8 findings are repeated in this
report.
We conducted our audit fieldwork from September 5, 2019 to June 30, 2020. A
portion of our fieldwork included time in which the local education agencies were
impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic health crisis. Specifically, beginning on
March 16, 2020, the State Superintendent of Schools decided to close school and
administrative buildings to employees and the public for a two-week period. This
was eventually extended for the remainder of the 2019-2020 school year with
limited access by certain employees. Although all HCPS buildings were closed
for a portion of our fieldwork, the objectives and scope of our audit were not
significantly impacted. To the extent that the COVID-19 crisis continues to
impact WCPS operations, certain recommendations in this report may need to be
adjusted to ensure proper controls under the modified operations.
HCPS’ response to this audit is included as an appendix to this report. We
reviewed the response and noted agreement to our findings and related
recommendations, and while there are other aspects of HCPS’ response which
will require further clarification, we do not anticipate that these will require the
Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee’s attention to resolve. Finally, we have
edited HCPS’ response to remove certain vendor names or products, as allowed
by our policy.
2

--- Page 5 ---
We wish to acknowledge the cooperation extended to us during the audit by
HCPS and its willingness to address the audit issues and to implement appropriate
corrective actions.
Respectfully submitted,
Gregory A. Hook, CPA
Legislative Auditor
3

--- Page 6 ---
4

--- Page 7 ---
Table of Contents
Background Information 7
Statistical Overview 7
Oversight 8
External Audits 9
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report 10
Findings and Recommendations 11
Revenue and Billing Cycle 11
Federal Funds 12
Procurement and Disbursement Cycle
Finding 1 – Harford County Public Schools’ (HCPS) procurement 14
policies did not incorporate certain recognized best practices or
requirements of State law when evaluating the merits of participation
in intergovernmental cooperative purchasing agreements.
* Finding 2 – Certain transactions processed on its automated system 15
were not subject to independent review and approval and verified to
appropriate supporting documentation after being entered on the
system.
Human Resources and Payroll
* Finding 3 – HCPS did not ensure critical human resources and payroll 17
transactions were independently reviewed for propriety.
Equipment Control and Accountability
* Finding 4 – HCPS’ equipment policies were not comprehensive, detail 18
records were incomplete, and physical inventories were not
conducted.
Information Technology
* Finding 5 – HCPS did not ensure employee access to its automated 19
financial system applications was properly restricted resulting in
numerous employees with improper and unnecessary access.
* Denotes item repeated in full or part from preceding audit report
5

--- Page 8 ---
Finding 6 – HCPS maintained sensitive electronic personally identifiable 21
information in a manner that did not provide adequate safeguards.
* Finding 7 – HCPS lacked assurance that an online data backup service 21
managed by a third-party provider was properly secured against
operational and security risks.
* Finding 8 – Certain servers were improperly located within the 23
the internal network, and intrusion detection prevention system
coverage did not exist for untrusted encrypted traffic.
Facilities Construction, Renovation, and Maintenance
Finding 9 – HCPS did not perform preventive maintenance in accordance 25
with its Comprehensive Maintenance Plan.
Transportation Services
* Finding 10 – Certain components of the payments to bus contractors 26
could not be supported and included costs that should not have been
reimbursed, resulting in higher payments than necessary for student
transportation services.
Finding 11 – HCPS did not independently verify manifest data entered 28
into the transportation payments system and did not maintain support
for payments made prior to fiscal year 2020.
Food Services 29
School Board Oversight 29
Management of Other Risks
* Finding 12 – HCPS did not audit or adequately verify the propriety of 31
health care claims, insurance premiums and administrative fees paid to
the third-party administrator, and the eligibility of enrolled dependents.
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology 34
Agency Response Appendix
* Denotes item repeated in full or part from preceding audit report
6

--- Page 9 ---
Background Information
Statistical Overview
Enrollment
According to student enrollment records compiled by the Maryland State
Department of Education (MSDE), Harford County Public Schools (HCPS) ranks
8th in student enrollment among the 24 public school systems in Maryland. Fiscal
year 2019 full-time student enrollment was 37,826 students. HCPS had 53
schools, consisting of 33 elementary schools, 8 middle schools, 8 high schools, 1
middle/high school, and 3 other types of schools (including alternative,
vocational, and special education).
Funding
HCPS revenues consist primarily of funds received from Harford County, the
State, and the federal government. According to the HCPS audited financial
statements, revenues from all sources totaled approximately $570.2 million in
fiscal year 2019; including approximately $257.6 million from the State. See
Figure 1 below for HCPS’ revenue sources per enrolled student in fiscal year
2019 according to its audited financial statements.
Figure 1
HCPS Revenue Sources Per Enrolled Student
Fiscal Year 2019
Source: HCPS’ Fiscal Year 2019 Audited Financial Statements and MSDE Data
7

--- Page 10 ---
Expenditures
According to HCPS’ audited financial statements, fiscal year 2019 expenditures
were approximately $579.3 million. The largest expenditure category was
salaries and wages, including benefits, which accounted for approximately 81
percent of total expenditures during fiscal year 2019. According to MSDE
records, during the 2018-2019 school year, HCPS had 5,064 full-time equivalent
positions, which consisted of 3,603 instructional and 1,461 non-instructional
positions (see Figure 2).
Figure 2
HCPS Expenditures by Category and Selected Statistical Data
Fiscal Year 2019
(amounts in millions)
Source: HCPS’ Fiscal Year 2019 Audited Financial Statements and MSDE Data
Oversight
HCPS is governed by a local school board, consisting of six elected voting
members, three appointed voting members, the county superintendent of schools,
who is an ex officio nonvoting member, and one voting student member. The
student member has the same rights and privileges as a member appointed or
elected, and can vote on and participate in all matters except those specifically
prohibited by law, such as acquisition and disposition of real property, collective
bargaining and the appointment of the superintendent. In accordance with State
law, MSDE provides considerable oversight of HCPS through the establishment
and monitoring of various financial and academic policies and regulations.
8

--- Page 11 ---
MSDE also works with HCPS to comply with the requirements and mandates of
federal law. The Harford County government exercises authority over HCPS
primarily through the review and approval of HCPS’ annual operating and capital
budgets.
External Audits
HCPS engages a certified public accounting firm to independently audit its annual
financial statements. The firm performs procedures to verify the amounts and
disclosures in the financial statements. The firm also evaluates the
appropriateness of accounting policies used and the reasonableness of significant
accounting estimates made by management. In the related audit reports, the firm
stated that the financial statements presented fairly, in all material respects, the
financial position of HCPS as of June 30, 2015, 2016, 2017, 2018, and 2019, and
the changes in its financial position and its cash flows for the years then ended in
accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of
America.
Additionally, in accordance with Government Auditing Standards, as part of the
audited financial statements the accounting firm also issued separate reports on
HCPS’ control over financial reporting and its tests of HCPS’ compliance with
certain provisions of laws, regulations, contracts, grant agreements and other
matters. This report is an integral part of the annual independent audited financial
statements. Furthermore, the accounting firm also conducts the Single Audit of
HCPS’ federal grant programs. The Single Audit is intended to provide assurance
to the federal government that adequate internal controls are in place, and the
entity is generally in compliance with program requirements.
We reviewed the aforementioned financial statement audits and Single Audit
reports for fiscal years 2015 through 2019, and examined the related work papers
for the fiscal year 2018 audits, which were the latest available during our audit
fieldwork.
Certain work of the independent certified public accounting firm, which we
determined was reliable, covered areas included in the scope of our audit. As a
result, we did not conduct any audit work related to the following areas:
 State and local government revenues received via wire transfer
 Accounts receivables
 Federal grant activity
 Employee salary levels
9

--- Page 12 ---
The independent accounting firm did not disclose any material deficiencies in
these areas.
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report
Our audit included a review to determine the status of the 15 findings contained in
our preceding audit report dated January 29, 2015. As disclosed in Figure 3, we
determined that HCPS satisfactorily addressed 7 of these findings. The remaining
8 findings are repeated in this report.
Figure 3
Status of Preceding Findings
Preceding Implementation
Finding Description
Finding Status
Finding 1 Finance Office collections were not recorded or deposited timely. Not repeated
HCPS did not adequately restrict users’ capabilities on its automated Repeated
Finding 2
procurement and accounts payable system. (Current Finding 5)
HCPS did not adequately monitor payments made for special Repeated
Finding 3
education services. (Current Finding 2)
Independent reviews of payroll and personnel transactions were Repeated
Finding 4 lacking and access to the automated payroll system was not properly (Current Finding 3
restricted. and 5)
HCPS certified sick leave to the Maryland State Retirement and
Finding 5 Pension System as unused for the portion that was previously paid to Not repeated
employees upon separation, resulting in increased pension benefits.
Repeated
Finding 6 HCPS equipment policies were not comprehensive.
(Current Finding 4)
HCPS’ information technology controls over disaster recovery
Finding 7 Not repeated
planning and backup of critical data were not sufficient.
HCPS lacked assurance that adequate controls existed over its Repeated
Finding 8
production data backups stored with a cloud service provider. (Current Finding 7)
The HCPS intrusion detection prevention system was not properly Repeated
Finding 9
protecting the network. (Current Finding 8)
HCPS’ energy management program was not sufficiently
Finding 10 Not repeated
comprehensive.
HCPS did not have formal targets and goals for revising bus routes or
Finding 11 Not repeated
use automated routing software to improve route efficiency.
Certain payments to bus contractors were not based on market Repeated
Finding 12
conditions or actual costs. (Current Finding 10)
Food service collections were not properly recorded nor adequately
Finding 13 Not repeated
safeguarded until deposit.
HCPS did not ensure the propriety of payments for employee and Repeated
Finding 14
retiree healthcare costs. (Current Finding 12)
Competitive bids were not obtained for a stop-loss contract and the
Finding 15 Not repeated
contract was not approved by the Board.
10

--- Page 13 ---
Findings and Recommendations
Revenue and Billing Cycle
Background
Harford County Public Schools (HCPS) revenues consist primarily of funds
received from Harford County, the State, and the federal government. According
to HCPS’ audited financial statements, revenues from all sources totaled
approximately $570.2 million in fiscal year 2019; including approximately $257.6
million from the State.
External Audits
There were similarities between the work of the independent certified public
accounting firm that audited HCPS’ financial statements and the objectives of our
audit for certain revenue activities. As a result, we relied on this work to provide
audit coverage for State and local government revenues received via wire transfer
and accounts receivable, for which the auditor’s procedural review and testing
disclosed no material weaknesses or significant deficiencies.
School Activity Funds
Schools collect funds for other purposes such as student activities, clubs, and
school publications. Because they are not considered school revenue, these
school activity funds are accounted for separately by each school, and reported in
summary in the audited financial statements. During fiscal year 2019, school
activity collections totaled $6 million and the June 30, 2019 fund balance was
$2.4 million.
HCPS’ Board of Education (the Board) has a fiduciary responsibility to ensure
that school activity funds were used only for intended purposes. HCPS’ internal
auditor conducts audits of the school activity funds at each of its schools. The
reviews consisted of evaluating and testing compliance with the HCPS
Procedures Manual for School Activity Funds. The Manual establishes standard
procedures for all schools to follow to ensure school activity funds are adequately
safeguarded and accounted for in a uniform manner. The results of the reviews
were provided to the respective school’s principal and HCPS management to be
addressed. Our review of the internal auditor’s findings during fiscal years 2017,
2018 and 2019 generally found the management of these funds to be adequate and
that any control weaknesses identified were not prevalent. The internal audit
reports reviewed did not identify any improprieties regarding the misuse of funds.
11

--- Page 14 ---
Conclusion
Based on our current assessment of significance and risk relative to our audit
objectives, we did not conduct any work in this area other than a limited review to
determine that HCPS satisfactorily addressed the prior report finding. We relied
on the work performed by the independent certified public accounting firm and
HCPS’ internal auditor for all other audit coverage in this area including
procedures and controls related to the accounting for and safeguarding of cash
receipts with respect to revenue and billing.
Federal Funds
Background
HCPS receives funds pertaining to federal government programs that are
generally restricted for use for a specific program (such as the School Lunch
Program or Special Education). According to HCPS’ Single Audit, fiscal year
2019 expenditures totaled $26.6 million, not including federally funded fee-for-
service programs such as Medicaid reimbursement for special education services.
Single Audit Reports Disclosed No Reportable Conditions Regarding Federal
Grant Management
There were similarities in the work performed by the independent certified public
accounting firm that conducted the Single Audit of HCPS’ federal grants and the
objectives of our audit in this area. In addition to expressing an opinion on HCPS
compliance with the terms of several grant programs, the auditor also considered
the existing internal control structure’s impact on compliance and audited the
required Schedule of Expenditures of Federal Awards (which includes claimed
and reported grant expenditures) for fiscal years 2016 to 2019.
The related reports stated that HCPS complied, in all material respects, with the
requirements applicable to its major federal programs. With respect to internal
controls over compliance with, and the operation of, major federal programs, the
auditors did not identify any material weaknesses or significant deficiencies.
Medicaid Funds for Eligible Services
HCPS has established a procedure to identify children eligible for Medicaid-
subsidized services and the services rendered. Medicaid is an entitlement program
for which certain service costs can be reimbursed to HCPS. Medicaid activity is
not covered by the Single Audit of federal grants.
The Maryland State Department of Education’s Interagency Medicaid Monitoring
Team issued a report in June 2019 of the results of its review of 40 student case
12

--- Page 15 ---
files for 74 criteria (including the correct billing of Medicaid for eligible
services). The report found that HCPS was 100 percent compliant with 69 criteria
and between 93 and 99 percent compliant with the remaining 5 criteria.
According to HCPS records, fiscal year 2019 state and federal reimbursements for
Medicaid-subsidized services totaled approximately $5.3 million.
Conclusion
Based on our current assessment of significance and risk relative to our audit
objectives, our audit did not include a review of Medicaid-subsidized services.
We relied on the work of the independent certified public accounting firm that
conducted the Single Audits for all other work in this area, including policies,
procedures, and controls with respect to federal grants and expenditures.
Procurement and Disbursement Cycle
Background
According to the audited financial statements and HCPS’ records, non-payroll
disbursements totaled $108.5 million during fiscal year 2019. HCPS uses a
combination of manual and automated methods to process purchases and
disbursements. Requisitions are manually created and approved by a supervisor
in the requesting department. Approved requisitions are then entered into the
financial management system and converted to purchase orders by the purchasing
department, which also generally handles the solicitation, bid evaluation, and
establishment of contracts.
HCPS written procurement policies require that procurements exceeding $25,000
be competitively bid in accordance with Section 5-112 of the Education Article of
the Annotated Code of Maryland. Contracts and agreements exceeding $100,000
that HCPS procures are to be approved by the Board.
Invoices are submitted by vendors directly to the accounts payable department for
entry into the financial management system. The system matches invoices to
appropriate purchasing documents and the verification of receipt entered by the
receiving school or department. Invoices received without an associated purchase
order must be accompanied by a disbursement voucher approved by department
supervisory personnel. The system then prints vendor checks or processes an
electronic payment and posts the payment to the financial records.
13

--- Page 16 ---
Finding 1
HCPS procurement policies did not incorporate certain recognized best
practices or requirements of State law when evaluating the merits of
participation in intergovernmental cooperative purchasing agreements
(ICPA).
Analysis
HCPS procurement policies did not incorporate certain recognized best practices
or requirements of State law when evaluating the merits of participating in an
ICPA. Specifically, the following statutory requirement and critical best practices
were not included in HCPS’ policies and were not consistently used when
obtaining goods and services under an ICPA.
 Prepare a written assessment of the benefits of using an ICPA as required
by State law
 Analyze all costs of conducting competitive solicitations
 Research, compare, and evaluate available ICPAs
 Verify ICPA has a clause allowing utilization by other parties
 Verify the ICPA solicitation was competitively bid and publicly
advertised. Obtain originating agency’s competitive procurement
documentation (including public advertisements and proposal evaluations)
 Verify terms, scope of services, specifications, and price meet HCPS
needs
 Execute an addendum of participation with lead agency and remove or
incorporate necessary local terms and conditions
We tested HCPS’ participation in four ICPAs during fiscal years 2017 through
2020 with contract awards totaling approximately $4.7 million. Our review
disclosed that HCPS did not comply with the statutory requirement that it prepare
a written assessment of the benefits of using the ICPA for any of the ICPAs
tested. In addition, four of the six best practices (analyze all the costs of
conducting competitive solicitations; research, compare, and evaluate other
available ICPAs; obtain the originating agency’s competitive procurement
documentation; and verify the terms and specifications meet its needs) were not
performed for any of the ICPAs tested and the remaining two best practices were
not performed for at least two of the ICPAs tested.
Incorporating the aforementioned statutory requirement and best practices into
HCPS policies could help ensure they are consistently used. We did find that an
additional best practice to obtain a copy of the ICPA price list for invoice
verification was included by HCPS in an ICPA checklist that it used and was
adhered to for all four ICPAs we reviewed.
14

--- Page 17 ---
State law, which legal counsel to the Maryland General Assembly advised us is
applicable to local education agencies, allows the use of cooperative purchasing
arrangements or ICPAs only after the using entity has determined (or assessed) in
writing that the use of such arrangements will provide cost benefits, promote
administrative efficiencies, or promote intergovernmental cooperation1.
Furthermore, the Institute for Public Procurement, formerly known as the
“National Institute of Government Purchasing”, as well as other public and
educational organizations have published ICPA best practices that include
comprehensive multi-step checklists that require, among other things (as per the
list above), that prospective ICPA users verify that the contract allows other
entities to participate, the contract was awarded through a competitive
procurement process, and requires that addendums be executed documenting their
participation and incorporating local required terms and conditions.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that HCPS establish and adhere to the aforementioned
statutory requirement and other identified and acknowledged best practices
when using ICPAs.
Finding 2
Certain transactions processed on its automated system were not subject to
independent review and approval and verified to appropriate supporting
documentation after being entered into the system.
Analysis
Certain transactions processed on its automated system were not subject to
independent review and approval and verified to appropriate supporting
documentation after being entered into the system.
 HCPS did not periodically generate a report of new vendors added, or changes
to existing vendor information, for review by independent personnel to ensure
that the vendor information added or changed was proper and accurately
1Section 13-110 of the State Finance and Procurement Article, of the Annotated Code of Maryland
in part, defines an intergovernmental cooperative purchasing agreement (ICPA). As defined, an
ICPA is a contract that is entered into by at least one governmental entity in a certain manner,
that is available for use by the governmental entity entering the contract and at least one
additional governmental entity, and that is intended to promote efficiency and savings that can
result from intergovernmental cooperative purchasing. The aforementioned law applies to all
ICPAs regardless of the services, goods, or commodities purchased. In addition, Section 5-
112(a)(3) of the Education Article of the Code provides that local education agencies do not need
to conduct competitive procurements for goods and commodities if they use a contract awarded
by public agencies or intergovernmental purchasing organizations and the originating procuring
agency followed public bidding procedures.
15

--- Page 18 ---
recorded. During the period of January 2018 to November 2019, there were
20,319 vendor information changes (such as vendor name, bank account
number) made by 9 different HCPS employees without any supervisory
oversight. Our review of 10 of these vendor changes did not identify any
improprieties.
 The employee responsible for approving the disbursements batch generated by
the automated system prior to payment, including those that did not have an
associated purchase order, only assessed the reasonableness of the transaction
and did not perform a documented comparison of the transactions to the
related supporting documentation (such as an invoice and disbursement
voucher form). During fiscal year 2019, HCPS processed over 8,000
payments totaling approximately $218.1 million for invoices without an
associated purchase order (including 300 payments totaling $136.8 million for
health care, retirement, and workers compensation).
 Invoices processed for special education service providers were not verified
against independent documentation. HCPS special education program
personnel compared the invoices to time records, which were produced and
maintained by the providers’ employees. Although the time records were
signed by HCPS school-based personnel after services were rendered, these
original signed time records were not sent directly to HCPS contract monitors
but, rather, were first returned to the providers’ employees, who then
submitted them to contract monitors. This practice could allow the
opportunity for unauthorized changes to be made to the time records that
could go undetected. According to HCPS records, payments to six special
education service providers totaled $1.4 million during fiscal years 2017 -
2019. A similar condition related to verifying special education services
billed was commented upon in our preceding audit report.
Recommendation 2
We recommend that HCPS
a. ensure that changes to the vendor information recorded in the automated
accounts payable system are periodically verified to appropriate source
documentation by an independent employee;
b. ensure that an independent employee conducts a documented comparison
of disbursement transactions to the related supporting documentation, at
least on a test basis; and
c. obtain independent supporting documentation for special education
services invoices (repeat).
16

--- Page 19 ---
Human Resources and Payroll
Background
Payroll expense represents the largest single cost component in the HCPS budget.
According to HCPS’ records, fiscal year 2019 salary, wage, and benefit costs
totaled approximately $470.8 million, representing 81 percent of the total
expenditures. According to Maryland State Department of Education reports,
during the 2018-2019 school year HCPS had 5,064 full-time positions, which
consisted of 3,603 instructional and 1,461 non-instructional positions.
HCPS uses automated systems to maintain human resources information, record
employee time, track employee leave usage, and process and record payroll
transactions. Most employees use direct deposit, which is processed by HCPS’
payroll system.
Finding 3
HCPS did not ensure critical human resources and payroll transactions were
independently reviewed for propriety.
Analysis
HCPS did not ensure critical human resources and payroll transactions entered in
the system were independently reviewed for propriety. Specifically, the
processing of new hires, other earnings transactions (including leave payouts),
and rate increases were not subject to independent review and comparison to
supporting documentation. Although we were advised that system reports were
produced for certain transactions, the employees that reviewed them were not
independent, and the reports were not retained for future reference. In calendar
year 2019, HCPS processed over 7,600 critical human resources and payroll
transactions, including adding and terminating employees and processing salary
increases. Our test of 10 employee additions or terminations and 10 salary
increases totaling approximately $230,000 did not disclose any inappropriate or
erroneous transactions.
A similar condition regarding the lack of supervisory review and approval of
critical transactions was commented upon in our preceding audit report.
Recommendation 3
We recommend that HCPS
a. perform a documented independent supervisory review of human
resources and payroll transactions entered in the system to appropriate
supporting documentation, at least on a test basis (repeat); and
b. retain system reports of transactions entered used to verify transactions.
17

--- Page 20 ---
Equipment Control and Accountability
Background
According to HCPS’ audited financial statements, the undepreciated value of its
capital equipment inventory totaled $48.8 million as of June 30, 2019. HCPS
maintains centralized automated records for equipment with a cost of $5,000 or
more (including assets capitalized for financial statement purposes). Control and
recordkeeping of non-capitalized assets having a value of less than $5,000 was
delegated to individual departments or schools. Thus, certain information
technology items (desktops, laptops, tablets) are recorded on separate inventory
records maintained by each school where the items are located.
Finding 4
HCPS’ equipment policies were not comprehensive, detail records were
incomplete, and physical inventories were not conducted.
Analysis
HCPS’ equipment policies did not establish system-wide standards for controlling
capital and sensitive equipment. For example, there were no requirements for
tagging equipment, performing physical inventories, and investigating lost and
stolen items. Additionally, HCPS policy did not define or require recording of
non-capitalized sensitive equipment items that would be prone to theft, such as
technology equipment (for example, cameras and laptops). The Government
Finance Officers Association recommends that an entity establish controls over
non-capitalized equipment that is marketable and susceptible to theft.
Absent established system-wide standards, HCPS maintained informal,
incomplete records of sensitive non-capitalized assets, which included certain
types of sensitive items (such as desktops, laptops, and tablets) while excluding
others (such as digital cameras or projectors). Furthermore, since it was not
required, these records did not include the cost of the sensitive items or the
purchase date. As of February 2020, HCPS’ records listed approximately 37,000
non-capitalized devices with product names, model, serial numbers, and location
information.
HCPS also did not perform periodic physical inventories of either capital or
sensitive non-capitalized equipment to account for items recorded, and identify
and investigate missing items. During our test of 26 equipment items recorded in
HCPS records, we could not locate 8 of those items. We were advised by HCPS
that these items were either lost, stolen, or damaged. However, HCPS could not
provide any documentation supporting this assertion.
18

--- Page 21 ---
A similar condition regarding the failure to establish policies and procedures to
ensure uniform accountability and control over its equipment inventory was
commented upon in our two preceding audit reports.
Recommendation 4
We recommend that HCPS
a. establish policies and procedures to ensure that uniform accountability
and control is maintained over its equipment inventory (recording and
conducting periodic inventories), including certain sensitive non-
capitalized items (repeat);
b. ensure that all sensitive equipment items, deemed subject to theft, are
recorded in the detail records (including recording the purchase date and
cost); and
c. conduct periodic physical inventories of equipment items, compare the
results to the detail records, and investigate missing items, including those
noted above.
Information Technology
The HCPS Office of Information Technology (OIT) maintains and administers the
HCPS’ computer network, computer operations, and information system
applications. HCPS operates a wide area network, with internet connectivity,
which connects the individual schools’ local networks to the computer resources
located at HCPS’ headquarters. OIT maintains a computer room at the
headquarters location in which numerous computer servers and network devices
operate to support HCPS information system applications including its student
information and financial management systems. Also, OIT utilized a cloud
service provider for storage of critical production systems’ data backups, which
included sensitive personal information for both students and employees.
Finding 5
HCPS did not ensure employee access to its automated financial management
system applications was properly restricted resulting in numerous employees
with improper and unnecessary access.
Analysis
HCPS did not ensure that employee access to its automated financial system
applications, such as procurement, accounts payable, human resources and
payroll, was properly restricted resulting in numerous employees with
unnecessary or incompatible access capabilities. User access was granted by OIT
based upon electronic mail messages sent by an employee’s respective supervisor.
19

--- Page 22 ---
Our review disclosed that HCPS did not retain these messages to support the
access assigned and did not perform periodic reviews to ensure all user access
was proper and necessary to complete the users’ job duties.
Our review disclosed that 322 of the 326 users (including external auditors and
cafeteria workers) with access to perform both critical accounts payable (such as
adding a vendor, entering invoices, and processing payments) and human
resources and payroll functions (such as, adding new employees and processing
payroll transactions) did not require such broad access for their specific jobs. The
remaining four users were information technology employees who HCPS advised
needed unrestricted access to the system. HCPS was unaware that the 322 users
had the unnecessary access until we brought it to their attention in November
2019. After we brought the situation to its attention, HCPS changed a user access
profile setting that reduced the number of users with critical access to 54.
We reviewed the access of the remaining 54 users and concluded that 19 still had
access that was not required to perform their job duties and 26 had incompatible
or unnecessary access. For example, three users could perform incompatible
accounts payable system functions, such as adding vendors, entering invoices and
processing payments without the need for online independent approval. These
users also had access to the blank check stock and two could print checks with
authorized facsimile signatures. Another 13 of the 54 users still had incompatible
human resources and payroll access (such as adding employees and processing
payroll) without online independent approval.
Finally, HCPS did not create transaction reports to monitor the four information
technology employees with unrestricted access to ensure no unauthorized
transactions were processed. Similar conditions regarding the need to restrict
critical automated financial system capabilities and eliminate incompatible
functions were commented upon in our preceding audit report.
Recommendation 5
We recommend that HCPS ensure that employee access to its automated
financial system applications, such as procurement, accounts payable, human
resources and payroll is appropriate. Specifically, we recommend that HCPS
a. retain documentation to support supervisory approval of user access;
b. perform periodic independent reviews of financial system applications
access;
c. restrict critical system functions to employees who need those capabilities
to perform their job duties and separate employee duties to eliminate
incompatible financial system application functions, including those
noted above (repeat); and
20

--- Page 23 ---
d. generate and review transaction reports to monitor employees with
unrestricted access capabilities to ensure all transactions processed were
proper.
Finding 6
HCPS maintained sensitive electronic personally identifiable information
(PII) in a manner that did not provide adequate safeguards.
Analysis
HCPS maintained sensitive electronic PII in a manner that did not provide
adequate safeguards. Specifically, as of October 2019, we identified one critical
system’s database which contained sensitive PII involving approximately 102,500
records which was maintained in a manner that made the information vulnerable
to improper disclosure. Additionally, HCPS personnel advised us that other
substantial mitigating controls did not exist to otherwise protect this sensitive PII.
Furthermore, HCPS had not performed an inventory of its systems to identify all
stored sensitive PII, determined if it was necessary to retain the PII, and deleted
PII identified as unnecessary. Detailed aspects of this finding were omitted from
this report; however, the related information was previously shared with HCPS
for the purposes of implementing the following recommendations.
The State of Maryland Information Technology Security Manual requires that
agencies protect confidential data using adequate safeguards and/or other
substantial mitigating controls.
Recommendation 6
We recommend that HCPS
a. implement appropriate information security safeguards for sensitive
electronic PII it maintains; and
b. perform an annual inventory of its application systems, identify all
sensitive electronic PII, and delete all unnecessary PII.
Finding 7
HCPS lacked assurance that an online data backup service managed by a
third-party provider was properly secured against operational and security
risks.
Analysis
HCPS lacked assurance that all necessary information technology security and
operational controls existed over its production systems online data backup
21

--- Page 24 ---
service which was hosted, operated, and maintained by a third-party service
provider. HCPS used the backup service, which included storage of PII, under a
service order dated July 1, 2008, which was updated on June 25, 2015. Our
examination disclosed the associated contract did not contain certain key security
control provisions in regard to protecting HCPS backup data within the service
provider’s network. For example, provisions did not exist for defining security
incidents and necessary actions, requiring software vulnerability testing and patch
management, and for requiring regular reviews of audit logs. Industry best
practices recommend detailing the specific responsibilities mentioned above in
clear and concise contractual language to limit operational and security risks. A
similar condition was commented upon in our prior audit report.
The service provider obtained a System and Organization Controls (SOC) 2 Type
2 report, issued on December 19, 2018, for the period October 1, 2017 to
September 30, 2018, covering the security, availability, processing integrity, and
confidentiality trust service principles. The report did not cite any control
weaknesses, and was obtained and reviewed by HCPS. Our November 2019
review disclosed that the SOC report did not address certain key security controls
necessary for the data backup service and the associated network that are typically
included in a SOC 2 review covering the security and availability principles. For
example, the SOC review did not test controls related to retention and review of
audit logs recording privileged or unauthorized access or information security
events and the use of vulnerability scanning, network intrusion detection and
malware prevention. A similar condition was commented upon in our prior audit
report.
The American Institute of Certified Public Accountants has issued guidance
concerning examinations of service providers and issuance of System and
Organization Controls reports, including SOC 2 Type 2 reports for service
organizations. The SOC 2 Type 2 report contain the service organization’s
description of its system and the results of the auditor’s examination of the
suitability of the system design and operating effectiveness for the period under
review, and can include an evaluation of system security, data availability,
processing integrity, confidentiality, and privacy trust services criteria. Service
provider customers are responsible for obtaining and reviewing SOC reports in
order to assess risk over their usage of service provider systems. The State of
Maryland Information Technology Security Manual, within its risk assessment
policy section, enumerates customer responsibilities relative to SOC reports
which include reviewing such reports to ensure they contain complete
implementation of all needed security controls.
22

--- Page 25 ---
Recommendation 7
We recommend that HCPS
a. take appropriate actions to include in its service provider contract
provisions that address the aforementioned security and operational risks
(repeat), and
b. request that the independent security reviews for its online data backup
service and related SOC reports address all necessary security controls
(repeat).
Finding 8
Certain servers were improperly located within the internal network, and
intrusion detection prevention system coverage did not exist for untrusted
encrypted traffic.
Analysis
HCPS’ computer network was not adequately secured. We noted two conditions
affecting network security.
 Certain servers were located in the HCPS internal network rather than being
isolated in a separate protected network zone to minimize security risks.
These servers, by their nature and location, created improper security risk for
the internal network. Best practices in the State of Maryland Information
Technology Security Manual include placing such servers in an external
protected zone to protect those servers as well as the entity’s internal network.
Detailed aspects of this finding were omitted from this report; however, the
related information was previously shared with HCPS for the purposes of
implementing appropriate corrective actions.
 Intrusion detection prevention system (IDPS) coverage did not exist for
untrusted encrypted traffic entering the HCPS network. HCPS operated a
network appliance having integrated IDPS. Although the network-based
IDPS used by HCPS had the capability to decrypt and analyze encrypted
network traffic received, this feature was not enabled for a portion of such
traffic. Additionally, server host-based intrusion prevention system coverage
was not used for this untrusted encrypted traffic. We identified 2 firewall
rules that allowed encrypted traffic from any source to 26 unique network
destinations within HCPS’ internal network without IDPS coverage.
The aforementioned absence of IDPS coverage creates network security risk
as the untrusted encrypted traffic could contain undetected malicious data.
Best practices in the State of Maryland Information Technology Security
23

--- Page 26 ---
Manual require protection against malicious code and attacks by using IDPS
to monitor system events, detect attacks, and identify unauthorized use of
information systems and/or confidential information. A similar condition was
commented upon in our preceding audit report.
Recommendation 8
We recommend that HCPS
a. relocate servers, as appropriate, to a separate protected network zone to
limit security exposures to the internal network segment; and
b. perform a documented review and assessment of its network security
risks and identify how IDPS coverage should be applied to its network for
all untrusted traffic, including encrypted traffic, and implement this
coverage (repeat).
Facilities Construction, Renovation, and Maintenance
Background
HCPS employs a staff of 504 employees to maintain its 53 schools (including
alternative, vocational, and special education) and a number of other facilities
(such as administrative and support offices). According to its fiscal year 2020
Capital Improvement Plan, necessary construction, major renovations, and
systemic improvements to HCPS’ facilities over the next six years are estimated
to cost $344.3 million.
HCPS Capital Projects Were Properly Procured and Approved and Related
Expenditures Were Properly Supported
Our review of 9 construction-related procurements awarded during fiscal years
2015 to 2018 totaling $62.6 million, disclosed that all 9 contracts were
competitively procured and approved by the Board. In addition, our test of 20
invoices totaling $12.7 million for these contracts disclosed that the invoices were
properly supported and the amounts invoiced were in accordance with contract
terms. Finally, our test of 16 change orders totaling $980,000 for these contracts
disclosed that the change orders were properly supported and approved.
Processes are in Place to Minimize Energy Costs
HCPS has processes in place to minimize energy costs. Specifically, HCPS
utilizes vendor energy metering systems to monitor heating and air conditioning
usage and related costs. HCPS also has written policies that encourage both
students and employees to be aware of and limit their energy use. HCPS also
makes use of solar alternative energy sources. Finally, HCPS participates in a
Baltimore regional cooperative and an Eastern Shore consortium to purchase
24

--- Page 27 ---
energy at the best possible terms. According to documents provided by HCPS
from its energy management vendor (which we did not audit), HCPS saved over
$5.5 million through energy cost avoidance from calendar years 2015 to 2018.
Finding 9
HCPS did not perform preventive maintenance in accordance with its
Comprehensive Maintenance Plan.
Analysis
HCPS did not perform preventive maintenance (PM) in accordance with its
Comprehensive Maintenance Plan (CMP). Although, HCPS developed a CMP
which required inspections and PM at certain intervals, our review of 61 PM work
orders at 15 schools disclosed that 29 work orders were performed between 15
and 432 days late, including 18 that were overdue by 120 days or more.
Required PM is performed on critical building components (such as air
conditioning and ventilation systems, boilers and plumbing, electrical systems,
and roofs) and parking lots. Failing to perform the required PM in a timely
manner could cause system failures and additional maintenance expenditures.
Recommendation 9
We recommend that HCPS complete all preventive maintenance required by
its comprehensive maintenance plan in a timely manner.
Transportation Services
Background
According to statistics compiled by the Maryland State Department of Education
(MSDE), HCPS has approximately 32,500 students eligible to receive student
transportation services. HCPS reported that 7.6 million route miles were traveled
to transport students for the 2018-2019 school year. These students were
transported using 334 contractor-owned buses and 97 school system-owned buses.
According to HCPS’ financial records, fiscal year 2019 transportation costs
totaled $45.2 million with $25.0 million (55 percent) representing payments for
the contracted bus services.
HCPS’s bus contracts are for a 6-year term and payments are negotiated each
year. Specifically, HCPS and the bus contractors meet in August and September
of each school year to reach an agreement on the rates to be paid the following
school year. If no agreement is reached by January 1st, then the contract
terminates as of June 30th of the fiscal year in question. As noted in Figure 4,
25

--- Page 28 ---
payments to bus contractors consist of several components including hourly
reimbursements for drivers, a per-mile maintenance fee, fuel costs, a per-vehicle
allotment (or PVA) intended as reimbursement for the cost of purchasing a bus
(less sales tax which is reimbursed upfront) and a flat rate for return on
investment, reimbursement of certain administrative costs (such as bus driver
training, physicals, and drug testing), and an operations payment.
Figure 4
Cost Components for Bus Contractor Payments
Fiscal Year 2019
(dollar amounts in millions)
Cost Component Amount
Reimbursements for Drivers Hourly Rates $7.8 31%
Maintenance Fee and Fuel Costs $5.9 24%
Per-vehicle Allotment (PVA) $4.8 19%
Field Trips, Athletics, Alternative, and Special Education $3.1 13%
Other Administrative Costs, Spare Bus, Extended Buses,
$2.3 9%
Sales Tax, and Insurance
Operations Payment (formula per-bus profit margin) $1.1 4%
Total $25.0
Source: HCPS Records
Finding 10
Certain components of the payments to bus contractors could not be
supported and included costs that should not have been reimbursed,
resulting in higher payments than necessary for student transportation
services.
Analysis
Certain components of the payments to bus contractors could not be supported
and included costs that should not have been reimbursed, resulting in higher
payments than necessary for student transportation services. During the 2017-
2018 school year, the HCPS cost per mile for transporting students ($4.33) was
higher than the average cost per mile for three of four other similarly sized school
systems ($3.66).
 HCPS did not have a documented basis for the formula used to calculate the
monthly operations payments to bus contractors. Specifically, although a
formula2 for calculating the operations element was included in the bus
2 The formula is generally equal to 13 percent of the average total payments for time and route
mileage associated with each bus (excluding spare buses) plus certain administrative costs.
26

--- Page 29 ---
contracts annual table of payment rates, it was not supported by any cost
studies and the basis for the payment was not explained in the contracts.
HCPS modified its PVA payment formula, effective fiscal year 2017, to
include the annual operations component, which it advised is intended to
provide profit to the bus contractors. We estimate the operations payments
collectively totaled $3.8 million during fiscal 2017 to 2020 for the 213 buses
placed into service during that period. According to HCPS records, the
operations payment per bus year class increased each year and ranged from
$5,793 in fiscal year 2017 to $6,698 in fiscal year 2020. The operations
payments are projected to be an additional $15.6 million over the remaining
15-year life of the buses, resulting in payments totaling $19.4 million
(approximately $91,000 during the life of each bus in addition to the PVA).
 HCPS could not support the appropriateness of the $4.1 million it paid to bus
contractors for bus maintenance costs during fiscal year 2019. The contract
includes language that provides for the annual adjustment of the previous
year’s per-mile maintenance reimbursement rate based on the Transportation
Consumer Price Index for the Baltimore Washington metro area, contingent
upon available funding. However, the annual per-mile maintenance base rate
used was not supported by actual documented maintenance costs, cost studies
or independently derived estimates, and the rate paid ($0.83 per-mile for fiscal
year 2020) was not stipulated in the contracts.
 HCPS did not obtain Board approval of the individual bus contracts, which
are for a six-year term, or the bus payment rate exhibits referenced in the
contracts, which are annually negotiated, as required by its procurement
policies for contracts exceeding $100,000. Of the 32 bus contractors, 29
received fiscal year 2019 payments of over $100,000 per year, including 8
who received over $1 million per year.
 The standard contract language used by HCPS for its bus contracts did not
include a right to audit provision. Such a provision would allow HCPS to
verify the contractor’s actual costs of purchasing and maintaining the buses
when negotiating the PVA and the operations payment noted above, plus
hourly reimbursements for drivers, the per-mile maintenance fee, fuel costs,
and other administrative costs. The State of Maryland has established a
preference in regulation that all contracts require contractors to make their
records available for audit by authorized representatives of the State at all
reasonable times.
27

--- Page 30 ---
Similar conditions regarding inadequate support for bus maintenance payments,
and not submitting bus payment components to the Board for approval, were
commented upon in our preceding audit report.
Recommendation 10
We recommend that HCPS
a. document the basis for the bus contractor operations payment;
b. use actual documented maintenance costs, cost studies, or independently
derived estimates for establishing contractor rates for per-mile
maintenance costs (repeat);
c. present the bus contracts and annual updated bus component payment
rates to the Board for approval (repeat); and
d. include provisions to audit the bus contractors in future contracts and use
it to determine the actual cost of operating contractor buses to use in
future contract negotiations.
Finding 11
HCPS did not independently verify manifest data entered into the
transportation payments system and did not maintain support for payments
made prior to fiscal year 2020.
Analysis
HCPS did not independently verify the accuracy of manifest data entered into the
transportation payments system and did not maintain support for payments made
prior to fiscal year 2020.
 Manifest information manually entered into the automated system by HCPS
employees was not independently reviewed for propriety. The manifest
information, such as route times and miles, is used to calculate certain
payments, such as the drivers’ hourly reimbursement that is made to the
contractors.
 The automated system used by HCPS prior to fiscal year 2020 did not
maintain historical data supporting the calculation of payments for the PVA,
administrative costs, fuel, and bus driver hourly wages. Specifically, the data
were overwritten each year and no record of the prior year’s payments were
maintained. As a result, we are unable to determine if payments made to bus
contractors prior to 2020 were proper. HCPS converted to a new
transportation payments system beginning in fiscal year 2020, and we were
informed that the new system will maintain historical data. The contractor
payments we were able to test for fiscal year 2020 did not disclose any
28

--- Page 31 ---
material payment inaccuracies (driver hours and mileage was supported,
negotiated rates were properly applied, and payment amounts were
mathematically accurate).
Recommendation 11
We recommend that HCPS
a. independently verify manifest data entered into transportation payments
system for accuracy, and
b. ensure system payment documentation and support is maintained for
future reference.
Food Services
Background
According to the audited financial statements, food service operating expenditures
totaled $17.9 million in fiscal year 2019, which were primarily funded from
federal sources totaling $9.6 million and food sales totaling $7.9 million.
According to MSDE records, HCPS had 263.5 food service positions in fiscal
year 2019 for its 53 schools, consisting of 230 cafeteria positions and 33.5
administrative positions.
According to MSDE records, 30 percent of HCPS students qualified for free and
reduced-price meals as of October 31, 2018.
Conclusion
Based on our current assessment of significance and risk relative to our audit
objectives, we did not conduct any work in this area other than a limited review to
determine that HCPS satisfactorily addressed the prior report finding in this area.
School Board Oversight
Background
The Harford County Board of Education (the Board) is composed of six elected
members, three appointed members, and the county superintendent of schools,
who is an ex officio nonvoting member. There is also one student member who
has the same rights and privileges as the other voting members, with the exception
of certain matters (such as acquisition and disposition of real property, collective
bargaining, and employee promotions and discipline). As noted in the
Background Information section, the Board contracted with a certified public
accounting firm for independent audits of the HCPS financial statements and
29

--- Page 32 ---
federal programs. To assist in its oversight of various areas of HCPS operations
and governance, the Board established several committees, such as Audit, Board
Policy, Budget, Legislative, and Student Government. Additionally, the Board
has established a number of citizen advisory committees (such as Career and
Technology Education, Family Life, Gifted and Talented, Safety and Security,
and Special Education), which meet with the Board periodically and serve as
channels for public concerns and information.
HCPS Adopted an Ethics Policy that Met the Requirements of State Law
The HCPS Board has adopted a detailed ethics policy that conforms to State law
and was approved by the State Ethics Commission. The policy is applicable to all
Board members and employees and includes provisions for conflicts of interest
and financial disclosures by Board members and certain employees. Specifically,
annual financial disclosures are required to be filed by Board members,
candidates for the Board, the Superintendent, and other administrators (such as
school principals and agency buyers) by April 30th of each year.
In accordance with the policy, HCPS established an Ethics Panel consisting of
five members appointed by the Board to interpret ethics policies and provide
advice on policy implementation. The Panel also reviews and rules on any
reported complaints of ethics violations. Our review of the records for certain
Board members and HCPS employees required to submit financial disclosure
forms for calendar year 2018 disclosed that forms were submitted as required.
Conclusion
Our audit did not disclose any reportable conditions related to school board
oversight.
Management of Other Risks
Healthcare Background
HCPS is a member of the Harford County Public Entities Health Care Consortium
(hereafter referred to as the Consortium) for employee and retiree health care.
The Consortium negotiates contracts with a third-party administrator (TPA) firm
for health care claims processing services for employee and retiree medical,
vision, dental, and pharmacy costs and for stop-loss coverage. HCPS is the
largest member of the Consortium as its claims represented 70 percent of the
Consortium’s total claims for plan year 2019.
HCPS is self-insured and ultimately covers the cost of the medical services
received by its employees. HCPS pays the TPA monthly that includes a
30

--- Page 33 ---
subscription charge based on the number of participants and their medical
coverage, and an administration fee. The monthly payment also includes the stop-
loss insurance, which indemnifies HCPS against health insurance claim amounts
that exceed $300,000 per participant per plan year.
Medical providers submit claims to the TPA who pays them on behalf of HCPS.
In a year-end settlement process, which segregates the participating agencies for
the plan year ending June 30, 2019, the TPA nets the amount of medical claims it
paid, and related fees, excess stop loss amounts and rebates, against the monthly
subscription charges billed to and paid by HCPS to determine any excess amount
due from or to be reimbursed to either party.
The Consortium contracts with a consultant to help manage the health plans. The
consultant performs data analysis of the health services utilization and costs,
provides recommendations on potential rate changes, and evaluates the merits of
the health plan proposals.
As of February 19, 2020, HCPS provided health insurance benefits to
approximately 15,500 enrolled employees, dependents, and retirees. According to
TPA records, during the 2018-2019 contract year health care payments totaled
$97.2 million, including $2.9 million in administrative fees and $3.3 million in
stop-loss insurance.
Finding 12
HCPS did not audit or adequately verify the propriety of health care claims,
insurance premiums and administrative fees paid to the TPA, and the
eligibility of enrolled dependents.
Analysis
HCPS did not audit or adequately verify the propriety of health care claims,
insurance premiums and administrative fees paid to the TPA, and the eligibility of
enrolled dependents.
 HCPS did not audit the propriety of the medical claims paid on its behalf by
the TPA to ensure that the services were actually provided, covered by the
health plans, appropriately priced, and accurately reported on the year-end
settlement. Furthermore, HCPS did not receive detailed claims data from the
TPA to verify the propriety of the aforementioned items and accuracy of the
year-end settlement. The State of Maryland’s Office of Personnel Services
and Benefits administers self-insured health plans for State employees and
contracts for comprehensive reviews of claims paid by plan administrators.
According to the Office, improper payments identified from these reviews
31

--- Page 34 ---
have consistently exceeded the cost of the reviews. A similar condition was
commented upon in our preceding audit report.
 HCPS did not always document its verification of health insurance premiums
billed monthly by the TPA. HCPS had developed a computerized report that
compared amounts due according to its enrollment records to the amounts
billed by the TPA, which was to be reviewed monthly by staff. Our test of 12
fiscal year 2019 monthly billings totaling $97.2 million disclosed that HCPS
could not document the comparison for 5 monthly billings totaling $39.4
million.
 HCPS did not verify the propriety of administrative fees assessed by the TPA,
which totaled $2.9 million in fiscal year 2019. The fees were included in the
annual settlement with the TPA based on a fixed amount per enrollee.
However, HCPS did not verify the accuracy of the annual settlement amount
by multiplying the number of participants according to its human resources
enrollment records by the applicable contract rate. Our recalculation of the
administrative fees for the 2019 contract year did not disclose significant
variances. A similar condition was commented upon in our preceding audit
report.
 HCPS did not ensure that it received all prescription drug rebates from the
TPA’s pharmacy benefits manager as reported on the annual settlement with
the TPA. In fiscal year 2019, the TPA reported that HCPS received
prescription drug rebates totaling $6.2 million.
 HCPS did not ensure all enrolled dependents were eligible to participate in the
HCPS health plan. Although HCPS had established new dependent eligibility
verification procedures and enrollment documentation criteria, such
documentation was not always obtained to verify new dependents met health
insurance enrollment criteria. Furthermore, HCPS had not performed a
dependent eligibility audit to identify previously enrolled ineligible
dependents. Our test of 18 employees with dependent insurance coverage
disclosed that 17 of the employees had not provided documentation required
to support dependent eligibility, such as social security cards, and birth and
marriage certificates.
Recommendation 12
We recommend that HCPS
a. ensure audits are conducted of the propriety of health care claims paid,
and documentation is obtained supporting amounts reported on the year-
end settlement by the TPA (repeat);
32

--- Page 35 ---
b. document the comparisons of its records of enrolled employees to TPA
invoices and contract rates to determine the propriety of premiums
billed;
c. perform documented comparisons of its records of enrolled employees
and contract rates to determine the propriety of administrative fees
assessed on the year-end settlement (repeat);
d. obtain documentation from the TPA’s pharmacy benefit manager
supporting the amount of drug rebates reported by the TPA on the year-
end settlement; and
e. conduct audits of enrolled dependents and ensure employees in the health
care plan submit the documentation required to verify the eligibility of
their dependents before they are enrolled in the plans.
33

--- Page 36 ---
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We conducted a performance audit to evaluate the effectiveness and efficiency of
the financial management practices of the Harford County Public Schools
(HCPS). We conducted this audit under the authority of the State Government
Article, Section 2-1220(e) of the Annotated Code of Maryland, and performed it
in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards. Those
standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient,
appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and
conclusions based on our audit objectives. We believe that the evidence obtained
provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit
objectives.
We had two broad audit objectives:
1. Evaluate whether the HCPS procedures and controls were effective in
accounting for and safeguarding its assets.
2. Evaluate whether the HCPS policies provided for the efficient use of
financial resources.
In planning and conducting our audit of HCPS, we focused on 11 major financial-
related areas of operations as approved on December 6, 2016 by the Joint Audit
and Evaluation Committee of the Maryland General Assembly in accordance with
the enabling legislation. The scope of the work performed in each of these areas
was based on our assessments of significance and risk. Therefore, our follow-up
on the status of findings included in our preceding audit report on HCPS dated
January 27, 2015, included those findings that were applicable to the current audit
scope for each of the 11 areas.
The audit objectives excluded reviewing and assessing student achievement,
curriculum, teacher performance, and other academic-related areas and functions.
Also, we did not evaluate the HCPS Comprehensive Education Master Plan or
related updates, and we did not review the activities, financial or other, of any
parent teacher association, group, or funds not under the local board of
education’s direct control or management.
To accomplish our objectives, we reviewed applicable State laws and regulations
pertaining to public elementary and secondary education, as well as policies and
procedures issued and established by HCPS. We also interviewed personnel at
HCPS and the Maryland State Department of Education (MSDE), and staff at
other local school systems in Maryland (as appropriate). Our audit procedures
34

--- Page 37 ---
included inspections of documents and records, and observations of HCPS
operations. We also tested transactions and performed other auditing procedures
that we considered necessary to achieve our objectives, generally for the period
from July 1, 2016 to September 4, 2019. Generally, transactions were selected for
testing based on auditor judgment, which primarily considers risk. Unless
otherwise specifically indicated, neither statistical nor non-statistical audit
sampling was used to select the transactions tested. Therefore, the results of the
tests cannot be used to project those results to the entire population from which
the test items were selected. For certain areas within the scope of the audit, we
relied on the work performed by the independent accounting firm that annually
audits HCPS’ financial statements and conducts the federal Single Audit, as well
as the HCPS internal auditor.
We used certain statistical data—including financial and operational—compiled
by MSDE from various informational reports submitted by the Maryland local
school systems. This information was used in this audit report for background or
informational purposes, and was deemed reasonable.
We also extracted data from the HCPS automated financial management system
for the purpose of testing expenditure and payroll transactions. We performed
various audit procedures on the relevant data and determined the data were
sufficiently reliable for the purposes the data were used during the audit.
HCPS’ management is responsible for establishing and maintaining effective
internal control. Internal control is a process designed to provide reasonable
assurance that objectives pertaining to the reliability of financial records;
effectiveness and efficiency of operations including safeguarding of assets; and
compliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations are achieved. As
provided in Government Auditing Standards, there are five components of
internal control: control environment, risk assessment, control activities,
information and communication, and monitoring. Each of the five components,
when significant to the audit objectives, and as applicable to HCPS, were
considered by us during the course of this audit.
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate. In addition
to the conditions included in this report, other findings were communicated to
HCPS that were not deemed significant and, consequently, did not warrant
inclusion in this report.
35

--- Page 38 ---
We conducted our audit fieldwork from September 5, 2019 to June 30, 2020. A
portion of our fieldwork included time in which the local education agencies were
impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic health crisis. Specifically, beginning on
March 16, 2020, the State Superintendent of Schools decided to close school and
administrative buildings to employees and the public for a two-week period. This
was eventually extended for the remainder of the 2019-2020 school year with
limited access by certain employees. Although all HCPS buildings were closed
for a portion of our fieldwork, the objectives and scope of our audit were not
significantly impacted. To the extent that the COVID-19 crisis continues to
impact HCPS operations, certain recommendations in this report may need to be
adjusted to ensure proper controls under the modified operations.
The HCPS response to our findings and recommendations is included as an
appendix to this report. As prescribed in the State Government Article, Section 2-
1224 of the Annotated Code of Maryland, we will advise HCPS regarding the
results of our review of its response.
36

--- Page 39 ---
APPENDIX
Business Services
Deborah L. Judd, CPA
Assistant Superintendent for Business Services
March 19, 2021
Mr. Gregory A. Hook, CPA,
Legislative Auditor
Dear Mr. Hook:
Please accept the attached Agency Response Form as the result of the Legislative
Audit of Harford County Public Schools. We appreciate the collaboration during the
audit and the opportunity to provide responses to your findings.
Please contact us with any questions
Sincerely,
Deborah L. Judd, CPA
Assistant Superintendent for Business Services

--- Page 40 ---
Harford County Public Schools
Agency Response Form
Procurement and Disbursement Cycle
Finding 1
HCPS procurement policies did not incorporate certain recognized best practices or
requirements of State law when evaluating the merits of participation in intergovernmental
cooperative purchasing agreements (ICPA).
We recommend that HCPS establish and adhere to the aforementioned statutory
requirement and other identified and acknowledged best practices when using ICPAs.
Agency Response
Analysis Factually Accurate
Please provide
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 1 Agree Estimated Completion Date: 6/30/2021
Please provide details of The purchasing practices as it relates to ICPA agreements currently incorporate
corrective action or many of the requirements of State Law by using a “Piggyback” check list to evaluate
explain disagreement. the merits of participating in an ICPA. Going forward HCPS will incorporate other
best practices.
Page 1 of 16

--- Page 41 ---
Harford County Public Schools
Agency Response Form
Finding 2
Certain transactions processed on its automated system were not subject to independent
review and approval and verified to appropriate supporting documentation after being
entered into the system.
We recommend that HCPS
a. ensure that changes to the vendor information recorded in the automated accounts
payable system are periodically verified to appropriate source documentation by an
independent employee;
b. ensure that an independent employee conducts a documented comparison of
disbursement transactions to the related supporting documentation, at least on a test
basis; and
c. obtain independent supporting documentation for special education services invoices
(repeat).
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 2a Agree Estimated Completion Date: Jan 2021
Please provide details of AP135 picks up vendor changes and other things. The Assistant
corrective action or Superintendent for Business Services will review the report quarterly
explain disagreement. and randomly select documentation to confirm appropriate changes.
Recommendation 2b Agree Estimated Completion Date: Complete
Please provide details of Independent review occurs by any number of managers within the
corrective action or organization as described in the processes and compensating controls
explain disagreement. below.
Budget Managers monitor their budget accounts very closely and are
provided daily reports that are updated each night for that day’s
transactions. Any inappropriate charges to their accounts are questioned
and investigated. . Budget Managers routinely contact Business Services
if a transaction is posted to one of their accounts that they did not
approve or if something is not charged to their account that should have
been. In addition, the Assistant Superintendent of Business Services
prepares the quarterly financial reports and investigates variances, often
looking at documentation to understand the specific transactions that
have posted.
Page 2 of 16

--- Page 42 ---
Harford County Public Schools
Agency Response Form
The budget office monitors Health, Life, Dental and Retirement accounts
very closely. Any unexpected variances are questioned and
investigated. Quarterly meetings are held with the budget office and the
Assistant Superintendent of Business Services to discuss budgets by
state categories and by line item for any areas that appear high.
When Health, Life and Dental are paid each month, the Benefits Office
sends the approved Disbursement Vouchers and invoices to
Finance. Approximately $10 million each month. The accounting
specialist coordinates with the Director of Finance in order to process the
payments, ensuring funds are available. The Director of Finance will
transfer money from our MLGIP account to our checking account to
cover this large amount, as needed. The accounting specialist then
processes the ACH payments. There is management involvement and
approval in processing these payments each month.
Retirement payments made quarterly and annually are initiated by the
Director of Finance. For the quarterly Local Share of Teachers’
retirement and the quarterly Admin Fee for Teachers and Employees
plans, the Director of Finance prepares and submits the Disbursement
Vouchers to Accounts Payable who process payment.
The annual employer contribution to Employees’ Retirement is paid via
Wire Transfer in December each year. The Director of Finance provides
instruction to Accounts Payable to make this payment via Wire
Transfer. Management involvement throughout the process as The
Director then faxes payment acknowledgement to MSRA.
Recommendation 2c Agree Estimated Completion Date: Jan 2021
Please provide details of HCPS will develop a process that requires the timesheet to come to the
corrective action or special education office from the school, rather than the contractor.
explain disagreement.
Human Resources and Payroll
Finding 3
Page 3 of 16

--- Page 43 ---
Harford County Public Schools
Agency Response Form
HCPS did not ensure critical human resources and payroll transactions were
independently reviewed for propriety.
We recommend that HCPS
a. perform a documented independent supervisory review of human resources and payroll
transactions entered in the system to appropriate supporting documentation, at least on
a test basis (repeat); and
b. retain system reports of transactions entered used to verify transactions.
Agency Response
Analysis Factually Accurate
Please provide HCPS does ensure accuracy of payroll transactions through monitoring
additional comments exception reports and ensuring supervisor approval exists, as necessary.
as deemed necessary. The independent auditor, on a test basis, also reviews transactions.
Recommendation 3a Agree Estimated Completion Date: Ongoing
Please provide details HCPS will perform a periodic documented review of personnel and
of corrective action or payroll transactions, on a test basis by the Assistant Superintendent for
explain disagreement. Human Resources.
Recommendation 3b Agree Estimated Completion Date: March 2020
Please provide details Human resources will run reports quarterly and the Assistant
of corrective action or Superintendent for Human Resources will review and verify transactions
explain disagreement. and will retain the documentation.
Page 4 of 16

--- Page 44 ---
Harford County Public Schools
Agency Response Form
Equipment Control and Accountability
Finding 4
HCPS’ equipment policies were not comprehensive, detail records were incomplete, and
physical inventories were not conducted.
We recommend that HCPS
a. establish policies and procedures to ensure that uniform accountability and control is
maintained over its equipment inventory (recording and conducting periodic
inventories), including certain sensitive non-capitalized items (repeat);
b. ensure that all sensitive equipment items, deemed subject to theft, are recorded in the
detail records (including recording the purchase date and cost); and
c. conduct periodic physical inventories of equipment items, compare the results to the
detail records, and investigate missing items, including those noted above.
Agency Response
Analysis Factually Accurate
Please provide
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 4a Agree Estimated Completion Date: June 2021
Please provide details of HCPS will establish inventory policies/procedures to address the
corrective action or accountability and controls over certain sensitive items.
explain disagreement.
Recommendation 4b Agree Estimated Completion Date: complete
Please provide details of HCPS automated asset management systems does inventory
corrective action or (continuously) through the asset reporting agent. HCPS will address any
explain disagreement.
unaccounted for items. The several systems utilized for tracking do not
have the capability to track purchase date and cost. Those items would
be found in HCPS’ ERP system.
Recommendation 4c Agree Estimated Completion Date: annually
Please provide details of The 20/21 school year was the first-year students all had devices.
corrective action or Devices will be accounted for at year-end and unaccounted for devices
explain disagreement. will be investigated. Each school has an asset tag system which
identifies the device assigned to each student.
Page 5 of 16

--- Page 45 ---
Harford County Public Schools
Agency Response Form
Information Technology
Finding 5
HCPS did not ensure employee access to its automated financial management system
applications was properly restricted resulting in numerous employees with improper and
unnecessary access.
We recommend that HCPS ensure that employee access to its automated financial system
applications, such as procurement, accounts payable, human resources and payroll is
appropriate. Specifically, we recommend that HCPS
a. retain documentation to support supervisory approval of user access;
b. perform periodic independent reviews of financial system applications access;
c. restrict critical system functions to employees who need those capabilities to perform
their job duties and separate employee duties to eliminate incompatible financial system
application functions, including those noted above (repeat); and
d. generate and review transaction reports to monitor employees with unrestricted access
capabilities to ensure all transactions processed were proper.
Agency Response
Analysis Factually Accurate
Please provide
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 5a Agree Estimated Completion Date: Complete
Please provide details of Technology has developed a form for this purpose. Approval is tracked,
corrective action or verified, and retained.
explain disagreement.
Recommendation 5b Agree Estimated Completion Date: April 2021
Please provide details of Management will review appropriate financial system access quarterly.
corrective action or
explain disagreement.
Recommendation 5c Agree Estimated Completion Date: Complete
Please provide details of HCPS restricts access to critical systems through security software
corrective action or which is implemented by the Technology Department. Security Roles
explain disagreement. are established within the security module and users are assigned to roles
based on their job duties. Through the quarterly review of user security
access (see 5b response), HCPS will be able to identify employees who
Page 6 of 16

--- Page 46 ---
Harford County Public Schools
Agency Response Form
may be included in a role in error and their access will be removed, if
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 5d Agree Estimated Completion Date: Ongoing
Please provide details of Upon completion of the quarterly review of system access, HCPS will
corrective action or review any transactions that may have occurred by employees with
explain disagreement. incompatible job functions.
Page 7 of 16

--- Page 47 ---
Harford County Public Schools
Agency Response Form
Finding 6
HCPS maintained sensitive electronic personally identifiable information (PII) in a manner
that did not provide adequate safeguards.
We recommend that HCPS
a. implement appropriate information security safeguards for sensitive electronic PII it
maintains; and
b. perform an annual inventory of its application systems, identify all sensitive electronic
PII, and delete all unnecessary electronic PII.
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 6a Agree Estimated Completion Date: Ongoing
Please provide details of HCPS IT staff meet weekly to identify ANY potential security
corrective action or vulnerabilities, craft a scope and sequence for deployment, or
explain disagreement. corrective measure(s).
Recommendation 6b Agree Estimated Completion Date: Ongoing
Please provide details of HCPS IT staff will continually identify and perform deletion of
corrective action or electronic PII as appropriate and does not impact operation of the
explain disagreement. district’s mission.
Details of deletion of non-electronic PII falls outside the Office of
Technology.
Page 8 of 16

--- Page 48 ---
Harford County Public Schools
Agency Response Form
Finding 7
HCPS lacked assurance that an online data backup service managed by a third-party
provider was properly secured against operational and security risks.
We recommend that HCPS
a. take appropriate actions to include in its service provider contract includes provisions
that address the aforementioned security and operational risks (repeat), and
b. request that the independent security reviews for its online data backup service and
related SOC reports address all necessary security controls (repeat).
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 7a Agree Estimated Completion Date: 12 months
Please provide details of Agree in part, as HCPS can only request the suggested modifications.
corrective action or This was done after the 2015 audit to no avail. As an alternative, HCPS
explain disagreement. is exploring moving our data backup strategy to a more local controlled
data center.
Recommendation 7b Agree Estimated Completion Date:
Please provide details of HCPS is actively reworking the existing contract to include additional
corrective action or security controls covered under the vendor’s independent SOC review.
explain disagreement.
Page 9 of 16

--- Page 49 ---
Harford County Public Schools
Agency Response Form
Finding 8
Certain servers were improperly located within the internal network, and intrusion
detection prevention system coverage did not exist for untrusted encrypted traffic.
We recommend that HCPS
a. relocate servers, as appropriate, to a separate protected network zone to limit security
exposures to the internal network segment; and
b. perform a documented review and assessment of its network security risks and identify
how IDPS coverage should be applied to its network for all untrusted traffic, including
encrypted traffic, and implement this coverage (repeat).
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 8a Agree Estimated Completion Date: 12 months
Please provide details of HCPS will research and, where appropriate, will relocate servers.
corrective action or
explain disagreement.
Recommendation 8b Agree Estimated Completion Date: 12 months
Please provide details of HCPS is actively working to strengthen security protection measures to
corrective action or all publicly facing web servers.
explain disagreement.
Page 10 of 16

--- Page 50 ---
Harford County Public Schools
Agency Response Form
Facilities Construction, Renovation, and Maintenance
Finding 9
HCPS did not perform preventive maintenance in accordance with its Comprehensive
Maintenance Plan.
We recommend that HCPS complete all preventive maintenance required by its
comprehensive maintenance plan in a timely manner.
Agency Response
Analysis Factually Accurate
Please provide
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 9 Agree Estimated Completion Date: Spring 2021
Please provide details of HCPS is evaluating the structure of the preventative maintenance
corrective action or program to align the needs of the system to the staffing resources. The
explain disagreement. next comprehensive maintenance plan will incorporate these changes.
Page 11 of 16

--- Page 51 ---
Harford County Public Schools
Agency Response Form
Transportation Services
Finding 10
Certain components of the payments to bus contractors could not be supported and
included costs that should not have been reimbursed, resulting in higher payments than
necessary for student transportation services.
We recommend that HCPS
a. document the basis for the bus contractor operations payment;
b. use actual documented maintenance costs, cost studies, or independently derived
estimates for establishing contractor rates for per-mile maintenance costs (repeat);
c. present the bus contracts and annual updated bus component payment rates to the
Board for approval (repeat); and
d. include provisions to audit the bus contractors in future contracts and use it to
determine the actual cost of operating contractor buses to use in future contract
negotiations.
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 10a Agree Estimated Completion Date: Complete
Please provide details of The agreements with the bus contractors document the agreed-upon
corrective action or payments. HCPS will retain documentation supporting the bus
explain disagreement. contractor operations payment from future negotiation meetings with the
bus contractors or during the bid process.
Recommendation 10b Agree Estimated Completion Date: complete
Please provide details of The agreements with the bus contractors document agreed-upon
corrective action or payments. HCPS will retain documentation supporting the bus
explain disagreement. contractor per-mile maintenance cost from future negotiation meetings
with the bus contractors or during the bid process.
Recommendation 10c Agree Estimated Completion Date: ongoing
Please provide details of Each year the board approves the increase in all annual costs related to
corrective action or the bus contractors through the annual budget approval process.
explain disagreement. Renegotiated contracts will continue to be presented to the board for
approval in the future (2023 when this contract expires).
Recommendation 10d Agree Estimated Completion Date: 2023
Page 12 of 16

--- Page 52 ---
Harford County Public Schools
Agency Response Form
Please provide details of HCPS will attempt to include an audit or financial review provision in
corrective action or the next bus contract negotiations.
explain disagreement.
Page 13 of 16

--- Page 53 ---
Harford County Public Schools
Agency Response Form
Finding 11
HCPS did not independently verify manifest data entered into the transportation payments
system and did not maintain support for payments made prior to fiscal year 2020.
We recommend that HCPS
a. independently verify manifest data entered into transportation payments system for
accuracy, and
b. ensure system payment documentation and support is maintained for future reference.
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 11a Agree Estimated Completion Date: Complete
Please provide details of HCPS began implementing the recommendation in the 19/20 school
corrective action or year.
explain disagreement.
Recommendation 11b Agree Estimated Completion Date: Complete
Please provide details of HCPS will maintain this information for audit purposes.
corrective action or
explain disagreement.
Page 14 of 16

--- Page 54 ---
Harford County Public Schools
Agency Response Form
Management of Other Risks
Finding 12
HCPS did not audit or adequately verify the propriety of health care claims, insurance
premiums and administrative fees paid to the TPA, and the eligibility of enrolled
dependents.
We recommend that HCPS
a. ensure audits are conducted of the propriety of health care claims paid, and
documentation is obtained supporting amounts reported on the year-end settlement by
the TPA (repeat);
b. document the comparisons of its records of enrolled employees to TPA invoices and
contract rates to determine the propriety of premiums billed;
c. perform documented comparisons of its records of enrolled employees and contract
rates to determine the propriety of administrative fees assessed on the year-end
settlement (repeat);
d. obtain documentation from the TPA’s pharmacy benefit manager supporting the
amount of drug rebates reported by the TPA on the year-end settlement; and
e. conduct audits of enrolled dependents and ensure employees in the health care plan
submit the documentation required to verify the eligibility of their dependents before
they are enrolled in the plans.
Agency Response
Analysis Factually Accurate
Please provide
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 12a Agree Estimated Completion Date: Spring 2021
Please provide details of HCPS is currently engaged in an audit with a third party to review the
corrective action or propriety of healthcare claims. HCPS will also corroborate the year-end
explain disagreement. settlement produced by the TPA.
Recommendation 12b Agree Estimated Completion Date: Ongoing
Please provide details of The HR/IS Analyst will compare invoices to employee elections to
corrective action or verify monthly medical billings.
explain disagreement.
Recommendation 12c Agree Estimated Completion Date: 7/1/2021
Page 15 of 16

--- Page 55 ---
Harford County Public Schools
Agency Response Form
Please provide details of 1)HCPS will engage a benefit consultant , benefit enrollment provider,
corrective action or and health benefits insurer in conversation by March 31, 2021 to develop
explain disagreement.
a process to validate monthly administrative fees, and fees assessed on
year-end settlement.
2)Solution to be tested for plan year ending 6/30/2021 and implemented
for use beginning with plan year 7/1/2021 – 6/30/2022.
Recommendation 12d Agree Estimated Completion Date: 2021
Please provide details of HCPS will engage benefit consultant, pharmacy benefits manager, and
corrective action or health benefits insurer as needed, in conversation by March 31, 2021 to
explain disagreement.
determine how HCPS may be able to verify drug rebates reported on the
year-end settlement.
Recommendation 12e Agree Estimated Completion Date: 2021/2022
Please provide details of HCPS will consider a dependent audit. For new enrollees, verification is
corrective action or currently required to ensure valid dependent status.
explain disagreement.
Page 16 of 16

--- Page 56 ---
A T
UDIT EAM
Raymond G. Burton Jr., CPA, CFE
Audit Manager
Richard L. Carter, CISA
R. Brendan Coffey, CPA, CISA
Information Systems Audit Managers
Mindy R. Garrett
Senior Auditor
Roman J. Gouin
Matthew D. Walbert, CISA
Information Systems Senior Auditors
Jordan T. Duke
Owen M. Long
John B. Wachter, CFE
Staff Auditors
Joseph R. Clayton
Information System Staff Auditor