Title: Department of Natural Resources
Date: 04/05/2021
Type: Fiscal Compliance
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=606ca562a1ce5813a4b8168d
Extracted: 2025-06-19T11:49:43.059016
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Audit Report
Department of Natural Resources
April 2025
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Senator Shelly L. Hettleman (Senate Chair) Delegate Jared Solomon (House Chair)
Senator Joanne C. Benson Delegate Steven J. Arentz
Senator Benjamin T. Brooks, Sr. Delegate Andrea Fletcher Harrison
Senator Paul D. Corderman Delegate Steven C. Johnson
Senator Katie Fry Hester Delegate Mary A. Lehman
Senator Cheryl C. Kagan Delegate David H. Moon
Senator Clarence K. Lam, M.D. Delegate Julie Palakovich Carr
Senator Cory V. McCray Delegate Emily K. Shetty
Senator Justin D. Ready Delegate Stephanie M. Smith
Senator Bryan W. Simonaire Delegate M. Courtney Watson
To Obtain Further Information
Office of Legislative Audits
The Warehouse at Camden Yards
351 West Camden Street, Suite 400
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Phone: 410-946-5900
Maryland Relay: 711
TTY: 410-946-5401 · 301-970-5401
E-mail: webmaster@ola.state.md.us
Website: www.ola.state.md.us
To Report Fraud
The Office of Legislative Audits operates a Fraud Hotline to report fraud, waste, or abuse involving State
of Maryland government resources. Reports of fraud, waste, or abuse may be communicated anonymously
by a toll-free call to 1-877-FRAUD-11, by mail to the Fraud Hotline, c/o Office of Legislative Audits, or
through the Office’s website.
Nondiscrimination Statement
The Department of Legislative Services does not discriminate on the basis of age, ancestry, color, creed,
marital status, national origin, race, religion, gender, gender identity, sexual orientation, or disability in the
admission or access to its programs, services, or activities. The Department’s Information Officer has been
designated to coordinate compliance with the nondiscrimination requirements contained in Section 35.107
of the United States Department of Justice Regulations. Requests for assistance should be directed to the
Information Officer at 410-946-5400 or 410-970-5400.

--- Page 3 ---
April 24, 2025
Senator Shelly L. Hettleman, Senate Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Delegate Jared Solomon, House Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Members of Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Annapolis, Maryland
Ladies and Gentlemen:
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the Department of Natural
Resources (DNR) for the period beginning August 6, 2019 and ending December
31, 2023. DNR oversees the management and use of the State’s living and natural
resources for the current and future enjoyment of Maryland’s citizens and visitors.
These resources include the Chesapeake Bay and its tributaries, State forests and
parks, and fisheries and wildlife.
Our audit disclosed that DNR did not effectively monitor State and local Forest
Conservation Act programs to ensure they complied with the terms of the
program and did not properly account for the related funds. For example, DNR
did not use $3.4 million collected for reforestation projects within the required
timeframe and did not refund the funds to the paying entities to use for planting
trees as required by State law. Similar conditions were noted in our preceding
audit report.
Our audit also disclosed that DNR did not evaluate the Chesapeake and Atlantic
Coastal Bays Trust Fund grant proposals using the published grant selection
criteria and certain grants were not competitively awarded as required by law.
For example, DNR awarded two grants totaling $8.1 million without using a
competitive selection process.
We also received a referral to our fraud, waste, and abuse hotline which noted that
DNR was not receiving the maximum amount in the Mel Noland Woodland
Incentive Fund as allowed under State law. Based on our review, we were able

--- Page 4 ---
to substantiate concerns raised in the allegation. Specifically, we noted that DNR
did not use available information to ensure the Comptroller of Maryland (COM)
transferred certain required revenue into the Fund (see Finding 5). Our analysis
disclosed that for fiscal years 2020 to 2023 the COM did not transfer $430,225 of
the $706,715 it should have under State law.
Our review also disclosed that DNR could not provide documentation to support
the propriety of approximately $1.7 million in federal fund accrued revenue.
DNR also could not document the recovery of these funds and subsequently
advised us that approximately $603,000 is not recoverable because the related
costs were deemed ineligible by the federal granting agency. Therefore, State
general or special funds may be needed to cover these expenditures.
Finally, our review disclosed that DNR did not verify the propriety of charges
totaling $15.1 million related to technology enterprise services received from the
Department of Information Technology during fiscal years 2021 through 2023. A
similar condition was noted but not resolved from our preceding audit report.
DNR’s response to this audit is included as an appendix to this report. We
reviewed the response to our findings and related recommendations, and have
concluded that the corrective actions identified are sufficient to address all audit
issues.
We wish to acknowledge the cooperation extended to us during the audit by DNR.
Respectfully submitted,
Brian S. Tanen
Brian S. Tanen, CPA, CFE
Legislative Auditor
2

--- Page 5 ---
Table of Contents
Background Information 5
Agency Responsibilities 5
Referral to Our Fraud, Waste, and Abuse Hotline 6
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report 7
Findings and Recommendations 8
Forest Conservation Act (FCA)
* Finding 1 – The Department of Natural Resources (DNR) did not 8
effectively monitor local FCA programs to ensure they complied
with the terms of the program and did not properly account for the
related funds.
* Finding 2 – DNR did not use $3.4 million collected for reforestation 9
projects within the required timeframe and did not refund the funds to
the paying entities to use for planting trees as required by State law.
Chesapeake and Atlantic Coastal Bays Trust Fund
Finding 3 – DNR did not evaluate Chesapeake and Atlantic Coastal 10
Bays Trust Fund grant proposals using the published grant selection
criteria, and certain grants were not competitively awarded as
required by State law.
Budgetary and Year-End Closing
Finding 4 – DNR could not provide documentation to support the propriety 11
of approximately $1.7 million in federal fund accrued revenue. DNR
also could not document the recovery of the funds and subsequently
advised us that approximately $603,000 is not recoverable because the
related costs were deemed ineligible by the federal granting agency.
Mel Noland Woodland Incentive Fund
Finding 5 – DNR did not use available information to ensure the 13
Comptroller of Maryland transferred certain required revenue into the
Fund.
* Denotes items repeated in full or part from preceding audit report
3

--- Page 6 ---
Disbursements
* Finding 6 – DNR did not verify the propriety of $15.1 million in charges 13
for technology enterprise services from the Department of Information
Technology during fiscal years 2021 through 2023.
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology 15
Agency Response Appendix
* Denotes items repeated in full or part from preceding audit report
4

--- Page 7 ---
Background Information
Agency Responsibilities
The Department of Natural Resources (DNR) oversees the management and use
of the State’s living and natural resources for the current and future enjoyment of
Maryland’s citizens and visitors. These resources include the Chesapeake Bay
and its tributaries, State forests and parks, and fisheries and wildlife. DNR
maintains a headquarters location in Annapolis and eight Regional Service
Centers.
According to the State’s records, during fiscal year 2023, DNR’s expenditures
totaled $652.5 million, including $255.6 million for land acquisition through
Program Open Space and $43.1 million for capital improvement projects. See
Figure 1 for DNR’s fiscal year 2023 expenditures by major functional area. See
Figure 2 for DNR’s positions, expenditures and funding for fiscal year 2023.
During the period June 30, 2021 through June 30, 2023, DNR had vacancy rates
that ranged from 8.4 percent to 11.1 percent. As of June 30, 2023, approximately
11.1 percent of the total 1,386 positions were vacant. These vacancies may have
contributed, at least in part, to the findings in this report.
Figure 1
DNR Expenditures by Major Functional Area
Fiscal Year 2023
(amounts in millions)
Land Acquisition and Planning $255.6
39%
Administration $103.4
16%
Park and Forest Services
$87.0
13%
Chesapeake and Coastal Service
$75.5
12%
Police $71.5
11%
Fishing, Boating, Wildlife, and Heritage Services $59.5
9%
Source: Fiscal Year 2025 Operating Budget Book
5

--- Page 8 ---
Figure 2
DNR Positions, Expenditures, and Funding Sources
Full-Time Equivalent Positions as of June 30, 2023
Positions
Filled 1,232
Vacant 154
Total 1,386
Fiscal Year 2023 Expenditures
Expenditures
Salaries, Wages, and Fringe Benefits $156,972,744
Technical and Special Fees 14,678,776
Operating Expenses 480,869,464
Total $652,520,984
Fiscal Year 2023 Funding Sources
Funding
General Fund $106,574,357
Special Fund 491,318,921
Federal Fund 43,568,085
Reimbursable Fund 11,059,621
Total $652,520,984
Source: State financial and personnel records
Referral to Our Fraud, Waste, and Abuse Hotline
We received a referral to our fraud, waste, and abuse hotline alleging that DNR
was not receiving the maximum amount in the Mel Noland Woodland Incentive
Fund as allowed under State law. We reviewed DNR’s process to ensure it
received the maximum amount as allowed under the law.
Based on our review, we were able to substantiate the concerns raised in the
allegation (see Finding 5). However, the results of our review of the allegation
did not identify any issues that warranted a referral to the Office of the Attorney
General – Criminal Division.
6

--- Page 9 ---
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report
Our audit included a review to determine the status of the seven findings
contained in our preceding audit report dated April 5, 2021. See Figure 3 for the
results of our review.
Figure 3
Status of Preceding Findings
Preceding Implementation
Finding Description
Finding Status
The Department of Natural Resources (DNR) overpaid for
Conservation Reserve Enhancement Program easements and did
Finding 1 Not repeated
not ensure that land owners complied with the terms of the
easements.
DNR did not obtain required documentation needed to
effectively monitor the State Forest Conservation Act (FCA) Repeated
Finding 2
program. In addition, DNR did not use $3.5 million collected (Current Finding 2)
for reforestation projects within the time required.
DNR did not effectively monitor local FCA programs to ensure
Repeated
Finding 3 local jurisdictions complied with the terms of the program and
(Current Finding 1)
did not properly account for the related funds.
DNR did not perform periodic reviews to determine the
propriety of user access to its COMPASS web-based licensing
and registration system. As a result, from our limited review,
Finding 4 Not repeated
we identified several users who had improper access or could
process critical transactions without adequate supervisory
review and certain transactions were not properly supported.
Collections at DNR’s headquarters complex and the Annapolis
Regional Service Center were not always safeguarded and
Finding 5 Not repeated
independently verified to subsequent deposit, and certain
collection functions were not separated as required.
DNR did not always comply with State procurement regulations
including documenting bid openings, retaining proposals,
Finding 6 Not repeated
executing contracts, and publishing contract awards on
eMaryland Marketplace.
DNR did not ensure it received technology enterprise services
Repeated
Finding 7 during fiscal year 2020 valued at $5 million from the
(Current Finding 6)
Department of Information Technology.
7

--- Page 10 ---
Findings and Recommendations
Forest Conservation Act (FCA)
Background
Under the FCA, the State protects forests, trees, and sensitive areas by
establishing standards and for development activities (subdivisions, project
planning, grading permits, and sediment control plans) on certain projects. The
implementation of the program is primarily performed by local jurisdictions
through local forest conservation programs.
Finding 1
The Department of Natural Resources (DNR) did not effectively monitor
local FCA programs to ensure they complied with the terms of the program
and did not properly account for the related funds.
Analysis
DNR did not effectively monitor local FCA programs to ensure they complied
with the terms of the program. State law requires DNR to monitor the local FCA
programs including conducting biennial reviews that evaluate local jurisdiction
compliance with performance measures and required forest conservation
measures. State regulations further require as part of the biennial reviews, DNR
to perform field checks at development projects subject to the local program. Our
review of the most recent cycle of biennial reviews conducted in fiscal year 2022
disclosed that DNR did not conduct reviews for 15 of the 22 jurisdictions
requiring a review. Although DNR advised us that it had periodically performed
site visits to monitor local FCA projects, it did not provide documentation of any
site visits.
DNR also did not effectively monitor and account for local forest conservation
funds.1 State law requires a local authority within each jurisdiction with a forest
conservation fund to provide DNR with detailed accounting procedures for
accurately tracking money received into and expended out of the local forest
conservation fund. While local jurisdiction reported collections and expenses
they did not report fund balances. This is significant because money deposited
into the fund for reforestation or afforestation, must be used within five years (or
six growing cycles) or be returned to the person who provided the funds. Without
1 When a developer cannot reasonably plant the required acreage of trees either onsite or offsite,
the developer pays a fee to the Forest Conservation Fund for the State or the local authority to
perform reforestation, maintenance of existing forest, and achieving urban canopy goals.
8

--- Page 11 ---
an accurate fund balance, DNR could not readily determine whether any funds
needed to be refunded.
Similar conditions were commented upon in our preceding audit report. In
response to that report, DNR stated biennial reviews would be conducted in 2022
and that it would obtain a detailed listing of the local forest conservations projects
from the jurisdictions. DNR also stated that it uses information in a jurisdiction’s
annual report to monitor fund balances and that beginning and ending balances
would be added to facilitate reconciliation to the prior year's report and
verification of the information. However, as noted above, most biennial reviews
were not conducted. Furthermore, 12 jurisdictions did not submit annual reports
to DNR and the reports that were submitted did not contain sufficient information
to account for local forest conservation funds.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that DNR
a. perform biennial reviews of all local forest conservation programs
(repeat),
b. maintain a complete listing of local projects (repeat),
c. ensure all local jurisdictions submit annual reports, and
d. properly identify and account for the use of local forest conservation
funds in accordance with State law (repeat).
Finding 2
DNR did not use $3.4 million collected for reforestation projects within the
required timeframe and did not refund the funds to the paying entities to use
for planting trees as required by State law.
Analysis
DNR did not ensure it used State FCA funds collected for reforestation projects
within the time required by State law. State law requires DNR to use the funds
for reforestation or afforestation (the process of introducing trees and tree
seedlings to an area not previously forested) within five years or six growing
seasons2 after receipt of the funds or return the funds to the paying entity for tree
planting. Our analysis disclosed that as of March 2024, DNR had not used or
returned $3.4 million collected prior to fiscal year 2019 as required.
2 Chapter 542, Laws of Maryland 2023, effective July 1, 2023, increased the amount of time to
accomplish reforestation or afforestation from two years or three growing seasons to five years
or six growing seasons.
9

--- Page 12 ---
A similar condition was commented upon in our preceding audit report. In
response to that report, DNR stated that it would adapt State FCA record keeping
and tracking policies by September 2021 that identify if funds were used within
the required time frame and refund any amounts that were not used. However, as
noted above, DNR still had not ensured State FCA funds were used timely.
Recommendation 2
We recommend that DNR
a. ensure State FCA funds are expended for reforestation and afforestation
in accordance with State law (repeat); and
b. determine the amount of State FCA funds that have not been spent
within the time required, refund those funds back to the entities in
accordance with State law, and ensure that those funds are used for tree
planting (repeat).
Chesapeake and Atlantic Coastal Bays Trust Fund
Finding 3
DNR did not evaluate Chesapeake and Atlantic Coastal Bays Trust Fund
grant proposals using the published grant selection criteria, and certain
grants were not competitively awarded as required by State law.
Analysis
DNR did not evaluate Chesapeake and Atlantic Coastal Bays Trust Fund grant
proposals using the published grant selection criteria, and certain grants were not
competitively awarded as required by State law. The grant solicitation provided
that grant proposals would be evaluated based on (1) geographic targeting, (2)
readiness and ability to proceed, and (3) cost efficiency. According to the
Chesapeake and Atlantic Coastal Bays Trust Fund Annual Report and
Expenditure Plans, DNR awarded grants totaling $64.1 million during fiscal years
2021 through 2023. Our test of seven grants3 executed between August 2020 and
October 2023 totaling approximately $23.4 million disclosed the following:
• For five grants totaling approximately $15.3 million, DNR did not evaluate
the grant proposals using the published selection criteria. Specifically, DNR
only considered the readiness and ability to proceed in the evaluation process
and used two criteria (maximizing opportunities and overall project) not listed
in the grant solicitation. DNR could not document its change in selection
criteria. We could not readily determine if the change in selection criteria
3 Grants were selected based on materiality.
10

--- Page 13 ---
resulted in awards that would otherwise not have been made if the grant
proposal selection criteria was used.
• For two other grants totaling approximately $8.1 million, DNR did not use a
competitive selection process. State law requires that to the maximum extent
practicable, Chesapeake and Atlantic Coastal Bays Trust Fund grants should
be awarded on a competitive basis. DNR advised us that it awarded the grants
without competition based on a determination by management that the related
projects were a priority but could not document the basis for its decision.
Both grant awards were made to one entity to help restore a portion of the
Severn River that had experienced significant erosion and pollution.
Recommendation 3
We recommend that DNR
a. evaluate grant proposals submitted based on the published selection
criteria, and
b. ensure all grant awards are competitively solicited as required.
Budgetary and Year-End Closing
Finding 4
DNR could not provide documentation to support the propriety of
approximately $1.7 million in federal fund accrued revenue. DNR also could
not document the recovery of the funds and subsequently advised us that
approximately $603,000 is not recoverable because the related costs were
deemed ineligible by the federal granting agency.
Analysis
DNR could not provide documentation to support the propriety of approximately
$1.7 million in federal fund accrued revenue or the subsequent recovery of the
funds due from the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA). At the
end of fiscal year 2023, DNR recorded 117 non-budgeted and federal fund
accrued revenue entries totaling $18.9 million, consisting of 97 positive accrued
revenue entries (recording a receivable for anticipated future funds due) totaling
$15 million, and 20 negative accrued revenue entries (deferred revenue) totaling
$3.9 million.
We reviewed six positive material federal fund accrued revenue entries totaling
$7.9 million and noted that DNR could not support the amounts accrued for two
entries totaling $2.9 million. DNR could not document that the total amount
accrued was proper and represented amounts that were actually collectable.
11

--- Page 14 ---
Specifically, DNR could not support $1.1 million of a $1.6 million accrued
revenue entry and could not support $595,700 of a $1.3 million accrued revenue
entry. The failure to ensure these amounts were proper is significant because as
of July 2024, DNR could not demonstrate that these unsupported amounts had
been recovered from the federal government. After bringing this to DNR’s
attention, it determined that $603,000 was not recoverable because FEMA
deemed certain costs ineligible for reimbursement. Therefore, State general or
special funds may be needed to cover these expenditures.
The Comptroller of Maryland’s General Accounting Division’s year-end closing
instructions provide that accrued revenue transactions should reflect amounts that
are collectable within 60 days of the end of the fiscal year.
Recommendation 4
We recommend that DNR
a. maintain supporting documentation for accrued revenue entries; and
b. determine the disposition of the aforementioned entries, properly report
any amounts determined to be uncollectable, and work with the
Department of Budget and Management to resolve any related deficits.
Mel Noland Woodland Incentive Fund
Background
The Natural Resources Article, Section 5-307 of the Annotated Code of Maryland
established the Mel Noland Woodland Incentive Fund (Fund) to finance the
Woodland Incentive Program and the Mel Noland Fellowship Program. The
Woodland Incentive Program assists eligible landowners in conducting woodland
management and the Mel Noland Fellowship Program supports students seeking a
career in fields relating to natural resources.
We received a referral to our fraud, waste and abuse hotline alleging that DNR
was not receiving all required funds allowed under State law. Based on our
review, we were able to substantiate the allegation. We did not identify any
issues that warranted a referral to the Office of the Attorney General’s Criminal
Division but did identify certain deficiencies that require corrective action by
DNR as further described in the finding below.
12

--- Page 15 ---
Finding 5
DNR did not use available information to ensure the Comptroller of
Maryland (COM) transferred certain required revenue into the Fund.
Analysis
DNR did not use available information to ensure COM transferred certain
required revenue into the Fund. One of the Fund’s revenue sources consists of up
to $200,000 annually of the proceeds of the Agricultural Land Transfer Tax that
are attributable to the taxation of land that are entirely woodland. The taxes
collected are submitted to COM which is responsible for distributing the revenue
into the Fund.
Our review disclosed that DNR did not use available reports from the State
Department of Assessments and Taxation (DAT) to ensure the proper amount was
transferred to the Fund. Our analysis of DNR and DAT records for fiscal years
2020 to 2023, disclosed that COM did not transfer $430,225 of the $706,715 it
should have under State law. For example, during fiscal year 2023 the COM only
transferred $101,240 of the $200,000 that should have been transferred. DNR
was unaware of the underfunding until we brought the matter to their attention.
Recommendation 5
We recommend that DNR
a. ensure COM deposits the proper amount into the Fund, and
b. work in conjunction with COM to recover the aforementioned $430,225.
Disbursements
Finding 6
DNR did not verify the propriety of $15.1 million in charges for technology
enterprise services received from the Department of Information Technology
(DoIT) during fiscal years 2021 through 2023.
Analysis
DNR did not obtain adequate documentation to verify the propriety of charges
totaling $15.1 million related to technology enterprise services received from
DoIT during fiscal years 2021 through 2023. Specifically, DNR did not utilize
available DoIT reports to support the estimated units billed by comparing them to
actual usage. For example, DNR did not attempt to verify the propriety of the
support service charges for 424 desktops at a cost of $1.2 million for fiscal year
2023.
13

--- Page 16 ---
At the beginning of fiscal year 2020, DoIT transitioned to a cost allocation model
for technology enterprise services provided to State agencies, including DNR.
Under this model, a total budget for services to be provided is prepared by DoIT
and invoiced in four equal quarterly payments.
A similar condition regarding the verification of invoices was commented upon in
our preceding audit report. In response to that report, DNR indicated it would
work with DoIT on alternative methods of ensuring detailed technology enterprise
invoices are received before payments are issued. DNR advised they made
several attempts to obtain supporting detail from DoIT since our preceding audit
report but have yet to receive adequate documentation to support services billed.
Recommendation 6
We recommend that DNR continue to work with DoIT to obtain the
necessary information to ensure all technology enterprise services invoiced
are supported and received, including those noted above (repeat).
14

--- Page 17 ---
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the Department of Natural
Resources (DNR) for the period beginning August 6, 2019 and ending December
31, 2023. The audit was conducted in accordance with generally accepted
government auditing standards. Those standards require that we plan and perform
the audit to obtain sufficient, appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis
for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives. We believe that
the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and
conclusions based on our audit objectives.
As prescribed by the State Government Article, Section 2-1221 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, the objectives of this audit were to examine DNR’s financial
transactions, records, and internal control, and to evaluate its compliance with
applicable State laws, rules, and regulations.
In planning and conducting our audit, we focused on the major financial-related
areas of operations based on assessments of significance and risk. The areas
addressed by the audit included procurements and disbursements, corporate
purchasing cards, cash receipts, payroll, equipment, and special funds. Our
information systems security and control review included cloud computing,
system access and authentication, and malware prevention. Furthermore, we
reviewed activities related to the Mel Noland Woodland Incentive Fund based on
a referral to our fraud, waste, and abuse hotline. Finally, we determined the status
of the findings contained in our preceding audit report.
Our audit did not include an evaluation of internal controls over compliance with
federal laws and regulations for federal financial assistance programs and an
assessment of DNR’s compliance with those laws and regulations because the
State of Maryland engages an independent accounting firm to annually audit such
programs administered by State agencies, including DNR.
Our assessment of internal controls was based on agency procedures and controls
in place at the time of our fieldwork. Our tests of transactions and other auditing
procedures were generally focused on the transactions occurring during our audit
period of August 6, 2019 to December 31, 2023, but may include transactions
before or after this period as we considered necessary to achieve our audit
objectives.
To accomplish our audit objectives, our audit procedures included inquiries of
appropriate personnel, inspections of documents and records, tests of transactions,
and to the extent practicable, observations of DNR’s operations. Generally,
15

--- Page 18 ---
transactions were selected for testing based on auditor judgment, which primarily
considers risk, the timing or dollar amount of the transaction, or the significance
of the transaction to the area of operation reviewed. As a matter of course, we do
not normally use sampling in our tests, so unless otherwise specifically indicated,
neither statistical nor non-statistical audit sampling was used to select the
transactions tested. Therefore, unless sampling is specifically indicated in a
finding, the results from any tests conducted or disclosed by us cannot be used to
project those results to the entire population from which the test items were
selected.
We also performed various data extracts of pertinent information from the State’s
Financial Management Information System (such as revenue and expenditure
data) and the State’s Central Payroll Bureau (payroll data), as well as from the
contractor administering the State’s Corporate Purchasing Card Program (credit
card activity). The extracts are performed as part of ongoing internal processes
established by the Office of Legislative Audits and were subject to various tests to
determine data reliability. We determined that the data extracted from these
sources were sufficiently reliable for the purposes the data were used during this
audit. Finally, we performed other auditing procedures that we considered
necessary to achieve our audit objectives. The reliability of data used in this
report for background or informational purposes was not assessed.
DNR’s management is responsible for establishing and maintaining effective
internal control. Internal control is a process designed to provide reasonable
assurance that objectives pertaining to the reliability of financial records;
effectiveness and efficiency of operations, including safeguarding of assets; and
compliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations are achieved. As
provided in Government Auditing Standards, there are five components of
internal control: control environment, risk assessment, control activities,
information and communication, and monitoring. Each of the five components,
when significant to the audit objectives, and as applicable to DNR, were
considered by us during the course of this audit.
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate.
Our reports are designed to assist the Maryland General Assembly in exercising
its legislative oversight function and to provide constructive recommendations for
improving State operations. As a result, our reports generally do not address
activities we reviewed that are functioning properly.
16

--- Page 19 ---
This report includes findings related to conditions that we consider to be
significant deficiencies in the design or operation of internal control that could
adversely affect DNR’s ability to maintain reliable financial records, operate
effectively and efficiently, and/or comply with applicable laws, rules, and
regulations. Our report also includes findings regarding significant instances of
noncompliance with applicable laws, rules, or regulations. Other less significant
findings were communicated to DNR that did not warrant inclusion in this report.
DNR’s response to our findings and recommendations is included as an appendix
to this report. As prescribed in the State Government Article, Section 2-1224 of
the Annotated Code of Maryland, we will advise DNR regarding the results of our
review of its response.
17

--- Page 20 ---
APPENDIX
April 24, 2025
Brian S. Tanen, CPA, CFE
Legislative Auditor
Office of Legislative Audits
The Warehouse at Camden Yards
351 West Camden Street, Suite 400
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Dear Mr. Tanen,
Thank you for your draft audit report for the Department of Natural Resources for the period beginning
August 6, 2019, through December 31, 2023. Enclosed is our agency response.
We would like to thank you and your team for your professionalism and collaborative approach throughout
the audit process. Should you need clarification or additional information, please contact Dona Goeller at 410-
260-8394 or Dona.Goeller@Maryland.gov.
Sincerely,
Josh Kurtz
Secretary
Department of Natural Resources
CC: David Goshorn, Deputy Secretary
Julia Solomon, Assistant Secretary
Dona Goeller, Director, Audit and Management Review
Tawes State Office Building – 580 Taylor Avenue – Annapolis, Maryland 21401
410-260-8DNR or toll free in Maryland 877-620-8DNR – dnr.maryland.gov – TTY Users Call via the Maryland Relay

--- Page 21 ---
Department of Natural Resources
Agency Response Form
Forest Conservation Act (FCA)
Finding 1
The Department of Natural Resources (DNR) did not effectively monitor
local FCA programs to ensure they complied with the terms of the program
and did not properly account for the related funds.
We recommend that DNR
a. perform biennial reviews of all local forest conservation programs
(repeat),
b. maintain a complete listing of local projects (repeat),
c. ensure all local jurisdictions submit annual reports, and
d. properly identify and account for the use of local forest conservation
funds in accordance with State law (repeat).
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide The Department performs biennial reviews of all local forest
additional comments as conservation programs as required by the Forest Conservation Act
deemed necessary. (FCA). As of April 2025, there are 22 counties and 36 municipalities
with local programs. Allegany and Garrett Counties, along with the
towns of Highland Beach, North Beach, and Port Tobacco Village are
exempt. The Department agrees with the recommendations and will
continue to monitor all local forest conservation programs and funds in
accordance with the FCA.
There are multiple reasons why the review of local forest conservation
programs and their respective report submissions were less than fully
compliant with FCA requirements in fiscal year 2022. During that time
period there were significant changes to staff and an increase in remote
working conditions at both state and local levels that caused delays of
site visits and reviews. Additionally, the reporting requirements changed
to include more detailed questions about local projects and a new
virtual/electronic process was implemented that contributed to a
reduction in reporting. Due to these circumstances, desired
documentation of the local jurisdiction biennial reviews was not
available for the audit period. The staff changes, remote work situations,
and reduction in local jurisdiction reporting also caused the challenges in
tracking local forest conservation funds and project-level expenditures
needed for reconciliation of the Forest Conservation Fund.
Page 1 of 8

--- Page 22 ---
Department of Natural Resources
Agency Response Form
Recommendation 1a Agree Estimated Completion Date: 12/31/26
Please provide details of DNR agrees that we should perform biennial reviews of all local forest
corrective action or conservation programs. Since this audit period, DNR has hired staff
explain disagreement. within the FCA program and improved its internal record-keeping and
review processes to resolve the issues found during this audit.
Recommendation 1b Agree Estimated Completion Date: 6/30/25
Please provide details of DNR agrees that we should maintain a complete listing of local projects.
corrective action or As part of the 2024 annual reporting protocol (deadline: 3/31/25), local
explain disagreement. program officers were required to upload a spreadsheet containing
detailed information for every project they reviewed during the previous
calendar year.
Recommendation 1c Agree Estimated Completion Date: 6/30/25
Please provide details of DNR will vigorously pursue all local jurisdictions' timely and complete
corrective action or submission of annual reports.
explain disagreement.
Recommendation 1d Agree Estimated Completion Date: 12/31/25
Please provide details of Since the audit period, DNR has implemented a more comprehensive
corrective action or process to identify and account for the use of the Forest Conservation
explain disagreement. Fund with increased access for multiple staff to avoid loss of data seen in
prior methods. Additionally, DNR is hiring a new program manager to
oversee the FCA program this year.
Page 2 of 8

--- Page 23 ---
Department of Natural Resources
Agency Response Form
Finding 2
DNR did not use $3.4 million collected for reforestation projects within the
required timeframe and did not refund the funds to the paying entities to use
for planting trees as required by State law.
We recommend that DNR
a. ensure State FCA funds are expended for reforestation and afforestation
in accordance with State law (repeat); and
b. determine the amount of State FCA funds that have not been spent
within the time required, refund those funds back to the entities in
accordance with State law, and ensure that those funds are used for tree
planting (repeat).
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide The Forest Conservation Act requires developers to pay a fee-in-lieu to
additional comments as the state if appropriate afforestation or reforestation cannot be
deemed necessary. accomplished. DNR then has an obligation to re-plant the mitigation
acres in the affected county or watershed within a certain timeframe, or
be subject to refunding payments where conditions are met.
DNR does not dispute that funds for tree planting remain in the Forest
Conservation Fund and that improved project-level tracking is needed.
We want to clarify that significant acres required for mitigation have
been planted (60.5 acres on 18 properties between 2019 and 2023 in the
FCA-WIP program alone). Other sites are in planning stages to assure
fully documented acres can be tracked for all received fee-in-lieu funds.
DNR has managed the Fund repayments in accordance with COMAR
08.19.04.09 C., refunding payments if an application was received and
the applicant demonstrated that funds were being spent on eligible tree
planting. Funds have been expended for authorized reforestation and
afforestation activities, including site identification, acquisition, and
preparation, maintenance of existing forests, and achieving urban canopy
goals.
Recommendation 2a Agree Estimated Completion Date: 6/30/25
Please provide details of Since the audit period, DNR has transferred all of its relevant paper files
corrective action or to a digital cloud-based platform that has greatly improved its ability to
explain disagreement. track State FCA funds collected and use them in accordance with State
law.
Page 3 of 8

--- Page 24 ---
Department of Natural Resources
Agency Response Form
Recommendation 2b Agree Estimated Completion Date: 12/31/25
Please provide details of Deposits to the state Forest Conservation Fund have been accounted for
corrective action or and Maryland Forest Service staff is working to plant trees or issue
explain disagreement. refunds upon request and proper documentation in compliance with state
law.
Page 4 of 8

--- Page 25 ---
Department of Natural Resources
Agency Response Form
Chesapeake and Atlantic Coastal Bays Trust Fund
Finding 3
DNR did not evaluate Chesapeake and Atlantic Coastal Bays Trust Fund
grant proposals using the published grant selection criteria, and certain
grants were not competitively awarded as required by State law.
We recommend that DNR
a. evaluate grant proposals submitted based on the published selection
criteria, and
b. ensure all grant awards are competitively solicited as required.
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide The Conservation Finance Act, effective as of July 1, 2022 required the
additional comments as Trust Fund to consider co-benefits associated with projects in addition to
deemed necessary. geographic targeting, readiness to proceed, and cost efficiency. Co-
benefits include environmental justice/DEIJ, carbon sequestration,
habitat and aquatic restoration, recreational opportunities, and climate
resiliency. These co-benefits are embedded within the maximizing
opportunities review criteria and the geographic targeting criteria
through a specific map developed in consultation with the Trust Fund
Scientific Advisory Panel. As a result, high and multiple co-benefit
scores can impact overall considerations of the selection criteria.
Additionally, DNR independently evaluates cost-effectiveness for
accuracy (based on monitoring data and appropriate application in the
field) as well as readiness to proceed based on progress made during the
review period.
Recommendation 3a Agree Estimated Completion Date: 7/1/24
Please provide details of DNR will evaluate grant proposals submitted based on the published
corrective action or selection criteria. The SFY26 solicitation has been updated to make our
explain disagreement. scoring, review questions and language more transparent. Guidance on
the co-benefit and targeting map is also available online. DNR will
continue to review and select all proposals using published criteria and
in SFY26 will have clearer documentation regarding selection decisions
within the review files.
Recommendation 3b Agree Estimated Completion Date: 12/1/24
Please provide details of DNR will ensure all grant awards are competitively solicited as required.
corrective action or All proposals will be submitted through the Grants Gateway portal and
explain disagreement. will be reviewed using the published selection criteria.
Page 5 of 8

--- Page 26 ---
Department of Natural Resources
Agency Response Form
Budgetary and Year-End Closing
Finding 4
DNR could not provide documentation to support the propriety of
approximately $1.7 million in federal fund accrued revenue. DNR also could
not document the recovery of the funds and subsequently advised us that
approximately $603,000 is not recoverable because the related costs were
deemed ineligible by the federal granting agency.
We recommend that DNR
a. maintain supporting documentation for accrued revenue entries; and
b. determine the disposition of the aforementioned entries, properly report
any amounts determined to be uncollectable, and work with the
Department of Budget and Management to resolve any related deficits.
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 4a Agree Estimated Completion Date: 7/1/2025
Please provide details of DNR agrees to maintain supporting documentation for accrued revenue
corrective action or entries and to facilitate this we are in the process of centralizing the
explain disagreement. Grants Management Division. With this centralization there will be
sufficient oversight of all federal funds to ensure proper documentation
and tracking. This centralization is set to occur July 1, 2025.
Recommendation 4b Agree Estimated Completion Date: 7/1/2025
Please provide details of We agree to determine the disposition of the aforementioned entries, and
corrective action or properly report any amounts determined to be uncollectable. DNR
explain disagreement. continues to work through Federal Grant Reimbursements to ensure
proper accounting of each accrual. DNR is working in conjunction with
our DBM Analyst in the event of any possible deficiencies. This task
will be completed by July 1, 2025.
Page 6 of 8

--- Page 27 ---
Department of Natural Resources
Agency Response Form
Mel Noland Woodland Incentive Fund
Finding 5
DNR did not use available information to ensure the Comptroller of
Maryland (COM) transferred certain required revenue into the Fund.
We recommend that DNR
a. ensure COM deposits the proper amount into the Fund, and
b. work in conjunction with COM to recover the aforementioned $430,225.
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 5a Agree Estimated Completion Date: 12/31/25
Please provide details of DNR will ensure the Comptroller of Maryland deposits the proper
corrective action or amount into the Fund. The Forest Service has re-established a solid
explain disagreement. communication channel with employees of the State Department of
Assessments and Taxation in order to request and receive reports
containing data on woodland tax collection. DNR will use that data to
ensure the proper amount of funding is transferred to the Mel Noland
Woodland Incentives and Fellowship Fund.
Recommendation 5b Agree Estimated Completion Date: 12/31/25
Please provide details of DNR agrees to work in conjunction with COM to recover the $430,225.
corrective action or
explain disagreement.
Page 7 of 8

--- Page 28 ---
Department of Natural Resources
Agency Response Form
Disbursements
Finding 6
DNR did not verify the propriety of $15.1 million in charges for technology
enterprise services received from the Department of Information Technology
(DoIT) during fiscal years 2021 through 2023.
We recommend that DNR continue to work with DoIT to obtain the
necessary information to ensure all technology enterprise services invoiced
are supported and received, including those noted above (repeat).
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide DNR provided proof to OLA auditors that several requests were made
additional comments as through emails, ServiceNow tickets, and several meetings with DoIT
deemed necessary. over several years to obtain adequate documentation to verify the
charges totaling $15.1 million related to technology enterprise services
received from DoIT during fiscal years 2021 through 2023. Despite
DoIT's annual meetings to explain the budget data entered in Apptio for
DNR’s projected expenses, it was not until 1/23/25 that DNR received
sufficient documentation from DoIT to reconcile some of the estimated
service costs with the services received in prior years.
Recommendation 6 Agree Estimated Completion Date: 4/1/25
Please provide details of DNR agrees with the recommendation that we should continue to work
corrective action or with DoIT to obtain the necessary information to ensure all technology
explain disagreement. enterprise services invoiced are supported and received. DNR IT
leadership now meets regularly with DoIT project managers and
leadership to go over active projects and recent and imminent
expenditures of funds provided to DoIT for DNR. Through those
meetings we have created shared documents for inventory tracking
purposes, and DoIT has provided records of expenditures. Importantly,
however, DNR is not part of the workflow for ordering, inventorying,
deploying, and disposing of DoIT's services and equipment. Thus,
DNR’s ability to ensure all services invoiced are supported and received
is contingent upon DoIT providing the requested information to DNR.
DNR commits to continuing to collaborate with its connections at DoIT
and will seek expenditure documentation regularly to reconcile that data
with annual budget projections.
Page 8 of 8

--- Page 29 ---
AUDIT TEAM
Adam J. Westover, CPA
Audit Manager
Edwin L. Paul, CPA, CISA
Information Systems Audit Manager
Matusala Y. Abishe
Tu N. Vuong
Senior Auditors
Peter W. Chong, CISA
Information Systems Senior Auditor
Charlotte M.S. Chamberlin
Marcus J. Cheese
Keli R. Edmonds
Matthew P. Henry
Brian M. Webbert, CIA
Staff Auditors