Title: Judiciary
Date: 04/07/2021
Type: Fiscal Compliance
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=606e0dfca1ce580e9c11386b
Extracted: 2025-06-19T11:49:52.817412
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Audit Report
Judiciary
December 2024
Public Notice
In compliance with the requirements of the State Government Article Section
2-1224(i), of the Annotated Code of Maryland, the Office of Legislative
Audits has redacted cybersecurity findings and related auditee responses
from this public report.
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Senator Clarence K. Lam, M.D. (Senate Chair) Delegate Jared Solomon (House Chair)
Senator Joanne C. Benson Delegate Steven J. Arentz
Senator Paul D. Corderman Delegate Andrea Fletcher Harrison
Senator Katie Fry Hester Delegate Steven C. Johnson
Senator Shelly L. Hettleman Delegate Mary A. Lehman
Senator Cheryl C. Kagan Delegate David H. Moon
Senator Cory V. McCray Delegate Julie Palakovich Carr
Senator Justin D. Ready Delegate Emily K. Shetty
Senator Bryan W. Simonaire Delegate Stephanie M. Smith
Senator Craig J. Zucker Delegate M. Courtney Watson
To Obtain Further Information
Office of Legislative Audits
The Warehouse at Camden Yards
351 West Camden Street, Suite 400
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Phone: 410-946-5900
Maryland Relay: 711
TTY: 410-946-5401 ꞏ 301-970-5401
E-mail: webmaster@ola.state.md.us
Website: www.ola.state.md.us
To Report Fraud
The Office of Legislative Audits operates a Fraud Hotline to report fraud, waste, or abuse involving State
of Maryland government resources. Reports of fraud, waste, or abuse may be communicated anonymously
by a toll-free call to 1-877-FRAUD-11, by mail to the Fraud Hotline, c/o Office of Legislative Audits, or
through the Office’s website.
Nondiscrimination Statement
The Department of Legislative Services does not discriminate on the basis of age, ancestry, color, creed,
marital status, national origin, race, religion, gender, gender identity, sexual orientation, or disability in the
admission or access to its programs, services, or activities. The Department’s Information Officer has been
designated to coordinate compliance with the nondiscrimination requirements contained in Section 35.107
of the United States Department of Justice Regulations. Requests for assistance should be directed to the
Information Officer at 410-946-5400 or 410-970-5400.

--- Page 3 ---
December 17, 2024
Senator Clarence K. Lam, M.D., Senate Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Delegate Jared Solomon, House Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Members of Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Annapolis, Maryland
Ladies and Gentlemen:
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the Judiciary for the period
beginning June 10, 2019 and ending July 31, 2023. The Judiciary, as established
by the state Constitution, is responsible for the administration of justice in
Maryland. The Judiciary comprises the courts and various other agencies (such as
the Administrative Office of the Courts and the State Law Library) that support
the administrative and regulatory functions of the Judicial Branch of government.
Our audit disclosed that the Judiciary did not require independent approvals of
purchases less than $2,500, which led to one employee circumventing the
Judiciary’s procurement policies. Specifically, the employee purchased office
supplies totaling $438,600 from a vendor that did not have a contract with the
Judiciary and at higher cost than the Judiciary’s existing office supply contract.
Furthermore, our audit disclosed cybersecurity-related findings. However, in
accordance with the State Government Article, Section 2-1224(i) of the
Annotated Code of Maryland, we have redacted the findings from this audit
report. Specifically, State law requires the Office of Legislative Audits to redact
cybersecurity findings in a manner consistent with auditing best practices before
the report is made available to the public. The term “cybersecurity” is defined in
the State Finance and Procurement Article, Section 3.5-301(b), and using our
professional judgment we have determined that the redacted findings fall under
the referenced definition. The specifics of the cybersecurity findings were
previously communicated to those parties responsible for acting on our
recommendations.
Finally, our audit included a review to determine the status of the seven findings
contained in our preceding audit report of the Judiciary dated April 7, 2021. We

--- Page 4 ---
determined that the Judiciary satisfactorily addressed these findings.
Additionally, we determined the status of the one finding contained in our
preceding audit report of the Judiciary-Judicial Information Systems dated August
23, 2021. We determined that the Judiciary satisfactorily addressed this finding.
The Judiciary’s response to this audit is included as an appendix to this report.
However, consistent with State law, we have redacted the elements of the
response related to the cybersecurity audit findings.
In accordance with State law, we have reviewed the response and, while the
Judiciary agrees with the recommendations in this report, we identified certain
instances in which statements in the response conflict with a report finding. In
each instance, we reviewed and reassessed our audit recommendations, and
reaffirmed the validity of our finding. In accordance with generally accepted
government auditing standards, we have included an “auditor’s comment” within
Judiciary’s response to explain our position. Finally, there are other aspects of the
Judiciary’s response which will require further clarification, but we do not
anticipate that these will require the Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee’s
attention to resolve.
We wish to acknowledge the cooperation extended to us during the audit by the
Judiciary. We also wish to acknowledge the Judiciary’s willingness to address
the audit issues and implement appropriate corrective actions.
Respectfully submitted,
Brian S. Tanen
Brian S. Tanen, CPA, CFE
Legislative Auditor
2

--- Page 5 ---
Table of Contents
Background Information 4
Agency Responsibilities 4
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report 6
Findings and Recommendations 7
Procurements and Disbursements
Finding 1 – The Judiciary did not require independent approval of 7
purchases less than $2,500. Consequently, one Clerk employee
circumvented the Judiciary’s procurement policies including the
purchase approximately $438,600 in office supplies from a vendor
that did not have a contract with the Judiciary and at higher cost than
the Judiciary’s existing office supply contract.
Information Systems Security and Control
Finding 2 – Redacted cybersecurity-related finding 9
Finding 3 – Redacted cybersecurity-related finding 9
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology 10
Exhibit 1 – Listing of Most Recent Office of Legislative Audits Fiscal 14
Compliance Audits of Clerks of the Circuit Court as of October 2024
Exhibit 2 – Summary of Judiciary’s Internal Audit Department (IAD) 15
Most Recent Audit Findings on District Courts as of February 2024
Agency Response Appendix
3

--- Page 6 ---
Background Information
Agency Responsibilities
The Judiciary is established by the State Constitution as a separate branch of the
government responsible for the administration of justice in Maryland. The
Judiciary comprises the courts and various other judicial offices and agencies that
support the administrative and regulatory functions of the Judicial Branch of
government. The Judiciary includes the
 Appellate Courts, consisting of the Supreme Court of Maryland and the
Appellate Court of Maryland;
 Circuit Courts, one of which is located in each of the State’s 24 local
subdivisions;
 District Courts of which there are 33 locations, with at least one in each
local subdivision and which are organized into 12 geographic districts; and
 Judicial offices and agencies such as the Administrative Office of the
Courts (AOC), State Law Library, State Reporter, Attorney Grievance
Commission, State Board of Law Examiners, and the Client Protection
Fund.
The AOC provides services supporting certain financial activities of other units of
the Judiciary, including personnel administration, preparation and administration
of the Judiciary’s budget and related accounting records, payroll processing, and
invoice payment processing. The Judiciary also operates the Judicial Information
Systems (JIS) on behalf of the State court systems. JIS develops and maintains
State court system applications, operates a statewide computer network, and is
responsible for data center contingency planning. JIS operates a computer wide
area network that connects to all units of the Judiciary including the
Administrative Office of the Courts, the District Courts, and the Circuit Courts.
The scope of this audit includes certain of these services provided to the 24
Offices of the Clerk of Circuit Courts (such as payroll and invoice payment
processing, and maintenance of budgetary accounting and equipment records). In
addition, we reviewed controls over the JIS, which in the past were subject to a
separate audit.
We conduct separate audits of the fiscal activities administered by each of the
Offices of the Clerk of the Circuit Courts, such as the collection of funds related
to court filings. A listing of the most recent Office of Legislative Audits fiscal
compliance audits of Offices of the Clerk of the Circuit Courts performed during
the current audit cycle can be found in Exhibit 1 of this report.
4

--- Page 7 ---
The Judiciary’s Internal Audit Department (IAD) performs periodic scheduled
audits of District Court operations. We reviewed internal audit reports and the
related work papers of District Court operations and relied on the results of these
audits to reduce the scope of our audit work related to the District Courts’ revenue
and cash receipt processing functions. According to the State’s records, these
revenues totaled approximately $50.7 million during fiscal year 2023. See
Exhibit 2 for a summary of IAD audit findings for the most recent audit of each
District Court jurisdiction through February 2024, which identified 54 findings,
including 9 repeat findings.
According to the State’s accounting records, during fiscal year 2023, the
Judiciary’s operating expenditures, including expenditures for the district and
circuit courts, totaled approximately $715.4 million (see Figure 1 on the following
page).
5

--- Page 8 ---
Figure 1
Judiciary Positions, Expenditures, and Funding Sources
Full-Time Equivalent Positions as of June 30, 2023
Positions Percent
Filled 3,825 92.3%
Vacant 319 7.7%
Total 4,1441
Fiscal Year 2023 Expenditures
Expenditures Percent
Salaries, Wages, and Fringe Benefits $465,022,214 65.0%
Technical and Special Fees 24,871,703 3.5%
Operating Expenses 225,542,446 31.5%
Total $715,436,363
Fiscal Year 2023 Funding Sources
Funding Percent
General Fund $645,647,417 90.2%
Special Fund 64,086,397 9.0%
Federal Fund 512,985 0.1%
Reimbursable Fund 5,189,564 0.7%
Total $715,436,363
Source: State financial and personnel records
1 Full-time equivalent positions include 1,505 positions at the 24 Offices of the Clerks of the Circuit
Courts, which the OLA audits separately. The scope of our audit of the Judiciary includes payroll
support services provided to the Offices of the Clerks of the Circuit Courts.
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report
Our audit included a review to determine the status of the seven findings
contained in our preceding audit report of the Judiciary dated April 7, 2021. We
determined that the Judiciary satisfactorily addressed the seven findings. We also
determined the status of the one finding in our August 23, 2021 audit report of
Judiciary – Judicial Information Systems, which addressed the Judiciary’s data
center and wide area network. We determined that the Judiciary satisfactorily
addressed this finding.
6

--- Page 9 ---
Findings and Recommendations
Procurements and Disbursements
Finding 1
The Judiciary did not require independent approval of purchases less than
$2,500. Consequently, one Clerk employee circumvented the Judiciary’s
procurement policies including the purchase of approximately $438,600 in
office supplies from a vendor that did not have a contract with the Judiciary
and at higher cost than the Judiciary’s existing office supply contract.
Analysis
The Judiciary did not require independent approval of purchases less than $2,500.
According to Judiciary’s records, these transactions totaled $3.4 million during
the period from June 2019 through December 2023. Our review of all
transactions under $2,500 disclosed that one employee in a Clerk of the Circuit
Court circumvented Judiciary procurement policy by processing multiple
transactions totaling $1,040,970 between February 2020 and June 2023, including
$438,571 to an office supply vendor that did not have a contract with the
Judiciary. In this regard, the Judiciary had an existing contract with another
vendor that provided similar supplies at lower prices. For example, our review of
10 invoices1 totaling $20,220 for office supplies purchased by this employee
during the period March 2021 to January 2023 disclosed the same items could
have been purchased for $7,646 less (38 percent).
Judiciary procurement policy requires an invitation to bid or request for proposal
for purchases of goods or services in excess of $100,000 and a formal contract.
The procurement policy further requires the procurement officer to check a list of
blanket purchase orders annually to see if the desired goods or services are
available under an existing contract.
Prior to our audit, the Judiciary’s Internal Audit Department (IAD) conducted a
review of this Clerk’s office supply expenditures because it had been notified of
significant office supply purchases, including those made by the aforementioned
employee. The IAD reviewed the Clerk’s procedures and controls, and tested
office supply purchases during the period July 2021 to December 2022. In its
April 2023 report, the IAD noted inadequate segregation of duties, a lack of
supporting documentation for purchases, and purchases from a vendor without a
1 We arbitrarily selected 10 payments out of the total $438,571 in payments made to the office
supply vendor from a report of all transactions processed by the cited employee between
February 2020 and June 2023.
7

--- Page 10 ---
contract. The report included recommendations for the Clerk to address these
deficiencies. The IAD advised us that it was informed that there was previously a
blanket purchase order with the aforementioned office supply vendor and the
Clerk continued to use the vendor after the blanket purchase order was
discontinued.
State policies and procedures generally require independent review and approval
of transactions. Although the Judiciary is exempt from following these policies
and procedures, we believe that it should establish similar controls unless there is
an adequate justification for not having such controls. Regardless, Judiciary
should establish additional procedures to ensure these transactions are proper.
Judiciary management advised us that it did not require approval of these
transactions to allow offices and departments to quickly obtain goods and
services, similar to a corporate purchasing card (CPC). However, the need to
expedite transactions is not an adequate justification for the lack of approvals and
State policies require all CPC transactions to be subject to independent review and
approval subsequent to the purchase which was not the case for these purchases.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that the Judiciary
a. establish procedures for independent review of all transactions including
those below $2,500;
b. take corrective action, including disciplinary action, for improper
transactions; and
c. ensure existing contracts are used for the purchase of goods and services.
Information Systems Security and Control
We determined that the Information Systems Security and Control section,
including Findings 2 and 3 related to “cybersecurity,” as defined by the State
Finance and Procurement Article, Section 3.5-301(b) of the Annotated Code of
Maryland, and therefore are subject to redaction from the publicly available audit
report in accordance with the State Government Article 2-1224(i). Consequently,
the specifics of the following findings, including the analysis, related
recommendations, along with Judiciary’s responses, have been redacted from this
report copy.
8

--- Page 11 ---
Finding 2
Redacted cybersecurity-related finding.
Finding 3
Redacted cybersecurity-related finding.
9

--- Page 12 ---
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the Judiciary for the period
beginning June 10, 2019 and ending July 31, 2023. The audit was conducted in
accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards. Those
standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient,
appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and
conclusions based on our audit objectives. We believe that the evidence obtained
provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit
objectives.
As prescribed by the State Government Article, Section 2-1221 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, the objectives of this audit were to examine Judiciary’s
financial transactions, records, and internal control, and to evaluate its compliance
with applicable State laws, rules, and regulations.
In planning and conducting our audit, we focused on the major financial-related
areas of operations based on assessments of significance and risk. The areas
addressed by the audit included procurements and disbursements, corporate
purchasing cards, processing of traffic citations and related collections, payroll,
equipment, eligibility of legal representation by public defenders, special funds,
as well as information systems security and control. We also determined the
status of the findings included in our preceding audit reports of the Judiciary and
the Judicial Information Systems.
Our audit included fiscal support services provided by the Judiciary on a
centralized basis for the 24 Offices of the Clerks of the Circuit Courts (for
example, payroll, processing of invoices, and maintenance of budgetary
accounting and equipment records). During the audits of each Office of the Clerk
of the Circuit Courts, we audit other fiscal activities that are administered by the
Office, such as the collection of funds related to court filings for real estate
transactions. Separate audit reports are issued for each of these audits.
The Judicial Internal Audit Division performs audits of the District Courts
approximately every four years. During the course of our audit, we judgmentally
reviewed internal audit reports and related work papers and relied on the results to
reduce the scope of our audit work related to the District Courts’ revenue and cash
receipt processing functions.
Our assessment of internal controls was based on agency procedures and controls
in place at the time of our fieldwork. Our tests of transactions and other auditing
procedures were generally focused on the transactions occurring during our audit
10

--- Page 13 ---
period of June 10, 2019 to July 31, 2023, but may include transactions before or
after this period as we considered necessary to achieve our audit objectives.
To accomplish our audit objectives, our audit procedures included inquiries of
appropriate personnel, inspections of documents and records, tests of transactions,
and to the extent practicable, observations of Judiciary’s operations. Generally,
transactions were selected for testing based on auditor judgment, which primarily
considers risk, the timing or dollar amount of the transaction, or the significance
of the transaction to the area of operation reviewed. As a matter of course, we do
not normally use sampling in our tests, so unless otherwise specifically indicated,
neither statistical nor non-statistical audit sampling was used to select the
transactions tested. Therefore, unless sampling is specifically indicated in a
finding, the results from any tests conducted or disclosed by us cannot be used to
project those results to the entire population from which the test items were
selected.
We also performed various data extracts of pertinent information from the State’s
Financial Management Information System (such as revenue and expenditure
data) and the State’s Central Payroll Bureau (payroll data). The extracts are
performed as part of ongoing internal processes established by the Office of
Legislative Audits and were subject to various tests to determine data reliability.
We determined that the data extracted from these sources were sufficiently
reliable for the purposes the data were used during this audit.
We also extracted data from various key Judiciary internal systems, such as the
Judiciary’s financial management system for the purpose of testing procurements
and disbursements. We performed various tests of the relevant data and
determined the data were sufficiently reliable for the purposes the data were used
during the audit. Finally, we performed other auditing procedures that we
considered necessary to achieve our audit objectives. The reliability of data used
in this report for background or informational purposes was not assessed.
Judiciary’s management is responsible for establishing and maintaining effective
internal control. Internal control is a process designed to provide reasonable
assurance that objectives pertaining to the reliability of financial records;
effectiveness and efficiency of operations, including safeguarding of assets; and
compliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations are achieved. As
provided in Government Auditing Standards, there are five components of
internal control: control environment, risk assessment, control activities,
information and communication, and monitoring. Each of the five components,
when significant to the audit objectives, and as applicable to Judiciary, were
considered by us during the course of this audit.
11

--- Page 14 ---
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate.
Our reports are designed to assist the Maryland General Assembly in exercising
its legislative oversight function and to provide constructive recommendations for
improving State operations. As a result, our reports generally do not address
activities we reviewed that are functioning properly.
This report includes findings relating to conditions that we consider to be
significant deficiencies in the design or operation of internal control that could
adversely affect Judiciary’s ability to maintain reliable financial records, operate
effectively and efficiently, and/or comply with applicable laws, rules, and
regulations. Our report also includes findings regarding significant instances of
noncompliance with applicable laws, rules, or regulations. Other less significant
findings were communicated to Judiciary that did not warrant inclusion in this
report.
State Government Article Section 2-1224(i) requires that we redact in a manner
consistent with auditing best practices any cybersecurity findings before a report
is made available to the public. This results in the issuance of two different
versions of an audit report that contains cybersecurity findings – a redacted
version for the public and an unredacted version for government officials
responsible for acting on our audit recommendations.
The State Finance and Procurement Article, Section 3.5-301(b), states that
cybersecurity is defined as “processes or capabilities wherein systems,
communications, and information are protected and defended against damage,
unauthorized use or modification, and exploitation.” Based on that definition, and
in our professional judgment, we concluded that certain findings in this report fall
under that definition. Consequently, for the publicly available audit report all
specifics as to the nature of cybersecurity findings and required corrective actions
have been redacted. We have determined that such aforementioned practices, and
government auditing standards, support the redaction of this information from the
public audit report. The specifics of these cybersecurity findings have been
communicated to the Judiciary and those parties responsible for acting on our
recommendations in an unredacted audit report.
The response from the Judiciary to our findings and recommendations is included
as an appendix to this report. Depending on the version of the audit report,
12

--- Page 15 ---
responses to any cybersecurity findings may be redacted in accordance with State
law. As prescribed in the State Government Article, Section 2-1224 of the
Annotated Code of Maryland, we will advise the Judiciary regarding the results of
our review of its response.
13

--- Page 16 ---
Exhibit 1
Listing of Most Recent Office of Legislative Audits
Fiscal Compliance Audits of Clerks of the Circuit Court
As of October 2024
Number of
Clerk of Circuit Court Most Recent Total
Repeat
Jurisdiction Report Date Findings
Findings
1 Allegany County 8/31/2020 0 0
2 Anne Arundel County 9/17/2024 2 0
3 Baltimore City 10/17/2022 2 1
4 Baltimore County 5/24/2022 0 0
5 Calvert County 1/5/2023 0 0
6 Caroline County 10/5/2023 1 0
7 Carroll County 2/25/2022 0 0
8 Cecil County 7/20/2021 0 0
9 Charles County 7/13/2022 0 0
10 Dorchester County 9/13/2023 0 0
11 Frederick County 8/27/2021 0 0
12 Garrett County 10/26/2020 0 0
13 Harford County 8/26/2022 0 0
14 Howard County 4/29/2024 0 0
15 Kent County 9/13/2023 0 0
16 Montgomery County 9/13/2023 0 0
17 Prince George’s County 8/19/2021 0 0
18 Queen Anne’s County 5/17/2024 1 0
19 Somerset County 4/4/2022 0 0
20 St. Mary’s County 1/16/2024 0 0
21 Talbot County 11/1/2022 1 0
22 Washington County 5/23/2022 0 0
23 Wicomico County 9/20/2023 0 0
24 Worcester County 11/3/2023 1 0
Total 8 1
14

--- Page 17 ---
Exhibit 2
Summary of Judiciary’s Internal Audit Department (IAD)
Most Recent Audit Findings on District Courts
As of February 2024
Number of IAD Reportable Findings by Area
Total Number
% of
Number of
Bond and Problem
Jurisdiction* Repeat
of Repeat
Bank Computer Solving Fiscal
Findings
Commissioners
Findings Findings
Account Security Courts Mgmt.
Mgmt. Grant
Allegany County 2 1 n/a n/a n/a 3 0 0%
Anne Arundel County 3 1 1 n/a 1 6 1 17%
Baltimore City 1 n/a n/a 1 2 4 1 25%
Baltimore County 1 1 n/a n/a 1 3 1 33%
Calvert County n/a n/a n/a n/a 1 1 0 0%
Caroline County n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a 0 0 0%
Carroll County n/a 1 n/a 1 1 3 1 33%
Cecil County n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a 0 0 0%
Charles County n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a 0 0 0%
Dorchester County 4 1 n/a n/a 1 6 2 33%
Frederick County n/a n/a n/a n/a 1 1 0 0%
Garrett County 1 1 n/a n/a n/a 2 0 0%
Harford County n/a n/a n/a n/a 1 1 0 0%
Howard County 2 n/a n/a 1 2 5 2 40%
Kent County n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a 0 0 0%
Montgomery County n/a 1 1 n/a 1 3 0 0%
Prince George’s County 3 1 n/a 1 1 6 1 17%
Queen Anne’s County n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a 0 0 0%
Somerset County 2 n/a n/a n/a n/a 2 0 0%
St. Mary’s County 2 n/a n/a n/a n/a 2 0 0%
Talbot County n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a 0 0 0%
Washington County 1 n/a n/a n/a 1 2 0 0%
Wicomico County n/a 1 n/a n/a n/a 1 0 0%
Worcester County 1 1 n/a n/a 1 3 0 0%
Total 23 10 2 4 15 54 9 17%
Source: Judiciary IAD Audit Reports
n/a - Not applicable; no findings in this area.
*- IAD issued multiple reports for each jurisdiction (for example to the Commissioner and District Court Clerk). The amounts
above include the findings noted in all reports.
15

--- Page 18 ---
(cid:36)(cid:51)(cid:51)(cid:40)(cid:49)(cid:39)(cid:44)(cid:59)

--- Page 19 ---
Judiciary
Agency Response Form
Procurements and Disbursements
Finding 1
The Judiciary did not require independent approval of purchases less than
$2,500. Consequently, one Clerk employee circumvented the Judiciary’s
procurement policies including the purchase of approximately $438,600 in
office supplies from a vendor that did not have a contract with the Judiciary
and at higher cost than the Judiciary’s existing office supply contract.
We recommend that the Judiciary
a. establish procedures for independent review of all transactions including
those below $2,500;
b. take corrective action, including disciplinary action, for improper
transactions; and
c. ensure existing contracts are used for the purchase of goods and services.
Agency Response
Analysis Partially accurate
Please provide The Judiciary has existing procedures that require independent approval
additional comments as of all transactions, including those under the competitive threshold, to
deemed necessary. maintain a clear separation of duties.
The Express Purchase Order (XPO) process mandates the independent
approval of every expenditure. Expenditures against an XPO undergo
proactive, independent approval by an authorized official from the
respective court or office before processing any payment. This proactive
oversight contrasts with the CPC program, where independent review
typically occurs after a transaction has been completed.
While the finding appropriately notes the Judiciary’s independent
authority to establish procurement policies, it is important to emphasize
that the above processes are consistent with those employed by the
executive branch.
The Judiciary recognizes the value of enhanced central oversight for
these transactions to ensure compliance with procurement policies and
procedures. The steps to achieve this are outlined below.
Page 1 of 3

--- Page 20 ---
Judiciary
Agency Response Form
Auditor’s Comment: While the Judiciary agrees with our recommendations,
it states that all transactions are subject to independent approval. However, as
explained in the finding, purchasing transactions below the $2,500 threshold
were not independently approved. Although the Judiciary has independent
approvals over the related payments, the approvals would not necessarily
detect procurement issues similar to those identified in the finding. Therefore,
we stand by the analysis in our finding and our recommendation to establish
procedures for independent review and approval of purchasing transactions
below the $2,500 threshold.
Recommendation 1a Agree Estimated Completion Date: ongoing
Please provide details of While the Judiciary has existing procedures for the independent review
corrective action or of transactions exceeding the competitive threshold, these reviews did
explain disagreement. not adequately address successive purchases of $2,500 or less that
collectively exceed the threshold. To address this gap, the Judiciary has
implemented an annual review process to identify and evaluate like
purchases (e.g., supplier) that, in aggregate, exceed the competitive
threshold for Category I Small Procurements.
Recommendation 1b Agree Estimated Completion Date: ongoing
Please provide details of The Judiciary will actively and regularly monitor spending activities to
corrective action or detect and address any attempts to circumvent the Procurement Policy,
explain disagreement. ensuring ongoing compliance with the Judiciary Procurement Policy and
maintaining the integrity of financial operations. When potential
violations are discovered, the Judiciary will adhere to existing practices,
including counseling individuals, offices, and departments, issuing
procurement violation notices, and taking further disciplinary actions
through Human Resources, as necessary, based on findings identified
during the independent review of transactions.
Recommendation 1c Agree Estimated Completion Date: ongoing
Please provide details of The Judiciary will leverage the newly established process for conducting
corrective action or an independent annual review of transactions alongside existing
explain disagreement. practices such as maintaining and publishing an available Blanket
Purchase Order (BPO) list. These efforts will be reinforced by the
Department of Procurement, Contract & Grant Administration (DPCGA)
staff through formal and informal communications and regular training
designed to support and educate internal stakeholders.
Page 2 of 3

--- Page 21 ---
Judiciary
Agency Response Form
Information Systems Security and Control
The Office of Legislative Audits (OLA) has determined that the Information
Systems Security and Control section, including Findings 2 and 3 related to
“cybersecurity,” as defined by the State Finance and Procurement Article, Section
3.5-301(b) of the Annotated Code of Maryland, and therefore are subject to
redaction from the publicly available audit report in accordance with the State
Government Article 2-1224(i). Although the specifics of the following findings,
including the analysis, related recommendations, along with the Judiciary’s
responses, have been redacted from this report copy, the Judiciary’s responses
indicated agreement with the findings and related recommendations.
Finding 2
Redacted cybersecurity-related finding.
Agency Response has been redacted by OLA.
Finding 3
Redacted cybersecurity-related finding.
Agency Response has been redacted by OLA.
Page 3 of 3

--- Page 22 ---
A T
UDIT EAM
Bekana Edossa, CPA, CFE
Audit Manager
R. Brendan Coffey, CPA, CISA
Edwin L. Paul, CPA, CISA
Information Systems Audit Managers
Nelson W. Hopkins, CPA
Senior Auditor
Edward O. Kendall, CISA
Matthew D. Walbert, CISA
Information Systems Senior Auditors
Nicole D. Bishop
Owen M. Long-Grant
Alexandra M. Resney
Garrett A. White
Staff Auditors
Christopher C. Pitre
Neha S. Tirkey
Information Systems Staff Auditors