Title: Review of the Actions Taken by the Department of Budget and Management, Office of the State Treasurer, and Maryland State Department of Education to Resolve Repeat Personally Identifiable Information Findings in Response to the April 2020 Joint Chairmen's Report
Date: 04/14/2021
Type: Special Reports and Letters
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=60799402a1ce580feca7cdcf
Extracted: 2025-06-19T11:50:02.637739
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
April 14, 2021
Senator Guy J. Guzzone, Chair
Senate Budget and Taxation Committee
Miller Senate Office Building, 3 West Wing
11 Bladen Street
Annapolis, Maryland 21401
Delegate Maggie McIntosh, Chair
House Appropriations Committee
House Office Building, Room 121
6 Bladen Street
Annapolis, Maryland 21401
Senator Clarence K. Lam, M.D., Senate Chair
Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Miller Senate Office Building, Room 420
11 Bladen Street
Annapolis, Maryland 21401
Delegate Carol L. Krimm, House Chair
Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
House Office Building, Room 422
6 Bladen Street
Annapolis, Maryland 21401
Ladies and Gentlemen:
The Office of Legislative Audits (OLA) has reviewed the actions taken by
the Department of Budget and Management (DBM), Office of the State Treasurer
(STO), and Maryland State Department of Education (MSDE) to resolve the
repeat personally identifiable information (PII) findings in our respective 2019
audit reports. This review was conducted in accordance with a requirement
contained in the April 2020 Joint Chairmen’s Report (JCR), pages 245 and 246.

--- Page 2 ---
Senator Guy J. Guzzone, Chair -2- April 14, 2021
Delegate Maggie McIntosh, Chair
Senator Clarence K. Lam, M.D., Senate Chair
Delegate Carol L. Krimm, House Chair
The JCR required that, prior to the release of $100,000 of each agencies’
administrative appropriation for fiscal year 2021, DBM, STO, and MSDE must
have met with the State Chief Information Security Officer (SCISO) concerning
their repeat PII finding. Furthermore, the meeting was to identify and document a
path for resolution of any outstanding issues and to confirm that the agencies have
taken corrective action with respect to PII protection, including articulating any
ongoing associated costs and a timeline for resolution if the corrective action is
not complete. In addition, the JCR required the SCISO to submit a report to OLA
by February 1, 2021 addressing corrective actions taken to protect PII, a path and
timeline for resolution of any outstanding issues, and any ongoing costs
associated with corrective actions. The JCR language further provided that OLA
submit a report by May 1, 2021 to the budget committees and the Joint Audit and
Evaluation Committee (JAEC) listing each repeat audit finding along with
information that demonstrates the agencies’ commitment to correct each repeat
audit finding.
In accordance with the April 2020 requirement, the SCISO provided a
report to OLA, dated January 26, 2021, detailing the corrective actions that DBM,
STO, and MSDE had taken with respect to the repeat audit findings (Exhibit 1).
The SCISO status report indicated that DBM and STO had taken corrective
actions to address their respective repeat PII findings. The SCISO status report
indicated that MSDE is making progress to address its repeat PII finding.
Regarding MSDE’s status, the SCISO’s status report contained detailed sensitive
information about current remediation efforts that OLA deemed necessary to
redact from publication in this letter.
We reviewed the SCISO status report and related documentation and held
discussions with the SCISO as necessary to assess the implementation status of
the related recommendations. Based on our review of the actions described in the
report, it is our opinion that the DBM and STO PII audit report findings (Finding
10 and Finding 5, respectively) have been resolved. In addition, we found that
MSDE was making progress and the remedial actions described in the status
report demonstrated a commitment to correct PII audit report Finding 4 (Exhibit
2). Due to the redaction of certain sensitive material and OLA not describing the
MSDE corrective actions in a public document, we hope that the aforementioned
OLA opinion on MSDE’s actions will be sufficient for the purposes of this letter.
We advised DBM, STO, and MSDE of the results of our review. We wish
to acknowledge the cooperation extended by DBM, STO, MSDE, and the SCISO

--- Page 3 ---
Senator Guy J. Guzzone, Chair -3- April 14, 2021
Delegate Maggie McIntosh, Chair
Senator Clarence K. Lam, M.D., Senate Chair
Delegate Carol L. Krimm, House Chair
during this review and their willingness to address the audit issues and implement
appropriate corrective actions.
We trust our response satisfactorily addresses the JCR requirement.
Please contact me if you need additional information.
Sincerely,
Gregory A. Hook, CPA
Legislative Auditor
cc: Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee Members and Staff
Senator William C. Ferguson IV, President of the Senate
Delegate Adrienne A. Jones, Speaker of the House of Delegates
Governor Lawrence J. Hogan, Jr.
Comptroller Peter V.R. Franchot
Treasurer Nancy K. Kopp
Attorney General Brian E. Frosh
Honorable David R. Brinkley, Secretary, Department of Budget and
Management
Karen B. Salmon, Ph.D., State Superintendent of Schools
Charles I. (Chip) Stewart IV, State Chief Information Security Officer,
Department of Information Technology
Victoria L. Gruber, Executive Director, Department of Legislative Services
Anne P. Wagner, Policy Analyst, Department of Legislative Services
Samuel M. Quist, Policy Analyst, Department of Legislative Services
Laura H. Hyde, Policy Analyst, Department of Legislative Services

--- Page 4 ---
Exhibit 1 to April 14, 2021 Letter to Joint Chairmen and Joint Audit and
Evaluation Committee

--- Page 11 ---
The SCISO’s Status Report contained detai led sensitive information about current
remediation efforts that OLA redacted from inclusion in this public document.

--- Page 12 ---
Exhibit 2
Status of Repeat PII Findings in OLA’s 2019 Audit Reports of the
Department of Budget and Management, the Office of the State Treasurer,
and the Maryland State Department of Education
Status Based on
Prior Recommendations Pertaining to Repeat Findings
OLA Review
Department of Budget and Management
Finding 10 – We recommend that DBM use approved encryption
methods or other substantial mitigating controls to Resolved
properly protect all sensitive PII (repeat).
Office of the State Treasurer
Finding 5 – We recommend that STO properly protect the
aforementioned sensitive PII by the use of encryption or Resolved
other substantial mitigating controls (repeat).
Maryland State Department of Education
Finding 4 – We recommend that MSDE, in conjunction with DoIT,
a. perform a manual inventory of all of its systems,
In Progress
identify all sensitive PII, and delete all unnecessary
PII; and
b. use an approved encryption method, or other
substantial mitigating controls to properly protect all
In Progress
necessary sensitive PII (repeat).