Title: Subsequent Injury Fund
Date: 04/19/2021
Type: Fiscal Compliance
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=607dc78ea1ce580ab4a31d42
Extracted: 2025-06-19T11:50:12.070502
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Audit Report
Subsequent Injury Fund
March 2025
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Senator Shelly L. Hettleman (Senate Chair) Delegate Jared Solomon (House Chair)
Senator Joanne C. Benson Delegate Steven J. Arentz
Senator Benjamin T. Brooks, Sr. Delegate Andrea Fletcher Harrison
Senator Paul D. Corderman Delegate Steven C. Johnson
Senator Katie Fry Hester Delegate Mary A. Lehman
Senator Cheryl C. Kagan Delegate David H. Moon
Senator Clarence K. Lam, M.D. Delegate Julie Palakovich Carr
Senator Cory V. McCray Delegate Emily K. Shetty
Senator Justin D. Ready Delegate Stephanie M. Smith
Senator Bryan W. Simonaire Delegate M. Courtney Watson
To Obtain Further Information
Office of Legislative Audits
The Warehouse at Camden Yards
351 West Camden Street, Suite 400
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Phone: 410-946-5900
Maryland Relay: 711
TTY: 410-946-5401 ꞏ 301-970-5401
E-mail: webmaster@ola.state.md.us
Website: www.ola.state.md.us
To Report Fraud
The Office of Legislative Audits operates a Fraud Hotline to report fraud, waste, or abuse involving State
of Maryland government resources. Reports of fraud, waste, or abuse may be communicated anonymously
by a toll-free call to 1-877-FRAUD-11, by mail to the Fraud Hotline, c/o Office of Legislative Audits, or
through the Office’s website.
Nondiscrimination Statement
The Department of Legislative Services does not discriminate on the basis of age, ancestry, color, creed,
marital status, national origin, race, religion, gender, gender identity, sexual orientation, or disability in the
admission or access to its programs, services, or activities. The Department’s Information Officer has been
designated to coordinate compliance with the nondiscrimination requirements contained in Section 35.107
of the United States Department of Justice Regulations. Requests for assistance should be directed to the
Information Officer at 410-946-5400 or 410-970-5400.

--- Page 3 ---
March 21, 2025
Senator Shelly L. Hettleman, Senate Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Delegate Jared Solomon, House Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Members of Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Annapolis, Maryland
Ladies and Gentlemen:
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the Subsequent Injury Fund (SIF)
for the period beginning November 1, 2020 and ending September 30, 2024. SIF
pays workers’ compensation awards in connection with certain claims for
employees’ subsequent occupational injuries or deaths, and collects assessments
from certain employers and insurance companies to fund these awards and its
operating costs. During fiscal year 2024, assessment collections totaled
approximately $30 million and claim payments totaled approximately $17.9
million.
Our audit did not disclose any findings that warrant mention in this report.
We wish to acknowledge SIF’s efforts to satisfactorily address the finding
contained in our preceding audit report. We also wish to acknowledge the
cooperation extended to us during the audit by SIF.
Respectfully submitted,
Brian S. Tanen
Brian S. Tanen, CPA, CFE
Legislative Auditor

--- Page 4 ---
2

--- Page 5 ---
Background Information
Agency Responsibilities and Financial Activity
The purpose of the Subsequent Injury Fund (SIF) is to encourage the employment
of individuals with pre-existing health conditions by limiting an employer’s
liability should a subsequent occupational injury render an individual permanently
disabled or result in the individual’s death. Specifically, the employer’s liability
under these circumstances is limited to compensation for damages from the
current injury. SIF incurs the liability associated with the combined effects of all
injuries. The administration of SIF is supervised by the Subsequent Injury Fund
Board, which consists of three members appointed by the Governor. As shown in
Figure 1, according to State records, during fiscal year 2024, SIF’s operating
expenditures totaled approximately $3 million, of which the majority represented
payroll costs.
Figure 1
SIF Positions, Expenditures, and Funding Source
Full-Time Equivalent Positions as of June 30, 2024
Positions Percent
Filled 17 100.0%
Vacant 0 0.0%
Total 17
Fiscal Year 2024 Expenditures
Expenditures Percent
Salaries, Wages, and Fringe Benefits $2,713,366 89.3%
Technical and Special Fees 50,461 1.7%
Operating Expenses 275,913 9.0%
Total $3,039,740
Fiscal Year 2024 Funding Source
Funding Percent
Special Fund $3,039,740 100.0%
Total $3,039,740
Source: State financial and personnel records
3

--- Page 6 ---
SIF collects assessments against certain employers and insurance companies
which are deposited into the Subsequent Injury Fund (Fund) to cover claim
payments and SIF’s operating expenses. Specifically, SIF assesses each award
against an employer or its insurer for permanent disability or death and each
amount payable by an employer or its insurer under a settlement agreement
approved by the Workers’ Compensation Commission. These assessments are
currently 6.5 percent of the aforementioned award amounts. There was a
temporary decrease in the assessment rate to 5.5 percent during fiscal year 2021.
According to State records, during fiscal year 2024, revenues including
assessment collections totaled approximately $30 million and claim payments
totaled approximately $17.9 million. The assessment revenue and related claims
payments are not reflected in SIF’s reported operating revenue and expenditures.
As shown in Figure 2, the Fund’s balance as of August 31, 2024, totaled
approximately $131.9 million, which represents a 20 percent increase over a
three-year period.
Figure 2
Summary of SIF Financial Data for Fiscal Years 2021 -2024
($ in millions)
Claim Payments Operating Expenses Assessment Revenue Fund Balance
$131.9
$121.9 $140.0
$114.7
$109.4
$120.0
$100.0
$80.0
$60.0
$40.0
$20.0
$0.0
2021 2022 2023 2024
Source: SIF Annual Reports
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report
Our audit included a review to determine the status of the finding contained in our
preceding audit report dated April 19, 2021. We determined that SIF
satisfactorily addressed this finding.
4

--- Page 7 ---
Findings and Recommendations
Our audit did not disclose any significant deficiencies in the design or operation
of the Office’s internal controls. Our audit also did not disclose any significant
instances of noncompliance with applicable laws, rules, or regulations. Findings
that did not warrant inclusion in this report were separately communicated to SIF.
A draft copy of this report was provided to SIF. Since there are no
recommendations in this report, a written response was not necessary.
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the Subsequent Injury Fund (SIF)
for the period beginning November 1, 2020 and ending September 30, 2024. The
audit was conducted in accordance with generally accepted government auditing
standards. Those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain
sufficient, appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and
conclusions based on our audit objectives. We believe that the evidence obtained
provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit
objectives.
As prescribed by the State Government Article, Section 2-1221 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, the objectives of this audit were to examine SIF’s financial
transactions, records, and internal control, and to evaluate its compliance with
applicable State laws, rules, and regulations.
In planning and conducting our audit, we focused on the major financial-related
areas of operations based on assessments of significance and risk. The areas
addressed by the audit included assessment collections and billings, claim
payments, and information systems security and control. Specifically, our review
of information systems security and control addressed general controls, personally
identifiable information, database security, system access and authentication, and
malware prevention. We also determined the status of the finding contained in
our preceding audit report.
Our assessment of internal controls was based on agency procedures and controls
in place at the time of our fieldwork. Our tests of transactions and other auditing
procedures were generally focused on the transactions occurring during our audit
period of November 1, 2020 to September 30, 2024, but may include transactions
before or after this period as we considered necessary to achieve our audit
objectives.
5

--- Page 8 ---
To accomplish our audit objectives, our audit procedures included inquiries of
appropriate personnel, inspections of documents and records, tests of transactions,
and to the extent practicable, observations of SIF’s operations. Generally,
transactions were selected for testing based on auditor judgment, which primarily
considers risk, the timing or dollar amount of the transaction, or the significance
of the transaction to the area of operation reviewed. As a matter of course, we do
not normally use sampling in our tests, so unless otherwise specifically indicated,
neither statistical nor non-statistical audit sampling was used to select the
transactions tested. Therefore, unless sampling is specifically indicated in a
finding, the results from any tests conducted or disclosed by us cannot be used to
project those results to the entire population from which the test items were
selected.
We also performed various data extracts of pertinent information from the State’s
Financial Management Information System (such as revenue and expenditure
data) and the State’s Central Payroll Bureau (payroll data). The extracts are
performed as part of ongoing internal processes established by the Office of
Legislative Audits and were subject to various tests to determine data reliability.
We determined that the data extracted from these sources were sufficiently
reliable for the purposes the data were used during this audit.
We also extracted data from SIF’s automated accounts receivable and accounts
payable system for the purpose of testing assessment accounts receivable and
claim payment monitoring. We performed various tests of the relevant data and
determined that the data were sufficiently reliable for the purposes the data were
used during the audit. Finally, we performed other auditing procedures that we
considered necessary to achieve our audit objectives. The reliability of data used
in this report for background or informational purposes was not assessed.
SIF’s management is responsible for establishing and maintaining effective
internal control. Internal control is a process designed to provide reasonable
assurance that objectives pertaining to the reliability of financial records;
effectiveness and efficiency of operations, including safeguarding of assets; and
compliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations are achieved. As
provided in Government Auditing Standards, there are five components of
internal control: control environment, risk assessment, control activities,
information and communication, and monitoring. Each of the five components,
when significant to the audit objectives, and as applicable to SIF, were considered
by us during the course of this audit.
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
6

--- Page 9 ---
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate.
Our reports are designed to assist the Maryland General Assembly in exercising
its legislative oversight function and to provide constructive recommendations for
improving State operations. As a result, our reports generally do not address
activities we reviewed that are functioning properly.
7

--- Page 10 ---
A T
UDIT EAM
Michael J. Murdzak, CPA
Audit Manager
Michael K. Bliss, CISA
Information Systems Audit Manager
John B. Wachter, CFE
Senior Auditor
Vickey K. Micah
Information Systems Senior Auditor
Kareem R. Jackson
Staff Auditor