Title: Review of the Actions Taken by the Department of General Services - Office of Procurement and Logistics to Resolve Repeat Audit Findings in Response to the April 2020 Joint Chairmen's Report


NOTE: Effective October 1, 2019, the Office of Procurement and Logistics is now named Office of State Procurement.
Date: 04/28/2021
Type: Special Reports and Letters
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=608abc6da1ce580ec8778676
Extracted: 2025-06-19T11:50:31.135767
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
April 28, 2021
Senator Guy J. Guzzone, Chair
Senate Budget and Taxation Committee
Miller Senate Office Building, 3 West Wing
11 Bladen Street
Annapolis, Maryland 21401
Delegate Maggie McIntosh, Chair
House Appropriations Committee
House Office Building, Room 121
6 Bladen Street
Annapolis, Maryland 21401
Dear Senator Guzzone and Delegate McIntosh:
The Office of Legislative Audits (OLA) has reviewed the actions taken by the Department
of General Services (DGS) to resolve the repeat findings in our December 5, 2019 audit report for
the former DGS Office of Procurement and Logistics (OPL). Effective October 1, 2019, in
accordance with Chapter 590, Laws of Maryland 2017, the Office of Procurement and Logistics
became the Office of State Procurement (OSP) within DGS.
This review was conducted in accordance with the requirement specified in the April 2020
Joint Chairmen’s Report (JCR), pages 70 and 71. The JCR required that, prior to the release of
$100,000 of its administrative appropriation for fiscal year 2021, DGS must take corrective action
with respect to all repeat audit findings on or before November 1, 2020. The JCR language further
provided that OLA submit a report to the budget committees listing each repeat audit finding along
with a determination that each repeat finding was corrected. The OLA report is required to be
submitted to allow 45 days for the budget committees to review and release the funds prior to the
end of the fiscal year.
The December 5, 2019 audit report of OPL contained five repeat audit findings (Findings
1, 2, 3, 4, and 5) that were addressed by seven recommendations (recommendations 1a, 2, 3, 4a,
4b, 5a, and 5b). DGS provided a report to OLA, dated November 30, 2020, detailing the corrective
actions that it had taken with respect to the repeat audit findings (Exhibit 1). The DGS status
report indicated that corrective actions had been completed to address the recommendations for
Findings 3, 4a, 4b, and 5b, and that corrective actions were ongoing for recommendations 1a, 2,
and 5a.

--- Page 2 ---
Senator Guy J. Guzzone, Chair -2- April 28, 2021
Delegate Maggie McIntosh, Chair
We reviewed the DGS status report and related documentation, performed limited tests and
analyses of the information, and held discussions with DGS personnel as necessary to assess the
implementation status of the related recommendations. Our review did not constitute an audit
conducted in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards. Based on our
review, we concur with DGS’ assessment that it had taken sufficient actions to fully correct
findings 3 and 4, and part of finding 5, but had not taken sufficient actions to correct findings 1, 2,
and the remaining repeat element of finding 5 (Exhibit 2). Our assessment of the three repeat
findings in progress, and consequently not resolved, is included in Exhibit 3.
After discussing our review results, DGS generally agreed with the accuracy of the
information presented. We wish to acknowledge the cooperation extended to us during the review
by OSP. We also wish to acknowledge DGS’ and OSP’s willingness to address the audit issues
and implement appropriate corrective actions.
We trust our response satisfactorily addresses the JCR requirement. Please contact me if
you need additional information.
Sincerely,
Gregory A. Hook, CPA
Legislative Auditor
cc: Senator Clarence K. Lam, Senate Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Delegate Carol L. Krimm, House Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee Members and Staff
Senator William C. Ferguson IV, President of the Senate
Delegate Adrienne A. Jones, Speaker of the House of Delegates
Governor Lawrence J. Hogan, Jr.
Comptroller Peter V.R. Franchot
Treasurer Nancy K. Kopp
Attorney General Brian E. Frosh
Secretary David R. Brinkley, Department of Budget and Management
Secretary Ellington Churchill, Jr., Department of General Services
Robert E. Gleason, Chief Procurement Officer, Office of State Procurement, DGS
Joan Peacock, Manager, Audit Compliance Unit, Department of Budget and Management
Victoria L. Gruber, Executive Director, Department of Legislative Services
Patrick S. Frank, Policy Analyst, Department of Legislative Services

--- Page 3 ---
Exhibit 1 to April 28, 2021 Letter to Joint Chairmen

--- Page 4 ---
Exhibit 1 to April 28, 2021 Letter to Joint Chairmen

--- Page 5 ---
Exhibit 1 to April 28, 2021 Letter to Joint Chairmen

--- Page 6 ---
Exhibit 1 to April 28, 2021 Letter to Joint Chairmen

--- Page 7 ---
Exhibit 1 to April 28, 2021 Letter to Joint Chairmen

--- Page 8 ---
Exhibit 1 to April 28, 2021 Letter to Joint Chairmen

--- Page 9 ---
Exhibit 1 to April 28, 2021 Letter to Joint Chairmen

--- Page 10 ---
Exhibit 2 to April 28, 2021 Letter to Joint Chairmen
Status of Repeat Findings in OLA’s December 5, 2019 Audit Report on the
Department of General Services – Office of Procurement and Logistics (OPL)
Status Based on
Prior Recommendations Pertaining to Repeat Findings
OLA Review
State Agency Procurement Monitoring
1. We recommend that OPL
a. monitor agency procurements by conducting audits of Not Resolved
delegated procurements in accordance with State (In Progress)
regulations and its procedures.
Statewide Procurements
2. We recommend that OPL comply with State procurement laws
and regulations by publishing contract awards on eMaryland Not Resolved
Marketplace (eMM)1 within 30 days of the contract award. (In Progress)
3. We recommend that OPL either independently publish contract
prices or refer agencies to pricing information from the agency
that procured the Intergovernmental Cooperative Purchasing Resolved
Agreement (ICPA) for items available from ICPAs for use by
State agencies.
Monitoring of Providers with Procurement Preferences
4. We recommend that OPL
a. establish comprehensive procedures to independently Resolved
determine and publish the fair market prices of Maryland
Correctional Enterprises’ (MCE) goods and services.
b. publish or verify the fair market prices of Blind Industries
and Services of Maryland’s (BISM) goods and services as
determined by the Pricing and Selection Committee for Resolved
BISM and the Employment Works Program.
5. We recommend that OPL
a. monitor the coordinating entity (CE) to ensure that it is
providing the goods and services required by State law and Not Resolved
the Memorandum of Understanding. (In Progress)
b. specify in sufficient detail how the CE’s responsibilities
should be carried out. Resolved
1 - eMM is an Internet-based, interactive procurement system managed by the Department of
General Services (DGS). Effective July 2019, DGS replaced eMM with eMaryland Marketplace
Advantage (eMMA).

--- Page 11 ---
Exhibit 3 to April 28, 2021 Letter to Joint Chairmen
OLA’s Assessments Regarding Repeat Findings That Were Not Resolved
Prior Report Recommendation – Finding 1a
We recommend that OPL
a. monitor agency procurements by conducting audits of delegated procurements in
accordance with State regulations and its procedures (repeat).
Status: Not Resolved
Our review disclosed that although DGS drafted procedures for conducting audits of delegated
procurements, the procedures were being revised based on the results of a pilot audit which had
not been finalized as of February 18, 2021. In addition, DGS had only initiated one additional
audit of another agency’s delegated procurements and scheduled six more audits to be performed
in calendar year 2021. Audits for the remaining 53 agencies had not been scheduled.
Prior Report Recommendation – Finding 2
We recommend that OPL comply with State procurement laws and regulations by
publishing contract awards on eMaryland Marketplace within 30 days of the contract
award (repeat).
Status: Not Resolved
Our review disclosed that DGS had begun to develop procedures that would confirm timely
contract publication on eMaryland Marketplace Advantage (eMMA) through utilization of a
procurement checklist and subsequent supervisory review. However, these procedures had not
been finalized at the time of our review. In addition, we noted that DGS had performed two
quarterly reviews of a limited selection of contracts recorded in the State’s accounting records to
determine whether the associated awards had been properly published on eMMA; however, the
resulting reports indicated inconsistent compliance statistics and omitted results of certain types
of contracts. Finally, DGS advised that it is on schedule to implement an update to eMMA in
2021 that will automatically prompt procurement officers to publish contract awards within 30
days.
Prior Report Recommendation – Finding 5a
We recommend that OPL
a. monitor the coordinating entity (CE) to ensure that it is providing the goods and
services required by State law and the Memorandum of Understanding (MOU)
(repeat).
Status: Not Resolved
Our review disclosed that although DGS had executed a new MOU between DGS and the CE to
detail the CE’s responsibilities for monitoring compliance with requirements of the Maryland
Works Program, the related monitoring procedures had not been finalized. In addition, DGS

--- Page 12 ---
Exhibit 3 to April 28, 2021 Letter to Joint Chairmen
advised that an audit position necessary to perform the monitoring function had not been filled
due to budget issues related to the COVID-19 pandemic.