Title: Review of the Actions Taken by the Department of Human Services - Family Investment Administration to Resolve Repeat Audit Findings in Response to the April 2020 Joint Chairmen's Report
Date: 04/28/2021
Type: Special Reports and Letters
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=608abc53a1ce580ec877720e
Extracted: 2025-06-19T11:50:40.945366
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
April 28, 2021
Senator Guy J. Guzzone, Chair
Senate Budget and Taxation Committee
Miller Senate Office Building, 3 West Wing
11 Bladen Street
Annapolis, Maryland 21401
Delegate Maggie McIntosh, Chair
House Appropriations Committee
House Office Building, Room 121
6 Bladen Street
Annapolis, Maryland 21401
Dear Senator Guzzone and Delegate McIntosh:
The Office of Legislative Audits (OLA) has reviewed the actions taken by the Department
of Human Services (DHS) Family Investment Administration (FIA) to resolve the repeat findings
in our March 21, 2019 audit report. This review was conducted in accordance with a requirement
specified in the April 2020 Joint Chairmen’s Report (JCR), page 141. The JCR required that, prior
to the release of $100,000 of its administrative appropriation for fiscal year 2021, DHS must take
corrective action with respect to all repeat audit findings on or before November 1, 2020. The JCR
language further provided that OLA submit a report to the budget committees listing each repeat
audit finding along with a determination that each finding was corrected. The OLA report is
required to be submitted to allow 45 days for the budget committees to review and release the
funds prior to the end of the fiscal year.
The March 21, 2019 audit report of FIA contained four repeat audit findings (Findings 4,
5, 6, and 7) that were addressed by six recommendations (recommendations 4a, 5a, 5b, 6a, 6b, and
7). DHS provided a report to OLA, dated December 3, 2020, detailing the corrective actions that
it had taken with respect to the repeat audit findings (Exhibit 1). The DHS status report indicated
that corrective actions had been completed to address the recommendation for Finding 5b, and that
corrective actions were ongoing for repeat recommendations from Findings 4a, 5a, 6a, 6b, and 7.

--- Page 2 ---
Senator Guy J. Guzzone, Chair -2- April 28, 2021
Delegate Maggie McIntosh, Chair
We reviewed the DHS status report and related documentation, performed limited tests and
analyses of the information, and held discussions with FIA personnel as necessary to assess the
implementation status of the related recommendations. Our review did not constitute an audit
conducted in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards. Based on our
review, we felt compelled to reach a slightly different conclusion than DHS’ status report (Exhibit
2). Specifically, we determined that FIA had resolved Findings 5a, 5b, 6a, and 6b. However,
sufficient actions had not been taken to correct repeat Finding 7, and for Finding 4a corrective
action had been taken, but suspended based on the current State of Emergency. Consequently, at
the time of our review, our assessment of the two repeat findings concluded that they were in
progress, and subsequently, had not been resolved as explained in Exhibit 3.
After discussing our review results, DHS generally agreed with the accuracy of the
information presented. We wish to acknowledge the cooperation extended to us during the review
by FIA. We also wish to acknowledge DHS’ and FIA’s willingness to address the audit issues and
implement appropriate corrective actions.
We trust our response satisfactorily addresses the JCR requirement. Please contact me if
you need additional information.
Sincerely,
Gregory A. Hook, CPA
Legislative Auditor
cc: Senator Clarence K. Lam, Senate Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Delegate Carol L. Krimm, House Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee Members and Staff
Senator William C. Ferguson IV, President of the Senate
Delegate Adrienne A. Jones, Speaker of the House of Delegates
Governor Lawrence J. Hogan, Jr.
Comptroller Peter V.R. Franchot
Treasurer Nancy K. Kopp
Attorney General Brian E. Frosh
Secretary David R. Brinkley, Department of Budget and Management
Secretary Lourdes R. Padilla, Department of Human Services
LaSherra Ayala, Executive Director, Family Investment Administration, DHS
Joan Peacock, Manager, Audit Compliance Unit, Department of Budget and Management
Victoria L. Gruber, Executive Director, Department of Legislative Services
Tonya D. Zimmerman, Policy Analyst, Department of Legislative Services

--- Page 3 ---
Exhibit 1 to April 28, 2021 Letter to Joint Chairmen

--- Page 4 ---
Exhibit 1 to April 28, 2021 Letter to Joint Chairmen

--- Page 5 ---
Exhibit 1 to April 28, 2021 Letter to Joint Chairmen

--- Page 6 ---
Exhibit 1 to April 28, 2021 Letter to Joint Chairmen

--- Page 7 ---
Exhibit 1 to April 28, 2021 Letter to Joint Chairmen

--- Page 8 ---
Exhibit 1 to April 28, 2021 Letter to Joint Chairmen

--- Page 9 ---
Exhibit 1 to April 28, 2021 Letter to Joint Chairmen

--- Page 10 ---
Exhibit 1 to April 28, 2021 Letter to Joint Chairmen

--- Page 11 ---
Exhibit 1 to April 28, 2021 Letter to Joint Chairmen

--- Page 12 ---
Exhibit 2 to April 28, 2021 Letter to Joint Chairmen
Status of Repeat Findings in OLA’s March 21, 2019 Audit Report on the
Department of Human Services – Family Investment Administration (FIA)
Status Based on
Prior Recommendations Pertaining to Repeat Findings
OLA Review
Quality Assurance Programs
4. We recommend that FIA
a. take appropriate follow-up action to ensure the Local Not Resolved
Departments of Social Services conduct the required (In Progress)
number of quality assurance reviews.
Temporary Disability Assistance Program (TDAP)
5. We recommend that FIA
a. establish procedures to ensure that it receives all
documentation required to establish recipient eligibility prior Resolved
to making TDAP payments so that federal reimbursement
can be received.
b. establish procedures to ensure that TDAP cases are closed in
a timely manner once the Social Security Administration
Resolved
renders its final decision regarding a recipient’s application
for federal benefits.
Contract Monitoring
6. We recommend that FIA
Resolved
a. ensure that all contract and agreement deliverables are
received.
b. obtain adequate documentation, including detailed invoices,
Resolved
to verify the accuracy of billings.
Grants Management
7. We recommend that FIA as the designated Department of
Human Services agency responsible for grants management, Not Resolved
independently verify, at least on a test basis, that grant funds are (In Progress)
spent as intended by ensuring that all required reports are
submitted, adequately supported, and reviewed.

--- Page 13 ---
Exhibit 3 to April 28, 2021 Letter to Joint Chairmen
OLA’s Assessments Regarding Repeat Findings That Were Not Resolved
Prior Report Recommendation – Finding 4a
We recommend that FIA
a. take appropriate follow-up action to ensure the Local Departments of Social Services
conduct the required number of quality assurance reviews (repeat).
Status: Not Resolved
Our review disclosed that prior to the State of Emergency in March 2020, FIA established a
process to monitor the Local Departments of Social Services’ compliance with conducting the
required number of quality assurance reviews. We were advised by FIA management that since
the State of Emergency, FIA has stopped monitoring compliance; however, it intends on
resuming the monitoring after the State of Emergency.
Prior Report Recommendation – Finding 7
We recommend that FIA as the designated DHS agency responsible for grants
management, independently verify, at least on a test basis, that grant funds are spent as
intended by ensuring that all required reports are submitted, adequately supported, and
reviewed (repeat).
Status: Not Resolved
Our review disclosed that FIA has recently reorganized and transferred the responsibility for
these grants from its Bureau of Special Grants to its Office of Nutrition Assistance Program
(ONAP). As of March 22, 2021, ONAP was in the process of retrieving historical documents
and meeting with grantees to establish its own processes to effectively manage and monitor grant
funds. FIA projects these processes to be in place by September 2021.