Title: Maryland Health Benefit Exchange
Date: 05/06/2021
Type: Fiscal Compliance
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=609414aca1ce581310dbfcdf
Extracted: 2025-06-19T11:51:00.407544
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Audit Report
Maryland Health Benefit Exchange
January 2025
Public Notice
In compliance with the requirements of the State Government Article Section
2-1224(i), of the Annotated Code of Maryland, the Office of Legislative Audits
has redacted cybersecurity findings and related auditee responses
from this public report.
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Senator Shelly L. Hettleman (Senate Chair) Delegate Jared Solomon (House Chair)
Senator Joanne C. Benson Delegate Steven J. Arentz
Senator Benjamin T. Brooks, Sr. Delegate Andrea Fletcher Harrison
Senator Paul D. Corderman Delegate Steven C. Johnson
Senator Katie Fry Hester Delegate Mary A. Lehman
Senator Cheryl C. Kagan Delegate David H. Moon
Senator Clarence K. Lam, M.D. Delegate Julie Palakovich Carr
Senator Cory V. McCray Delegate Emily K. Shetty
Senator Justin D. Ready Delegate Stephanie M. Smith
Senator Bryan W. Simonaire Delegate M. Courtney Watson
To Obtain Further Information
Office of Legislative Audits
The Warehouse at Camden Yards
351 West Camden Street, Suite 400
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Phone: 410-946-5900
Maryland Relay: 711
TTY: 410-946-5401 ꞏ 301-970-5401
E-mail: webmaster@ola.state.md.us
Website: www.ola.state.md.us
To Report Fraud
The Office of Legislative Audits operates a Fraud Hotline to report fraud, waste, or abuse involving State
of Maryland government resources. Reports of fraud, waste, or abuse may be communicated anonymously
by a toll-free call to 1-877-FRAUD-11, by mail to the Fraud Hotline, c/o Office of Legislative Audits, or
through the Office’s website.
Nondiscrimination Statement
The Department of Legislative Services does not discriminate on the basis of age, ancestry, color, creed,
marital status, national origin, race, religion, gender, gender identity, sexual orientation, or disability in the
admission or access to its programs, services, or activities. The Department’s Information Officer has been
designated to coordinate compliance with the nondiscrimination requirements contained in Section 35.107
of the United States Department of Justice Regulations. Requests for assistance should be directed to the
Information Officer at 410-946-5400 or 410-970-5400.

--- Page 3 ---
January 28, 2025
Senator Shelly L. Hettleman, Senate Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Delegate Jared Solomon, House Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Members of Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Annapolis, Maryland
Ladies and Gentlemen:
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the Maryland Health Benefit
Exchange (MHBE) for the period beginning March 9, 2020 and ending June 30,
2023. MHBE is primarily responsible for the establishment and operation of the
Maryland state-based health insurance exchange, which is intended to provide a
marketplace for individuals, families, and small businesses to purchase affordable
health coverage as a means to reduce the number of Maryland residents who have
no health insurance.
Our audit disclosed that MHBE did not request supporting documentation from
applicants who reported having zero income when State wage records indicated
the applicant had income exceeding the Medicaid qualification threshold. Rather,
MHBE only required these applicants to self-certify that they did in fact have zero
income when they applied for benefits. Our analysis identified numerous
individuals which State wage records indicated had income before, during, and
subsequent to their application that exceeded the income thresholds. For
example, one applicant self-certified zero income in February 2023 when State
wage records indicated income totaling $62,400 in each of the quarters ending
December 2022, March 2023, and June 2023. Based on various factors, including
the unreported income, the applicant did not qualify for Medicaid.
Our audit also disclosed that MHBE did not ensure that it used the most current
income data to verify the reported income submitted by Medicaid applicants. Our

--- Page 4 ---
test of 30 Medicaid enrollees who submitted an application during our audit
period identified 10 enrollees for which MHBE’s verification did not use the most
current income data available, including 2 enrollees that would not have qualified
for Medicaid if the most current available income data had been used.
In addition, MHBE did not verify certain applicants’ income against available
federal tax information which would identify all potential applicant income, such
as dividend and alimony payments. In addition, MHBE did not always ensure
that manual overrides of applicant eligibility were independently reviewed and
approved.
Furthermore, MHBE did not adequately pursue the collection of $649 million in
insurance provider fees collected by the Maryland Insurance Administration that
should have been transferred into the MHBE Fund. In fiscal year 2023, MHBE
did not transfer $15 million to the Health Equity Resource Community Reserve
Fund due to a lack of funds. We also noted that MHBE did not always publish
contract awards and document bid proposal openings.
Our audit also disclosed cybersecurity-related findings. However, in accordance
with the State Government Article, Section 2-1224(i) of the Annotated Code of
Maryland, we have redacted the findings from this audit report. Specifically,
State law requires the Office of Legislative Audits to redact cybersecurity
findings in a manner consistent with auditing best practices before the report is
made available to the public. The term “cybersecurity” is defined in the State
Finance and Procurement Article, Section 3.5-301(b), and using our professional
judgment we have determined that the redacted findings fall under the referenced
definition. The specifics of the cybersecurity findings were previously
communicated to those parties responsible for acting on our recommendations.
As further explained on page 9 of this report, our audit scope was limited with
respect to MHBE’s Medicaid eligibility determination and redetermination
processes because of restrictions imposed by the federal Internal Revenue Code
on access to federal tax information as well as MHBE’s application of those
restrictions to applicant data.
Finally, our audit included a review to determine the status of the three findings
contained in our preceding audit report. For the non-cybersecurity-related
findings, we determined that MHBE did not satisfactorily addressed those two
findings which are repeated in this report.
MHBE’s response to this audit is included as an appendix to this report. We have
edited MHBE’s response to remove certain vendor names or products and links to
2

--- Page 5 ---
websites and online documents, as allowed by our policy. Consistent with State
law, we have redacted the elements of MHBE’s response related to the
cybersecurity audit findings.
In accordance with State law, we have reviewed the response, and we identified
certain instances in which statements in the response conflict with or disagree
with the report findings. In this regard, MHBE disagreed with several of our
recommendations despite agreeing with the factual accuracy of the related
analysis. In each instance, we reviewed and reassessed our audit documentation,
reaffirmed the validity of our findings, and we continue to maintain that our
recommendations are valid.
In accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards, we have
included “auditor’s comments” within MHBE’s response to explain our position.
We will advise the Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee of any outstanding
issues that we cannot resolve with MHBE.
Respectfully submitted,
Brian S. Tanen
Brian S. Tanen, CPA, CFE
Legislative Auditor
3

--- Page 6 ---
4

--- Page 7 ---
Table of Contents
Background Information 7
Agency Responsibilities 7
Financial Activity 8
Audit Scope Limitation 9
Potential Federal Fund Liability 10
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report 10
Findings and Recommendations 12
Medicaid Eligibility
Finding 1 – The Maryland Health Benefits Exchange (MHBE) did not 13
request supporting documentation from applicants who reported having
zero income when State wage records reflected the applicant had
income that exceeded the Medicaid income qualification threshold.
Finding 2 – MHBE did not ensure it used the most current income 15
data in its verification process resulting in inaccurate enrollment
determinations for Medicaid applicants.
 Finding 3 (Policy Issue) – MHBE continues to rely solely on State 16
wage records to verify income of certain applicants even though it
excluded many types of applicant income.
 Finding 4 – MHBE did not always ensure that manual overrides of 18
applicant eligibility were independently reviewed and approved.
MHBE Fund
Finding 5 – MHBE did not adequately pursue the collection of $649 19
million in insurance provider fees collected by the Maryland Insurance
Administration that should have been transferred to the MHBE Fund.
Procurements
Finding 6 – MHBE did not always publish contract awards and document 20
bid proposal openings.
 Denotes item repeated in full or part from preceding audit report
5

--- Page 8 ---
Information Systems Security and Control
Finding 7 – Redacted cybersecurity-related finding 21
Finding 8 – Redacted cybersecurity-related finding 21
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology 22
Agency Response Appendix
6

--- Page 9 ---
Background Information
Agency Responsibilities
Under the provisions of the Insurance Article of the Annotated Code of Maryland,
the Maryland Health Benefit Exchange (MHBE) is a public corporation and
independent unit of State government that was established to implement the
federal Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act (ACA) in Maryland.
Consistent with the ACA, the primary purpose of MHBE is to reduce the number
of Maryland residents who have no health insurance.
MHBE has a nine-member Board of Trustees (the MHBE Board) that includes the
Secretary of the Maryland Department of Health (MDH), the Maryland Insurance
Commissioner, the Executive Director of the Maryland Health Care Commission,
and six other persons appointed by the Governor including three who represent
employers and individual consumer interests. The MHBE Board is responsible
for governing and managing MHBE. Under its enabling legislation, MHBE is
exempt from a number of State laws and regulations, including procurement and
inventory control. Consequently, the MHBE Board is responsible for establishing
various policies and procedures governing MHBE operations.
MHBE established Maryland’s state-based health insurance exchange, referred to
as the Maryland Health Connection (MHC), to provide a marketplace for
individuals, families, and small businesses to purchase affordable health coverage.
The MHC was implemented in October 2013 and consists of several computer
processing platforms that perform various functions. Acting together, these
platforms enable Maryland residents to explore qualified health, dental, and vision
insurance plans, compare rates, and determine their eligibility for tax credits, cost
sharing reductions, and public assistance programs such as Medical Assistance
(Medicaid) and the Maryland Children’s Health Insurance Program. Once an
individual or family selects a qualified health plan or available program, they may
use the MHC internet portal to enroll in that plan or program.
MDH has agreements with both MHBE and the Department of Human Services
(DHS) delegating responsibility for Medicaid eligibility determinations and
redeterminations. MHBE is responsible for processing income-based
determinations via its automated system, and DHS is responsible for processing
non-income based determinations (such as, for applicants applying for other DHS
benefits such as disability or Temporary Cash Assistance). Applications that are
rejected or flagged by the MHC are forwarded to DHS or MDH for additional
processing and review.
7

--- Page 10 ---
Since April 1, 2014, small business owners have been able to enroll their
employees in health insurance plans certified under the ACA Small Business
Health Options Program. Employers with 1 to 50 employees may purchase
insurance plans directly from an insurance provider, a third-party administrator, or
a broker, and for those who are eligible, employers receive federal small business
tax credits.
MHBE also administers the Connector Program, which provides grants to entities
organized geographically in Maryland to provide outreach and enrollment
services in their respective regions with the purpose of educating and assisting
Maryland residents in obtaining health insurance.
During the 2018 Legislative Session, the Maryland General Assembly passed
emergency legislation (Chapter 6, Laws of Maryland 2018, effective March 19,
2018) establishing the State Reinsurance Program beginning January 1, 2019,
administered by MHBE. The Program reduces healthcare premiums for all
Maryland consumers in the individual market by reimbursing qualifying,
individual health insurers for a percentage of an enrollee’s claims. The Program
is funded through federal funds1 and a State health insurance provider fee
assessed and collected by the Maryland Insurance Administration, which is to be
subsequently transferred to MHBE.
Financial Activity
According to the State’s records, MHBE’s fiscal year 2023 expenditures totaled
approximately $572.6 million. These expenditures were funded by State funds
totaling $49.9 million and federal funds totaling $522.7 million. MHBE’s
expenditures related primarily to information technology development, outreach
and consumer assistance, reinsurance payments administered by MHBE, and
agency operations necessary to maintain MHC (see Figure 1 on the following
page). The healthcare costs associated with individuals enrolled in Medicaid via
MHC are included in the budget of the MDH – Medical Care Programs
Administration.
1 Federal funding is via a State Innovation Waiver through Section 1332 of the Affordable Care
Act (ACA). Maryland has a waiver in place through December 2028 which provides federal
funds to pay for reinsurance. These funds are allowed to carry over if they are not all needed in
the year provided. Any reinsurance amounts above the federal funding must be covered by State
funds.
8

--- Page 11 ---
Figure 1
MHBE Positions, Expenditures, and Funding Sources
Full-Time Equivalent Positions as of June 30, 2023
Positions Percent
Filled 65 97.0%
Vacant 2 3.0%
Total 67
Fiscal Year 2023 Expenditures
Expenditures Percent
Salaries, Wages & Fringe Benefits $ 9,763,210 1.7%
Operating Expenses 562,885,841 98.3%
Total $572,649,051
Fiscal Year 2023 Funding Sources
Funding Percent
General Fund $ 3,549,620 0.6%
Special Fund 45,243,251 7.9%
Federal 522,734,940 91.3%
Reimbursable Fund 1,121,240 0.2%
Total $572,649,051
Source: State financial and personnel records
Audit Scope Limitation
Our audit scope was limited with respect to MHBE’s Medicaid eligibility
determination and redetermination processes due to restrictions imposed by the
federal Internal Revenue Code (IRC) on access to federal tax information (FTI) as
well as MHBE’s application of those restrictions to applicant data. According to
the State Government Article, Section 2-1223 of the Annotated Code of
Maryland, our access to records extends to all agency records except as prohibited
by the federal IRC. Section 6103 of the IRC provides that FTI may be used by
officers, employees, and contractors of the United States Department of Health
and Human Services, an Exchange established under the Affordable Care Act, or
a State agency for purposes of determining eligibility as it relates to health care
options. Internal Revenue Service Publication 1075 further describes that the
9

--- Page 12 ---
authority to receive federal tax return information does not extend to independent
State audit agencies unless a contractual relationship is established which
conforms to the disclosure requirements of IRC Section 6103.
To determine applicant eligibility, MHBE performs certain procedures including,
as discussed further in Finding 3, matching certain applicant attested financial
information against FTI to verify the recorded income. MHBE and OLA worked
together with legal counsel to establish an agreement in accordance with federal
requirements to allow OLA access to FTI for testing. Despite months of effort, it
was determined that the process would be onerous and would compromise our
independence and ultimately we were unable to work out terms. As a result,
during our audit, we could not review MHBE’s eligibility determination and
redetermination processes for which FTI information was used to assess whether
proper determinations were being made.
Potential Federal Fund Liability
MHBE had a $28.4 million potential liability to the federal government related to
a 2015 audit finding by the federal Department of Health and Human Services –
Office of the Inspector General (HHS – OIG) which sighted certain misallocated
expenditures. This issue was also addressed in our reports on the Statewide
Review of Budget Closeout Transactions for Fiscal Year 2018 (dated January 15,
2019), 2019 (dated January 16, 2020), 2020 (dated January 26, 2021), 2021 (dated
January 26, 2022), and 2022 (dated January 26, 2023).2 According to MHBE
personnel, there has been no resolution of this matter as of November 2024.
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report
Our audit included a review to determine the status of the three findings contained
in our preceding audit report dated May 6, 2021. As disclosed in Figure 2 on the
following page, for the non-cybersecurity-related findings, we determined those
two findings are repeated in this report.
2 Our Statewide Review of Budget Closeout Transactions for Fiscal Year 2023 (dated January 19,
2024) did not include a comment regarding the potential liability to the federal government
because that report had a reduced scope of work that did not include MHBE.
10

--- Page 13 ---
Figure 2
Status of Preceding Findings
Preceding Implementation
Finding Description
Finding Status
MHBE continues to rely solely on the Maryland
Finding 1
Automated Benefits System (MABS) to verify the
(Policy Repeated
income of certain applicants even though MABS
Issue) (Current Finding 3)
excluded many types of applicant income.
Manual overrides of applicant eligibility status were
not subject to independent review and approval and,
Finding 2 Repeated
consequently, unauthorized changes could be made
(Current Finding 4)
without detection.
Remote access to the internal agency network by
MHBE employees used a single authentication
Finding 3 measure, and traffic from remote network Status Redacted3
connections by certain affiliated third parties was
not filtered.
3 Specific information on the current status of this cybersecurity–related finding has been redacted
from the publicly available report in accordance with State Government Article, Section 2-
1224(i) of the Annotated Code of Maryland.
11

--- Page 14 ---
Findings and Recommendations
Medicaid Eligibility
Background
The Maryland Health Benefit Exchange (MHBE) and the Maryland Department
of Health4 (MDH) have a memorandum of understanding (MOU) since April
2012 under which MHBE processes Medical Assistance eligibility determinations
and redeterminations for income-based coverage groups. This includes certain
categorically eligible or medically needy applicants with household income up to
138 percent of federal poverty guidelines – the dollar threshold of which is
determined by family size.
Individuals may now apply for Medical Assistance or a Qualified Health Plan
through the Maryland Health Connection (MHC), which is MHBE’s consumer
exchange system portal. Individuals may access MHC by phone via MHBE’s
consumer support contractor, directly through the MHC website, using the MHC
mobile app, or in-person at various locations that are capable of providing
personal assistance with eligibility determinations. These locations include local
departments of health, local departments of social services, insurance brokers, and
designated MHBE connector entities.
In accordance with MCPA’s applicant data verification plan approved by the
federal Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services, MHBE matches applicant
attested identification information (such as, date of birth and social security
number) and citizenship or immigration status through the Federal Data Sharing
Hub (FDSH). Simultaneously, MHBE matches applicant attested income to the
Maryland Department of Labor’s (MDL) Division of Unemployment Insurance
(DUI) information system, referred to as BEACON.5 BEACON is an electronic
database that contains employer reported wages for most Maryland workers and
unemployment insurance benefits paid.
In certain situations, such as, if no BEACON records are located, applicant
attested income is verified to annual federal tax information (FTI) on FDSH.
Discrepancies are subject to a manual verification performed by designated
Department of Human Services (DHS) or MDH employees. A similar process is
4 As Maryland’s administering agency for the Medical Assistance program (Medicaid), MDH’s
Medical Care Programs Administration (MCPA) is responsible for establishing regulations,
guidelines, and procedures for Medical Assistance applicant eligibility.
5 BEACON was implemented in October 2021 and the previous MDL information system was the
Maryland Automated Benefit System (MABS).
12

--- Page 15 ---
used to verify Medicaid enrollee income during the annual redetermination
process.
According to MHBE records, during fiscal year 2023, individuals applying (both
new application and renewals) for health insurance coverage through MHC
resulted in 1,260,950 individuals who were determined to be eligible for Medicaid
and 176,953 individuals who were enrolled in a qualified health plan. According
to State records, Medicaid-related payments made by MDH totaled approximately
$15.1 billion during fiscal year 2023.
Finding 1
MHBE did not request supporting documentation from applicants who
reported having zero income when BEACON reflected the applicant had
income that exceeded the Medicaid income qualification threshold.
Analysis
MHBE did not request supporting documentation from applicants who reported
having zero income when BEACON reflected the applicant had income that
exceeded the Medicaid income qualification threshold. Rather, MHBE only
required these applicants to sign an affidavit self-certifying that they had no
income without any additional support to explain the discrepancy. This practice
was inconsistent with MHBE’s procedure for applicants that reported income that
did not agree with BEACON who had to submit evidence supporting the reported
income.
At our request, MHBE generated a report which identifed 5,488 Medicaid
applicants in fiscal year 2023 who self-certified as having no income after MHBE
had identified through BEACON that the applicants income exceeded the income
qualification threshold for Medicaid. From this report, we matched the 4,465
applicants that had a social security number6 to BEACON income data for the
quarter before the application was filed, and the subsequent two quarters
(including the quarter in which the application was filed).
Our match disclosed 467 applicants for which BEACON reported income from
the same employer in the quarter prior, during, and subsequent to the application
raising questions about the validity of the affidavit. We tested seven of the match
results7 and determined that none of the applicants qualified for Medicaid based
on various factors including BEACON reported income. For example, one
applicant completed the self-certification of zero income in February 2023.
6 Not all Medicaid applicants have a social security number.
7We selected seven test items from the match results with significant overall income earnings
combined for the quarter of application and the following quarter.
13

--- Page 16 ---
Our review of the related BEACON income disclosed that this applicant had
income of $62,400 in each of the quarters ending December 2022, March 2023,
and June 2023 (the period prior, during, and subsequent to the application) for a
total income of $187,200. Based on various factors, including BEACON reported
income, we determined the applicant did not qualify for Medicaid. MHBE was
not aware of this discrepancy until we brought it to its attention and therefore had
not attempted to address the discrepancy with the applicant. As of May 2024,
Medicaid expenditures for this applicant since they enrolled in Medicaid totaled
$15,827.
While federal regulations allowed MHBE the flexibility of accepting such an
affidavit, federal regulations also allowed MHBE to request an explanation and
supporting documentation for any discrepancies.8 MHBE is subject to MCPA’s
guidance on Medicaid eligibility determinations and therefore any changes to
MHBE’s procedures for zero income applicants would need MCPA approval.
The MOU between MHBE and MCPA required MHBE to ensure compliance
with federal and State laws for detection and prevention of fraud, waste and abuse
by performing analytics and assessments, in consultation with MDH, to identify
and mitigate potentially fraudulent activities.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that MHBE
a. in collaboration with MDH, modify the supporting documentation
requirement for applicants who reported zero income when BEACON
reported income that exceeded the Medicaid eligibility threshold, so that
eligibility will only be granted if the applicant provides an explanation
and supporting documentation for any discrepancies;
b. investigate all instances when applicant’s affidavits conflict with
BEACON data, including those noted above; and
c. refer instances of potential fraud, waste, and abuse, including those
identified above, to the Office of Inspector General for Health.
8 During the pandemic health emergency, MHBE was federally prohibited from disenrolling
Medicaid recipients. As such, MHBE asserted that even if applicants improperly obtained
eligibility, they could not be disenrolled. We question whether this prohibition would apply to
cases of potential fraud and MHBE was unable to provide documentation to support that it would
be prohibited from disenrolling applicants who fraudulently applied. Moreover, a related federal
regulation (42 CFR 435.940) states that, “nothing in this regulation should be construed as
limiting the State’s program integrity measures or affecting the State’s obligation to ensure that
only eligible individuals receive benefits.”
14

--- Page 17 ---
Finding 2
MHBE did not ensure it used the most current income data in its verification
process resulting in inaccurate enrollment determinations for Medicaid
applicants.
Analysis
MHBE did not ensure that it used the most current income data to verify income
reported by Medicaid applicants. Under an MOU with MDL, MHBE sends
applicant data to MDL to match against State wage records. The MOU provides
that, in accordance with federal regulations, MDL is to use the most current wage
data for the verification. Our review disclosed that MHBE did not ensure its
system consistently used the most current available data from MDL.
We tested 30 Medicaid enrollees9 who submitted an application during our audit
period that had income verified against State wage records. Our test identified 10
enrollees for which MHBE’s verification used income data that was between one
and three quarters older than the most current available income data as of the date
of application. Our further review of these 10 enrollees disclosed that 2 would
not have qualified for Medicaid if the most current available income data had
been used because the income for the more recent quarter exceeded the Medicaid
income eligibility threshold.
Recommendation 2
We recommend that MHBE
a. establish procedures to ensure that the most recent income data is used to
verify applicant reported income; and
b. identify all instances where non-current income data was used, and take
the necessary corrective action for any applicants who were not eligible
based on the current data.
9 Our test included 12 items which were processed by MABS prior to its replacement with
BEACON in October 2021. We selected from both initial applications as well as redetermination
applications throughout our audit period. Our test was limited to only applications which were
verified against State sources due to the scope limitation prohibiting our access to FTI.
15

--- Page 18 ---
Finding 3 (Policy Issue)
MHBE continues to rely solely on State wage records to verify income of
certain applicants even though it excluded many types of applicant income.
Analysis
MHBE continues to rely solely on State wage records from BEACON10 to verify
the income of certain applicants even though it excluded many types of applicant
income. As noted in our two prior audit reports, MHBE conducts income
verifications using federal tax information (FTI) only if no State wage record was
located on BEACON for the applicant. If the BEACON wage and unemployment
compensation data matched the applicant attested income within certain tolerance
levels, no additional verification was performed using FTI. If the BEACON wage
and unemployment data exceeded the applicant attested income beyond the
tolerable level, a manual review was performed, which also did not involve using
FTI.
Using BEACON data exclusively for income verification purposes has inherent
limitations that restrict its effectiveness. BEACON data does not include all types
of income and, therefore, may not identify applicants who omit or underreport
their income. While BEACON does include State unemployment compensation it
does not include interest, dividend, alimony, and rental income that may be
included in FTI – all of which must be considered for Medicaid eligibility. In
addition, BEACON would not identify wages earned from certain employers
exempt from reporting wages to the State (such as federal agencies and non-
Maryland-based employers) and would not identify any net earnings from self-
employment, all of which would be included in FTI.
Federal regulations require state-based exchanges to request financial information
from various state (for example, DUI) and federal agencies (for example, Internal
Revenue Service data that is necessary to verify applicants’ income). These
regulations have permitted the development of varying income verification
processes across the country. Specifically, according to the individual State and
District of Columbia Medicaid/Children’s Health Insurance Program eligibility
verification plans, 26 states and the District of Columbia utilize FTI data to verify
income eligibility, while other states have elected to not use FTI. See Figure 3 on
the following page.
10 Maryland Automated Benefits System (MABS) was used by the Maryland Department of Labor
Division of unemployment Insurance for income and unemployment data prior to BEACON.
16

--- Page 19 ---
Figure 3
States That Elected to Use FTI in Medicaid Eligibility
Verifications
Source: Medicaid website (https://www.medicaid.gov)
MHBE’s income verification methodology is consistent with Maryland MCPA's
federally approved plan. However, based on the above noted income omissions,
we believe there are opportunities for a more comprehensive income verification
process. Due to the limitations imposed on us by the federal IRC and MHBE
(described in the Audit Scope Limitation section of this report), we were unable to
assess the significance of MHBE not accessing additional FTI for the income
verification process.
A similar condition regarding the comprehensiveness of information used in
determining Medicaid eligibility was commented upon in our two preceding
reports dating back to October 30, 2018. In response to our most recent prior
audit report, MHBE agreed to collaborate with MCPA by June 30, 2022 to assess
various methods, including the usefulness of using FTI data, to obtain at the
point-in-time income information from consumers and other electronic sources.
During our current audit we noted that MHBE had not collaborated with MCPA
17

--- Page 20 ---
as indicated in its response and was unable to explain why the assessment was not
done.
Recommendation 3
We recommend that MHBE in collaboration with MCPA conduct a study
using FTI data in addition to BEACON to assess the significance and
usefulness of formally incorporating that data into its verification
methodology (repeat).
Finding 4
MHBE did not always ensure that manual overrides of applicant eligibility
were independently reviewed and approved.
Analysis
MHBE did not always ensure that manual overrides of applicant eligibility were
independently reviewed and approved. During the period September 2022
through August 2023 there were 3,976 manual overrides (1,906 processed by
MHBE and its contractor, 2,009 by MDH, and 61 by DHS employees).
Reviews of Manual Overrides Were Not Comprehensive and Independent
MHBE did not review 675 of the 1,906 overrides (35 percent) processed by
MHBE employees or its contractor during the period of September 2022 and
August 2023 due in part to errors in the output reports used for the review. In
addition, beginning in July 2022, the MHBE employee responsible for the review
and approval of MHBE employees and contractors’ overrides could also process
overrides. We reviewed override reports for September 2022 through August
2023 and there were no instances of the employee reviewing their own overrides.
Once we brought this lack of independence to MHBE’s attention, MHBE
removed the employee’s ability to perform overrides.
A similar condition regarding the lack of independent reviews for manual
overrides was commented upon in our preceding audit report. In its response,
MHBE indicated that it would implement procedures to ensure that independent
supervisory reviews would be performed by December 31, 2021. However, as
noted above, MHBE did not implement the recommended procedures. MHBE
management could not explain why the procedures were not implemented in
accordance with its response to the prior report.
MHBE Did Not Ensure the Propriety of MDH and DHS Eligibility Overrides
MHBE did not have a process to ensure that overrides of applicant eligibility
performed by MDH and DHS employees were independently reviewed and
18

--- Page 21 ---
approved. Due to the large percentage of overrides performed by MDH, we
reached out to MDH management personnel who advised that it was not
reviewing the overrides performed by its employees. At our request, MHBE
reviewed 20 overrides performed by MDH and DHS employees and concluded
that 16 overrides were improper. For example, an employee performed an
override to add retroactive coverage when the applicant had not applied for
retroactive coverage.
Recommendation 4
We recommend that MHBE
a. ensure that all applicant eligibility overrides processed by MHBE
employees and its contractors are independently reviewed and approved
(repeat);
b. develop and implement procedures to ensure that eligibility overrides
performed by MDH and DHS employees are independently reviewed and
approved; and
c. take appropriate corrective action for any improper overrides, including
those identified above.
MHBE Fund
Finding 5
MHBE did not adequately pursue the collection of $649 million in insurance
provider fees collected by the Maryland Insurance Administration (MIA)
that should have been transferred to the MHBE Fund.
Analysis
MHBE did not pursue the collection of $649 million in insurance provider fees
collected by MIA that should have been transferred to the MHBE Fund. State law
provides that MIA was to collect insurance provider fees and deposit them in the
MHBE Fund. The MHBE Fund was established in 2011 to help cover the
expenses of MHBE’s operation and administration. Legislation effective March
2018 expanded the use of the MHBE Fund to cover the costs of the State
Reinsurance Program under which MHBE reimburses qualifying individual health
insurers for a percentage of an enrollee’s claims.
Our review disclosed that as of September 2023, MIA had not received $649
million in provider fees from MIA that were collected between January 2019
through June 2023. MHBE submitted multiple requests to MIA between 2019
and 2021to transfer the funds, but MIA did not comply with the request. MHBE
stopped requesting the funds in 2021 after it received notice from DBM indicating
19

--- Page 22 ---
it would take care of the transfer, but DBM did not transfer the funds. In response
to our inquiries in January 2024, MIA transferred $641 million11 to MHBE.
The failure to obtain the funds from MIA impacted MHBE’s ability to timely
transfer certain funds. Specifically, although MHBE was able to cover its
operation and administration costs using other funding sources (such as, federal
funds), it did not transfer $15 million to the Health Equity Resource Community
Reserve Fund (HERCRF) in fiscal year 2023 due to a lack of funds. These funds
were to be used to support areas that demonstrate measurable and documented
health disparities and poor health outcomes to facilitate reduction of health
disparities, health costs, and hospital admissions. MHBE subsequently
transferred the funds to HERCRF in January 2024.
Recommendation 5
We recommend that MHBE follow-up with MIA to ensure the timely
transfer of fees collected on its behalf.
Procurements
Finding 6
MHBE did not always publish contract awards and document bid proposal
openings.
Analysis
MHBE did not always publish contract awards and document bid proposal
openings. According to State records, MHBE’s procurements totaled $249.8
million during our audit period. Our test of six of these procurements12 totaling
$110.6 million, disclosed the following conditions:
 As of March 2024, MHBE had not published 2 of the 6 contracts totaling
$13.1 million that were awarded 8 to 30 months prior. For three other
contracts tested totaling $92.3 million, MHBE did not record the date of the
publication and therefore, we could not readily determine when MHBE
published those awards.
 MHBE procedures did not require documentation of the opening of vendor
bid proposals. Our test disclosed that MHBE did not document the opening of
11 MIA withheld certain funds collected in accordance with State law, relating to funds that will be
transferred to a different State agency for fiscal year 2024.
12 Our selection of test items was based on the significance of vendor payments during the period
March 9, 2020 through June 30, 2023.
20

--- Page 23 ---
the proposals for three of the six procurements totaling $97 million.
Specifically, MHBE did not document that two employees were present
during the proposal openings, the date of the opening, and the specific
proposals that were opened.
MHBE is exempt from a number of State laws and regulations, including State
procurement laws and regulations. The MHBE Board established procurement
policies and procedures governing MHBE’s procurements which require contract
awards to be published on its website but did not specify a time period (such as,
within 30 days from date of the award). Publishing awards provides transparency
over State procurements. MHBE procedures also require bids be opened in the
presence of two employees and that the date and time opened be documented.
However, the procedures do not include a similar requirement for the opening of
bid proposals.
Recommendation 6
We recommend that MHBE
a. post its contract awards on its website as required by its policies,
b. enhance contract award posting policies to require the publication date
on the website as well as a required posted period (e.g. within 30 days of
award), and
c. establish procedures to document the opening of bid proposals.
Information Systems Security and Control
We determined that the Information Systems Security and Control section,
including Findings 7 and 8 related to “cybersecurity,” as defined by the State
Finance and Procurement Article, Section 3.5-301(b) of the Annotated Code of
Maryland, and therefore are subject to redaction from the publicly available audit
report in accordance with the State Government Article 2-1224(i). Consequently,
the specifics of the following findings, including the analysis, related
recommendations, along with MHBE’s responses, have been redacted from this
report copy.
Finding 7
Redacted cybersecurity-related finding.
Finding 8
Redacted cybersecurity-related finding.
21

--- Page 24 ---
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the Maryland Health Benefit
Exchange (MHBE), for the period beginning March 9, 2020 and ending June 30,
2023. The audit was conducted in accordance with generally accepted
government auditing standards except for certain requirements related to
obtaining sufficient, appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our
findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives. Specifically, as described
on page 9, our audit scope was limited with respect to assessing certain aspects of
internal controls over the Medicaid eligibility process and the related compliance
with State laws, rules, and regulations. This scope limitation was due to
restrictions imposed by the federal Internal Revenue Code on access to federal tax
information as well as MHBE’s application of those restrictions to applicant data.
Generally accepted government auditing standards require that we plan and
perform the audit to obtain sufficient, appropriate evidence to provide a
reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives.
Except for the effects of the scope limitation described above, we believe that the
evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions
based on our audit objectives.
As prescribed by the State Government Article, Section 2-1221 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, the objectives of this audit were to examine MHBE’s financial
transactions, records, and internal control, and to evaluate its compliance with
applicable State laws, rules, and regulations.
In planning and conducting our audit, we focused on the major financial-related
areas of operations based on assessments of significance and risk. The areas
addressed by the audit included procurements and disbursements, the Medicaid
eligibility process, State Reinsurance Program, federal fund reimbursements, the
MHBE Fund, payroll, and information systems security and control. We also
determined the status of the findings contained in our preceding audit report.
Our audit did not include certain grant management support services provided to
MHBE by the Maryland Department of Health (MDH). These support services
(such as drawdowns of Medicaid federal funds including indirect cost allocations,
reconciling of grant revenue and expenditures, and recording payment
transactions in the State’s accounting system) are included within the scope of our
audit of the MDH – Office of the Secretary and Other Units. In addition, our
audit did not include an evaluation of internal controls over compliance with
federal laws and regulations for federal financial assistance programs and an
assessment of MHBE’s compliance with those laws and regulations because the
22

--- Page 25 ---
State of Maryland engages an independent accounting firm to annually audit such
programs administered by State agencies, including MHBE.
Our assessment of internal controls was based on agency procedures and controls
in place at the time of our fieldwork. Our tests of transactions and other auditing
procedures were generally focused on the transactions occurring during our audit
period of March 9, 2020 to June 30, 2023, but may include transactions before or
after this period as we considered necessary to achieve our audit objectives.
To accomplish our audit objectives, our audit procedures included inquiries of
appropriate personnel, inspections of documents and records, tests of transactions,
and to the extent practicable, observations of MHBE’s operations. Generally,
transactions were selected for testing based on auditor judgment, which primarily
considers risk, the timing or dollar amount of the transaction, or the significance
of the transaction to the area of operation reviewed. As a matter of course, we do
not normally use sampling in our tests, so unless otherwise specifically indicated,
neither statistical nor non-statistical audit sampling was used to select the
transactions tested. Therefore, unless sampling is specifically indicated in a
finding, the results from any tests conducted or disclosed by us cannot be used to
project those results to the entire population from which the test items were
selected.
We also performed various data extracts of pertinent information from the State’s
Financial Management Information System (such as revenue and expenditure
data). The extracts are performed as part of ongoing internal processes
established by the Office of Legislative Audits and were subject to various tests to
determine data reliability. We determined that the data extracted from this source
were sufficiently reliable for the purposes the data were used during this audit.
We also extracted data from MHBE’s Maryland Health Connection system for the
purpose of selecting test items and performing data analytics. We performed
various tests of the relevant data and determined that the data were sufficiently
reliable for the purposes the data were used during the audit. Finally, we
performed other auditing procedures that we considered necessary to achieve our
objectives. The reliability of data used in this report for background or
informational purposes was not assessed.
MHBE’s management is responsible for establishing and maintaining effective
internal control. Internal control is a process designed to provide reasonable
assurance that objectives pertaining to the reliability of financial records;
effectiveness and efficiency of operations, including safeguarding of assets; and
compliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations are achieved. As
23

--- Page 26 ---
provided in Government Auditing Standards, there are five components of
internal control: control environment, risk assessment, control activities,
information and communication, and monitoring. Each of the five components,
when significant to the audit objectives, and as applicable to MHBE, were
considered by us during the course of this audit.
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate.
Our reports are designed to assist the Maryland General Assembly in exercising
its legislative oversight function and to provide constructive recommendations for
improving State operations. As a result, our reports generally do not address
activities we reviewed that are functioning properly.
This report includes findings relating to conditions that we consider to be
significant deficiencies in the design or operation of internal control that could
adversely affect MHBE’s ability to maintain reliable financial records, operate
effectively and efficiently, and/or comply with applicable laws, rules, and
regulations. Our report also includes findings regarding significant instances of
noncompliance with applicable laws, rules, or regulations.
In addition, this report includes a finding which is identified as a “Policy Issue”.
Such findings represent significant operational or financial-related issues for
which formal criteria may not necessarily exist, and for which management has
significant discretion in addressing, but the recommendation represents prudent
and or practical actions, which we believe should be implemented by the agency
to improve outcomes. Other less significant findings were communicated to
MHBE that did not warrant inclusion in this report.
State Government Article Section 2-1224(i) requires that we redact in a manner
consistent with auditing best practices any cybersecurity findings before a report
is made available to the public. This results in the issuance of two different
versions of an audit report that contains cybersecurity findings – a redacted
version for the public and an unredacted version for government officials
responsible for acting on our audit recommendations.
The State Finance and Procurement Article, Section 3.5-301(b), states that
cybersecurity is defined as “processes or capabilities wherein systems,
communications, and information are protected and defended against damage,
unauthorized use or modification, and exploitation.” Based on that definition, and
24

--- Page 27 ---
in our professional judgment, we concluded that certain findings in this report fall
under that definition. Consequently, for the publicly available audit report all
specifics as to the nature of cybersecurity findings and required corrective actions
have been redacted. We have determined that such aforementioned practices, and
government auditing standards, support the redaction of this information from the
public audit report. The specifics of these cybersecurity findings have been
communicated to MHBE and those parties responsible for acting on our
recommendations in an unredacted audit report.
MHBE’s response to our findings and recommendations is included as an
appendix to this report. Depending on the version of the audit report, responses to
any cybersecurity findings may be redacted in accordance with State law. As
prescribed in the State Government Article, Section 2-1224 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, we will advise MHBE regarding the results of our review of
its response.
25

--- Page 28 ---
Docusign Envelope ID: 6DB45990-413A-4E47-A08C-609126819CBC
APPENDIX
Mr. Brian S. Tanen, CPA, CFE
Legislative Auditor
Office of Legislative Audits
The Warehouse at Camden Yards
351 West Camden Street, Suite 400
Baltimore, MD 21201
January 17, 2025
Dear Mr. Tanen:
Enclosed please find responses and corrective actions with timeframes which address the
final recommendations from OLA’s finance performance audit of Maryland Health Benefit
Exchange (MHBE) for period of March 9, 2020 through June 30, 2023.
MHBE’s executive leadership team has promptly addressed the audit recommendations. In
addition, MHBE’s Director of Compliance and Privacy will follow-up on the corrective actions to
ensure ongoing compliance. Our team takes great strides to improve MHBE’s overall operations,
accountability, security and transparency and will continue to do so into the future.
I want to thank the OLA audit team for their professionalism, thoroughness and collegiality
during their on-site review. If you have any questions or require additional information, please do
not hesitate to contact me at 410-547-1270.
Sincerely,
Michele Eberle,
Executive Director
Enclosure
Cc: Dr. Laura Herrera Scott, Chair, MHBE Board of Trustees
Scott R. Brennan, Director of Compliance and Privacy, MHBE

--- Page 29 ---
Maryland Health Benefit Exchange
Agency Response Form
Medicaid Eligibility
Finding 1
MHBE did not request supporting documentation from applicants who reported
having zero income when BEACON reflected the applicant had income that
exceeded the Medicaid income qualification threshold.
We recommend that MHBE
a. in collaboration with MDH, modify the supporting documentation requirement
for applicants who reported zero income when BEACON reported income that
exceeded the Medicaid eligibility threshold, so that eligibility will only be
granted if the applicant provides an explanation and supporting documentation
for any discrepancies;
b. investigate all instances when applicant’s affidavits conflict with BEACON data,
including those noted above; and
c. refer instances of potential fraud, waste, and abuse, including those identified
above, to the Office of Inspector General for Health.

--- Page 30 ---
Maryland Health Benefit Exchange
Agency Response Form
Agency Response
Analysis Factually Accurate
Please provide MHBE agrees with the material facts established in OLA’s finding.
additional comments as Regarding the decision to rely solely on an attestation of income, the
deemed necessary. Maryland Department of Health relies on 42 CFR 435.952, the reasonable
compatibility rule, for its approach to the zero-dollar income attestation.
42 CFR 435.952(c)(2), provides that “If information provided by or on
behalf of an individual is not reasonably compatible with information
obtained through an electronic data match, the agency must seek
additional information from the individual, including, "including--(i) a
statement which reasonably explains the discrepancy, or [emphasis
added] (ii) other information (which may include documentation)."
MHBE maintains that it is not required to request supporting
documentation from applicants who reported having zero income.
Furthermore, MHBE may rely solely on an affidavit of the applicant,
explaining the discrepancy between any electronic record of income with
their actual current income, without additional documentation. This
practice conforms to the policies and procedures of the Maryland
Department of Health (MDH), which are established directly from federal
and state regulations governing Medicaid eligibility and enrollment
criteria. Notably, MHBE is bound by MDH policies governing this
particular requirement and does not have discretion to deviate from that
guidance in the implementation of its business operation systems, which
are effectuated through technical applications comprising HBX.
During the eligibility determination process, as it is performed as a part
of the application process, MDH, with approval from CMS, has elected
not to stop the application at the point of a no-income declaration and
require a Verification Checklist (VCL) to seek the explanation. Instead,
Maryland allows the individual to choose from a list of explanations and
accepts this as part of the initial application. The particular explanation
choice selected is considered to be “a statement which reasonably
explains the discrepancy” and, standing alone, comports with 42 CFR
435.952(c)(2), as provided above. Inserting a VCL would not change the
nature of the explanation.
In sum, the Maryland Department of Health interprets the federal
regulation above as expressly permitting the state Medicaid agency to
accept an explanation of a discrepancy between the electronic databases
and the attested income. The process employed by MHBE is according
to MDH guidance and established processes it is bound to follow, and

--- Page 31 ---
Maryland Health Benefit Exchange
Agency Response Form
therefore takes exception to this finding on the basis of a difference in the
interpretation of the requirements in the Code of Federal Regulations.
Additionally, OLA’s match disclosed 467 applicants for which BEACON
reported income from the same employer in the quarter prior, during, and
subsequent to the application raising questions about the validity of the
affidavit. However, the Department of Health and Human Services,
Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services expressly prohibited
termination of individuals from Medicaid during the Public Health
Emergency, even if they no longer qualified. This policy was lifted with
June 2023 Medicaid redetermination notices. As a result, all
redeterminations that were included as a part of the 467 applicants cited
by OLA, would have maintained eligibility regardless of the validity or
accuracy of the no income attestation.
MHBE agrees that the MOU between MHBE and MDH requires MHBE
to ensure compliance with federal and state law for detection and
prevention of fraud, waste, and abuse by performing analytics and
assessments, in consultation with MDH, to identify and mitigate
potentially fraudulent activities.
Recommendation 1a Disagree Estimated Completion Date: N/A
Please provide details of MHBE does not agree with the recommendation that it modify the
corrective action or
supporting documentation requirement for applicants reporting zero
explain disagreement.
income when BEACON reports income that exceeded the Medicaid
eligibility threshold. Income verification (VCL) processing is a function
of the MDH. Any modification to work performed by the MHBE on
behalf of MDH would have to be at the direction of the MDH with
appropriate MOU’s and funding put in place to support the work. As
stated in the MHBE’s response above, it is our position and the position
of MDH, that supporting documentation is not required in this instance.

--- Page 32 ---
Maryland Health Benefit Exchange
Agency Response Form
Recommendation 1b Disagree Estimated Completion Date: N/A
Please provide details of MHBE employs a process flow that leads to allowable eligibility
corrective action or
determinations when an applicant’s affidavit conflicts with BEACON
explain disagreement.
data. MHBE has established this process flow within the HBX system at
the direction of MDH policy and maintains that the eligibility
determinations that are conducted conform with both MDH policy and all
applicable federal regulations, as cited in its response above.
Auditor’s Comment: Although MHBE acknowledges the accuracy of the
Analysis in our finding, including its responsibility to perform analytics and
assessments for the detection and prevention of fraud, waste, and abuse, it
disagrees with Recommendation 1a and 1b. MHBE continues to believe that
documentation is not required and the current policy conforms with MDH policy
and all applicable federal regulations.
Given the results presented in our analysis we continue to believe that
documentation should be required consistent with other discrepancies identified
by MHBE. Given that MHBE’s current practice has and could continue to result
in benefits going to unqualified applicants, it should work with MDH to resolve
any concerns precluding it from safeguarding State funds.
Recommendation 1c Agree Estimated Completion Date: Ongoing
Please provide details of As OLA recommends, MHBE will refer those cases identified above in
corrective action or OLA’s finding to the Office of Inspector General for Health. MHBE
explain disagreement. will continue its practice of referring instances of potential fraud, waste,
and abuse to OIG.

--- Page 33 ---
Maryland Health Benefit Exchange
Agency Response Form
Finding 2
MHBE did not ensure it used the most current income data in its verification
process resulting in inaccurate enrollment determinations for Medicaid applicants.
We recommend that MHBE
a. establish procedures to ensure that the most recent income data is used to verify
applicant reported income; and
b. identify all instances where non-current income data was used, and take the
necessary corrective action for any applicants who were not eligible based on the
current data.

--- Page 34 ---
Maryland Health Benefit Exchange
Agency Response Form
Agency Response
Analysis Factually Accurate
Please provide MHBE is diligent about ensuring it has the proper wage and income data
additional comments as to appropriately determine eligibility and enrollment for Qualified Health
deemed necessary. Plans and Maryland Medicaid coverage. Accordingly, MHBE has entered
into a Memorandum of Understanding with the Department of Labor
(MDL) which governs the information MHBE requests, and the
information MDL returns from the BEACON system for the purpose of
income verification.
After researching the BEACON related data in OLA’s findings, MHBE
found that it did not ensure that it used the most current income data
from the Maryland Department of Labor (DOL).
MHBE concurs with the finding in specific scenarios. In the instances
where the failure to utilize the most current data occurred, MHBE
identified a timing issue between the batch and real-time verification
methods within the income verification process. Upon further scrutiny,
MHBE did not find any indication that the income data received from
the Department of Labor was not the most current data, but rather that
the data MHBE relied upon was not always the most updated data
available to it.
Maryland Health Connection (MHC) uses the DOL's BEACON system
to verify consumer income. Generally, if income cannot be obtained in
real-time through a BEACON call, the HBX system defaults to using
DOL's monthly bulk data for verification. However, in some limited
scenarios, the monthly batch process handling verification checks does
not recognize when the most recent income information has been
obtained via a real-time call and income verification has been completed.
This leads to redundant checks using potentially outdated bulk data,
resulting in inconsistent enrollment determinations for Medicaid
applicants in specific cases.
Recommendation 2a Agree Estimated Completion Date: No later than
Feb. 25, 2025
Please provide details of To resolve the issue identified above, MHBE will modify the monthly
corrective action or batch verification process to correctly handle the timing between the
explain disagreement. real-time and batch verification methods. This modification will ensure
that only the most up-to-date income data is used for eligibility
determinations, thereby improving the accuracy of enrollment decisions
for Medicaid applicants.
Recommendation 2b Disagree Estimated Completion Date: N/A

--- Page 35 ---
Maryland Health Benefit Exchange
Agency Response Form
Please provide details of MHBE contends that the annual redeterminations process, as opposed to
corrective action or a retroactive manual identification process, will efficiently address this
explain disagreement. issue. Since these application discrepancies were identified by OLA, the
most recent of which was from February 23, 2023, all affected consumers
would have undergone at least one annual income redetermination.
MHBE’s examination of the 2 BEACON samples that were found to
contain income discrepancies showed that for the first sample identified,
the consumer was moved from Medicaid to a private insurance plan after
reporting an income change subsequent to their initial 2023 application,
and for the second sample identified, the consumer also reported an
income change and attested via affidavit of current income, which resulted
in the consumer maintaining their Medicaid coverage. Because the
system fix described in the previous response, in combination with the
annual redetermination process, cures the deficiencies identified, the
recommended manual process is unnecessary.
Auditor’s Comment: MHBE disagrees with Recommendation 2b, asserting that
it is unnecessary because MHBE is correcting the system error which caused the
non-current data to be used and contends that the annual redetermination process
will efficiently address this issue. However, as noted in MHBE’s response to
Recommendation 2a, the system error will not be corrected until (no later than)
February 25, 2025. Therefore, any errors in determining eligibility that occurred
during our audit period as a result of non-current data will not be addressed until
the next redetermination after the system error is corrected. As such, we continue
to believe that MHBE needs to identify all instances where non-current income
data was used and take corrective action for those applicants who were not
eligible based on current data.

--- Page 36 ---
Maryland Health Benefit Exchange
Agency Response Form
Finding 3 (Policy Issue)
MHBE continues to rely solely on State wage records to verify income of certain
applicants even though it excluded many types of applicant income.
We recommend that MHBE in collaboration with MCPA conduct a study using FTI
data in addition to BEACON to assess the significance and usefulness of formally
incorporating that data into its verification methodology (repeat).
Agency Response
Analysis Factually Accurate
Please provide MHBE agrees that it continues to rely solely on financial information
additional comments as through State wage records (BEACON) (formerly MABS) to verify the
deemed necessary.
income of certain applicants even though BEACON excluded many
types of applicant income. However, in MHBEs response to OLA’s
May 2021 Audit Report, MHBE stated that “MHBE will collaborate
with MCPA to assess various methods, including the usefulness of using
FTI data, to obtain at the point in time income information from
consumers and other electronic sources. Projected: June 30, 2022”.
There was not an agreement to conduct an assessment. The
collaboration did occur, and it was concluded that FTI data was not
useful as the data would always be 12-18 months old. In addition,
MHBE explored using another electronic data source. After CMS
informed MHBE that it would not pay for the service, and that the State
would have to pay for it, it was deemed too costly to use given the
expected outcome.
Auditor’s Comment: MHBE asserts that there was no agreement to conduct an
assessment. However, MHBE’s response to OLA’s May 2021 audit report clearly
states, “MHBE will collaborate with MCPA to assess various methods, including
the usefulness of using FTI data, to obtain at the point in time income information
from consumers and other electronic sources.” MHBE also did not provide any
documentation showing that CMS informed MHBE that it would not pay for
another electronic data source and it was deemed too costly to use the service
given the expected outcome. We continue to believe that MHBE should consider
using FTI to help ensure that only qualified applicants are approved for benefits.

--- Page 37 ---
Maryland Health Benefit Exchange
Agency Response Form
Recommendation 3 Disagree Estimated Completion Date: N/A
Please provide details of MHBE is currently conducting Medicaid Income Verifications according
corrective action or to policy established by MDH, Maryland’s State Medicaid agency. The
explain disagreement. policy MDH enacted has been approved by CMS and meets all Federal
requirements. Conducting a study on using FTI data, in addition to
BEACON, to assess the significance and usefulness of formally
incorporating that data into the verification methodology would be costly
and create an administrative burden for MHBE and MDH. More
importantly, should the study determine that the older FTI data showed
different results than the more current BEACON data, the ultimate
outcome would be the same, as the more current data would be used to
approve eligibility, but the impact to the consumer would be significant.
If an income verification was generated, the enrollment would be put on
hold and manual intervention required by a caseworker. This would delay
the consumers enrollment and not align with “CMSs Guidelines for
Achieving Compliance with Medicaid and CHIP Eligibility Renewal
Timeliness Requirements Following the Medicaid and CHIP Unwinding
Period”.
Finally, as the State is required to participate in the CMS Payment Error
Rate Measurement (PERM) program annually, which specifically
examines eligibility determinations, there are checks and balances in place
to ensure proper eligibility determinations have been made based on
income.
MHBE refers OLA to our 2018 Audit Finding Response and 2021 Audit
Finding Response for additional information.
In its current finding, OLA highlights the fact that 26 states and the
District of Columbia utilize FTI data to verify income eligibility, while
other states have elected to not use FTI. In response, MHBE offers the
same response and rationale for the current findings, as those found in its
2021 response as follows:
“While OLA points out that 24 states and the District of Columbia use
FTI as a primary data source, or in combination with state quarterly
wage and other data sources, there is no consistency in the manner or
the extent to which they rely on FTI data in the overall eligibility
determination processes. Each uses its own algorithms to determine
eligibility within its state, district and/or federal regulatory frameworks.
Significantly, the information returned from the Federal Data Services
Hub (FDSH) only indicates whether the applicant’s bottom-line income
amount from their last tax filing is or is not within the 10% FFP
tolerance range. That is to say, no actual dollar amount of earned or

--- Page 38 ---
Maryland Health Benefit Exchange
Agency Response Form
unearned income is garnered that could be used to project an applicant’s
income at the time of their application. There was thus no basis for
expecting improved outcomes from implementing OLA's
recommendation, which would have significant administrative and
systems costs, put additional pressure on the Office of Administrative
Hearings, and result in undue delays to consumers in receiving healthcare
coverage.”
To conclude, MHBE does not believe an FTI study is advisable, due to
the projected cost of such a study, the FTI-cleared resources required to
complete such a study, and most importantly, the fact that whatever the
results of the study may be, the above issues that prevent the adoption of
FTI in Maryland would remain unchanged.
Auditor’s Comment: MHBE disagreed with our recommendation that MHBE in
collaboration with MCPA conduct a study using FTI data in addition to BEACON
to assess the significance and usefulness of formally incorporating that data into
its verification methodology. We question MHBE’s statements for the reasons
listed below:
First, MHBE noted that conducting a study on using FTI would be costly.
However, MHBE could not provide documentation of the cost of the requested
study.
Second, MHBE asserted that the addition of FTI would not change the eligibility
determination process. However, MHBE could not provide documentation
supporting this assertion.
Third, MHBE stated that the expanded use of FTI is unnecessary because MHBE
participates in the CMS Payment Error Rate Measurement (PERM). However,
the PERM does not necessarily make the use of FTI unnecessary. PERM is a
program to quantify the amount of improper payments and implement plans to
reduce improper payments and the use of FTI could reduce improper payments.
We continue to believe that MHBE should collaborate with MCPA and conduct a
study using FTI data in addition to BEACON and document its results.

--- Page 39 ---
Maryland Health Benefit Exchange
Agency Response Form
Finding 4
MHBE did not always ensure that manual overrides of applicant eligibility were
independently reviewed and approved.
We recommend that MHBE
a. ensure that all applicant eligibility overrides processed by MHBE employees and
its contractors are independently reviewed and approved (repeat);
b. develop and implement procedures to ensure that eligibility overrides performed
by MDH and DHS employees are independently reviewed and approved; and
c. take appropriate corrective action for any improper overrides, including those
identified above.
Agency Response
Analysis Factually Accurate

--- Page 40 ---
Maryland Health Benefit Exchange
Agency Response Form
Please provide MHBE did not review 704 of the 1,906 overrides processed by MHBE
additional comments as employees or its contractor during the period from September 2022 to
deemed necessary. August 2023, due to errors in the reporting criteria used in the technical
reports that are relied upon for internal override reviews. Upon discovery
of this error by OLA, MHBE immediately examined and remedied the
parameters used to generate the report to ensure that all overrides would
be appropriately captured in reports from February 2, 2024, forward.
There was also one individual identified by OLA as having both override
access as well as supervisory override access. Inadvertently, access to one
of the override roles was not removed as it should have been in this case.
This individual was not aware that he/she had the dual access and in fact,
had previously and correctly requested that the access be removed. This
individual was operating with the understanding that the appropriate
access removal had been completed. As a result, and as OLA notes, there
were no instances where this employee reviewed their overrides.
Nevertheless, dual access was present, and this is in contravention of
MHBE’s policy.
In OLA’s previous audit report of May 2021, 23 individuals were
identified as having override ability without independent review and
approval. This was due to inadequate controls which were strengthened
as part of MHBE’s previous Corrective Action Plan. This was
accomplished, in part, by the inclusion of such controls in the December
8, 2021, policy on Review of Eligibility Overrides. In the present case,
and as explained above, only one individual was determined to have
inappropriate access.
MHBE did not have a process to ensure that overrides of applicant
eligibility performed by employees at MDH and DHS were independently
reviewed and approved. Upon review of a sample of MDH and DHS
overrides, which were provided and performed by MDH, it was
determined that 16 of the 20 overrides were improper. MHBE is
committed to the integrity of overrides performed within the HBX system
and has collaborated with MDH to develop and implement procedures to
ensure that eligibility overrides performed by MDH and DHS employees
are independently reviewed and that improper overrides are corrected.
This corrective action is outlined below in Recommendation b below.

--- Page 41 ---
Maryland Health Benefit Exchange
Agency Response Form
Recommendation 4a Agree Estimated Completion Date: June 30, 2025
Please provide details of Corrective Action is outlined as follows:
corrective action or
explain disagreement. A) The MHBE Reporting team, which is currently required by MHBE
policy, “to pull cases from HBX where eligibility was changed from HBX
generated eligibility to eligibility provided by action by an override
worker,” will examine the report parameters and ensure accurate output
each month for six months beginning with its September 20, 2024 report.
Projected Completion: March 31, 2025
B) Supervisors who oversee the validity of overrides will not
have override capability. Override access within the Health Benefit
Exchange (HBX) will be reviewed by MHBE’s Director of Consumer
Assistance, or designee, on a quarterly basis to ensure this is the case, with
a written communication of the results to the Director of Compliance and
Privacy. This commenced in September of 2024, and will be ongoing in
nature, with the Policy on Review of Eligibility Overrides already updated
to reflect this new quality control.
Projected Completion: Ongoing
C) The Director of Compliance and Privacy, or designee will perform an
annual internal review of the Consumer Assistance and Eligibility
Department to ensure that override capability has been appropriately
managed commensurate with the corrective action plan and updated
policy requirements.
Projected Completion: June 30, 2025
Recommendation 4b Agree Estimated Completion Date: Completed as
of December
31, 2024
Please provide details of Corrective Action is outlined as follows:
corrective action or
explain disagreement. MHBE and MDH Management have discussed and agreed upon certain
specific processes to ensure that eligibility overrides performed by MDH
and DHS employees are independently reviewed and approved, and that
improper overrides are corrected.
MDH Actions:
A) Access Controls
MDH has proposed, and MHBE agrees, that overrides performed by
MDH and DHS would be performed by an individual at a team lead or
supervisory level, with oversight over the overrides granted to a
separate individual with appropriate subject matter expertise, and who
does not have the ability to perform overrides themself.

--- Page 42 ---
Maryland Health Benefit Exchange
Agency Response Form
Proposed Implementation Date: Implemented as of December 31, 2024
B) Written Procedure
MDH and MHBE agree that for MDH processes, MDH will draft a
written, standardized operating procedure, which outlines requirements
surrounding the review of overrides performed by MDH and DHS
employees. This document should address access to overrides, review
frequency and volume, authorization controls regarding performing and
reviewing overrides, etc. Written guidelines will help ensure the quality
and integrity of the override process.
Proposed Implementation Date: Implemented as of December 31, 2024
C) Implementation of a Volume Based Quality Control/Override Review
Paradigm
MDH and MHBE agree that a defined schedule for the number of
overrides to be reviewed by MDH will serve as a good benchmark to
ensure consistent reviews are taking place, to control the resource burden
for override reviews, and to standardize the number of overrides requiring
review. Currently, MHBE reviews 100% of internal overrides, but may
consider a reduction to standardize the process with MDH, given that
MHBE will be taking on a new workflow in reviewing a percentage of
those overrides performed by MDH and DHS workers. The review table
below has been proposed by MDH, is based on industry accepted
standards for quality assurance, and will be included in the written,
standardized operating procedure referenced in section B above. If the
same schedule is practical for MHBE, it will be incorporated into the
MHBE Policy on Review of Eligibility Overrides.
Table 1. Number of Records and Sample Percentage
Number of Records Percentage Sampled
1-20 100%
21-200 20%
201-1000 10%
1001 - 2000 5%

--- Page 43 ---
Maryland Health Benefit Exchange
Agency Response Form
2001 + 1%
Proposed Implementation Date: Implemented as of December 31, 2024
MHBE Actions:
MHBE proposes the implementation of the following procedures to
ensure that eligibility overrides performed by MDH and DHS employees
are independently reviewed and approved by both MDH and MHBE, and
that improper overrides, including those identified in the analysis above,
are corrected.
A) The MHBE reporting team will provide a monthly override report to
designated contacts at MHBE, and MDH for MDH and DHS overrides.
B) A MDH designated individual, to be defined by title, will be
responsible for pulling a monthly random sample of overrides and other
designated individuals, in a separate department of MDH, will be
responsible for performing the review of overrides for MDH and DHS, in
accordance with the table above.
C) A MDH designated individual, to be defined by title, will securely
email the completed random sample review to the MHBE Director of
Compliance and Privacy, MHBE Director of Consumer Assistance, and
the MHBE Special Projects Manager.
D) The MHBE Special Projects Manager, who does not and will not be
granted override access, will be responsible for performing a 100%
review of random sample size that has been reviewed by MDH for MDH
and DHS overrides.
E) All findings, corrections, and the final reviews performed by the
MHBE Special Project Manager will be sent, via secure email, to the
MHBE Director of Compliance and Privacy and a MDH designated
individual, to be defined by title.
F) MHBE Director of Compliance and Privacy will, on an ongoing basis
connect with a MDH designated individual, to be defined by title, to
ensure override reviews are being completed.
Proposed Implementation Date: Implemented as of December 31, 2024

--- Page 44 ---
Maryland Health Benefit Exchange
Agency Response Form
Recommendation 4c Agree Estimated Completion Date: Completed as
of December
31, 2024
Please provide details of All overrides that OLA found to be improper were identified, examined,
corrective action or and corrected. At the direction of MHBE’s Director of Consumer
explain disagreement.
Assistance, the unreviewed overrides identified were reviewed in an
expedited manner. As a matter of due diligence and quality assurance,
MHBE reviews all overrides processed by MHBE employees and its
contractor rather than just a statistically valid sample. As established in
the above recommendation responses, MHBE now has a formal process
with MDH and DHS for quality assurance checks based on the specifically
defined sample size. When improper overrides are identified, they are
corrected as part of the process established in recommendation section 4b.

--- Page 45 ---
Maryland Health Benefit Exchange
Agency Response Form
MHBE Fund
Finding 5
MHBE did not adequately pursue the collection of $649 million in insurance
provider fees collected by the Maryland Insurance Administration (MIA) that
should have been transferred to the MHBE Fund.
We recommend that MHBE follow-up with MIA to ensure the timely transfer of
fees collected on its behalf.
Agency Response
Analysis Factually Accurate
Please provide The State Legislation governing the MHBE Fund was passed on April 10,
additional comments as 2018, and signed by the Governor on April 4, 2018 (Senate Bill 387,
deemed necessary. Health Insurance - Individual Market Stabilization [Maryland Health Care
Access Act of 2018], with the stated purpose summarized as follows:
“Requiring certain insurers, nonprofit health service plans, health
maintenance organizations, dental plan organizations, fraternal benefit
organizations, managed care organizations, and certain other persons to
be subject to a certain 2.75% assessment in calendar year 2019;
establishing that the purpose of the assessment is to recoup a certain
aggregate amount of the health insurance provider fee for certain
purposes; requiring distribution of the assessment to the Maryland Health
Benefit Exchange Fund; etc.”
In January 2019, November 2019, August of 2020, and March of 2021
MHBE inquired about the transfer of the funds from the Maryland
Insurance Administration (MIA). The Maryland Department of Budget
and Management (DBM) instructed MHBE to keep the funds with MIA
in a March 2021 email.
MHBE relied upon this representation from the DBM in its decision to
keep the funds with MIA. MHBE clarifies that the amount due to
MHBE was $641,013,402.87, as determined by MIA. MHBE relies on
MIA to assess the fee and transfer it to MHBE. At all times during
which MIA held these reinsurance funds, MHBE had access to them
upon request.
Recommendation 5 Agree Estimated Completion Date: June 30, 2025

--- Page 46 ---
Maryland Health Benefit Exchange
Agency Response Form
Please provide details of On January 17, 2024, MIA transferred $641,013,402.87 to MHBE. At the
corrective action or end of each Fiscal Year the Chief Financial Officer, or designee will
explain disagreement. request the amount collected by MIA for the premium surcharge
supported by appropriate detail. MHBE will request transfer of the amount
collected by MIA and ensure its transfer to MHBE.
The Director of Compliance and Privacy, or designee, will perform an
annual internal review of the Finance and Procurement Department to
ensure that MHBE has timely requested the transfer from MIA and that
the amount is, in fact, transferred to MHBE as part of MHBE’s corrective
action plan.
Projected Completion: June 30, 2025

--- Page 47 ---
Maryland Health Benefit Exchange
Agency Response Form
Procurements
Finding 6
MHBE did not always publish contract awards and document bid proposal
openings.
We recommend that MHBE
a. post its contract awards on its website as required by its policies,
b. enhance contract award posting policies to require the publication date on the
website as well as a required posted period (e.g. within 30 days of award), and
c. establish procedures to document the opening of bid proposals.
Agency Response
Analysis Factually Accurate
Please provide MHBE agrees with this finding and its corrective actions are detailed in
additional comments as the following recommendation sections.
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 6a Agree Estimated Completion Date: June 30, 2025
Please provide details of The Chief Financial Officer will work to update internal procedures to
corrective action or memorialize the written requirement that contract awards are posted to the
explain disagreement. website within 30 days, and the MHBE Procurement Manager will ensure
that this is completed on an ongoing basis.
Implemented as of December 31, 2024
The Director of Compliance and Privacy, or designee, will perform an
annual internal review of the Finance and Procurement Department to
ensure that the above requirements are met as part of MHBE’s corrective
action plan.
Projected Completion: June 30, 2025
Recommendation 6b Agree Estimated Completion Date: June 30, 2025
Please provide details of MHBE will update its internal policies governing contract awards to
corrective action or require the publication of awards on MHBE’s website no later than
explain disagreement. 30 days after execution, along with the publication date. Projected
Completion: June 30, 2025
The Director of Compliance and Privacy, or designee, will perform an
annual internal review of the Finance and Procurement Department to
ensure that the above requirements are met as part of MHBE’s corrective
action plan.
Projected Completion: June 30, 2025

--- Page 48 ---
Maryland Health Benefit Exchange
Agency Response Form
Recommendation 6c Agree Estimated Completion Date: Ongoing
Please provide details of MHBE will take the following steps as corrective action:
corrective action or
explain disagreement.
A) The Chief Financial Officer, or designee, will ensure that the awards
are posted and the opening of bids is documented.
B) The Chief Financial Officer, or designee, currently reports new
contracts on a monthly basis to the MHBE’s Board of Trustees. After
completion of the report, the report preparer will check to ensure that
the awards are posted on the MHBE website and that the
documentation for the opening of the bids is in the Procurement
Folder. The CFO will ensure that the documentation of opening bids
is completed properly and in every case.
Projected Completion: Ongoing
The Director of Compliance and Privacy, or designee, will perform an
annual internal review of the Finance and Procurement Department to
ensure that the above requirements are met as part of MHBE’s corrective
action plan.
Projected Completion: June 30, 2025

--- Page 49 ---
Maryland Health Benefit Exchange
Agency Response Form
Information Systems Security and Control
The Office of Legislative Audits (OLA) has determined that the Information Systems
Security and Control section, including Findings 7 and 8 related to “cybersecurity,” as
defined by the State Finance and Procurement Article, Section 3.5-301(b) of the
Annotated Code of Maryland, and therefore are subject to redaction from the publicly
available audit report in accordance with the State Government Article 2-1224(i).
Although the specifics of the following findings, including the analysis, related
recommendations, along with MHBE’s responses, have been redacted from this report
copy, MHBE’s responses indicated agreement with the findings and related
recommendations.
Finding 7
Redacted cybersecurity-related finding.
Agency Response has been redacted by OLA.
Finding 8
Redacted cybersecurity-related finding.
Agency Response has been redacted by OLA.

--- Page 50 ---
A T
UDIT EAM
Catherine M. Clarke, CPA, CIA, CFE
Audit Manager
R. Brendan Coffey, CPA, CISA
Edwin L. Paul, CPA, CISA
Information Systems Audit Managers
David R. Fahnestock, CPA
Data Analytics Manager
Joel E. Kleiman, CPA
Senior Auditor
Michael K. Bliss, CISA
Matthew D. Walbert, CISA
Information Systems Senior Auditors
Charles H. Hinds, IV, CPA
Ian T. Pontius
Data Analytics Senior Auditors
Johanna K. Bachman
Ali A. Dayya
Staff Auditors
Vickey K. Micah
Christopher C. Pitre
Information Systems Staff Auditors