Title: Department of Human Services - Social Services Administration
Date: 06/03/2021
Type: Fiscal Compliance
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=60b92537a1ce58135c03b08d
Extracted: 2025-06-19T11:51:41.930688
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Audit Report
Department of Human Services
Social Services Administration
June 2021
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Senator Clarence K. Lam, M.D. (Senate Chair) Delegate Carol L. Krimm (House Chair)
Senator Malcolm L. Augustine Delegate Steven J. Arentz
Senator Adelaide C. Eckardt Delegate Julie Palakovich Carr
Senator George C. Edwards Delegate Mark S. Chang
Senator Katie Fry Hester Delegate Nicholas P. Charles II
Senator Cheryl C. Kagan Delegate Andrea Fletcher Harrison
Senator Benjamin F. Kramer Delegate Keith E. Haynes
Senator Cory V. McCray Delegate Trent M. Kittleman
Senator Justin D. Ready Delegate David Moon
Senator Craig J. Zucker Delegate Geraldine Valentino-Smith
To Obtain Further Information
Office of Legislative Audits
301 West Preston Street, Room 1202
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Phone: 410-946-5900 ꞏ 301-970-5900 ꞏ 1-877-486-9964 (Toll Free in Maryland)
Maryland Relay: 711
TTY: 410-946-5401 ꞏ 301-970-5401
E-mail: OLAWebmaster@ola.state.md.us
Website: www.ola.state.md.us
To Report Fraud
The Office of Legislative Audits operates a Fraud Hotline to report fraud, waste, or abuse involving State
of Maryland government resources. Reports of fraud, waste, or abuse may be communicated anonymously
by a toll-free call to 1-877-FRAUD-11, by mail to the Fraud Hotline, c/o Office of Legislative Audits, or
through the Office’s website.
Nondiscrimination Statement
The Department of Legislative Services does not discriminate on the basis of age, ancestry, color, creed,
marital status, national origin, race, religion, gender, gender identity, sexual orientation, or disability in the
admission or access to its programs, services, or activities. The Department’s Information Officer has been
designated to coordinate compliance with the nondiscrimination requirements contained in Section 35.107
of the United States Department of Justice Regulations. Requests for assistance should be directed to the
Information Officer at 410-946-5400 or 410-970-5400.

--- Page 3 ---
June 3, 2021
Senator Clarence K. Lam, M.D., Senate Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Delegate Carol L. Krimm, House Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Members of Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Annapolis, Maryland
Ladies and Gentlemen:
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the Department of Human
Services (DHS) – Social Services Administration (SSA) for the period
beginning July 1, 2016 and ending April 30, 2020. SSA supervises, directs,
and monitors the social services programs (including foster care) of the State’s
24 local departments of social services (LDSSs). According to SSA records,
during fiscal year 2019, approximately 17,000 children participated in SSA
programs and were served by 9,000 providers/parents at a cost of
approximately $274 million.
SSA had not established a comprehensive and effective quality assurance
program to ensure that child welfare programs were being properly
administered by the LDSSs. The LDSSs are responsible for case management
functions, including monitoring of child care placements and providers, and
investigating reports of abuse and neglect. There were two general themes
disclosed by our findings; one was the need for timely action by LDSSs as
required by policies and regulations, coupled with comprehensive monitoring
of LDSS performance and the other was the lack of certain reliable system
records on which to base this monitoring.
Specifically, we found that SSA’s procedures for monitoring services and
functions performed by the LDSSs were not sufficient or were not
consistently performed, and periodic on-site case reviews performed by SSA
at each LDSS did not address all of the critical functions of the LDSS. For

--- Page 4 ---
example, these reviews did not include procedures to ensure that required
substance-exposed newborn risk assessments were performed in a timely
manner.
We found that SSA had not established LDSS oversight or the oversight was
insufficient in the following six required services or attributes:
 Foster care placement recordkeeping
 Medical and dental exams for foster care children
 School attendance for school-aged children
 Child abuse and neglect investigations
 Substance-exposed newborn risk assessments
 Children born to individuals with parental rights previously
terminated
In each of the six areas, we identified instances in which the LDSSs were not
complying with SSA requirements, State regulations, or State law. For
example, our test of 48 foster care children monitored by 13 different LDSSs
noted that evidence was lacking regarding compliance with 39 percent of five
of the six required attributes tested, such as the child receiving an annual
medical exam. In addition, as of August 2020, the LDSSs did not perform
required assessments of the familial environments of 144 children who were
born in 2019 to individuals whose parental rights had been terminated.
We also noted that SSA did not maximize the recovery of federal
reimbursement for eligible children in foster care, as well as those in adoption
and guardianship programs. Our test of 55 cases (children) from those
programs for which expected federal reimbursement was not being received,
identified 8 cases where the children had been incorrectly identified by SSA
as ineligible.
Our audit also disclosed that SSA did not pursue overpayments totaling
approximately $4.8 million made to certain providers of child placement
services during fiscal years 2017 and 2018. Our tests also found that SSA had
not ensured that adoption assistance payments funded entirely by the State
were suspended when an adopted child was removed from the adoptive home.
In addition, SSA did not ensure that payments made to a State university
under three interagency agreements were adequately supported and in
accordance with the terms of the agreements. As of July 2020, payments to
the State university under these agreements totaled $11.2 million.
2

--- Page 5 ---
Our audit also included a review to determine the status of the 14 findings
contained in our preceding report. We determined that SSA satisfactorily
addressed 6 of these findings. The remaining 8 findings are repeated in this
report as 7 findings.
In our preceding audit report, dated November 20, 2017, we reported that SSA’s
accountability and compliance level was unsatisfactory in accordance with the
rating system that we established in conformity with State law. Based on the
results of our current audit, we have concluded that SSA’s accountability and
compliance level remains unsatisfactory. The primary factors contributing to the
unsatisfactory rating were the significance of the audit findings, the number of
repeat findings, and SSA’s lack of sufficient monitoring of the 24 LDSSs for
compliance with numerous policies and regulations. Consequently, although not
included as a report finding or recommendation, we believe it would be prudent
for DHS, in conjunction with the Department of Budget and Management, to
jointly establish a formal process to promote accountability, and to both assist
SSA and monitor corrective actions to ensure full implementation of the report
findings prior to commencement of the next audit.
DHS’ response to this audit, on behalf of SSA, is included as an appendix to this
report. We reviewed the response and noted agreement to our findings and
related recommendations, and while there are other aspects of DHS’ response
which will require further clarification, we do not anticipate that these will require
the Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee’s attention to resolve.
We wish to acknowledge the cooperation extended to us during the audit by SSA.
We also wish to acknowledge DHS’ and SSA’s willingness to address the audit
issues and implement appropriate corrective actions.
Respectfully submitted,
Gregory A. Hook, CPA
Legislative Auditor
3

--- Page 6 ---
4

--- Page 7 ---
Table of Contents
Background Information 7
Agency Responsibilities 7
Foster Care Service Outcomes 9
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report 10
Findings and Recommendations 13
Quality Assurance Program
 Finding 1 – Although the Social Services Administration (SSA) had 13
implemented certain processes to monitor the administration of child
welfare program services by the State’s local departments of social
services (LDSSs), we found they were not necessarily comprehensive
or effective.
Monitoring Compliance with Foster Care Requirements
 Finding 2 – SSA had not established effective monitoring of the LDSSs 15
to ensure that foster children were placed in the least restrictive
environment and received required services.
Child Protective Services
 Finding 3 – SSA’s monitoring process was not effective for both ensuring 18
timeliness of child abuse and neglect investigations and for the
required assessments of substance-exposed newborns conducted by
the LDSSs.
 Finding 4 – SSA lacked adequate controls to ensure the LDSSs were 20
immediately notified of children born to individuals who previously
had their parental rights terminated for abuse or neglect.
Federal Funds
 Finding 5 – SSA did not have an effective process for ensuring the 21
propriety and timeliness of Title IV-E eligibility determinations and
redeterminations, and had not conducted quality assurance reviews;
both of which resulted in a potential loss of federal funds.
* Denotes item repeated in full or part from preceding audit report
5

--- Page 8 ---
Foster Care, Adoption, and Guardianship Payments
Finding 6 – SSA did not pursue the collection of approximately $4.8 23
million in provider overpayments.
 Finding 7 – SSA had not established procedures to ensure that adoption 24
assistance payments funded entirely by the State were suspended when
an adopted child was removed from the adoptive home.
Interagency Agreements
 Finding 8 – SSA did not ensure that payments made to a State university 25
for three interagency agreements were adequately supported, were
reasonable in relation to the tasks performed, and were made in
accordance with the terms of the agreements.
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology 27
Agency Response Appendix
* Denotes item repeated in full or part from preceding audit report
6

--- Page 9 ---
Background Information
Agency Responsibilities
The Department of Human Services (DHS) – Social Services Administration
(SSA) supervises, directs, and monitors social services programs, which are
administered by the local departments of social services (LDSSs) located in each
of the State’s 24 local subdivisions.1 These programs are designed to prevent or
remedy abuse, neglect, and exploitation of children and families, and include
foster care, adoption and guardianship assistance, and child protective services.
Foster Care Program
The foster care program provides alternate settings and supportive services to
children who are unable to live at home for various reasons, such as abuse and
neglect. Children are assigned foster status as the result of legal action by the
applicable courts or through voluntary placement. SSA monitors the program and
the LDSSs are responsible for placing these children in the most appropriate
setting. According to State regulations, the LDSSs are responsible for placing
children, in order of preference, with a relative, in a family foster home, or in a
group care setting. Children with serious emotional, behavioral, medical, or
psychological conditions may be placed in treatment foster care. The goal of the
foster care program is to secure a permanent living arrangement (such as
reunification, adoption, or guardianship) for these children.
Adoption and Guardianship Assistance Programs
SSA provides financial assistance for individuals who adopt or become the legal
guardians of foster children. Adoptive parents are given all the legal rights and
responsibilities that once belonged to the biological parents, while guardians have
the full legal responsibility for the applicable child without terminating the
parental rights of the child’s biological parents.
Child Protective Services Program (CPS)
CPS is a social service provided by SSA to assist children believed to be
neglected or abused by parents or other adults having permanent or temporary
care or custody, or parental responsibility. The program also offers services to
household or family members who may require intervention to decrease the risk
of any continuing harm to children.
1 Organizationally, SSA does not have direct oversight of or control over the LDSSs or their
operations. The LDSSs are autonomous units within DHS, directly answerable to the DHS
Secretary.
7

--- Page 10 ---
Child Welfare Information Systems
During our audit period, SSA and the LDSSs primarily used the Children’s
Electronic Social Services Information Exchange (CHESSIE) as a statewide child
welfare, foster care, and adoption case management tool. CHESSIE was also
used to process transactions, such as payments made on behalf of children under
SSA’s supervision; and as the official record of all social services program
activity. According to SSA’s records, during fiscal year 2019, CHESSIE was
used to process transactions totaling approximately $274.4 million (see Figure 1
on page 9). In October 2019, SSA began the implementation of its new Child,
Juvenile, and Adult Management System (CJAMS) to replace CHESSIE.
According to SSA’s records, CJAMS was used to process expenditures totaling
$8 million for the period between November 2019 and April 2020, with
CHESSIE officially decommissioned during December 2020. Since the majority
of SSA activity during our audit period was processed using CHESSIE, our audit
primarily focused on that activity. Conversely, our next audit of the SSA will
include an assessment of CJAMS controls and processes.
SSA processes expenditures to foster care providers, adoptive parents, and
guardians monthly based on rates established in State regulations or through a
negotiation process. These maintenance expenditures are to cover the costs for
basic physical care, food, clothing, and shelter for the children. In addition to
these maintenance expenditures, SSA provides the LDSSs with funds to purchase
goods and services to support a family’s service plan when no other resource is
available. For example, these ancillary funds may be used for special educational
services, psychological treatment, vocational training, transportation costs,
personal care supplies, day care services, furniture, appliances, and automobile
operating and maintenance costs.
8

--- Page 11 ---
Figure 1
Fiscal Year 2019 Expenditures Processed via CHESSIE
Number of Number of
Expenditures
Category Children Providers /
(In Millions)
During Year Parents
Treatment Foster Care 2,150 30 $63.6
Group Foster Care 1,460 67 70.2
Adoption Assistance 6,605 4,496 58.6
Guardianship Assistance 3,397 2,419 28.4
Family Foster Care 2,801 1,521 13.1
Teen Mother Foster Care 132 8 4.3
Other Foster Care 697 469 1.9
Subtotal (Maintenance) 17,242 9,010 $240.1
Ancillary 34.3
Total Expenditures $274.4
Source: SSA records
Foster Care Service Outcomes
SSA did not achieve the required 90 or 95 percent success rate for any of the
seven outcome measures in its most recent Child and Family Services Review
(CFSR) dated April 2019 covering the period from April 2018 through September
2018 (see Figure 2 on page 10). The CFSR is conducted by the Children’s
Bureau of the Administration for Children and Families (ACF) within the United
States Department of Health and Human Services to assess the performance of
state child welfare agencies with regard to achieving positive outcomes, including
safety, permanency, and well-being for children and families. The results of the
current review did show some improvement from the previous CFSR, dated
January 2010 which covered the period of April 2008 through June 2009.
9

--- Page 12 ---
Figure 2
Federal Child and Family Services Review (CFSR) Results
Achieved as Achieved as
Outcome Measures of January of April
2010 2019
Safety
Children are safe from abuse and
70% 90%
neglect1
Children are safely maintained at home
41% 69%
when possible
Permanency
Children have permanent and stable
23% 35%
living arrangements
Continuity of family relationships is
46% 45%
preserved
Child and Family Well-Being
Families have enhanced capacity to
30% 31%
provide for children’s needs
Children receive services to meet their
77% 79%
educational needs1
Children receive services to meet their
71% 58%
physical and mental health needs
1SSA is required to meet a 95% success rate for these outcome measures; all
others require 90%.
Source: Child and Family Services Reviews
As required by federal regulations, SSA and DHS implemented a Program
Improvement Plan (PIP) in order to continue receiving federal funding and to
temporarily avoid federal penalties. The Children’s Bureau approved SSA’s PIP
in July 2019. As part of the PIP process, SSA is required to periodically report
the status of the completion of the agreed-upon strategies and associated
benchmarks to the Children’s Bureau. In its most recent report to the Children’s
Bureau, dated October 14, 2020, SSA indicated that it had met certain program
goals outlined in the PIP and was making progress on the others.
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report
Our audit included a review to determine the status of the 14 findings contained in
our preceding audit report dated November 20, 2017. As disclosed in Figure 3 on
page 12, we determined that SSA satisfactorily addressed 6 of these findings. The
remaining 8 findings are repeated in this report, 2 of which were combined and
presented as one finding in this report.
10

--- Page 13 ---
In our preceding audit report, we reported that SSA’s accountability and
compliance level was unsatisfactory, in accordance with the rating system we
established in conformity with State law. Based on the results of our current
audit, we have concluded that SSA’s accountability and compliance level remains
unsatisfactory. The number of repeated audit findings is one of the primary
factors contributing to the current unsatisfactory rating.
11

--- Page 14 ---
Figure 3
Status of Preceding Findings
Preceding Implementation
Finding Description
Finding Status
The Social Services Administration (SSA) did not have comprehensive quality assurance
Repeated
Finding 1 processes to adequately monitor the administration of child welfare program services by the
(Current Finding 1)
State’s local departments of social services (LDSSs).
SSA had not established procedures to monitor the LDSSs to ensure that foster children were
placed in the least restrictive environment and received required services. Further, reports from
Repeated
Finding 2 Children’s Electronic Social Services Information Exchange (CHESSIE) did not accurately
(Current Finding 2)
reflect services provided to children in foster care, which hampered the ability of SSA to
monitor service delivery.
SSA did not establish procedures to ensure that the LDSSs complied with State regulations
Finding 3 regarding the initial approval of foster care providers, as well as ongoing monitoring Not repeated
requirements for foster care providers, adoptive parents, and guardians.
SSA had not established procedures to ensure that children who remained in the foster care,
adoption, or guardianship programs after they reached the age of 18 were eligible to do so and,
Finding 4 Not repeated
for certain cases we reviewed, there was a lack of documentation supporting continued
eligibility.
SSA did not have adequate procedures to ensure that it received federal reimbursement for all
children eligible for Title IV-E funding. Our tests disclosed instances in which children were Repeated
Finding 5
incorrectly determined to be ineligible, resulting in a potential loss of federal funds totaling (Current Finding 5)
approximately $1 million.
SSA did not maximize the recovery of federal funds for children who were eligible to receive
Finding 6 Not repeated
Supplemental Security Income.
SSA did not monitor the timeliness of child abuse and neglect investigations conducted by the
Repeated
Finding 7 LDSSs. In addition, reviews and investigations of allegations were not always performed
(Current Finding 3)
timely.
SSA did not monitor the timeliness of required assessments of substance-exposed newborns
Repeated
Finding 8 completed by the LDSSs. In, addition these assessments were not always completed within the
(Current Finding 3)
required time frames.
SSA lacked adequate controls to ensure the LDSSs were immediately notified of children born
to individuals who had previously had their parental rights terminated for abuse or neglect. In Repeated
Finding 9
addition, SSA did not ensure that the LDSSs completed an assessment of these families and (Current Finding 4)
offered services when appropriate.
SSA did not ensure that overpayments made to certain providers of child placement services
Finding 10 Not repeated
were identified and resolved in a timely manner.
SSA had not established procedures to ensure that adoption assistance payments were
Repeated
Finding 11 suspended, terminated, or as permitted, renegotiated with the adoptive parent when an adopted
(Current Finding 7)
child was removed from the adoptive home.
Ancillary expenditures incurred by the LDSSs to further support children in social services
Finding 12 Not repeated
programs were not adequately controlled.
SSA did not approve certain adoption assistance rates being paid by LDSSs as required by SSA
Finding 13 Not repeated
policy.
SSA did not ensure that payments made to a State university for three interagency agreements
Repeated
Finding 14 were adequately supported, were reasonable in relation to the tasks performed, and were made
(Current Finding 8)
in accordance with the terms of the agreements.
12

--- Page 15 ---
Findings and Recommendations
Quality Assurance Program
Finding 1
Although the Social Services Administration (SSA) had implemented certain
processes to monitor the administration of child welfare program services by
the State’s local departments of social services (LDSSs), we found they were
not necessarily comprehensive or effective.
Analysis
SSA had not implemented comprehensive and effective quality assurance
processes to ensure that child welfare programs for which SSA is responsible,
such as foster care, adoption, guardianship, and child protective services, were
being effectively administered by the State’s LDSSs. In our preceding audit
report, we recommended that SSA develop comprehensive written procedures for
monitoring these programs and implement a quality assurance case review
process at each LDSS. Although SSA took certain actions in response to our
prior report, we determined that these actions were not sufficiently comprehensive
to provide effective oversight of the LDSSs.
The independent LDSSs are responsible for providing and overseeing specific
critical program services and functions (see Figure 4) as dictated by State law and
regulations with policy direction from SSA, and SSA
Figure 4
is responsible for ensuring that the LDSSs perform
Critical LDSS Services
their responsibilities in accordance with those laws,
and Functions
regulations, and policies. Without effective and
comprehensive quality assurance processes, SSA •Approve foster care providers
•Place children with providers
cannot be assured that all required program services
•Ensure children receive necessary
and functions were being effectively and properly services, such as medical and dental
care
carried out by the LDSSs.
•Perform monthly visitations with
children under care
•Verify provider compliance with
This report details specific instances in which SSA did
regulatory requirements
not ensure that required critical child welfare program •Review, assess, and investigate child
services and functions had been conducted by the abuse allegations
•Conduct assessments of subtance-
LDSSs, including three findings related to these exposed newborns and children born to
programs repeated from our preceding audit report. individuals with previously terminated
parental rights
Although SSA had developed certain written
procedures for monitoring the services and functions, these procedures were not
always sufficient. For example, as addressed further in Finding 4 of this report,
SSA distributed various monitoring reports to the LDSSs to assist with oversight
13

--- Page 16 ---
of certain child protective services (such as, investigating allegations of abuse and
neglect); however, we found an issue with certain reporting inaccuracies and that
SSA had not explained how these reports should be used by SSA and the LDSSs
to ensure that the LDSSs conducted these investigations timely.
Finally, SSA implemented periodic on-site reviews of each LDSS, with periods
ranging from six months to three years, to monitor LDSS performance and
compliance. However, we found that while the scope of these reviews focused on
a number of elements, the scope was not as comprehensive as we deemed
necessary because it did not address certain critical LDSS functions, such as
approving foster care providers and ensuring that safety assessments were
conducted in a timely manner for substance-exposed newborns and children born
to individuals with previously terminated parental rights. Furthermore, as
evidenced by the other findings in this report, we question if these reviews, as
structured, provided an effective means of ensuring that the LDSSs effectively
administered the child welfare programs. For example, as noted in Finding 2,
there continued to be a lack of documentation to support that foster children were
placed in the least restrictive environment and received required services such as
annual medical exams.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that SSA establish comprehensive quality assurance
processes to ensure its child welfare programs are effectively and properly
administered by the LDSSs. Specifically, we recommend that SSA modify its
existing processes to ensure that they provide
a. comprehensive written procedures for monitoring program services and
functions to ensure compliance with applicable laws, regulations, and
policies; appropriate and timely recordkeeping; and the maintenance of
supporting documentation relating to services and functions performed
(repeat); and
b. a quality assurance case review process at each LDSS that addresses all
critical services and functions performed by the LDSSs (repeat).
14

--- Page 17 ---
Monitoring Compliance with Foster Care Requirements
Finding 2
SSA had not established effective monitoring of the LDSSs to ensure that
foster children were placed in the least restrictive environment and received
required services.
Analysis
SSA had not established effective monitoring of the LDSSs to ensure there was
documentation supporting that foster children were placed in the least restrictive
environment and received required services. For example, SSA could not provide
documentation supporting compliance with foster care requirements for numerous
cases we reviewed. Similar conditions were commented upon in our preceding
audit report. According to SSA records, 7,240 children were in foster care during
fiscal year 2019, with related payments totaling $153 million.
SSA did not Effectively Monitor the LDSSs
SSA did not use available reports to ensure LDSSs placed children in the least
restrictive environment and provided required services. SSA routinely provided a
report to each LDSS that identified all of the services provided to each foster child
based on data recorded by the LDSSs into the Children’s Electronic Social
Services Information Exchange (CHESSIE). For example, according to the July
29, 2019 report, 1,355 (or 44 percent) of the 3,067 children that had been in foster
care for at least the past 13 months had not had a medical exam within the past
year. However, since SSA did not use this report to monitor the LDSSs
performance it is unknown if the issue related to poor recordkeeping (LDSSs not
recording activity into CHESSIE) or if the required services were not provided.
In either case, there was no assurance that appropriate action was taken by the
LDSSs (providing the absent service or correcting an erroneous record).
LDSSs Were Not Compliant with Requirements
We reviewed records related to 48 children for which payments totaling $2.3
million were made during fiscal year 2019. The records reviewed were
judgmentally selected from payment reports to ensure coverage of children
residing in both family foster homes and group care settings that received
significant payments and included children monitored by 13 different LDSSs. For
each child, we tested compliance with the six requirements noted in Figure 5 on
page 16, as applicable to each child. Although we determined that for one
requirement, required monthly face-to-face meetings, there was compliance by
the LDSSs, for the other five there were varying levels of noncompliance.
15

--- Page 18 ---
For the five requirements with noted noncompliance, our test disclosed
discrepancies related to 39 percent of the separate requirements tested.
Specifically, we noted 83 discrepancies related to these 214 requirements (that is
documentation could not be provided or the recordation of the requirement was
inaccurate in CHESSIE). At least one discrepancy was noted for 42 of the 48
children tested, and the discrepancies were noted in all 13 of the LDSSs tested. In
47 instances, documentation of compliance with the requirement tested could not
be provided even though CHESSIE reflected that the requirements had been met.
Figure 5
Results of our Test of Foster Care Requirements
Number of Performance of
Foster Care Requirement Requirements for Requirement Not
Children Tested Documented
Caseworker Interaction Monthly Face-to-Face
48 0
Requirement Tested Meeting with Child
Subtotal Requirements with No Discrepancies 48 0
Legal Basis for Child
Placement 48 4
Entering Foster Care
Requirements
Effort to Place with
Tested 48 3
Relatives
Medical Exam within One
48 29
Year
Service
Dental Exam within Six
Requirements 47 37
Months
Tested
Attended School During
23 10
Fiscal Year 2020
Subtotal Requirements With Discrepancies 214 83
Total - All Requirements 262 83
Placement of Children
SSA was unable to provide documentation to support the legal basis for
placement of a child in foster care (such as a court order associated with the initial
placement) for 4 of the 48 children tested. In addition, SSA could not document
that the LDSSs attempted to place the child in the least restrictive environment
(such as with a relative) for 3 of the 48 children placed in their care (which
included 1 of the aforementioned 4 children). It should be noted that these
conditions were found in greater numbers in our prior report, wherein SSA was
unable to provide documentation associated with the initial placements and/or to
support that the LDSSs attempted to place the child in the least restrictive
environment for 9 and 35 of the 57 children tested, respectively.
16

--- Page 19 ---
State regulations require that the court order be maintained in the child’s case
record. State law requires the LDSS to exhaust all resources to locate a relative
for initial placement. Furthermore, according to State regulations, the LDSSs are
responsible for placing children, in order of preference, with a relative, in a family
foster home, or in a group care setting.
Services Provided to Children
As of October 2020, SSA was unable to provide documentation that 29 of the 48
children tested had received a medical exam within the past year, including 9
children who had not received a medical exam for between 18 to 25 months. In
addition, SSA was unable to provide documentation that 37 of the children tested
had received a dental exam within the past 6 months, including 27 children who
had not received a dental exam for between 9 to 26 months. Furthermore, there
were 3 children who had not had a dental exam since they entered foster care
from 2 to 5 years prior. Finally, SSA was unable to provide documentation that
10 of the 23 children ranging from 5 to 17 years of age attended school during
fiscal year 2020. While these results do represent an improvement from our prior
audit in the number of children without any record of a medical or dental exam
since entering care, we found that there continued to be a pervasive lack of
documentation to support that the children received the exams within the
timeframe provided in State regulations.
State regulations require a comprehensive health assessment within 60 days of
entering foster care, and subsequently, at a minimum, an annual medical exam as
required by the Early Periodic Screening, Diagnosis and Treatment Program.
State regulations also require a dental exam every six months. State regulations
also require the LDSSs to ensure that children of school age are attending school.
Recommendation 2
We recommend that SSA monitor the LDSSs to ensure compliance with
foster care requirements. Specifically, we recommend that SSA ensure
a. the applicable legal documentation is included in each foster child’s case
record in the statewide case management system (repeat);
b. the LDSSs place children in the least restrictive environment and
document attempts to place the child with a relative (repeat); and
c. compliance with medical, dental, and education requirements by
reviewing applicable documentation (repeat).
17

--- Page 20 ---
Child Protective Services
Background
SSA’s Child Protective Services unit provides services to assist children believed
to be neglected or abused by parents or other adults with parental responsibilities.
Allegations of child abuse or neglect are reported to the LDSSs, which are
responsible for conducting reviews and investigations. The LDSSs are required to
record allegations received and the steps taken to review and investigate each
allegation in CHESSIE. SSA is responsible for ensuring these reviews and
investigations are properly performed in a timely manner.
The unit is also responsible for ensuring that LDSSs conduct required safety and
family risk assessments for newborns exposed to controlled substances, and when
subsequent children are born to individuals who had previously had their parental
rights terminated by court order for abuse or neglect. The assessments are
performed to assess risk and to identify resources and necessary services to be
provided.
Finding 3
SSA’s monitoring process was not effective for both ensuring the timeliness
of child abuse and neglect investigations and for the required assessments of
substance-exposed newborns conducted by the LDSSs.
Analysis
SSA’s monitoring procedures were not effective for both ensuring the timeliness
of child abuse and neglect investigations and for the required assessments of
substance-exposed newborns conducted by the LDSSs.
SSA periodically distributed reports to assist the LDSSs with monitoring the
timeliness of these investigations and assessments. However, SSA did not
actively review these reports to assess LDSS compliance with the law, and based
on our testing, we found certain LDSS investigations and assessments were not
conducted timely, and SSA took no action (such as follow up with the LDSS to
determine the cause and necessary corrective action). Furthermore, and of equal
significance, we determined that these critical reports were not always accurate,
which might have been discovered by SSA and the LDSSs if active monitoring
had been in place.
Investigations of Abuse and Neglect
Our review of 20 allegations of child abuse or neglect received during the period
from May 2019 through December 2019 disclosed 6 allegations (3 allegations of
abuse and 3 allegations of neglect) for which the LDSS did not initiate and/or
18

--- Page 21 ---
complete its investigations timely. Specifically, investigations for the 3
allegations of abuse began 7 to 21 days after these allegations were received and
investigations for the 3 allegations of neglect began 6 to 14 days after receipt. For
these 6 investigations, 3 were completed between 62 and 72 days after receipt of
the allegations. According to SSA records, the LDSSs collectively received 5,355
allegations of child abuse or neglect during the period from October through
December 2019.
Assessments of Substance-Exposed Newborns
We reviewed the records in CHESSIE associated with 10 judgmentally selected
substance-exposed newborns born during fiscal year 2019, and we noted that the
LDSSs did not always complete the required safety and family risk assessments
within the required timeframes. For example, the safety assessment for one child
was performed 55 days after the LDSS was notified, and the family risk
assessments for four other children were performed between 36 and 70 days after
the respective LDSSs were notified. In each of these cases, the LDSSs concluded
that the children were not at significant risk of harm. According to SSA records,
during fiscal year 2019 there were 507 substance-exposed newborn notifications
made to the LDSSs.
Monitoring Reports
Our review also disclosed that the reports SSA distributed to the LDSSs for use in
monitoring the timely completion of these investigations and assessments were
not always accurate. Specifically, we noted discrepancies between the
investigation dates reflected on the monitoring report and the LDSS case files
(recorded in CHESSIE) for 9 of the 20 allegations of abuse or neglect tested. We
performed our testing based on the dates according to the LDSS case files, which
we determined to be more accurate than the monitoring report. For the substance
abuse assessment reports, we also found critical inaccuracies. For example, the
safety or family risk assessment dates were either missing or incorrect for all 10
of our test items. We determined the correct dates from other sources.
Similar conditions were noted in our preceding audit report.
State law requires investigations to be initiated within 24 hours after receiving an
allegation of abuse and 5 days after receiving an allegation of neglect, and
completed no later than 60 days after the allegation is received. In addition, State
regulations require health care practitioners involved in the delivery or care of a
substance-exposed newborn to notify the applicable LDSS verbally as soon as
possible, and in writing within 48 hours. State regulations also require the LDSSs
to examine substance-exposed newborns and perform a safety risk assessment of
the newborn within 48 hours of notification by health care practitioners. Also,
19

--- Page 22 ---
SSA policy requires the LDSSs to complete a formal safety assessment and a
family risk assessment within 2 and 30 days of the health care practitioner’s
notification, respectively.
Recommendation 3
We recommend that SSA
a. establish effective procedures to ensure that the LDSSs conduct and
complete investigations of allegations of child abuse and neglect and
safety and risk assessments of controlled substance-exposed newborns in
a timely manner, as required by State law and regulations (repeat); and
b. enhance the accuracy and completeness of system reports to ensure they
can be reliably used to monitor compliance with these requirements
(repeat).
Finding 4
SSA lacked adequate controls to ensure the LDSSs were immediately notified
of children born to individuals who previously had their parental rights
terminated for abuse or neglect.
Analysis
SSA lacked adequate controls to ensure that it timely notified the LDSSs when
children were born to individuals who previously had their parental rights
terminated by court order for abuse or neglect. State law requires SSA to provide
the names of individuals who have had their parental rights terminated by a court
order to the Maryland Department of Health (MDH), which notifies SSA of
children subsequently born to these individuals. State law further requires SSA to
immediately notify the applicable LDSS so that it may provide an assessment of
the family and offer services, if needed. Delays in completing these assessments
could result in children remaining in harmful environments.
According to SSA records, during calendar year 2019 there were 252 children
born to individuals whose parental rights had previously been terminated. As of
August 2020, the required assessments had not been performed for 144 of these
children, due primarily to SSA not notifying the LDSSs of the children’s births or
notifying them in an untimely manner. Specifically, SSA did not notify the
LDSSs that assessments were needed for 50 children identified by MDH between
8 and 19 months earlier, and SSA notified the LDSS between 7 to 19 months after
receiving notice from MDH for the other 94 children.
In our opinion, the aforementioned condition occurred primarily because SSA had
not established a supervisory review process to ensure the employee responsible
20

--- Page 23 ---
for these notification and monitoring duties was properly, and timely, performing
the work. A similar condition was commented upon in our preceding audit report.
Recommendation 4
We recommend that SSA establish adequate controls, such as initiating a
supervisory review over the process, to ensure that LDSSs are promptly
notified of children born to individuals who previously had their parental
rights terminated by a court (repeat).
Federal Funds
Finding 5
SSA did not have an effective process for ensuring the propriety and
timeliness of Title IV-E eligibility determinations and redeterminations, and
had not conducted quality assurance reviews; both of which resulted in a
potential loss of federal funds.
Analysis
SSA did not have an effective process for ensuring the propriety and timeliness of
Title IV-E eligibility determinations and redeterminations and had not conducted
quality assurance reviews. In addition, SSA did not perform a comprehensive
review of children deemed ineligible for Title IV-E funding, as recommended in
our preceding audit report. SSA is eligible to receive federal reimbursement
under Title IV-E of the Social Security Act for a portion of the cost of care
incurred on behalf of eligible children. According to SSA records, SSA received
Title IV-E reimbursements totaling $86.5 million during fiscal year 2019. State
regulations provide that SSA is to determine eligibility for Title IV-E funding
within 60 days of the date the child is removed from their home and conduct
eligibility redeterminations every 12 months thereafter. To ensure the propriety
of these determinations and redeterminations, SSA policy provides for periodic
quality assurance reviews (on a test basis) of this activity.
SSA had not conducted quality assurance reviews of the eligibility determinations
and redeterminations made during our audit period, resulting in certain errors
going undetected. We judgmentally selected 55 children who were in the foster
care or the adoption and guardianship assistance programs as of April 2020, to
determine whether the initial determination (for 40 children) or the most recent
annual redetermination (for 15 foster children) was done properly and timely.
Based on our review, SSA did not obtain available court orders for 8 foster
children and therefore improperly determined that these children were ineligible
(non-reimbursable). However, we obtained and reviewed the court orders for the
21

--- Page 24 ---
8 children and concluded that the orders demonstrated that these children were
eligible for Title IV-E funding. As a result, SSA did not recover federal funding
for a portion of the expenditures incurred for these children, which totaled
approximately $72,500 for the period between October 20192 and April 2020. In
addition, we noted 11 of the 40 initial determinations were completed from 63 to
390 days after the child entered care, and 10 of the 15 annual redeterminations
were overdue by 9 to 22 months.
We further noted that SSA had not reviewed the propriety of Title IV-E eligibility
determinations for ineligible children who entered care prior to July 2016 and
were still receiving SSA services, as recommended in our preceding audit report.
In response to our prior report SSA began including foster care children
previously deemed ineligible for Title IV-E in its reviews of redeterminations,
beginning with children who entered care in July 2016. However, SSA did not
review the eligibility determinations for 3,626 children (390 foster children and
3,236 children in the adoption or guardianship programs) who were determined to
be ineligible for Title IV-E who had entered care prior to July 2016 and who we
noted during the current audit were still receiving SSA services as of July 31,
2020. These cases, if actually found to be incorrectly determined to be Title IV-E
ineligible, could have the potential for reimbursement under federal regulations.
For example, payments to providers for the aforementioned 390 foster children
from October 2019 through April 2020 totaled $6.4 million.
A similar condition was commented upon in our preceding audit report.
Recommendation 5
We recommend that SSA ensure federal reimbursement is obtained for all
children eligible for Title IV-E funding. Specifically, we recommend that
SSA
a. ensure that Title IV-E eligibility is properly determined for all children
(repeat);
b. conduct reviews to ensure that Title IV-E eligibility determinations and
redeterminations are proper and timely, as required by SSA policy; and
c. review all children who are currently determined to be ineligible due to a
missing court order or who entered care prior to July 2016 (and received
2 Between July 1, 2015 and September 30, 2019, the federal government granted SSA a waiver,
which allowed it to use federal funds for foster care services that were not otherwise eligible
under Title IV-E. Under the federal waiver, the total federal reimbursement that SSA could
obtain for foster care services was limited to $277.4 million. Since SSA recovered all of the
available foster care funding under the waiver, it would not have been able to recover additional
federal funds for services provided to foster children during the waiver period; however,
payments made after the waiver period (beginning on October 1, 2019) on behalf of eligible
children are reimbursable.
22

--- Page 25 ---
services within the last two years), including the aforementioned cases,
and obtain Title IV-E funds when possible (repeat).
Foster Care, Adoption, and Guardianship Payments
Finding 6
SSA did not pursue the collection of approximately $4.8 million in provider
overpayments.
Analysis
SSA did not ensure that overpayments made to certain providers of child
placement services (group homes and child placement agencies) were recovered.
According to State records, fiscal year 2019 payments to group homes and child
placement agencies totaled $66.4 million and $63.7 million, respectively. SSA’s
contracts with these providers require the providers to submit annual financial
reports to the DHS’ Office of the Inspector General (OIG) by December 2nd of
each contract year. The OIG, on behalf of SSA, reviews the reports and notifies
SSA of the results, including any overpayments identified. SSA is responsible for
recovering these overpayments from the providers.
The OIG identified overpayments totaling $4.8 million made to 59 providers
during fiscal years 2017 and 2018 (see Figure 6). However, as of October 2020,
SSA had not pursued recovery of these amounts, which, according to OIG
records, had been reported to SSA between 2 months to 2.5 years prior.
Figure 6
Results of OIG Reviews for Fiscal Years 2017 and 2018
Overpayments Disclosed by OIG Reviews
Fiscal Payments Overpayments
Year Providers (in millions) Providers (in millions)
2017 103 $127.4 25 $2.3
2018 105 $123.6 34 2.5
Totals $251.0 59 $4.8
Source: SSA and OIG records
SSA could not explain why it had not pursued recovery of the aforementioned
$4.8 million in overpayments. Delays in the pursuit of provider overpayments
may decrease the likelihood of recovering the funds.
23

--- Page 26 ---
Recommendation 6
We recommend that SSA pursue for collection provider overpayments
calculated by the OIG, including those noted above.
Finding 7
SSA had not established procedures to ensure that adoption assistance
payments funded entirely by the State were suspended when an adopted
child was removed from the adoptive home.
Analysis
SSA had not established procedures to ensure that monthly adoption assistance
payments to an adoptive parent funded entirely by the State were suspended if the
adopted child was subsequently moved to an out-of-home placement, such as
foster care. Consequently, there was a potential for duplicative payments being
made by SSA for certain children (both adoption assistance and foster care
payments). State regulations provide that adoption assistance payments funded
entirely by the State shall be suspended when an adopted child enters an out-of-
home placement.
Our test of fiscal year 2019 adoption assistance payments related to 5 children
who had entered foster care disclosed that SSA did not suspend those payments
totaling $42,737 for any of the children even though they had entered foster care
between August 2013 and March 2019. We had previously identified that
adoption assistance payments had not been suspended for one of these children
(who entered foster care in August 2013) during our preceding audit. According
to SSA’s records, during fiscal year 2019, adoption assistance payments totaling
approximately $141,000 were paid for 28 children who had entered foster care. A
similar condition was commented upon in our preceding audit report.
Recommendation 7
We recommend that SSA
a. establish procedures to ensure compliance with State regulations
regarding adoption assistance payments being made for a child who has
been moved from the adoptive home to an out-of-home placement
(repeat); and
b. review adoption assistance payments made on behalf of children in out-
of-home placement, including the aforementioned 28 children, and
recover any amounts that were inappropriately paid (repeat).
24

--- Page 27 ---
Interagency Agreements
Finding 8
SSA did not ensure that certain payments made to a State university for
three interagency agreements were adequately supported, were reasonable in
relation to the tasks performed, and were made in accordance with the terms
of the agreements.
Analysis
SSA did not ensure that certain payments made to a State university were
adequately supported and in accordance with the terms of the agreements.
Between July 2014 and July 2018, SSA entered into three interagency agreements
with a combined value of $15.4 million with a State university for certain services
related to child welfare. SSA has had agreements of this nature with the State
university for many years. Under the terms of the agreements, payments to the
State university were primarily based on the actual time spent and the salary costs
of the applicable university personnel. Each agreement identified the specific
State university employees who would perform the work and their salaries
(including fringe benefits), and the percentage that each employee’s time would
apply to work under the agreement. According to State records, payments under
these agreements as of July 2020 totaled $11.2 million.
Our review disclosed that SSA did not verify certain billed costs, including direct
labor charges invoiced and subcontractor costs. For example, in fiscal year 2019,
SSA paid labor charges totaling $2 million for two of the agreements, which
exceeded the agreed-upon amounts (totaling $1.85 million) by $152,000 and
$35,000, respectively. In addition, our review of fiscal year 2019 invoices
disclosed that SSA paid $584,000 for 25 individuals who were not included in the
agreements. While SSA management advised that it received verbal notice from
the university of all personnel changes, SSA could not provide documentation that
it had approved the use of these 25 individuals and the agreements did not address
a process for personnel changes or additions.
In addition, under one agreement, SSA paid $551,000 during fiscal year 2019 to
the State university for work performed by subcontractors, as allowed; however,
SSA did not review documentation provided by the State university (such as
subcontractor billings) to ensure the documentation was complete and supported
the payments. Our review of the fiscal year 2019 invoices for this agreement
disclosed that SSA did not obtain documentation from the State university to
support subcontractor billings totaling $144,000 that were paid by SSA.
25

--- Page 28 ---
Certain of these conditions have been commented upon in audit reports dating
back to October 2008. SSA management advised that it believes the interagency
agreements are performance-based contracts structured to pay for the receipt of
deliverables. However, the agreements’ payment method was not based on
deliverables, but primarily on the actual time spent and the salary costs of the
applicable university personnel. Interagency agreements are used by State
agencies to obtain services from State institutions of higher education
(universities). Interagency agreements are exempt from State procurement laws,
including the requirements for competitive procurement, publication of
solicitations and awards, and Board of Public Works’ approval.
Recommendation 8
We recommend that SSA implement a process to ensure the propriety of
State university invoices. For example, obtain and review payroll records or
restructure the agreements to base payment on specific deliverables to be
monitored by SSA, or a combination thereof (repeat).
26

--- Page 29 ---
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the Department of Human
Services (DHS) – Social Services Administration (SSA) for the period beginning
July 1, 2016 and ending April 30, 2020. The audit was conducted in accordance
with generally accepted government auditing standards. Those standards require
that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient, appropriate evidence to
provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit
objectives. We believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for
our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives.
As prescribed by the State Government Article, Section 2-1221 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, the objectives of this audit were to examine SSA’s financial
transactions, records, and internal control, and to evaluate its compliance with
applicable State laws, rules, and regulations.
In planning and conducting our audit, we focused on the major financial-related
areas of operations based on assessments of significance and risk. The areas
addressed by the audit included federal fund reimbursement, foster care, child
protective services, adoption and guardianship assistance, the Children’s
Electronic Social Services Information Exchange (CHESSIE), and interagency
agreements. We also determined the status of the findings contained in our
preceding audit report.
Our audit did not include various support services (such as payroll, purchasing,
maintenance of accounting records, and related fiscal functions) provided by
DHS’ Office of the Secretary. Our audit also did not include an evaluation of
internal controls over compliance with federal laws and regulations pertaining to
federal financial assistance programs and an assessment of SSA’s compliance
with those laws and regulations because the State of Maryland engages an
independent accounting firm to annually audit such programs administered by
State agencies, including SSA.
Our assessment of internal controls was based on agency procedures and controls
in place at the time of our fieldwork. Our tests of transactions and other auditing
procedures were generally focused on the transactions occurring during our audit
period of July 1, 2016 to April 30, 2020, but may include transactions before or
after this period as we considered necessary to achieve our audit objectives.
To accomplish our audit objectives, our audit procedures included inquiries of
appropriate personnel, inspections of documents and records, tests of transactions,
and to the extent practicable, observations of SSA’s operations. Generally,
27

--- Page 30 ---
transactions were selected for testing based on auditor judgment, which primarily
considers risk, the timing or dollar amount of the transaction, or the materiality of
the transaction to the area of operation reviewed. As a matter of course, we do
not normally use sampling in our tests, so unless otherwise specifically indicated,
neither statistical nor non-statistical audit sampling was used to select the
transactions tested. Therefore, unless sampling is specifically indicated in a
finding, the results from any tests conducted or disclosed by us cannot be used to
project those results to the entire population from which the test items were
selected.
We also performed various data extracts of pertinent information from the State’s
Financial Management Information System (such as expenditure data). The
extracts are performed as part of ongoing internal processes established by the
Office of Legislative Audits and were subject to various tests to determine data
reliability. We determined that the data extracted from this source were
sufficiently reliable for the purposes the data were used during the audit. We also
extracted data from CHESSIE for the purpose of testing foster care requirements,
federal fund recoveries, child protective services investigations, and adoption and
guardianship assistance. We performed various tests of the relevant data in order
to determine data reliability. Use of the data was restricted to the situations in
which the data were deemed to be reliable for the purposes they were used.
Finally, we performed other auditing procedures that we considered necessary to
achieve our audit objectives. The reliability of data used in this report for
background or informational purposes was not assessed.
SSA’s management is responsible for establishing and maintaining effective
internal control. Internal control is a process designed to provide reasonable
assurance that objectives pertaining to the reliability of financial records;
effectiveness and efficiency of operations including safeguarding of assets; and
compliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations are achieved. As
provided in Government Auditing Standards, there are five components of
internal control: control environment, risk assessment, control activities,
information and communication, and monitoring. Each of the five components,
when significant to the audit objectives, and as applicable to SSA, were
considered by us during the course of this audit.
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate.
28

--- Page 31 ---
Our reports are designed to assist the Maryland General Assembly in exercising
its legislative oversight function and to provide constructive recommendations for
improving State operations. As a result, our reports generally do not address
activities we reviewed that are functioning properly.
This report includes findings related to conditions that we consider to be
significant deficiencies in the design or operation of internal controls that could
adversely affect SSA’s ability to maintain reliable financial records, operate
effectively and efficiently, and/or comply with applicable laws, rules, and
regulations. Our report also includes findings regarding significant instances of
noncompliance with applicable laws, rules, or regulations. Other less significant
findings were communicated to SSA that did not warrant inclusion in this report.
As a result of our audit, we determined that SSA’s accountability and compliance
level was unsatisfactory. The primary factors contributing to the unsatisfactory
rating were the significance of the audit findings, the number of repeat findings,
and SSA’s lack of sufficient monitoring of the 24 LDSSs for compliance with
numerous policies and regulations. Our rating conclusion has been made solely
pursuant to the aforementioned law and rating guidelines approved by the Joint
Audit and Evaluation Committee. The rating process is not a practice prescribed
by professional auditing standards.
The response from DHS, on behalf of SSA, to our findings and recommendations
is included as an appendix to this report. As prescribed in the State Government
Article, Section 2-1224 of the Annotated Code of Maryland, we will advise DHS
regarding the results of our review of its response.
29

--- Page 32 ---
APPENDIX
May 26, 2021
Mr. Gregory A. Hook
Legislative Auditor
Office of Legislative Audits
301 West Preston Street, Room 1202
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Dear Mr. Hook:
Please find enclosed the Department of Human Services’(DHS) response to the draft Legislative
Audit Report of the Social Services Administration (SSA) for the period beginning July 1, 2016
and ending April 30, 2020.
If you have any questions regarding the response,please contact the Inspector General, Marva Sutherland
of my staff at 443-378-4060 or marva.sutherland@maryland.gov.
Sincerely,
Lourdes R. Padilla
Secretary
Enclosures:
cc:
Gregory James, Deputy Secretary, Operations
Netsanet Kibret, Deputy Secretary, Programs
Samantha Blizzard, Chief of Staff
Michelle L. Farr, Executive Director, SSA
Stafford Chipungu, Chief Financial Officer
Marva M. Sutherland, Inspector General, OIG
Keonna Wiley, Assistant Inspector General – Audits, OIG
311 W. Saratoga Street, Baltimore, MD 21201-3500 |Tel: 1-800-332-6347 | TTY: 1-800-735-2258 |www.dhs.maryland.gov

--- Page 33 ---
Department of Human Services
Social Services Administration
Agency Response Form
Quality Assurance Program
Finding 1
Although the Social Services Administration (SSA) had implemented certain processes to
monitor the administration of child welfare program services by the State’s local
departments of social services (LDSSs), we found they were not necessarily comprehensive
or effective.
We recommend that SSA establish comprehensive quality assurance processes to ensure its
child welfare programs are effectively and properly administered by the LDSSs.
Specifically, we recommend that SSA modify its existing processes to ensure that they
provide
a. comprehensive written procedures for monitoring program services and functions to
ensure compliance with applicable laws, regulations, and policies; appropriate and
timely recordkeeping; and the maintenance of supporting documentation relating to
services and functions performed (repeat); and
b. a quality assurance case review process at each LDSS that addresses all critical services
and functions performed by the LDSSs (repeat).
Agency Response
Analysis Factually Accurate
Please provide
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 1a Agree Estimated Completion Date: June 2021
Please provide details of SSA will continue to take the appropriate actions to ensure specific
corrective action or program services and functions dictated by State law and regulations,
explain disagreement.
with policy direction from SSA, are performed effectively by LDSS.
Specifically, SSA continues to modify draft Standard Operating
Procedures (SOPs) that outline SSA’s monitoring activities. Each SOP
outlines a comprehensive quality assurance process designed to ensure
that all required program services and functions are being effectively and
properly carried out by the LDSS. The most recently edited versions of
the SOPs are expected to be implemented by June 2021.
In addition, SSA has developed a standardized local QA (Quality
Assurance) review process to be implemented within each LDSS by
December 2021.
Page 1 of 14

--- Page 34 ---
Department of Human Services
Social Services Administration
Agency Response Form
Recommendation 1b Agree Estimated Completion Date: December
2021
Please provide details of SSA will continue to take the appropriate actions to ensure that a
corrective action or standardized quality assurance review process exists at each jurisdiction
explain disagreement.
that addresses all critical services and functions performed by the LDSS.
Specifically, SSA has designed a standardized (QA) review process that
includes the development of a standardized web-based tool and
companion desk guide, random sampling methodology, a schedule for
when each program area (i.e. Child Protective Services {CPS}, Family
Preservation, Resource Home, and Foster Care, etc.) is to be reviewed,
and a recorded training to orient staff on the use of the tool.
In addition, between October and November 2020, the process was
shared with local departments and other stakeholders. LDSS are
identifying jurisdictions to pilot the standardized process.
Implementation of a 2-3-month pilot was launched in April 2021 with a
statewide launch planned for December 2021.
To support the piloting of the standardized QA process, SSA staff will
utilize the standardized web-based tool to conduct interim reviews as
outlined in the SOPs that support SSA’s monitoring activities.
Monitoring Compliance with Foster Care Requirements
Finding 2
SSA had not established effective monitoring of the LDSSs to ensure that foster children
were placed in the least restrictive environment and received required services.
We recommend that SSA monitor the LDSSs to ensure compliance with foster care
requirements. Specifically, we recommend that SSA ensure
a. the applicable legal documentation is included in each foster child’s case record in the
statewide case management system (repeat);
b. the LDSSs place children in the least restrictive environment and document attempts to
place the child with a relative (repeat); and
c. compliance with medical, dental, and education requirements by reviewing applicable
documentation (repeat).
Page 2 of 14

--- Page 35 ---
Department of Human Services
Social Services Administration
Agency Response Form
Agency Response
Analysis Factually Accurate
Please provide
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 2a Agree Estimated Completion Date: June 2022
Please provide details of SSA will continue to take action to ensure that the applicable legal
corrective action or documentation is included in each foster child’s case record.
explain disagreement.
Specifically, in April 2018, SSA completed and recorded a series of
webinars for local department staff on effective documentation of legal
documentation and drafted SOPs to outline a comprehensive quality
assurance process designed to ensure that all required program services
and functions are being effectively and properly carried out by the
LDSS.
In December 2020, the SSA Title IV-E Eligibility Unit began a 100%
review of all active cases in CJAMS to ensure that all required legal
documents are uploaded into CJAMS. Supervisors must approve all of
the updated IV-E determinations in CJAMS and maintain a QA log of all
case reviews. To support this process, the IV-E Eligibility Management
Team meets weekly to review and discuss the progress of the reviews
and any challenges the staff are facing. These reviews are anticipated to
be completed by June 2022.
In addition, SSA will implement the following actions:
Action #1: By June 2021, update and revise audit response webinars and
existing monitoring SOPs to align with CJAMS and offer technical
assistance to local departments related to the uploading of legal
documents.
Action #2: Between June - December 2021, review a randomly stratified
sample of cases per month, allowing for cases to be pulled from various
counties, to ensure legal documentation is uploaded into CJAMS. SSA
staff plans to utilize the standardized web-based tool to conduct these
reviews.
Action #3: Beginning December 2021, utilize the standardized quality
assurance (QA) case review process implemented at each LDSS to
monitor compliance with uploading all legal documents in each foster
child’s record and provide technical assistance accordingly.
Recommendation 2b Agree Estimated Completion Date: December
2021
Page 3 of 14

--- Page 36 ---
Department of Human Services
Social Services Administration
Agency Response Form
Please provide details of SSA will continue to take action to ensure that the State places children
corrective action or in the least restrictive environment and documents attempts to place
explain disagreement.
children with relatives. Specifically, in April 2018, SSA completed and
recorded a series of webinars for local department staff on effective
documentation of placement in the least restrictive environment and
placement with families. SSA also drafted SOPs to outline a
comprehensive quality assurance process designed to ensure that all
required program services and functions are being effectively and
properly carried out by the LDSS.
In addition, SSA will implement the following actions:
Action #1: By June 2021, update and revise audit response webinars and
existing monitoring SOPs to align with CJAMS and offer technical
assistance to local departments related to the documentation of
placement in the least restrictive environment and placement with
families.
Action #2: Between June - December 2021, review a randomly stratified
sample of cases per month, allowing for cases to be pulled from various
counties, to ensure placement in the least restrictive environment and
placement with families is documented in CJAMS. SSA staff plan to
utilize the standardized web-based tool to conduct these reviews.
Action #3: Beginning December 2021, utilize the standardized quality
assurance (QA) case review process implemented at each LDSS to
monitor compliance with uploading all legal documents in each foster
child’s record and provide technical assistance accordingly.
Recommendation 2c Agree Estimated Completion Date: December
2021
Please provide details of SSA is continuing to conduct activities to ensure specific program
corrective action or services, which are dictated by State laws and regulations, with policy
explain disagreement.
direction from SSA, are performed effectively by LDSS.
Specifically, in April 2018, SSA completed and recorded a series of
webinars for local department staff on effective documentation of
medical, dental, and education requirements and drafted education and
health monitoring standard operating procedures (SOPs).
In addition, SSA plans to implement the following actions:
Action #1: By June 2021 update SOPs to align with CJAMS reporting.
Once the SOPs and reporting tools are refined and updated, quarterly
Page 4 of 14

--- Page 37 ---
Department of Human Services
Social Services Administration
Agency Response Form
oversight and monitoring of medical, dental and education
documentation will resume via implementation of the updated SOP
utilizing the standardized web-based tool.
Action #2: By December 2021 update COMAR related to health. Based
on the resulting provisions, SSA will be conducting a review process of
related medical and dental policies to ensure alignment with practice,
CJAMS, and requirements for compliance; current education policies
will also be included in this review.
Action #3: Beginning December 2021, utilize the standardized quality
assurance (QA) case review process implemented at each LDSS to
monitor compliance with uploading all legal documents in each foster
child’s record and provide technical assistance accordingly.
Child Protective Services
Finding 3
SSA’s monitoring process was not effective for both ensuring the timeliness of child abuse
and neglect investigations and for the required assessments of substance-exposed newborns
conducted by the LDSSs.
We recommend that SSA
a. establish effective procedures to ensure that the LDSSs conduct and complete
investigations of allegations of child abuse and neglect and safety and risk assessments
of controlled substance-exposed newborns in a timely manner, as required by State law
and regulations (repeat); and
b. enhance the accuracy and completeness of system reports to ensure they can be reliably
used to monitor compliance with these requirements (repeat).
Agency Response
Analysis Factually Accurate
Please provide
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 3a Agree Estimated Completion Date: December
2021
Please provide details of Conduct and complete investigations of allegations of child abuse
corrective action or and neglect:
explain disagreement.
DHS is committed to ensuring the safety and wellbeing of children in
our state through thorough timely and appropriate responses to reports of
Page 5 of 14

--- Page 38 ---
Department of Human Services
Social Services Administration
Agency Response Form
child abuse and neglect. SSA will continue to take appropriate actions to
monitor the timeliness of CPS Responses. In April 2018, SSA
conducted and recorded a webinar to guide the LDSS on timeliness of
CPS cases and ensure appropriate documentation in MD CHESSIE.
Following the webinars, in May 2018, SSA began monitoring
compliance of timeliness of CPS cases utilizing the In-Home Milestone
Report.
In January 2019, SSA reassigned one staff person to serve as Acting
Program Manager for Baltimore City CPS staff with direct supervision
from SSA’s Director of CPS/Family Preservation Services. In addition,
SSA engaged a team to provide targeted support to Baltimore City CPS
staff to include training on CPS statute, regulations, policy and best
practice, implementation of a targeted case supervision approach, and
monthly meetings among Supervisors and Unit Managers to identify and
address any systemic issues in providing CPS responses.
In February 2020, SSA hired a staff person whose main responsibility is
to provide monitoring, oversight, and technical assistance for CPS
activities including timeliness of investigations. This staff person is
leading an interim process to monitor the timeliness of initiating and
completing investigations within targeted jurisdictions which began in
October 2020. This process allows for a random selection of cases out
of CJAMS to review. If concerns are noted, SSA contacts the local
department to discuss the findings and provide technical assistance.
In April 2020, SSA began working with CJAMS developers to refine the
CPS milestone report, to include the ability to monitor timely initiation
of responses and case closures. In March 2021, an accurate CPS
milestone report was implemented to capture the timely completion of
CPS investigations that is available daily to SSA and Local staff. SSA
has continued to direct LDSS leadership to utilize the existing CPS
Milestone Reports during supervision so CPS supervisors can monitor
case activities while a CPS case is active.
In addition, SSA plans to implement the following actions:
Action #1: Effective immediately, send out communication to all CPS
and Family Preservation staff to provide guidance related to timeliness
on investigations to include steps to take to access children, what to do if
staff are unable to see a child timely, and effective documentation of
reasonable efforts. To support the guidance provided, the current policy
regarding access to children will also be updated.
Page 6 of 14

--- Page 39 ---
Department of Human Services
Social Services Administration
Agency Response Form
Action #2: Reviewed CPS response data with LDSS Directors and
Assistant Directors at the March SSA/LDSS weekly call to identify
barriers and identify technical assistance needed. SSA will continue to
provide regular data to Local Directors and Assistant Directors related to
CPS responses.
Action: #3: In March 2021, initiated steps to begin an interim
monitoring process to using the information from the CFSR (Child and
Family Services Review) along with random case sampling by
requesting a data report of additional cases beyond what is currently
provided as part of the CFSR review (14 cases for a large jurisdiction, 10
or a medium jurisdiction and 6 for a small jurisdiction). The random
case samples will be from the same period under review as the CFSR.
The initial random sample was provided in May 2021.
The review of the additional cases will provide opportunities to offer
technical assistance to LDSS to reinforce their efforts to initiate and
complete CPS responses timely and allow for information learned from
the additional case reviews to be included in their final CFSR report.
Action #4: By December 2021, utilize the standardized quality
assurance case review process implemented at each LDSS to monitor
timeliness of initiating and closing investigations and provide technical
assistance accordingly.
Safety and risk assessments of controlled substance-exposed
newborns in a timely manner:
SSA has taken action to efficiently monitor and provide oversight of
Substance Exposed Newborn (SEN) assessments. The current In-Home
Milestone report captures active SEN Risk of Harm cases and the date of
the last/most current safety and risk assessment completed for the case;
however, this data report is incomplete.
Due to the report inaccuracies, an informal data validation process has
been utilized. After identifying the SEN cases for the jurisdictions using
the In-Home Milestone report, MD CHESSIE has been used to cross-
check the data (safety and risk assessment dates).
Additionally, SSA conducted a SEN policy training in February 2021.
The training included a review of the safety and risk assessments and
timelines for completion. Substance Exposed Newborn #21-05 policy
was issued to clarify, provide details, and offer additional guidance to
professionals serving SENs and their families. The revised SEN policy,
due to take effect in March 2021, was updated to clarify roles and
Page 7 of 14

--- Page 40 ---
Department of Human Services
Social Services Administration
Agency Response Form
responsibility as it relates to the coordination of, care of and response to
SENs. Along with the policy, several new and revised SEN forms are
being introduced to support and improve practice; those tools were also
demonstrated during the training.
In addition, SSA plans to implement the following actions:
Action #1: Beginning March 2021, utilized a pilot data report for SEN
as a short-term plan to provide improved data to support the monitoring
of the completion of required safety and risk assessment within required
timeframes.
Action #2: By May 2021, in order to improve oversight, refine the
existing Monitoring SOPs to include alignment with CJAMS (Child,
Juvenile and Adult Management System), the enhancement of the
oversight process, and the revision of the established monitoring
timeframes.
Action #3: By December 2021, utilize the standardized quality
assurance case review process implemented at each LDSS to monitor
compliance with medical, dental, and education requirements and
provide technical assistance accordingly.
Recommendation 3b Agree Estimated Completion Date: December
2021
Please provide details of SSA continues to implement appropriate actions to enhance the accuracy
corrective action or and completeness of reports to reliably monitor timely completion of
explain disagreement.
CPS investigations and the timeliness of required assessments of
substance-exposed newborns completed by the LDSS.
Specifically, SSA is planning the following short and long term activities
to ensure data is reliable and can be used to monitor compliance:
Action #1: In March 2021, implemented an accurate CPS milestone
report to capture the timely completion of CPS investigations that is
available daily to SSA and Local staff. In addition, in partnership with
the University of Maryland School of Social Work, a draft template of a
reporting tool that can be used for monitoring timeliness of SEN
assessments was created and provided to program staff for input.
Reporting templates outlined response timing for the jurisdictions and
state overall; the reporting template are in the process of being enhanced
to better monitor the accurate timeliness of safety and risk assessments
for a sample size of SENs. Once a final version of the SEN report is
decided upon, it will be created in the system where it will be available
on a daily basis.
Page 8 of 14

--- Page 41 ---
Department of Human Services
Social Services Administration
Agency Response Form
Action #2: In April 2021, completed a review of CJAMS Child Welfare
fields to ensure that data elements for timely completion of CPS
investigations and SENs reporting is a part of the application side of the
system. This review showed that the two reports either developed (CPS
Milestone) or SENS, in process of being finalized, will provide the
necessary information for monitoring timeliness either of CPS cases or
SENS assessments as the necessary data elements are in CJAMS.
Action #3: By September 2021, complete an assessment and update the
past reporting for timely completion of CPS investigations and SENs to
create improved electronic reporting capability.
Action #4: By December 2021, complete data/report validation of the
newly revised report(s) in the new system to confirm accuracy.
Finding 4
SSA lacked adequate controls to ensure the LDSSs were immediately notified of children
born to individuals who previously had their parental rights terminated for abuse or
neglect.
We recommend that SSA establish adequate controls, such as initiating a supervisory
review over the process, to ensure that LDSSs are promptly notified of children born to
individuals who previously had their parental rights terminated by a court (repeat).
Agency Response
Analysis Factually Accurate
Please provide
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 4 Agree Estimated Completion Date: August 2020
Please provide details of SSA has taken appropriate action to ensure LDSS receive timely
corrective action or notifications of children born to individuals who previously had their
explain disagreement.
parental rights terminated for abuse or neglect. Responsibility for who
receives the information from Vital Statistics has been adjusted and as of
August 2020 all outstanding birth matches were caught up. With all
jurisdictions now using CJAMS, a standard report has also been created.
Several months ago, the CPS/Family Preservation office established a
multi-step plan to review matches weekly after a match has been
received, and ensure notifications are sent within 2 business days of the
match. In addition, the CPS/Family Preservation Director reviews birth
Page 9 of 14

--- Page 42 ---
Department of Human Services
Social Services Administration
Agency Response Form
match notifications on a bi-weekly basis to ensure the LDSS are notified
of all matches by SSA. The CPS/Family Preservation Office maintains a
master list to track birth matches and notifications to the LDSSs. The
Office also tracks whether the LDSS has initiated a timely assessment of
the family where a match has been made and documents the information.
Federal Funds
Finding 5
SSA did not have an effective process for ensuring the propriety and timeliness of Title IV-
E eligibility determinations and redeterminations and had not conducted quality assurance
reviews; both of which resulted in a potential loss of federal funds.
We recommend that SSA ensure federal reimbursement is obtained for all children eligible
for Title IV-E funding. Specifically, we recommend that SSA
a. ensure that Title IV-E eligibility is properly determined for all children (repeat);
b. conduct reviews to ensure that Title IV-E eligibility determinations and
redeterminations are proper and timely, as required by SSA policy; and
c. review all children who are currently determined to be ineligible due to a missing court
order or who entered care prior to July 2016 (and received services within the last two
years), including the aforementioned cases, and obtain Title IV-E funds when possible
(repeat).
Agency Response
Analysis Factually Accurate
Please provide
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 5a Agree Estimated Completion Date: June 2022
Please provide details of SSA has taken appropriate action to ensure the timely determination of
corrective action or children’s eligibility for Title IV-E. Specifically, the SSA Title IV-E
explain disagreement.
Eligibility Unit began completing a 100% review of all active cases in
CJAMS in December 2020.
This review is being conducted to ensure that all eligibility
determinations were properly determined and to obtain reimbursement
of any federal funds potentially lost as a result of an incorrect decision.
The IV-E Eligibility Management Team meets weekly to review and
discuss the progress of the review and any challenges the staff are
facing.
Page 10 of 14

--- Page 43 ---
Department of Human Services
Social Services Administration
Agency Response Form
The IV-E Eligibility Supervisors must approve all of the updated IV-E
determinations in CJAMS and a QA log is being updated as case review
updates are provided.
Recommendation 5b Agree Estimated Completion Date: June 2022
Please provide details of SSA has taken appropriate action to ensure the timely determination of
corrective action or children’s eligibility for Title IV-E. Specifically, the SSA Title IV-E
explain disagreement.
Eligibility Unit began completing a 100% review of all active cases in
CJAMS in December 2020.
This review is being conducted to ensure that all eligibility
determinations were properly determined and to obtain reimbursement
of any federal funds potentially lost as a result of an incorrect decision.
The IV-E Eligibility Management Team meets weekly to review and
discuss the progress of the review and any challenges the staff are
facing.
The IV-E Eligibility Supervisors must approve all of the updated IV-E
determinations in CJAMS and a QA log is being updated as case review
updates are provided.
Recommendation 5c Agree Estimated Completion Date: June 2022
Please provide details of SSA has taken appropriate action to ensure the timely determination of
corrective action or children’s eligibility for Title IV-E. Specifically, the SSA Title IV-E
explain disagreement.
Eligibility Unit began completing a 100% review of all active cases in
CJAMS in December 2020. This review includes any remaining active
ineligible cases that received services within the last two years. These
cases are being prioritized and if any determinations are found to be
incorrect, the determination will be amended accordingly and all
necessary steps to obtain federal reimbursement will be taken where
applicable.
Foster Care, Adoption, and Guardianship Payments
Finding 6
SSA did not pursue the collection of approximately $4.8 million in provider overpayments.
We recommend that SSA pursue for collection provider overpayments calculated by the
OIG, including those noted above.
Page 11 of 14

--- Page 44 ---
Department of Human Services
Social Services Administration
Agency Response Form
Agency Response
Analysis Factually Accurate
Please provide
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 6 Agree Estimated Completion Date: October 2021
Please provide details of SSA continues to take appropriate action to pursue the collection of
corrective action or provider overpayments calculated by the Office of Inspector General.
explain disagreement.
In 2018, SSA, OIG and Budget and Finance agreed upon procedures to
address how each department would address calculated provider
overpayments. However, due to staff turnover, the procedures were not
fully carried out.
In 2020, a written standard operating procedure has been put in place
that adequately addresses how each department will continue to work
together to ensure that provider overpayments are pursued timely. SSA
has identified staff that will specifically address these functions. In
addition, monthly updates are scheduled to be provided to OIG and
Budget and Finance beginning in May 2021 to indicate the status of
those providers with overpayments.
Finding 7
SSA had not established procedures to ensure that adoption assistance payments funded
entirely by the State were suspended when an adopted child was removed from the
adoptive home.
We recommend that SSA
a. establish procedures to ensure compliance with State regulations
regarding adoption assistance payments being made for a child who has
been moved from the adoptive home to an out-of-home placement (repeat); and
b. review adoption assistance payments made on behalf of children in out-of-home
placement, including the aforementioned 28 children, and
recover any amounts that were inappropriately paid (repeat).
Agency Response
Analysis Factually Accurate
Please provide
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Page 12 of 14

--- Page 45 ---
Department of Human Services
Social Services Administration
Agency Response Form
Recommendation 7a Agree Estimated Completion Date: December
2021
Please provide details of SSA continues to take appropriate action to ensure that adoption
corrective action or assistance payments funded entirely by the State are suspended when an
explain disagreement.
adopted child is removed from the adoptive home. SSA is taking the
following actions:
Action #1: Review and update as needed Policy SSA/CW#13-01 to
ensure compliance with State COMAR regulations regarding the
suspension of adoption assistance payments when required.
Action #2: Create an automatic flag in CJAMS to stop payments for
state subsidized adoptions ending in out-of-home placement immediately
at the onset of the change in the placement status. Once completed,
generate monthly reports to allow for the monitoring of the suspension
of adoption subsidy for any youth who have moved from an adoptive
home to an out-of-home placement.
Action #3: Update and revise audit response webinars as a means of
providing ongoing technical assistance to LDSS to ensure that State
adoption subsidies are terminated when a youth is placed in out-of-home
care.
Recommendation 7b Agree Estimated Completion Date: April 2022
Please provide details of SSA is taking appropriate action to review adoption assistance payments
corrective action or made on behalf of children in out-of-home placement, including for the
explain disagreement.
aforementioned children, to determine the ability to recover any amounts
that were inappropriately paid.
Specifically, SSA is reviewing the list of children currently in foster care
who entered after an adoption to confirm that adoption subsidy payments
were suspended when appropriate and suspend those that no longer meet
the eligibility criteria for an adoption subsidy. SSA will complete the
review by June 30, 2021. For any payments not suspended, SSA will
make attempts to recoup any funds, as appropriate, by April 2022.
Interagency Agreements
Finding 8
SSA did not ensure that certain payments made to a State university for three interagency
agreements were adequately supported, were reasonable in relation to the tasks performed,
and were made in accordance with the terms of the agreements.
Page 13 of 14

--- Page 46 ---
Department of Human Services
Social Services Administration
Agency Response Form
We recommend that SSA implement a process to ensure the propriety of State university
invoices. For example, obtain and review payroll records or restructure the agreements to
base payment on specific deliverables to be monitored by SSA, or a combination thereof
(repeat).
Agency Response
Analysis Factually Accurate
Please provide
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 8 Agree Estimated Completion Date: June 2022
Please provide details of SSA currently receives timesheets and the DHS Monthly Detail Form
corrective action or for all Interagency Agreements (IAA) with the University of Maryland.
explain disagreement.
Both documents provide a detailed summary of charges for all staff
funded by the agreement and the specific tasks that each employee
worked on during the invoice period. SSA is taking the following
actions to implement a process to ensure the propriety of State university
invoices:
Action 1: By June 2021, develop a SOP and training to ensure that all
project officers have clear guidance on contract monitoring requirements
related to reviewing timesheets, tasks completed during the invoice
period, monthly charges for accuracy, and documentation provided to
support charges.
Action 2: By December 2021, review the current contracting mechanism
with the DHS procurement office and Office of Attorney General to
determine any necessary changes to the contracting process.
Action 3: By June 2022, partner with the Office of the Attorney General
and the Procurement Office to draft language to be included in the
current IAA agreements requiring SSA approval of critical changes in
personnel. While the IAA language is being drafted and finalized, SSA
is notifying University contacts in writing that key personnel changes
(i.e. Principal Investigators, Program Managers/Directors, Research
Analysts) must be approved by SSA prior to changes being made. These
notifications will be distributed in May 2021.
Page 14 of 14

--- Page 47 ---
AUDIT TEAM
Edward A. Rubenstein, CPA
Audit Manager
Menachem Katz, CPA
Mindy R. Garrett
Senior Auditors
Steven A. Crocker, CFE
Owen M. Long
Mariyum Mahmood
Gary B. Staples
Staff Auditors