Title: Maryland Department of Aging
Date: 06/23/2021
Type: Fiscal Compliance
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=60d36646a1ce5810c8ebfc10
Extracted: 2025-06-19T11:52:00.901366
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Audit Report
Maryland Department of Aging
April 2025
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Senator Shelly L. Hettleman (Senate Chair) Delegate Jared Solomon (House Chair)
Senator Joanne C. Benson Delegate Steven J. Arentz
Senator Benjamin T. Brooks, Sr. Delegate Andrea Fletcher Harrison
Senator Paul D. Corderman Delegate Steven C. Johnson
Senator Katie Fry Hester Delegate Mary A. Lehman
Senator Cheryl C. Kagan Delegate David H. Moon
Senator Clarence K. Lam, M.D. Delegate Julie Palakovich Carr
Senator Cory V. McCray Delegate Emily K. Shetty
Senator Justin D. Ready Delegate Stephanie M. Smith
Senator Bryan W. Simonaire Delegate M. Courtney Watson
To Obtain Further Information
Office of Legislative Audits
The Warehouse at Camden Yards
351 West Camden Street, Suite 400
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Phone: 410-946-5900
Maryland Relay: 711
TTY: 410-946-5401 ꞏ 301-970-5401
E-mail: webmaster@ola.state.md.us
Website: www.ola.state.md.us
To Report Fraud
The Office of Legislative Audits operates a Fraud Hotline to report fraud, waste, or abuse involving State
of Maryland government resources. Reports of fraud, waste, or abuse may be communicated anonymously
by a toll-free call to 1-877-FRAUD-11, by mail to the Fraud Hotline, c/o Office of Legislative Audits, or
through the Office’s website.
Nondiscrimination Statement
The Department of Legislative Services does not discriminate on the basis of age, ancestry, color, creed,
marital status, national origin, race, religion, gender, gender identity, sexual orientation, or disability in the
admission or access to its programs, services, or activities. The Department’s Information Officer has been
designated to coordinate compliance with the nondiscrimination requirements contained in Section 35.107
of the United States Department of Justice Regulations. Requests for assistance should be directed to the
Information Officer at 410-946-5400 or 410-970-5400.

--- Page 3 ---
April 23, 2025
Senator Shelly L. Hettleman, Senate Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Delegate Jared Solomon, House Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Members of Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Annapolis, Maryland
Ladies and Gentlemen:
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the Maryland Department of
Aging (MDOA) for the period beginning July 8, 2020 and ending March 31,
2024. MDOA is responsible for identifying the needs of the State’s elderly and for
ensuring that those needs are met through a comprehensive network of accessible
services at the local level. MDOA has designated 19 geographical regions within
the State and each region is served by a local Area Agency on Aging (AAA),
which is either a local governmental agency or a nonprofit organization.
Our audit disclosed that MDOA lacked evidence to substantiate that certain
activities of AAAs were properly monitored. Specifically, as of April 2024,
MDOA had not performed the required financial reviews for any AAAs for fiscal
years 2022 and 2023. In addition, certain required annual programmatic reviews,
had not been performed and/or were not adequately documented, including any
corrective action required by AAAs. Similar conditions have been included but
not corrected in one or more preceding audit reports dating back to 2011.
Our audit also disclosed that MDOA did not always submit requests for
reimbursement of federal fund expenditures in a timely manner, a condition noted
but not corrected from our prior audit report. As a result, MDOA is no longer
able to recover $200,000 and lost interest income totaling at least $63,000.
Furthermore, we reviewed referrals through our fraud, waste, and abuse hotline
alleging that MDOA improperly reallocated funds from its programs to fund two
additional grant programs, and made payments to grantees for these two programs
without ensuring that funds were properly expended. Based on our review, we

--- Page 4 ---
were able to substantiate certain concerns raised in the allegation. In this regard,
MDOA did not document how it selected grantees for these two grants.
Furthermore, MDOA paid grantees without obtaining supporting documentation,
including $1 million to one grantee that appeared questionable. For example
$600,000 was awarded for one jurisdiction that had no program participants two
years after the funds were awarded.
MDOA’s response to this audit is included as an appendix to this report. In
accordance with State law, we have reviewed the response and, while MDOA
generally agrees with the recommendations in this report, we identified certain
instances in which statements in the response conflict with or disagree with the
report findings. In each instance, we reviewed and reassessed our audit
documentation, and reaffirmed the validity of our finding. In accordance with
generally accepted government auditing standards, we have included an “auditor
comment” with MDOA’s response to explain our position. We will advise the
Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee of any outstanding issues that we cannot
resolve with MDOA.
We wish to acknowledge the cooperation extended to us during the audit by
MDOA.
Respectfully submitted,
Brian S. Tanen
Brian S. Tanen, CPA, CFE
Legislative Auditor
2

--- Page 5 ---
Table of Contents
Background Information 4
Agency Responsibilities 4
Referrals to Our Fraud, Waste, and Abuse Hotline 5
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report 6
Findings and Recommendations 7
Monitoring of the Local Area Agencies on Aging (AAA)
 Finding 1 – MDOA did not perform all required program reviews or 7
adequately document the reviews performed.
Federal Funds
 Finding 2 – MDOA’s requests for reimbursement of federal fund 9
expenditures were routinely submitted late or not submitted. As a
result, MDOA lost investment income totaling at least $63,000.
Community for Life and the Naturally Occurring Retirement Community
Grants
Finding 3 – MDOA did not document the selection of grantees or obtain 11
support for payments for the Community for Life and the Naturally
Occurring Retirement Community grant programs, certain of which
appeared questionable.
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology 13
Agency Response Appendix
* Denotes item repeated in full or part from preceding audit report
3

--- Page 6 ---
Background Information
Agency Responsibilities
The Maryland Department of Aging (MDOA) is responsible for providing
information and services to support older adults aging healthfully and safely in
their homes and communities. Under the guidance of the federal Older
Americans Act, MDOA has designated 19 local Area Agencies on Aging (AAAs)
within the State, based on geographical regions, to ensure that eligible Maryland
residents can easily access applicable information and services. Each regional
AAA is either a local government agency or a nonprofit organization. As
grantees of MDOA, these AAAs deliver direct services to support aging in place,
including nutrition support, chronic disease management, case management, and
elder abuse prevention, typically through State and federal grant programs.
According to the State's records, MDOA expenditures totaled approximately
$82.6 million during fiscal year 2023 including approximately $33.0 million in
State general funds and $45.8 million in federal funds provided for community
services, primarily through grants to AAAs (see Figure 1). During the period
June 30, 2021 through June 30, 2023, MDOA had vacancy rates ranging from
12.8 to 24.4 percent. As of June 30, 2023, approximately 24.4 percent of the total
41 position were vacant. These vacancies may have contributed, at least in part,
to the findings in this report.
4

--- Page 7 ---
Figure 1
MDOA Positions, Expenditures, and Funding Sources
Full-Time Equivalent Positions as of June 30, 2023
Positions
Filled 31
Vacant 10
Total 41
Fiscal Year 2023 Expenditures
Expenditures
Salaries, Wages, and Fringe Benefits $ 3,922,425
Technical and Special Fees 697,556
Operating Expenses 77,979,647
Total $82,599,628
Fiscal Year 2023 Funding Sources
Funding
General Fund $33,039,562
Special Fund 1,185,523
Federal Fund 45,787,035
Reimbursable Fund 2,587,508
Total $82,599,628
Source: State financial and personnel records
Referrals to Our Fraud, Waste, and Abuse Hotline
We received referrals to our fraud, waste, and abuse hotline alleging questionable
practices regarding two MDOA grants. The allegations indicated that MDOA
improperly reallocated funds from other programs to fund these grants and made
payments without ensuring that grant funds were properly expended. Based on
our determination of the associated risk, we interviewed applicable personnel and
reviewed applicable grant award and monitoring processes for these two grants.
Based on our review, we were able to substantiate certain concerns raised in the
allegations (see Finding 3). However, the results of our review of the allegations
did not identify any issues that warranted a referral to the Office of the Attorney
General – Criminal Division.
5

--- Page 8 ---
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report
Our audit included a review to determine the status of the three findings contained
in our preceding audit report dated June 23, 2021. See Figure 2 for the results of
our review.
Figure 2
Status of Preceding Findings
Preceding Implementation
Finding Description
Finding Status
MDOA’s policy for conducting annual financial reviews of
local Area Agencies on Aging was not comprehensive, and Repeated
Finding 1
MDOA did not perform numerous required reviews or (Current Finding 1)
adequately document reviews that were performed.
Annual MDOA reviews of Senior Assisted Living Group
Repeated
Finding 2 Home Subsidy and Senior Care grant program activity were
(Current Finding 1)
not performed or were not adequately documented.
MDOA did not always submit requests for reimbursement
Repeated
Finding 3 of federal fund expenditures in a timely manner, resulting in
(Current Finding 2)
lost interest income totaling at least $53,000.
6

--- Page 9 ---
Findings and Recommendations
Monitoring of the Local Area Agencies on Aging
Background
The Maryland Department of Aging (MDOA) works in partnership with the 19
local Area Agencies on Aging (AAAs) to deliver program services to older adults
primarily through State and federal grant programs. MDOA awards grants to the
AAAs, which provide services through numerous programs. The two most
significant programs are the State-funded Senior Assisted Living Group Home
Subsidy (SALGHS) program and the Senior Care program.
The SALGHS program offers a subsidy to eligible seniors (those aged 62 and
older) to help offset the cost of assisted living services. The Senior Care program
helps eligible seniors (those aged 65 and older) to live at home. The program
provides a comprehensive assessment of an individual’s needs, case management
services, and funds for services such as personal care, adult day care, home-
delivered meals, medications, medical supplies, transportation, and respite care.
During our audit period the Senior Care program was provided by 19 AAAs and
the SALGHS program at 15 AAAs. According to MDOA’s records, during fiscal
year 2023, approximately 4,047 and 418 seniors received services through the
SALGHS and Senior Care grant programs, respectively.
According to State records, during fiscal year 2023, MDOA expended
approximately $74.6 million for community services, of which $29.7 million
represented general funds provided primarily through State grants to AAAs. Of
these State funds, approximately $4.4 million was for the SALGHS program, $9.1
million was for the Senior Care grant program, and the remaining $16.2 million
was for numerous smaller grant programs. We reviewed MDOA’s monitoring of
AAAs including their administration of the SALGHS, and the Senior Care
program.
Finding 1
MDOA did not perform all required reviews of the AAA financial activity
and related programs or adequately document the reviews performed.
Analysis
MDOA did not perform all required reviews of the AAA financial activity and
related programs or adequately document the reviews performed. MDOA’s AAA
Monitoring and Assessment Policy requires MDOA to perform annual
performance or monitoring reviews and financial reviews. The reviews focus on
various programmatic aspects including ensuring that grant funds are properly
7

--- Page 10 ---
requested, spent in accordance with grant requirements and used for eligible
purposes. The Policy also requires MDOA to conduct separate reviews of each
program, including SALGHS and Senior Care, to determine if the AAA has
administered the programs appropriately, including verification of client
eligibility for services.
Financial and Programmatic Reviews Were Not Always Performed
As of April 2024, MDOA had not performed the required financial reviews for
any AAAs for fiscal year 2022 or fiscal year 2023. Additionally, as of April
2024, MDOA had not performed required programmatic reviews for fiscal year
2023 SALGHS and Senior Care grant activity and was unable to provide a final
report for 8 of the 19 fiscal year 2022 Senior Care grants.
Reviews Were Not Adequately Documented
Our test of 5 of the 12 AAA financial reviews MDOA conducted covering fiscal
year 2021 activity1 disclosed that MDOA lacked sufficient documentation to
support the work performed and conclusions reached. For example, there was no
documentation describing test objectives, scope, and conclusions, the extent to
which AAA procedures were reviewed, and there was insufficient documentation
of actual test items examined. In addition, there was no evidence that the reviews
were subject to supervisory review and approval. In regard to the programmatic
reviews, MDOA could not provide us with a listing of files it examined, or a
checklist of attributes examined for the fiscal year 2022 Senior Care grant activity
reviews.
Similar conditions regarding the lack of adequate documentation supporting work
performed and conclusions reached have been commented upon in our four
preceding audit reports dating back to 2011. Similar conditions regarding the lack
of financial and programmatic reviews performed and the lack of supporting
documentation were commented upon in our preceding audit report. In response
to our preceding audit report, MDOA stated it that it would ensure all reviews
would be completed, and maintain documentation of the client files it reviewed by
June 2021. However, during our current audit, MDOA advised that it did not
implement the recommendations primarily due to lack of adequate staffing.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that MDOA
a. complete all required financial and programmatic reviews and ensure
that sufficient grant expenditures and source documents are reviewed to
provide assurance that grant funds were spent in accordance with grant
requirements and for eligible purposes (repeat);
1 AAAs were selected for testing based on material allocations in fiscal year 2021.
8

--- Page 11 ---
b. adequately document and properly review and approve work performed
and conclusions reached (repeat); and
c. maintain adequate documentation of the reviews, including any
corrective action taken by the AAAs (repeat).
Federal Funds
Finding 2
MDOA’s requests for reimbursement of federal fund expenditures were
routinely submitted late or not submitted. As a result, MDOA is no longer
able to recover $200,000 in funds and lost investment income totaling at least
$63,000.
Analysis
MDOA’s requests for reimbursement of federal fund expenditures were routinely
submitted late or not submitted. Consequently, certain of the funds are no longer
recoverable and the State lost investment income that would have been earned had
the funds been requested and received timely. According to the State’s records,
during fiscal years 2021 through 2023, federal fund expenditures totaled $152.3
million, of which $98.8 million related to the Older Americans Act. These funds
are primarily allocated to the AAAs to cover the cost of various senior programs
and related administrative costs. Federal guidelines for these grant funds provide
for reimbursements when expenditures are incurred and requires MDOA to
request reimbursement within 90 days after the end of the grant period.
Our test of reimbursements of federal fund expenditures totaling $74.2 million for
five grant awards (selected based on materiality) for the period February 2021
through April 2024 disclosed that requests for reimbursement were routinely
submitted late or not submitted at all. For example, MDOA did not submit
requests for reimbursement for expenditures totaling $1.5 million incurred during
fiscal years 2021 and 2022. In response to our inquiries, MDOA requested and
subsequently received approximately $1.3 million of these funds, but the
remaining $200,000 can no longer be recovered. In addition, the untimely
recovery of the $1.3 million resulted in lost investment income totaling at least
$63,000 that would have been earned had the funds been requested and received
timely.
A similar condition regarding delays in requesting reimbursement of federal fund
expenditures in a timely manner was commented upon in our preceding audit
report. In response to that report, MDOA stated that it was hindered in submitting
timely reimbursement requests due to limited staffing, and it agreed to submit
9

--- Page 12 ---
these requests timely beginning June 30, 2021. However, as noted above, our
testing disclosed that MDOA did not submit requests timely.
Recommendation 2
We recommend that MDOA submit federal fund reimbursement requests
timely as permitted under federal guidelines (repeat).
Community for Life and the Naturally Occurring Retirement
Community Grants
Background
We received referrals to our fraud, waste, and abuse hotline alleging that MDOA
improperly reallocated funds from other programs to fund the Community for
Life (CFL) and the Naturally Occurring Retirement Community (NORC) grant
programs and made payments for these programs without ensuring that grant
funds were properly expended. The CFL program provides for certain limited
services (such as home safety assessments) for participants in 11 counties for a
monthly fee subsidized by MDOA. The NORC program supports elder abuse
prevention, helps the elderly stay in their communities, provides in-home care,
and supports Holocaust survivors.
Our review did not disclose that MDOA improperly reallocated funds for these
programs but did disclose that MDOA did not ensure that grant funds were
properly expended. Our review did not identify any matters that warranted a
referral to the Office of the Attorney General’s Criminal Division, but did identify
certain deficiencies that require corrective action by MDOA, as further described
in the finding below.
MDOA awarded CFL grants to six grantees to enroll participants, pay vendors for
services provided, and ensure that services were provided in accordance with the
program. In addition, MDOA provided funding to the grantees for start-up costs
necessary to initiate the program, including personnel and technology costs. The
related grant agreements require the grantees to submit documentation to support
start-up costs, and participant data for payment of monthly fee subsidies.
MDOA awarded NORC grants to four grantees to provide services based on the
grantee’s submitted annual plan. MDOA reviews and approves the plans,
requires the grantee to submit quarterly requests for payment, and requires the
submission of various written reports on the programs prior to the final payment.
10

--- Page 13 ---
According to State records, expenditures for the CFL and NORC grant programs
totaled $2.4 million and $5.3 million respectively during the period May 2020
through March 2024. These grants were managed by MDOA directly rather than
through the AAAs.
Finding 3
MDOA did not document the selection of grantees or obtain support for
payments for the CFL and NORC grant programs, certain of which
appeared questionable.
Analysis
MDOA did not document the selection of CFL and NORC grantees or obtain
support for payments, including certain payments that appeared questionable.
 MDOA was unable to provide documentation for how it solicited and selected
grantees for the NORC and CFL programs. MDOA advised us that it was not
aware of how the NORC grantees were selected but the CFL grantees were
selected through a competitive process. MDOA further advised that the
selection processes were performed by the previous administration and due to
turnover, individuals that were involved are no longer employed by MDOA
and there was no documentation to support the selections. As a result, MDOA
could not document that the grantees were the best qualified to provide the
NORC and CFL programs.
 MDOA made payments to CFL grantees without obtaining adequate
supporting documentation. According to MDOA records, as of September
2023, there were 176 CFL participants in 11 jurisdictions. Our test of 7
payments totaling $1.2 million2 disclosed that MDOA did not receive any
documentation to support the propriety of the payments including certain
payments that appeared questionable. Specifically, one of the three grantees
received $1 million in June 2022 to initiate the CFL program in four
jurisdictions. MDOA did not obtain support for how the funds were used and
according to MDOA, $600,000 was for one jurisdiction that still did not have
any CFL participants as of April 2024 and the remaining $400,000 was for
three jurisdictions that had a combined 17 participants as of September 2023.
In comparison, the other two grantees received approximately $200,000 for
two jurisdictions that had a combined 72 participants as of September 2023.
2 The test selection included at least one material payment to the 3 grantees who received the most
material payments between June 2020 and June 2023. These payments were related to 6
jurisdictions.
11

--- Page 14 ---
The Comptroller of Maryland’s Accounting Procedures Manual3 requires
agencies to document that the services have been rendered prior to payment.
Recommendation 3
We recommend that MDOA
a. document the solicitation and selection of grantees to ensure they are
qualified to operate the related programs, and
b. obtain and review supporting documentation for all grant payments and
recover any grant payments that cannot be supported.
3 The updated Accounting Policies and Procedures Manual, effective June 2024, has the same
requirements as previous versions.
12

--- Page 15 ---
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the Maryland Department of
Aging (MDOA) for the period beginning July 8, 2020 and ending March 31,
2024. The audit was conducted in accordance with generally accepted
government auditing standards. Those standards require that we plan and perform
the audit to obtain sufficient, appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis
for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives. We believe that
the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and
conclusions based on our audit objectives.
As prescribed by the State Government Article, Section 2-1221 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, the objectives of this audit were to examine MDOA’s
financial transactions, records, and internal control, and to evaluate its compliance
with applicable State laws, rules, and regulations.
In planning and conducting our audit, we focused on the major financial-related
areas of operations based on assessments of significance and risk. The areas
addressed by the audit included State grant programs, payroll, federal fund
reimbursements, budgetary closeout transactions, and disbursements for operating
expenditures. In addition, we reviewed MDOA’s procedures over two grants
based on referrals to our fraud, waste, and abuse hotline. Finally, we determined
the status of the findings contained in our preceding audit report.
Our audit did not include an evaluation of internal controls over compliance with
federal laws and regulations for federal financial assistance programs and an
assessment of MDOA’s compliance with those laws and regulations because the
State of Maryland engages an independent accounting firm to annually audit such
programs administered by State agencies, including MDOA.
Our assessment of internal controls was based on agency procedures and controls
in place at the time of our fieldwork. Our tests of transactions and other auditing
procedures were generally focused on the transactions occurring during our audit
period of July 8, 2020 to March 31, 2024, but may include transactions before or
after this period as we considered necessary to achieve our audit objectives.
To accomplish our audit objectives, our audit procedures included inquiries of
appropriate personnel, inspections of documents and records, tests of transactions,
and to the extent practicable, observations of MDOA’s operations. Generally,
transactions were selected for testing based on auditor judgment, which primarily
considers risk, the timing or dollar amount of the transaction or the significance of
the transaction to the area of operation reviewed. As a matter of course, we do
13

--- Page 16 ---
not normally use sampling in our tests, so unless otherwise specifically indicated,
neither statistical nor non-statistical audit sampling was used to select the
transactions tested. Therefore, unless sampling is specifically indicated in a
finding, the results from any tests conducted or disclosed by us cannot be used to
project those results to the entire population from which the test items were
selected.
We also performed various data extracts of pertinent information from the State’s
Financial Management Information System (such as revenue and expenditure
data). The extracts are performed as part of ongoing internal processes
established by the Office of Legislative Audits and were subject to various tests to
determine data reliability. We determined that the data extracted from this source
was sufficiently reliable for the purposes the data were used during this audit.
We also extracted data from MDOA’s financial systems for the purpose of testing
certain areas, such as federal funds. We performed various tests of the relevant
data and determined that the data were sufficiently reliable for the purposes the
data were used during the audit. Finally, we performed other auditing procedures
that we considered necessary to achieve our audit objectives. The reliability of
data used in this report for background or informational purposes was not
assessed.
MDOA’s management is responsible for establishing and maintaining effective
internal control. Internal control is a process designed to provide reasonable
assurance that objectives pertaining to the reliability of financial records;
effectiveness and efficiency of operations, including safeguarding of assets; and
compliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations are achieved. As
provided in Government Auditing Standards, there are five components of
internal control: control environment, risk assessment, control activities,
information and communication, and monitoring. Each of the five components,
when significant to the audit objectives, and as applicable to MDOA, were
considered by us during the course of this audit.
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate.
Our reports are designed to assist the Maryland General Assembly in exercising
its legislative oversight function and to provide constructive recommendations for
improving State operations. As a result, our reports generally do not address
activities we reviewed that are functioning properly.
14

--- Page 17 ---
This report includes findings relating to conditions that we consider to be
significant deficiencies in the design or operation of internal control that could
adversely affect MDOA’s ability to maintain reliable financial records, operate
effectively and efficiently, and/or comply with applicable laws, rules, and
regulations. Our report also includes findings regarding significant instances of
noncompliance with applicable laws, rules, or regulations. Other less significant
findings were communicated to MDOA that did not warrant inclusion in this
report.
MDOA’s response to our findings and recommendations, is included as an
appendix to this report. As prescribed in State Government Article, Section 2-
1224 of the Annotated Code of Maryland, we will advise MDOA regarding the
results of our review of its response.
15

--- Page 18 ---
APPENDIX
Mr. Brian S. Tanen, CPA, CFE
Legislative Auditor
Office of Legislative Audits
The Warehouse at Camden Yards
351 West Camden Street, Suite 400
Baltimore, MD 21201
April 18, 2025
Dear Mr. Tanen:
On behalf of the Maryland Department of Aging (MDOA), I respectfully submit our formal
response to the findings outlined in your recent audit of the Department’s oversight of local Area
Agencies on Aging (AAAs) and administration of federal and State grant funds. We acknowledge and
appreciate the thoroughness of the audit and fully recognize the importance of maintaining strong fiscal
oversight of our AAA network, timely financial practices, and transparent program management. Under
new fiscal leadership, MDOA has already taken significant steps to address the concerns raised, including
completing comprehensive fiscal reviews, enhancing documentation procedures, and instituting a rolling
schedule of reviews aligned to organizational risk and program complexity.
We are particularly proud of our recovery of $1.26 million in previously undrawn federal funds—
an outcome achieved through coordinated efforts with the Administration for Community Living
(ACL)—and our successful implementation of a monthly draw schedule to ensure future timeliness and
compliance. In addition, MDOA has implemented more rigorous oversight of the Community for Life
(CFL) program, with expenditures now actively managed and tracked by a designated program manager.
While we respectfully disagreed with certain characterizations related to CFL and NORC grantee
selection, we remain committed to strengthening transparency through structured RFP processes for the
NORC and improved recordkeeping for CFL.
MDOA views this audit as an opportunity for continuous improvement. We are implementing
systemwide enhancements to institutionalize accountability, strengthen fiscal integrity, and ensure that
state and federal resources are used efficiently to support Maryland’s aging population. We thank you for
your diligence and partnership in promoting responsible stewardship of public funds, and we look
forward to continued collaboration in the years ahead.
Carmel Roques
Carmel Roques
Carmel Roques (Apr 18, 2025 15:14 EDT)
Agency Head Date: 4/18/25
Michael Zomber
Chief Financial Officer Date: 4/18/25

--- Page 19 ---
Maryland Department of Aging
Agency Response Form
Monitoring of the Local Area Agencies on Aging
Finding 1
MDOA did not perform all required reviews of the AAA financial activity
and related programs or adequately document the reviews performed.
We recommend that MDOA
a. complete all required financial and programmatic reviews and ensure
that sufficient grant expenditures and source documents are reviewed to
provide assurance that grant funds were spent in accordance with grant
requirements and for eligible purposes (repeat);
b. adequately document and properly review and approve work performed
and conclusions reached (repeat); and
c. maintain adequate documentation of the reviews, including any
corrective action taken by the AAAs (repeat).
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide additional MDOA acknowledges OLA’s concerns and concurs that prior to June 2024, the agency did
comments as deemed not consistently complete AAA audits in a timely, effective manner or with sufficient
necessary. documentation. Previous fiscal leadership did not provide adequate oversight of the audit
function, and audits were neither professionally completed nor internally reviewed by the
CFO.
Recommendation 1a Agree Estimated Completion Date: Completed for FY21-
FY23. FY24 reviews to be
completed by 9/25
Please provide details of Under MDOA’s new fiscal leadership, the agency has conducted comprehensive fiscal
corrective action or explain reviews for the period in question. MDOA is committed to a regular rolling schedule of
disagreement. audit engagements with AAAs, with the exact cadence determined by the size, complexity,
and risk level of each AAA’s fiscal operations, as assessed through historical precedent.
Recommendation 1b Agree Estimated Completion Date: Completed for FY21-
FY23. FY24
documentation of reviews
to be completed by 12/25
Please provide details of To address previously incomplete or uncompleted audits, the Maryland Department of
corrective action or explain Aging (MDOA) engaged IBS Management & Consultancy—a highly regarded CPA and
disagreement. audit firm—to conduct comprehensive fiscal reviews of all federal and state grant activity
across the Area Agencies on Aging (AAA) network. These reviews were conducted
Page 1 of 5

--- Page 20 ---
Maryland Department of Aging
Agency Response Form
between June and December 2024, ensuring a thorough and independent examination of
financial operations. [see sample – Attachment A]1,
In a series of follow-up meetings held in mid-FY25, MDOA engaged the AAA network to
discuss the preliminary audit findings. Following these discussions, each AAA was
requested to provide a formal, written response to the IBS findings [see sample –
Attachment B], either acknowledging the validity of the findings or providing justification
for challenging the auditors’ conclusions.
Where findings were acknowledged as valid, AAAs were asked to submit a brief
explanation outlining the reasons for the non-compliance and the steps being taken to
prevent recurrence [see sample – Attachment C].
In instances where AAAs owed funds to the State—or, in some cases, to the federal
government—due to unsubstantiated reimbursement requests, they were directed to return
the funds promptly [see sample – Attachment D]. MDOA is actively working to recover
those funds and coordinate with federal partners to return the overdrawn funds.
For the most serious compliance violations, or in cases of repeated non-compliance,
MDOA issued directives requiring the submission of Corrective Action Plans (CAPs) to
ensure systemic corrective measures would be implemented to prevent recurrence [see
sample – Attachment E1]. AAAs who did not receive a CAP also received formal
notification that no CAP was necessary [see sample – Attachment E2].
Recommendation 1c Agree Estimated Completion Date: Summary document
completed; memorializing
document to be completed
5/31, CAPS to be
completed 7/31
Please provide details of MDOA has documented the results of the fiscal reviews, the corresponding agency
corrective action or explain responses, and any issued directives for Corrective Action Plans (CAPs) in Attachment F.
disagreement.
In parallel, MDOA is actively collecting CAP submissions from the AAAs and overseeing
their implementation, which is expected to be completed by summer 2025.
Finally, MDOA is developing a formal summary document that will memorialize the
scope of the audit initiative, highlight key findings, and provide a comprehensive overview
of outcomes. This document will serve as a reference to guide future audit procedures and
promote consistent, high-quality fiscal oversight across the network.
1 MDOA forwarded additional documentation with this response, referenced throughout as
Attachments. In accordance with our policy, we did not include this documentation.
Page 2 of 5

--- Page 21 ---
Maryland Department of Aging
Agency Response Form
Federal Funds
Finding 2
MDOA’s requests for reimbursement of federal fund expenditures were
routinely submitted late or not submitted. As a result, MDOA is no longer
able to recover $200,000 in funds and lost investment income totaling at least
$63,000.
We recommend that MDOA submit federal fund reimbursement requests
timely as permitted under federal guidelines (repeat).
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide additional MDOA acknowledges that past fiscal practices did not always ensure the timely
comments as deemed submission of federal draw requests in full compliance with federal guidelines and state
necessary. policies. As a result, the State experienced a loss of potential interest revenue and faced a
complex recovery process for undrawn funds from FY21 and FY22
The MDOA, in coordination with the ACL, conducted a thorough review and
reconciliation process to calculate and recover undrawn federal funds from FY21 and
FY22. This months-long effort resulted in the successful recovery of $1.26 million in
previously undrawn funds—an amount determined through substantial deliberation
between both parties.
Throughout this process, MDOA meticulously documented the administrative expenses
that qualified for these draws, justified the need for the recovery by demonstrating that the
funds had not been drawn, and successfully advocated for ACL to authorize a post-expiry
draw.
This achievement represents a significant accomplishment for MDOA, ensuring that
critical resources were reclaimed for the benefit of the State. [see Attachment G for
documentation of these draws.]
Recommendation 2 Agree Estimated Completion Date: completed
Please provide details of MDOA has implemented a structured process to ensure that draws for all major federal
corrective action or grant categories with substantial spending are conducted on a monthly basis. This policy
explain disagreement. has been in effect since the beginning of the federal fiscal year FY25, and MDOA can
provide documentation to support its consistent implementation. [see Attachment H].
Page 3 of 5

--- Page 22 ---
Maryland Department of Aging
Agency Response Form
Community for Life and the Naturally Occurring Retirement
Community Grants
Finding 3
MDOA did not document the selection of grantees or obtain support for
payments for the CFL and NORC grant programs, certain of which
appeared questionable.
We recommend that MDOA
a. document the solicitation and selection of grantees to ensure they are
qualified to operate the related programs, and
b. obtain and review supporting documentation for all grant payments and
recover any grant payments that cannot be supported.
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide additional MDOA respectfully asserts that OLA conflated concerns regarding CFL and NORC.
comments as deemed necessary. While MDOA acknowledges the finding of insufficient transparency in the selection of
NORC grantees, this issue does not apply to CFL. [see Attachment I for the FY24
NORC spending tracking.]
MDOA agrees with OLA’s assessment regarding the transparency of NORC grantee
selection. However, this criticism does not extend to CFL, whose grantees are selected
through a well-defined and transparent process.
Recommendation 3a Disagree Estimated Completion Date: 7/31/25
Please provide details of Some NORC grantees have been in place since as early as 2007 [see Attachment J],
corrective action or explain and the current composition of grantees predates the tenure of the previous Secretary of
disagreement. Aging. While MDOA cannot fully account for the selection process used for the current
slate of grantees, an application process [see Attachment K] has been utilized prior to
awarding grants.
Moving forward, MDOA is committed to enhancing transparency by implementing a
more structured process, including detailed RFPs and clearly defined selection criteria.
Recommendation 3b Disagree Estimated Completion Date: complete
Please provide details of While MDOA acknowledges that it was unable to fully account for and document CFL
corrective action or explain expenses during the audit period—primarily due to significant turnover and multiple
disagreement. individuals overseeing the program—the agency has since made substantial
improvements in its fiscal oversight. The current iteration of the CFL program
(Reimbursable Grant 6911) now features well-documented expenditures that are
actively monitored by a dedicated and accountable program manager. Therefore, we
respectfully assert that the auditors' concerns are no longer applicable to this program.
[see Attachment L]
Page 4 of 5

--- Page 23 ---
Maryland Department of Aging
Agency Response Form
Auditor’s Comment: MDOA disagrees with our finding and recommendation 3a
based on its belief that the CFL grantees were selected through a well-defined and
transparent process and that NORC grantees have been in place since 2007. As
noted in our analysis, MDOA was unable to provide documentation of the grantee
selection processes. However, MDOA’s response states it is committed to
enhancing transparency and will implement a more structured process.
Additionally, MDOA disagrees with recommendation 3b because it has advised
us that it has since implemented a process to document and monitor the CFL
expenditures. Our finding is accurate based on the procedures and controls in
place during our review and we continue to believe MDOA should review
documentation for all grant payments and recover any grant payments that cannot
be supported.
Page 5 of 5

--- Page 24 ---
A T
UDIT EAM
Mark S. Hagenbuch, CPA
Audit Manager
Matusala Y. Abishe
Senior Auditor
John E. Rooney
Staff Auditor