Title: Office of the Public Defender
Date: 08/10/2021
Type: Fiscal Compliance
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=611669bda1ce5815a0d1bed7
Extracted: 2025-06-19T11:52:48.210508
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Audit Report
Office of the Public Defender
May 2025
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Senator Shelly L. Hettleman (Senate Chair) Delegate Jared Solomon (House Chair)
Senator Joanne C. Benson Delegate Steven J. Arentz
Senator Benjamin T. Brooks, Sr. Delegate Andrea Fletcher Harrison
Senator Paul D. Corderman Delegate Steven C. Johnson
Senator Katie Fry Hester Delegate Mary A. Lehman
Senator Cheryl C. Kagan Delegate David H. Moon
Senator Clarence K. Lam, M.D. Delegate Julie Palakovich Carr
Senator Cory V. McCray Delegate Emily K. Shetty
Senator Justin D. Ready Delegate Stephanie M. Smith
Senator Bryan W. Simonaire Delegate M. Courtney Watson
To Obtain Further Information
Office of Legislative Audits
The Warehouse at Camden Yards
351 West Camden Street, Suite 400
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Phone: 410-946-5900
Maryland Relay: 711
TTY: 410-946-5401 ꞏ 301-970-5401
E-mail: webmaster@ola.state.md.us
Website: www.ola.state.md.us
To Report Fraud
The Office of Legislative Audits operates a Fraud Hotline to report fraud, waste, or abuse involving State
of Maryland government resources. Reports of fraud, waste, or abuse may be communicated anonymously
by a toll-free call to 1-877-FRAUD-11, by mail to the Fraud Hotline, c/o Office of Legislative Audits, or
through the Office’s website.
Nondiscrimination Statement
The Department of Legislative Services does not discriminate on the basis of age, ancestry, color, creed,
marital status, national origin, race, religion, gender, gender identity, sexual orientation, or disability in the
admission or access to its programs, services, or activities. The Department’s Information Officer has been
designated to coordinate compliance with the nondiscrimination requirements contained in Section 35.107
of the United States Department of Justice Regulations. Requests for assistance should be directed to the
Information Officer at 410-946-5400 or 410-970-5400.

--- Page 3 ---
May 28, 2025
Senator Shelly L. Hettleman, Senate Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Delegate Jared Solomon, House Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Members of Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Annapolis, Maryland
Ladies and Gentlemen:
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the Office of the Public Defender
(OPD) for the period beginning July 1, 2020 and ending January 15, 2025. OPD
is primarily responsible for providing legal services to eligible indigent
individuals charged with violating State, county, or municipal laws involving
possible incarceration.
Our audit did not disclose any findings that warrant mention in this report.
We wish to acknowledge the cooperation extended to us during the audit by OPD.
Respectfully submitted,
Brian S. Tanen
Brian S. Tanen, CPA, CFE
Legislative Auditor

--- Page 4 ---
2

--- Page 5 ---
Background Information
Agency Responsibilities
The Office of the Public Defender (OPD) is primarily responsible for providing
legal services to eligible indigent individuals charged with violating State, county,
or municipal laws involving possible incarceration. Legal representation is
provided in criminal and juvenile proceedings, post-conviction proceedings,
probation and parole revocations, involuntary commitments to public or private
institutions, and termination of parental rights proceedings. OPD provides these
services through a central headquarters and 47 offices located in 12 districts
throughout the State. According to State's records during fiscal year 2024, OPD's
expenditures totaled approximately $147 million. According to its annual report
for fiscal year 2024, OPD opened approximately 110,000 new cases.
OPD has a 13-member Board of Trustees with 11 members appointed by the
Governor with the advice and consent of the Senate, one member selected by the
Senate President, and one member selected by the Speaker of the House. The
Board reviews the administration of OPD, advises the Public Defender on its
operations, coordinates the activities of district advisory boards, and consults on
certain matters such as fees.
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report
Our audit included a review to determine the status of the four findings contained
in our preceding audit report dated August 10, 2021. See Figure 1 for the results
of our review.
3

--- Page 6 ---
Figure 1
Status of Preceding Findings
Preceding Implementation
Finding Description
Finding Status
OPD did not comply with State procurement laws
Finding 1 and regulations when awarding two sole source IT Not repeated
contracts with expenditures totaling $960,000.
OPD’s procedures for monitoring two IT contracts
Finding 2 did not ensure that certain deliverables were provided Not repeated
and tasks were performed.
OPD had not fully implemented three of ten
recommendations issued by DoIT based upon its
Finding 3 Not repeated
investigation of the IT security incident experienced
during March 2020.
OPD lacked comprehensive procedures to ensure the
propriety of PA invoices. In addition, OPD lacked
Finding 4 documentation that the payments for certain PA Not repeated
services that exceeded the maximum rate were
properly authorized.
Findings and Recommendations
Our audit did not disclose any significant deficiencies in the design or operation
of OPD’s internal control. Our audit also did not disclose any significant
instances of noncompliance with applicable laws, rules, or regulations. Findings
that did not warrant inclusion in this report were separately communicated to
OPD.
A draft copy of this report was provided to OPD. Since there are no
recommendations in this report, a written response was not necessary.
4

--- Page 7 ---
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the Office of the Public Defender
(OPD) for the period beginning July 1, 2020 and ending January 15, 2025. The
audit was conducted in accordance with generally accepted government auditing
standards. Those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain
sufficient, appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and
conclusions based on our audit objectives. We believe that the evidence obtained
provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit
objectives.
As prescribed by the State Government Article, Section 2-1221 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, the objectives of this audit were to examine OPD’s financial
transactions, records, and internal control, and to evaluate its compliance with
applicable State laws, rules, and regulations.
In planning and conducting our audit, we focused on the major financial-related
areas of operations based on assessments of significance and risk. The areas
addressed by the audit included payroll, as well as procurements and
disbursements. We also determined the status of the findings contained in our
preceding audit report.
Our assessment of internal controls was based on agency procedures and controls
in place at the time of our fieldwork. Our tests of transactions and other auditing
procedures were generally focused on the transactions occurring during our audit
period of July 1, 2020 to January 15, 2025, but may include transactions before or
after this period as we considered necessary to achieve our audit objectives.
To accomplish our audit objectives, our audit procedures included inquiries of
appropriate personnel, inspections of documents and records, tests of transactions,
and to the extent practicable, observations of the OPD’s operations. Generally,
transactions were selected for testing based on auditor judgment, which primarily
considers risk, the timing or dollar amount of the transaction, or the significance
of the transaction to the area of operation reviewed. As a matter of course, we do
not normally use sampling in our tests, so unless otherwise specifically indicated,
neither statistical nor non-statistical audit sampling was used to select the
transactions tested. Therefore, unless sampling is specifically indicated in a
finding, the results from any tests conducted or disclosed by us cannot be used to
project those results to the entire population from which the test items were
selected.
5

--- Page 8 ---
We also performed various data extracts of pertinent information from the State’s
Financial Management Information System (such as revenue and expenditure
data) and the State’s Central Payroll Bureau (payroll data). These extracts are
performed as part of ongoing internal processes established by the Office of
Legislative Audits and were subject to various tests to determine data reliability.
We determined that the data extracted from these sources were sufficiently
reliable for the purposes the data were used during this audit. Finally, we
performed other auditing procedures that we considered necessary to achieve our
audit objectives. The reliability of data used in this report for background or
informational purposes was not assessed.
OPD’s management is responsible for establishing and maintaining effective
internal control. Internal control is a process designed to provide reasonable
assurance that objectives pertaining to the reliability of financial records;
effectiveness and efficiency of operations, including safeguarding of assets; and
compliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations are achieved. As
provided in Government Auditing Standards, there are five components of
internal control: control environment, risk assessment, control activities,
information and communication, and monitoring. Each of the five components,
when significant to the audit objectives, and as applicable to OPD, were
considered by us during the course of this audit.
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate.
Our reports are designed to assist the Maryland General Assembly in exercising
its legislative oversight function and to provide constructive recommendations for
improving State operations. As a result, our reports generally do not address
activities we reviewed that are functioning properly.
6

--- Page 9 ---
A T
UDIT EAM
Robert A. Wells, Jr., CPA
Audit Manager
J. Alexander Twigg
Senior Auditor
Tari J. Covington
Albert S. Kim
Staff Auditors