Title: Review of Local Government Audit Reports - Fiscal Year Ending June 30, 2020
Date: 08/16/2021
Type: Special Reports and Letters
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=611aaf48a1ce58176c83112d
Extracted: 2025-06-19T11:52:58.481965
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Review of Local Government Audit Reports
Fiscal Year Ending June 30, 2020
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Senator Clarence K. Lam, M.D. (Senate Chair) Delegate Carol L Krimm (House Chair)
Senator Malcolm L. Augustine Delegate Steven J. Arentz
Senator Adelaide C. Eckardt Delegate Mark S. Chang
Senator George C. Edwards Delegate Nicholas P. Charles II
Senator Katie Fry Hester Delegate Andrea Fletcher Harrison
Senator Cheryl C. Kagan Delegate Trent M. Kittleman
Senator Benjamin F. Kramer Delegate David Moon
Senator Cory V. McCray Delegate Julie Palakovich Carr
Senator Justin D. Ready Delegate Geraldine Valentino-Smith
Senator Craig J. Zucker One Vacancy
To Obtain Further Information
Office of Legislative Audits
301 West Preston Street, Room 1202
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Phone: 410-946-5900 ꞏ 301-970-5900 ꞏ 1-877-486-9964 (Toll Free in Maryland)
Maryland Relay: 711
TTY: 410-946-5401 ꞏ 301-970-5401
E-mail: OLAWebmaster@ola.state.md.us
Website: www.ola.state.md.us
To Report Fraud
The Office of Legislative Audits operates a Fraud Hotline to report fraud, waste, or abuse involving State
of Maryland government resources. Reports of fraud, waste, or abuse may be communicated anonymously
by a toll-free call to 1-877-FRAUD-11, by mail to the Fraud Hotline, c/o Office of Legislative Audits, or
through the Office’s website.
Nondiscrimination Statement
The Department of Legislative Services does not discriminate on the basis of age, ancestry, color, creed,
marital status, national origin, race, religion, gender, gender identity, sexual orientation, or disability in the
admission or access to its programs, services, or activities. The Department’s Information Officer has been
designated to coordinate compliance with the nondiscrimination requirements contained in Section 35.107
of the United States Department of Justice Regulations. Requests for assistance should be directed to the
Information Officer at 410-946-5400 or 410-970-5400.

--- Page 3 ---
August 16, 2021
Senator Clarence K. Lam, M.D., Senate Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Delegate Carol L Krimm, House Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Members of Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Annapolis, Maryland
The Honorable Peter V. R. Franchot
Comptroller of Maryland
Ms. Victoria L. Gruber, Executive Director
Department of Legislative Services
Ladies and Gentlemen:
In accordance with the Local Government Article, Section 16-307 of the
Annotated Code of Maryland, we have performed desk reviews of the audit
reports for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2020 filed by each county, incorporated
city or town, and taxing district in Maryland (referred to as local governments).
We also reviewed overdue audit reports for prior fiscal years that were received
over the past year. The desk reviews consisted of assessments of compliance with
certain accounting and auditing standards, evaluations of compliance with certain
State laws, and analyses of selected financial data to identify potential financial
problems.
Most of the financial statements filed by the local governments for the fiscal year
ended June 30, 2020, along with the related independent auditors’ reports,
complied with the accounting and auditing standards that we assessed.
Nevertheless, we identified instances of noncompliance with certain requirements
of our audit guidelines, generally accepted accounting principles, and/or generally
accepted auditing standards. We sent letters to 45 local governments and, as
applicable, to their independent auditors to notify them of the deficiencies
disclosed by our reviews so that corrective actions could be taken to help ensure
future compliance.

--- Page 4 ---
A number of audit reports were not filed timely in accordance with the
requirements of State law. As of July 16, 2021, 9 local governments had not
submitted audit reports for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2020; one of these local
governments also had not filed audit reports for the fiscal years ended June 30,
2019 and 2018.
If a local government does not comply with the audit report filing requirements,
State law provides that the Comptroller of Maryland, on notice from the
Executive Director of the Department of Legislative Services, may order the
discontinuance of all moneys, grants, or State aid to which the local governments
are entitled. We notified the Executive Director of the Department of Legislative
Services of the local government with more than one audit report outstanding.
The fiscal year 2020 financial statements disclosed 15 local governments with
cash deposits that were not adequately collateralized, or otherwise insured, which
is an area of noncompliance with State law. Additionally, for one local
government, the auditor’s report included an explanatory paragraph describing an
uncertainty about its ability to continue as a going concern. As appropriate, we
sent letters to these local governments, and to their legislative representatives, to
communicate their noncompliance and to request that the local governments
advise us of the corrective actions that will be taken.
Respectfully submitted,
Gregory A. Hook, CPA
Legislative Auditor
2

--- Page 5 ---
Table of Contents
Introduction and Scope, Objectives, and Methodology 4
Results of Desk Reviews 6
Audit Reports
Finding 1 – A number of local governments had not filed the 6
required audit reports or had filed after the required date.
Finding 2 – Auditors’ reports for eight local governmental units 7
were not presented in accordance with certain generally accepted
auditing standards.
Financial Statements
Finding 3 – Twenty-one financial statements submitted by 20 local 8
governments did not meet certain requirements of generally
accepted accounting principles.
Finding 4 – Financial statements, accompanying notes, and required 8
supplementary information did not include certain disclosures
required by generally accepted accounting principles for four
audit reports.
Noncompliance with State Law
Finding 5 – Sixteen financial statements submitted by of 15 local 9
governments contained disclosures that cash deposits were not
adequately collateralized, or otherwise insured, as required by
State law.
Potential Financial Problems
Finding 6 – One local government disclosed potential financial 9
problems resulting in uncertainty regarding its ability to
continue as a going concern.
Special Taxing Districts
Finding 7 – The required reports had not been filed for five special 10
taxing districts as of July 16, 2021.
Exhibit A – Schedule of Audit Reports Containing Disclosures 11
That Cash Deposits Were Not Fully Collateralized or Otherwise
Insured
3

--- Page 6 ---
Introduction and Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
The Local Government Article, Section 16-306 of the Annotated Code of
Maryland requires each county, incorporated city or town, and taxing district in
Maryland (referred to in this report as local governments) to file audit reports
annually or once every four years under specified conditions. There were 194
local government audit reports due for inclusion in our fiscal year 2020 review
(24 counties, 155 cities and towns, and 15 taxing areas that are created under State
law). The reports are to include financial statements, with accompanying notes,
and auditors’ reports that express opinions as to whether the financial statements
are fairly presented. The financial statements are required to be prepared in
accordance with generally accepted accounting principles and audited in
accordance with generally accepted auditing standards. Finally, we annually
prepare and distribute audit guidelines to provide additional information regarding
the accounting, reporting, and auditing requirements.
The Local Government Article, Section 16-307 of the Code requires the Office of
Legislative Audits to perform a desk review of each local government’s annual
audit report for compliance with generally accepted accounting principles and
auditing standards. As part of the desk review process, we also addressed other
attributes as described below. Section 16-308 of the Article specifies the
reporting and review requirements applicable to special taxing districts created by
the counties. The applicable county is responsible for reviewing each special
taxing district’s compliance with the applicable provisions of the law and for
submitting the districts’ reports to the Office of Legislative Audits. The Office is
required to review the results of the counties’ reviews and the districts’ reports for
compliance with the law.
We conducted a desk review of each of the fiscal year 2020 reports that had been
received from the counties, incorporated cities and towns, and taxing districts.
We also reviewed one fiscal year 2017 report (Town of Deer Park) and seven
fiscal year 2019 reports (Town of Chesapeake City, City of Hyattsville, City of
Mount Rainier, City of Seat Pleasant, Bel Air Special Taxing Area, Mount Savage
Special Taxing Area, and Upper Potomac River Commission) that were received
over the last year. The desk reviews consisted of reviewing each audit report in
order to accomplish the following tasks:
 Identify areas of noncompliance with our audit guidelines and certain
accounting and auditing standards pertaining to the presentation of the
financial statements and auditors’ reports.
4

--- Page 7 ---
 Identify any instances of noncompliance with certain provisions of State law
(for example, collateral for bank deposits, timely filing of audit reports).
 Identify local governments with potential financial problems relating to deficit
fund balances or unfavorable trends and ratios, based on analyses of financial
data over the most recent five-year period (July 1, 2015 through June 30,
2020).
We also reviewed each of the fiscal year 2020 special taxing district reports
received and the related results of the counties’ reviews of these reports. The
purpose of our review was to ensure that the counties had reviewed the reports
submitted for compliance with the provisions of the law and to identify instances
in which required reports were not submitted.
At the conclusion of our review, we sent letters to applicable local governments
and their independent auditors to notify them of the deficiencies disclosed during
the review so that corrective actions can be taken to help ensure future
compliance. Additionally, as appropriate, we sent letters to local governments,
and to their legislative representatives, to communicate certain noncompliance
with State law or potential financial problems. For these issues, we asked the
local governments to advise us of corrective actions that will be taken.
5

--- Page 8 ---
Results of Desk Reviews
Audit Reports
Finding 1
A number of local governments had not filed the required audit reports or
had filed after the required filing date.
As of July 16, 2021, 9 local governments were delinquent in filing audit reports as
required by the Local Government Article of the Annotated Code of Maryland.
Local Government Fiscal Years Outstanding
Town of Capitol Heights 2020
Town of Chesapeake City 2020
Town of Deer Park 2018, 2019, 2020
Town of East New Market 2020
City of Hyattsville 2020
Town of Middletown 2020
City of Mount Rainier 2020
City of Seat Pleasant 2020
Town of Sudlersville 2020
Furthermore, 27 local government audit reports were submitted after the required
filing date. The submission of audit reports after the required filing date was also
noted for 11 of these 27 local government reports during at least our preceding
year’s review. The failure of a local government to file an audit report, or a delay
in filing, results in the lack of timely accountability to its citizens. The Local
Government Article, Section 16-306 of the Annotated Code of Maryland
generally requires audit reports to be filed on or before October 31 after the close
of the fiscal year or on or before December 31 after the close of the fiscal year for
those local governments with a population of more than 400,000.
Budget language adopted during previous sessions of the Maryland General
Assembly resulted in the withholding of transportation aid from certain local
governments pending receipt of their delinquent audit reports. Furthermore, the
failure to file a required report with the Department of Legislative Services for
three successive years provides the Department’s Executive Director with
reasonable cause to suppose that the municipality is no longer actively operating
under its charter, which could cause the municipality to have its charter repealed.
We have reported the failure of the Town of Deer Park to file the required reports
6

--- Page 9 ---
for the fiscal years ending June 30, 2018, 2019, and 2020 to the Executive
Director.
We will review all audit reports outstanding as of July 16, 2021 and take any
follow-up action necessary when the delinquent reports are received. The results
of these reviews will be included in the report on our review of fiscal year 2021
local government audit reports.
The towns of Barclay, Burkittsville, Eagle Harbor, Highland Beach, Marydel,
Port Tobacco, Rosemont, Templeville, and special taxing areas Ellerslie and
Mount Savage previously requested waivers from filing audit reports, which we
granted, as permitted by State law. These local governments met the conditions
for filing an audit report every fourth year as provided for under the Local
Government Article, Section 16-305 of the Code and, depending on the waiver
period, will be required to file its next audit report for either fiscal year 2021,
2022, or 2023.
Finding 2
Auditors’ reports for eight local governmental units were not presented in
accordance with certain generally accepted auditing standards.
Auditors’ reports for eight local governmental units were not presented in
accordance with certain generally accepted auditing standards. The auditors’
reports for four of these local governmental units included deficiencies that were
also cited during our preceding year’s review. The following is a summary of
these deficiencies:
Number of
Area of Noncompliance
Audit Reports
Auditor did not express an opinion on all opinion units or 6
financial statements.
Auditor’s report did not include all basic elements (for 2
example, auditor did not include appropriate
reference to the work of another auditor).
The Local Government Article, Section 16-306 of the Annotated Code of
Maryland requires that audits be performed in accordance with generally accepted
auditing standards. These standards require, in part, that the auditor express an
opinion(s) as to whether the basic financial statements present fairly, in all
material respects, the respective financial position, the respective changes in
financial position, and cash flows, where applicable, of the local government in
7

--- Page 10 ---
conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of
America.
Financial Statements
Finding 3
Twenty-one financial statements submitted by 20 local governments did not
meet certain requirements of generally accepted accounting principles.
Twenty-one financial statements submitted by 20 local governments did not meet
certain requirements of generally accepted accounting principles. Two of these
21 financial statements included a deficiency that was also cited during our
preceding year’s review. The following is a summary of the deficiencies and the
corresponding number of instances:
Number of
Deficiency
Instances
Presentation of financial statement(s) was inappropriate 12
(for example, certain amounts reported on more than
one financial statement did not agree).
Misclassification or improper presentation (for example, 7
financial statement was not mathematically
accurate).
Items reported as assets, deferred outflows of resources, 1
liabilities, or deferred inflows of resources were not
properly displayed.
Governmental fund balances were not properly 1
classified.
Finding 4
Financial statements, accompanying notes, and required supplementary
information did not include certain disclosures required by generally
accepted accounting principles for four audit reports.
Certain required information was not included in the financial statements, or
disclosed in the accompanying notes, or the required supplementary information,
for four audit reports. Adequate disclosure is necessary to facilitate the
understanding of and to provide for fair presentation of the financial information.
The financial statements of one of these local governments included a deficiency
8

--- Page 11 ---
that was also cited during our preceding year’s review. The following is a
summary of the areas of insufficient disclosure and the corresponding number of
instances:
Number of
Area of Insufficient Disclosure
Instances
Information related to other postemployment benefits 2
Cash and cash equivalents 2
Noncompliance with State Law
Finding 5
Sixteen financial statements submitted by 15 local governments contained
disclosures that cash deposits were not adequately collateralized, or
otherwise insured, as required by State law.
Sixteen financial statements submitted by 15 local governments contained
disclosures that cash deposits were not adequately collateralized, or otherwise
insured, as required by State law (see Exhibit A). The Local Government Article,
Section 17-101 of the Annotated Code of Maryland requires that deposits with
financial institutions by local governmental units be fully collateralized. Full
collateralization minimizes the risk of loss of deposits in the event the financial
institution defaults. In addition, this law requires that collateral be of the types
specified in the State Finance and Procurement Article, Section 6-202 of the
Code.
Potential Financial Problems
Finding 6
One local government disclosed potential financial problems resulting in
uncertainty regarding its ability to continue as a going concern.
One local government, the Upper Potomac River Commission – Waste Treatment
Plant, Trunk Sewer and Municipal Connecting System Fund (Fund), disclosed
potential financial problems resulting in uncertainty regarding its ability to
continue as a going concern. The auditor’s report for this Fund included an
emphasis paragraph describing an uncertainty about the Fund’s ability to continue
as a going concern. Specifically, the auditor’s report referenced the Fund’s notes
to the financial statements which stated that substantial doubt exists about its
9

--- Page 12 ---
ability to continue as a going concern. Additionally, the notes stated that the Fund
management is in the process of addressing how it will fulfill the Fund’s
obligations, given its economic dependence on a private corporation. This Fund
had an unrestricted net position deficit of $982,511, which was offset by net
investment in capital assets of $1,597,116 leaving the Fund with a positive net
position of $614,605 as of June 30, 2020.
Special Taxing Districts
The preceding contents of this report are applicable to local governments filing
audit reports in accordance with the provisions of the Local Government Article,
Section 16-306 of the Code. Section 16-308 of this Article requires that certain
types of special taxing districts (created by a county) file annual audit or financial
reports with the county in which the districts are located not later than 90 days
after the close of the fiscal year, in accordance with the rules and regulations
established by the applicable county. The applicable county is responsible for
reviewing each district’s compliance with the applicable provisions of the law and
for submitting copies of these reports to the Office of Legislative Audits.
Finding 7
The required reports had not been filed for five special taxing districts as of
July 16, 2021.
As of July 16, 2021, we had not received the required reports for the fiscal year
ended June 30, 2020 for five special taxing districts, which are located in Anne
Arundel County. Anne Arundel County advised us that they were in the process
of pursuing compliance with the applicable filing requirement for these districts
and that appropriate follow-up action would be taken (for example, withholding
funds).
10

--- Page 13 ---
Exhibit A
Schedule of Audit Reports Containing Disclosures That Cash
Deposits Were Not Fully Collateralized or Otherwise Insured
Similar Disclosures
Uninsured/ Included in Audit
Uncollateralized Reports for Each Fiscal
Entity Amount Year Since
At June 30, 2020
Counties
Dorchester County $40,218 n/a
Howard County 4,433,696 2016
Prince George’s County 266,125 n/a
Wicomico County 105,751 2014
Cities and Towns
Town of Brentwood 1,205,305 2016
Town of Garrett Park 129,781 2019
Town of Hebron 4,902 n/a
Town of Landover Hills 341,722 n/a
Town of Lonaconing 336,743 2017
Village of Martin’s Additions 7,536 2019
Town of Morningside 25,864 2018
Town of Preston 242,000 n/a
Special Taxing Areas
Village of Drummond 34,603 n/a
Upper Potomac River Commission 206,608 2019
At June 30, 2019
Cities and Towns
City of Seat Pleasant 156,515 n/a
Special Taxing Areas
Upper Potomac River Commission 177,388 n/a
n/a – not applicable, as not included in prior fiscal year report
11

--- Page 14 ---
A T
UDIT EAM
Bekana Edossa, CPA, CFE
Audit Manager
Catherine M. Easter
W. Thomas Sides
Senior Auditors