Title: Judiciary - Judicial Information Systems
Date: 08/23/2021
Type: Fiscal Compliance
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=6123d393a1ce5811d00d0d9a
Extracted: 2025-06-19T11:53:56.877246
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Audit Report
Judiciary
Judicial Information Systems
August 2021
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Senator Clarence K. Lam, M.D. (Senate Chair) Delegate Carol L. Krimm (House Chair)
Senator Malcolm L. Augustine Delegate Steven J. Arentz
Senator Adelaide C. Eckardt Delegate Mark S. Chang
Senator George C. Edwards Delegate Nicholas P. Charles II
Senator Katie Fry Hester Delegate Andrea Fletcher Harrison
Senator Cheryl C. Kagan Delegate Trent M. Kittleman
Senator Benjamin F. Kramer Delegate David Moon
Senator Cory V. McCray Delegate Julie Palakovich Carr
Senator Justin D. Ready Delegate Geraldine Valentino-Smith
Senator Craig J. Zucker One Vacancy
To Obtain Further Information
Office of Legislative Audits
301 West Preston Street, Room 1202
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Phone: 410-946-5900 ꞏ 301-970-5900 ꞏ 1-877-486-9964 (Toll Free in Maryland)
Maryland Relay: 711
TTY: 410-946-5401 ꞏ 301-970-5401
E-mail: OLAWebmaster@ola.state.md.us
Website: www.ola.state.md.us
To Report Fraud
The Office of Legislative Audits operates a Fraud Hotline to report fraud, waste, or abuse involving State
of Maryland government resources. Reports of fraud, waste, or abuse may be communicated anonymously
by a toll-free call to 1-877-FRAUD-11, by mail to the Fraud Hotline, c/o Office of Legislative Audits, or
through the Office’s website.
Nondiscrimination Statement
The Department of Legislative Services does not discriminate on the basis of age, ancestry, color, creed,
marital status, national origin, race, religion, gender, gender identity, sexual orientation, or disability in the
admission or access to its programs, services, or activities. The Department’s Information Officer has been
designated to coordinate compliance with the nondiscrimination requirements contained in Section 35.107
of the United States Department of Justice Regulations. Requests for assistance should be directed to the
Information Officer at 410-946-5400 or 410-970-5400.

--- Page 3 ---
August 23, 2021
Senator Clarence K. Lam, M.D., Senate Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Delegate Carol L. Krimm, House Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Members of Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Annapolis, Maryland
Ladies and Gentlemen:
We have audited the Judiciary – Judicial Information Systems (JIS). Our audit
included an internal control review of the Judiciary’s data center and the network
administered by JIS. JIS provides computing and network resources and operates
as a computer services provider for the Judiciary.
Our audit disclosed that JIS did not have sufficient controls over authenticating
remote network connections.
Our audit included a review to determine the status of five findings that were
contained in the preceding audit report. I would like to call your attention to our
determination that JIS satisfactorily addressed all five of these findings.
The Judiciary’s response to this report, on behalf of JIS, is included as an
appendix to this report. We reviewed the response to our finding and related
recommendation, and have concluded that the corrective actions identified are
sufficient to address all issues.

--- Page 4 ---
We wish to acknowledge the cooperation extended to us during the audit by JIS.
We also wish to acknowledge the Judiciary’s and JIS’ willingness to address the
audit issue and implement appropriate corrective actions.
Respectfully submitted,
Gregory A. Hook, CPA
Legislative Auditor
2

--- Page 5 ---
Background Information
Agency Responsibilities
The Judiciary operates the Judicial Information Systems (JIS) on behalf of the
State court systems. JIS develops and maintains State court system applications,
operates a statewide computer network, and is responsible for data center
contingency planning. JIS’ fiscal year 2020 expenditures totaled approximately
$61.4 million, according to State records.
JIS maintains two data centers and supports all major information technology
initiatives in the District Courts, the Circuit Courts, the Appellate Courts, as well
as other court-related offices. The Judiciary is transitioning courts across the state
onto the Maryland Electronic Courts (MDEC) system that supports case initiation,
scheduling, disposition, and other record keeping. As of June 28, 2021, 21 of 24
jurisdictions have been converted to MDEC.
JIS operates a computer wide area network (WAN) that connects to all units of
the Maryland State Judiciary including the Administrative Office of the Courts,
the District Courts, and the Circuit Courts. The WAN connects the remote court
locations to the MDEC and other JIS maintained applications. Furthermore,
numerous local area networks, across all remote court locations, can access
external agencies through networkMaryland as well as the internet.
Our audit focused exclusively on the computer and network operations of the JIS
data centers. An audit of JIS fiscal operations was conducted as part of the audit
of the Judiciary, and a separate report was issued on April 7, 2021.
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report
Our audit included a review to determine the status of the five findings contained
in our preceding audit report dated August 18, 2016. We determined that JIS
satisfactorily addressed these findings.
3

--- Page 6 ---
Findings and Recommendations
Finding 1
Remote access to the internal Judicial Information Systems (JIS) network by
employees, courts-affiliated personnel, and authorized contractors used a
single authentication measure rather than the more secure multi-factor
authentication.
Analysis
We determined that the remote access by employees, courts-affiliated personnel,
and authorized contractors to JIS’ internal network, using a Virtual Private
Network (VPN) connection, required a stronger security authentication measure
than was in place during the audit. Our review noted that 5,139 user accounts
across the above user categories had such VPN-based remote network access.
These remote VPN connections into JIS’ internal network did not require multi-
factor authentication (MFA) for establishing access. Instead, access was provided
based upon only single factor authentication. MFA uses two or more different
credential factors to authenticate user network connections. Access to critical
networks and resources requires layers of security protections which include use
of MFA, to help prevent security risks tied to compromised user credentials.
Best practices, as specified in the State of Maryland Information Technology
Security Manual, require Maryland agencies1 to ensure that MFA mechanisms are
employed for all remote access to networks.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that JIS implement multi-factor authentication for remote
connections into the JIS network by employees, courts-affiliated personnel,
and authorized contractors.
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We have audited the Judiciary – Judicial information Systems (JIS). Fieldwork
associated with our audit of JIS was conducted during the period from August
2020 to December 2020. The audit was conducted in accordance with generally
accepted government auditing standards. Those standards require that we plan
1 As an independent branch of State government, the Manual’s requirements do not apply to the
Judiciary and JIS.
4

--- Page 7 ---
and perform the audit to obtain sufficient, appropriate evidence to provide a
reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives.
We believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings
and conclusions based on our audit objectives.
As prescribed by the State Government Article, Section 2-1221 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, the objectives of this audit were to examine JIS’ internal
control over its data centers and network and to evaluate its compliance with
applicable State laws, rules, and regulations for the computer systems that support
the State courts and related agencies of the Judiciary.
In planning and conducting our audit, we focused on the major areas of operations
based on assessments of significance and risk. The areas addressed by the audit
included security procedures and controls over the mainframe operating system,
security software, and databases. Our audit also included an assessment of the
security controls for the network infrastructure and critical network devices (for
example firewalls), and JIS’ use of malware protection software to protect JIS’
computers. We also determined the status of the findings contained in our
preceding audit report on JIS.
JIS’ fiscal operations are audited separately as part of our audit of the Judiciary.
The most recent fiscal compliance audit that covered the Judiciary’s fiscal
operations was issued on April 7, 2021.
To accomplish our audit objectives, our audit procedures included inquiries of
appropriate personnel, inspections of documents and records, and to the extent
practicable, observations of JIS operations. We also performed other auditing
procedures that we considered necessary to achieve our audit objectives. The
reliability of data used in this report for background or informational purposes
was not assessed.
JIS’ management is responsible for establishing and maintaining effective internal
control. Internal control is a process designed to provide reasonable assurance
that objectives pertaining to the reliability of financial records; effectiveness and
efficiency of operations, including safeguarding of assets; and compliance with
applicable laws, rules, and regulations are achieved. As provided in Government
Auditing Standards, there are five components of internal control: control
environment, risk assessment, control activities, information and communication,
and monitoring. Each of the five components, when significant to the audit
objectives, and as applicable to JIS, were considered by us during the course of
this audit.
5

--- Page 8 ---
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate.
Our reports are designed to assist the Maryland General Assembly in exercising
its legislative oversight function and to provide constructive recommendations for
improving State operations. As a result, our reports generally do not address
activities we reviewed that are functioning properly.
This report includes a finding relating to a condition that we consider to be a
significant deficiency in the design or operation of internal control that could
adversely affect JIS’ ability to operate effectively and efficiently, and/or comply
with applicable laws, rules, and regulations. Our audit did not disclose any
instance of noncompliance with applicable laws, rules, or regulations. Other less
significant findings were communicated to JIS that did not warrant inclusion in
this report.
The response from the Judiciary, on behalf of JIS, to our findings and
recommendations is included as an appendix to this report. As prescribed in the
State Government Article, Section 2-1224 of the Annotated Code of Maryland,
we will advise JIS regarding the results of our review of its response.
6

--- Page 9 ---
APPENDIX

--- Page 10 ---
Judiciary
Judicial Information Systems
Agency Response Form
Finding 1
Remote access to the internal Judicial Information Systems (JIS) network by employees,
courts-affiliated personnel, and authorized contractors used a single authentication
measure rather than the more secure multi-factor authentication.
We recommend that JIS implement multi-factor authentication for remote connections into
the JIS network by employees, courts-affiliated personnel, and authorized contractors.
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 1 Agree Completion Date: June 23, 2021
Please provide details of Judicial Information Systems (JIS) recognizes the importance of
corrective action or authentication techniques that help prevent against account breaches and,
explain disagreement. as such, takes the necessary actions to further secure the Judiciary’s
network operations. In June 2019, JIS implemented multi-factor
authentication (MFA) for system administrators who use remote access
technology to connect to the Judiciary’s network. Further to this, JIS
began internal testing of MFA for use by all individuals who use remote
access technologies to access the Judiciary’s network. Following careful
consideration, JIS began pilot testing MFA with several user groups.
Due to the pandemic and its attendant issues, the timing for
implementation of MFA required contemplation of the impact to court
business operations. As such, the decision was made to hold the
implementation of MFA for all individuals who use remote access
technologies until the Judiciary resumed full operations on April 26,
2021. MFA was fully implemented for all Judiciary users of a
predominate operating system who connect to the Judiciary network
using remote access technology on June 23, 2021.
Page 1 of 1

--- Page 11 ---
A T
UDIT EAM
R. Brendan Coffey, CPA, CISA
Edwin L. Paul, CPA, CISA
Information Systems Audit Managers
Michael K. Bliss
Matthew D. Walbert, CISA
Information Systems Senior Auditors
Dominick R. Abril
Vickey K. Micah
Charles O. Price
Malcolm J. Woodard
Information Systems Staff Auditors