Title: Presentation to the Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee - Judiciary


Related Report Dated (4/7/2021)

Video Presentation (Judiciary starts at 01:47:07)
Date: 08/25/2021
Type: Presentations to the Legislature
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=61264255a1ce581130282e84
Extracted: 2025-06-19T11:53:26.746533
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Judiciary
Report Dated April 7, 2021
Presentation to Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Gregory A. Hook, CPA
Matthew L. Streett, CPA, CFE
Bekana Edossa, CPA, CFE
Joseph E. McWilliams, CFE
Sandra C. Medeiros
August 25, 2021

--- Page 2 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Background
 The Judiciary is responsible for the administration of justice in Maryland. The
Judiciary includes the courts and various other agencies that support the
administrative and regulatory functions of the Judicial Branch of government.
 During fiscal year 2019, the Judiciary’s operating expenditures (including the
district and circuit courts) totaled $566.7 million and revenues totaled $52.5
million.
 The audit report covers activity during the period from December 21, 2015
through June 9, 2019. The report contains seven findings, including two
repeat findings from our preceding audit report.
 The Judiciary’s response indicated disagreement with the factual accuracy of
the report findings, but in many cases agreed to implement the related
recommendations. In our opinion, many of the expressed disagreements
stemmed from the Judiciary’s position as an independent and equal branch
of State government. Nevertheless, we believe that does not mitigate the
need to establish, and follow, appropriate controls to safeguard State assets
under the Judiciary’s authority and care.
Judiciary Page 2

--- Page 3 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Key Findings
 The Judiciary did not adequately secure and/or retain critical procurement
documents, and did not publish certain contracts on eMaryland Marketplace
(eMM) as required by its policies.
 The Judiciary did not consider the use of available Statewide contracts for its
credit card processing and could not justify its long term use of sole source
procurements for these services, which we concluded resulted in reduced
competition and increased costs for consumers.
 The Judiciary did not maintain accurate and comprehensive records for its
information systems cable and wiring master contract, and did not properly
award task orders and change orders, certain of which appeared questionable.
Further, the Judiciary did not take all appropriate recommended corrective
actions to address allegations it received about the contract.
 The Judiciary did not have sufficient procedures and controls over eligibility
determinations for legal representation provided by the Office of the Public
Defender.
Judiciary Page 3

--- Page 4 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Procurements
Background:
The Judiciary, as an independent branch of the State Government, is not
subject to the State Finance and Procurement Article of the Annotated Code of
Maryland and State procurement regulations. The Judiciary established a
Procurement Policy under the authority of the Chief Judge of the Court of
Appeals in accordance with the Maryland Constitution. During fiscal year
2019, the Judiciary’s non-payroll operating expenditures totaled approximately
$179.5 million. During our audit, we selected for testing:
 ten contracts procured during our audit period totaling approximately $36.4
million (including contract modifications totaling $5.8 million),
 one $2.5 million cable and wiring master contract, that was the subject of
an allegation received through our fraud, waste, and abuse hotline, and
 one longstanding contract for credit card processing with the same vendor.
Judiciary Page 4

--- Page 5 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Procurements (Finding 1) Repeat Finding
The Judiciary did not adequately secure and/or retain critical procurement
documents and did not publish certain contracts on eMaryland Marketplace
(eMM) as required. Our review disclosed the following conditions:
 Bids were not properly secured prior to opening.
 Losing bidders’ financial and technical proposals or selection committee
evaluations for three of the eight competitively bid contracts tested totaling
approximately $7.3 million were not retained (Repeat Finding).
 The Judiciary did not document that a $2 million Intergovernmental
Cooperative Purchasing Agreement for office furniture was originally
competitively procured and that it resulted in favorable pricing and conditions.
 The Judiciary did not publish contract solicitation and/or awards on eMM for
eight contracts totaling $34.6 million as required by its policy.
Judiciary Page 5

--- Page 6 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Procurements (Finding 2)
The Judiciary did not consider the use of available Statewide contracts to obtain
credit card processing services and could not justify the use of a sole source
procurement for these services or the basis for the related fees.
 The Judiciary has continually obtained credit card payment services for online
and in-person district court transactions since at least 1989 using a sole
source procurement even though there was an existing Statewide contract for
similar services at lower costs to consumers. Our analysis estimated
consumers would have saved $2.7 million during the period from December
2015 to June 2019 under the Statewide contract.
 The Judiciary also did not adequately justify the use of the sole source
procurement for these services, could not document how it had negotiated the
fee with this vendor, and continued to use the vendor for at least 18 months
after the most recent contract expired.
The Judiciary is not required to use statewide contracts, but its Procurement
Policy allows for the use of Statewide contracts to achieve competitive prices,
terms, and conditions.
Judiciary Page 6

--- Page 7 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Questionable Procurement Activity (Findings 3 and 4)
Background:
 We received an allegation through our fraud, waste, and abuse hotline
regarding questionable contract activities involving certain Judiciary
employees and a vendor performing work under the Judiciary’s information
systems cable and wiring master contract. The Judiciary received a similar
allegation and its Internal Affairs Division, in conjunction with its Internal Audit
Department, conducted a review of the allegations. As of June 9, 2019,
payments under the contract totaled approximately $3.2 million, including
$2.3 million that was paid to the vendor referenced in the allegation.
 We reviewed the files supporting the results of the Judiciary’s internal review
and conducted our own review of the contract. We noted that the Judiciary
did not address certain recommendations included in its review and we
identified additional internal control and monitoring deficiencies and certain
questionable activity, which we referred to the Office of the Attorney General –
Criminal Division. A referral to the Criminal Division does not mean that a
criminal act has actually occurred or that criminal charges will be filed.
Judiciary Page 7

--- Page 8 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Questionable Procurement Activity (Finding 3)
As of June 9, 2019, the Judiciary awarded the vendor in the allegation 123 of the
193 task orders issued under the master contract, accounting for $2.4 million of
the $3.3 million awarded (73 percent). We judgmentally selected six task orders
and related change orders totaling $802,574 for testing, which were awarded to
the vendor identified in the allegation (see figure below).
Judiciary Page 8

--- Page 9 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Questionable Procurement Activity (Finding 3)
Our review of the task orders and related change orders disclosed the following:
 Accurate and comprehensive records of project awards and costs were not
maintained. As a result, the Judiciary overspent the contract by at least
$664,000 and overcommitted task orders by $769,000.
 For two task orders totaling $324,000, bids were received 5 and 16 calendar
days after the due dates specified in the solicitation.
 For two task orders totaling $194,700, the Judiciary did not notify all contract
vendors of changes made to the scope of the work after the initial bids were
received, but prior to awarding the task order.
 The Judiciary could not document that it had assessed the reasonableness of
11 of the 13 change orders totaling $130,800. The allegation noted that the
vendor submitted low bids to receive the award and then submitted change
orders to compensate for the initial low bids.
 Three change orders totaling $72,100 included labor costs that should not
have been charged per the task order or were submitted by the vendor after
the related work was already in progress or completed.
Judiciary Page 9

--- Page 10 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Questionable Procurement Activity (Finding 4)
 The Judiciary did not take sufficient corrective action to address allegations it
received about its cable and wiring master contract. At the time of our review,
three of the six recommendations included in an internal audit report had not
been implemented. Specifically, the Judiciary had not established:
(a) dollar thresholds for obtaining approvals on projects,
(b) comprehensive procedures for recording change orders, and
(c) procedures for authorizing work to start.
 The Judiciary disagreed with our finding and recommendations since it
believed it had adjusted processes as appropriate to address the
recommendations contained in the internal audit report. However, the
Judiciary could not provide documentation or otherwise sufficiently
demonstrate that is had taken action until after we brought this matter to its
attention.
Judiciary Page 10

--- Page 11 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Public Defender Eligibility Determinations (Finding 6)
 State law transferred responsibility for determining eligibility for most Office of
Public Defender (OPD) services to the Judiciary effective October 1, 2017. As
of June 2019, the Judiciary made 191,000 eligibility determinations since it
assumed responsibility. Our review disclosed the following conditions:
 The Judiciary did not develop a formal policy and definitions for determining
the applicant’s household or family size as required by federal regulations
and did not obtain documentation to verify the household or family size
claimed by the applicant.
 Applicant information entered into the eligibility database was not reviewed,
at least on a test basis, to ensure the accuracy of the data entry.
 The Judiciary disagreed with portions of the finding and related
recommendations based on it understanding of the controlling State statute,
and that its staff were judicial officers (implying that they were not
accustomed to or qualified to perform data verification). We believe the
Judiciary should ensure applicant information and related eligibility
determination are accurately recorded and performed, at least on a test basis.
Judiciary Page 11

--- Page 12 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Other Findings
Traffic Citations
 Finding 5 - Certain employees within the Judiciary’s Traffic Processing Center
(TPC) with access to the Maryland Automated Traffic System (MATS) had the
capability to delete recorded citation transactions without independent
approval or record of the transaction (that is, a record of its deletion would not
be known). Additionally, access to MATS and the Maryland Electronic Courts
(MDEC) system was not periodically monitored to ensure access was properly
restricted. We noted that 13 of 27 TPC employees had access to MDEC that
was not needed to perform their job duties.
Equipment
 Finding 7 (Repeat Finding) - The Judiciary did not establish effective controls
over equipment. Specifically, eight employees with access to inventory had
the capability to update the related equipment records. In addition, physical
inventories for the District Count were not conducted as required for 319
equipment items totaling $600,000.
Judiciary Page 12

--- Page 13 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Conclusions
The Judiciary should implement the following:
• secure and retain critical procurement documents and publish contract
solicitations and awards;
• consider using available Statewide contracts when advantageous;
• enhance procedures over task order processing and ensure total costs
expended do not exceed the value of related contract without documented
justification;
• address the unresolved recommendations of its internal report on alleged
questionable contract practices;
• ensure, at least on a test basis, the accuracy of eligibility determinations
for legal representation by OPD; and,
• establish effective controls over the processing of traffic citations and
equipment.
Judiciary Page 13