Title: Presentation to the Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee - Department of Human Services – Social Services Administration


Related Report Dated (6/3/2021)

Video Presentation (Department of Human Services – Social Services Administration starts at 2:08)
Date: 08/25/2021
Type: Presentations to the Legislature
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=61264254a1ce581130282e83
Extracted: 2025-06-19T11:53:36.834178
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Department of Human Services (DHS) -
Social Services Administration (SSA)
Report Dated June 3, 2021
Presentation to Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Gregory A. Hook, CPA
Edward A. Rubenstein, CPA
Menachem Katz, CPA
August 25, 2021

--- Page 2 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Audit Overview
 SSA supervises, directs, and monitors social services programs, including
foster care, adoption and guardianship, and child protective services
conducted by the State’s 24 local departments of social services (LDSS).
 Our report contains 8 findings; 7 of which are repeats from the prior audit
report. Although the current report has 7 repeats, 8 of 14 findings were
actually repeated from our prior audit report dated November 20, 2017,
but 2 of the 8 were merged into one current finding.
 We determined that SSA’s accountability and compliance level was
unsatisfactory, in accordance with the rating system that we established
in conformity with State law. In our opinion, the primary factors
contributing to this rating were the significance of the audit findings, the
number of repeat findings, and SSA’s insufficient monitoring of the 24
LDSSs for compliance with numerous policies and regulations.
DHS - Social Services Administration Page 2

--- Page 3 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Audit Overview
According to the Children’s Electronic Social Services Information Exchange
(CHESSIE), which was the primary computerized child welfare information
system used by SSA and the LDSSs, expenditures related to social services
program activity during fiscal year 2019 totaled approximately $274 million.
Fiscal Year 2019 Expenditures Processed via CHESSIE
Number of Children Number of Providers / Expenditures
Expenditure Category
During Year Parents (in millions)
Treatment Foster Care 2,150 30 $63.6
Group Foster Care 1,460 67 70.2
Adoption Assistance 6,605 4,496 58.6
Guardianship Assistance 3,397 2,419 28.4
Family Foster Care 2,801 1,521 13.1
Teen Mother Foster Care 132 8 4.3
Other Foster Care 697 469 1.9
Subtotal (Maintenance) 17,242 9,010 $240.1
Ancillary Funds 34.3
Total Expenditures $274.4
DHS - Social Services Administration Page 3

--- Page 4 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Key Findings
 SSA did not have comprehensive quality assurance processes to monitor the
administration of child welfare program services by the State’s LDSSs.
• SSA had not established effective monitoring to ensure that children were
placed in the least restrictive environment and received required services.
• SSA’s monitoring process was not effective for ensuring the timeliness of
child abuse and neglect investigations and safety assessments.
 SSA did not have adequate controls to ensure the LDSSs were notified of
children born to individuals who had their parental rights terminated.
 SSA did not have an effective process for ensuring the propriety and
timeliness of federal funds eligibility determinations.
 SSA did not pursue collecting overpayments of $4.8 million from providers.
 SSA did not ensure that adoption payments were suspended when required.
 SSA did not ensure payments made to a State university were supported.
DHS - Social Services Administration Page 4

--- Page 5 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Quality Assurance Program (Finding 1) Repeat Finding
SSA had not implemented comprehensive quality assurance procedures to
ensure that child welfare programs were being effectively administered by the
State’s LDSSs.
Those program services and functions included, for example
• approving and monitoring foster care providers, and placing children with
appropriate providers;
• ensuring that children in care receive specified services, such as medical
and dental care, within required timeframes;
• timely assessment and investigation of child abuse allegations; and
• conducting assessments of substance-exposed newborns and children born
to individuals with previously terminated parental rights.
DHS - Social Services Administration Page 5

--- Page 6 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Quality Assurance Program (Finding 1) - continued
In response to our prior report SSA had developed certain written procedures
for monitoring the services and functions; however, these procedures were
not always sufficient, and in certain cases suffered from inaccurate or
incomplete monitoring reports.
In addition, SSA had implemented on-site reviews of each LDSS, of various
time periods, to monitor LDSS performance and compliance. However, we
found that the scope of these reviews was not as comprehensive as we
deemed necessary, as it did not address certain critical LDSS functions.
The detailed findings in our audit report support the above conclusions and
highlight the need for more rigorous oversight of the LDSSs.
DHS - Social Services Administration Page 6

--- Page 7 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Monitoring Foster Care Compliance (Finding 2) Repeat Finding
SSA did not effectively monitor the LDSSs to ensure that there was
documentation supporting the performance of certain critical requirements
relating to the placement and care of foster children. Our test of 48 children in
foster care with fiscal year 2019 expenditures totaling $2.3 million disclosed
the following issues related to six selected foster care requirements.
Results of our Test of Foster Care Requirements
Number ofRequirements Performance of Requirement
Foster Care Requirement
for Children Tested Not Documented
Caseworker
Monthly Face-to-FaceMeeting with Child 48 0
Interaction
Placement Legal Basis for Child Entering Foster Care 48 4
Requirements
Tested Effort to Place with Relatives 48 3
Medical Exam within One Year 48 29
Service
Requirements Dental Exam within Six Months 47 37
Tested
Attended School During FiscalYear 2020 23 10
Total 262 83
DHS - Social Services Administration Page 7

--- Page 8 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Child Protective Services (Finding 3) Repeat Finding
SSA’s monitoring process was ineffective for ensuring the timeliness of LDSS
child abuse and neglect investigations, and required assessments of
substance-exposed newborns.
 Our review of 20 allegations of child abuse or neglect received during the
period from May 2019 through December 2019 disclosed 6 allegations for
which the LDSS did not initiate and/or complete investigations timely. For
example, for 3 allegations of abuse, the investigations began from 7 to 21
days after the allegations were received. State law requires these
investigations of abuse to be initiated within 24 hours of receipt.
 SSA did not always timely complete the safety and family risk assessments
for substance-exposed newborns. For example, our test of 10 such
newborns disclosed that for one child, the safety assessment was performed
55 days after the LDSSs were notified, and the family risk assessments for
four other children were performed between 36 and 70 days after the
respective LDSSs were notified. State regulations require the LDSSs to
perform safety and family risk assessments on substance-exposed
newborns within 48 hours and 30 days, respectively, of notification.
DHS - Social Services Administration Page 8

--- Page 9 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Child Protective Services (Finding 4) Repeat Finding
SSA lacked adequate controls to ensure the LDSSs were timely notified when
children were born to individuals who previously had their parental rights
terminated for abuse or neglect. State law requires SSA to immediately notify
the applicable LDSS so that it may provide an assessment of the family and
offer services, if needed.
 According to SSA records, during calendar year 2019 there were 252
children born to individuals whose parental rights had been terminated. As
of August 2020, the required assessments had not been performed for 144
of these children, due primarily to SSA not notifying the LDSSs of the
children’s births or not notifying the LDSSs timely.
 Of the 144 aforementioned children, SSA did not notify the LDSSs that
assessments were needed for 50 children even though SSA was informed of
the births from the Maryland Department of Health (MDH) between 8 and 19
months earlier. In addition, for the other 94 children, SSA notified the LDSSs
between 7 to 19 months after receiving notice from MDH.
DHS - Social Services Administration Page 9

--- Page 10 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Federal Funds (Finding 5) Repeat Finding
SSA did not have an effective process for ensuring the propriety and timeliness
of federal Title IV-E eligibility determinations and redeterminations, and had not
conducted quality assurance reviews, as required by its policies, resulting in a
potential loss of federal funds. According to SSA records, SSA received federal
Title IV-E reimbursements totaling $86.5 million in fiscal year 2019.
 SSA had not conducted quality assurance reviews of the eligibility
determinations and redeterminations made during our audit period,
resulting in certain errors going undetected. Our test of 55 children in foster
care or the adoption and guardianship assistance programs disclosed that
SSA incorrectly concluded that 8 foster children were not eligible, resulting in
the loss of $72,500 in federal funds.
 SSA had not reviewed the propriety of Title IV-E ineligibility determinations
for 3,626 children who entered SSA care prior to July 2016 and were
currently receiving services. If the determinations were inaccurate, SSA
could have the potential for federal reimbursement.
DHS - Social Services Administration Page 10

--- Page 11 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Provider Payments (Finding 6)
SSA did not ensure that overpayments made to certain providers of group
homes and child placement services were recovered. The DHS’ Office of the
Inspector General (OIG), on behalf of SSA, reviews the reports and notifies SSA
of the results, including any overpayments identified. SSA is responsible for
recovering these overpayments from the providers. According to State records,
fiscal year 2019 payments to these providers totaled approximately $130
million.
 The OIG identified overpayments totaling $4.8 million made to 59 providers
during fiscal years 2017 and 2018. As of October 2020, SSA had not
pursued recovery of these overpayments, which had been reported to SSA by
the OIG between 2 months to 2.5 years prior.
 SSA could not explain why it had not pursued recovery of these
overpayments. A delay in the pursuit of provider overpayments may
decrease the likelihood of recovering the funds.
DHS - Social Services Administration Page 11

--- Page 12 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Provider Payments (Finding 7) Repeat Finding
 SSA had not established procedures to ensure that monthly adoption
assistance payments to an adoptive parent were suspended when an
adopted child was removed from the adoptive home. Consequently, there
was a risk for duplicative payments being made (for both adoption assistance
and foster care payments). These payments were entirely from State funds.
 Our test of fiscal year 2019 adoption assistance payments made for 5
children who had entered foster care disclosed that SSA did not suspend
payments totaling $42,737 for any of these children even though they had
entered foster care between August 2013 and March 2019. Improper
(duplicative) payments for one of these children were noted in our prior audit,
but had not been addressed by SSA and we found it continued during our
current audit.
 According to SSA’s records, during fiscal year 2019, adoption assistance
payments totaling $141,000 were paid for 28 children in foster care.
DHS - Social Services Administration Page 12

--- Page 13 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Interagency Agreements (Finding 8) Repeat Finding
SSA did not ensure that certain payments made to a State university for three
interagency agreements were adequately supported and were made in
accordance with the terms of the agreements. According to State records,
payments under these agreements as of July 2020 totaled $11.2 million.
 SSA did not verify certain billed costs, including direct labor charges invoiced
and subcontractor costs. For example, in fiscal year 2019, SSA paid labor
charges totaling $2 million for two of the agreements, which exceeded the
two agreements by $187,000. In addition, SSA paid $584,000 for 25
individuals who were not included in the agreements.
 Certain of these conditions have been commented upon in audit reports
dating back to October 2008. SSA management advised that it believes the
interagency agreements are performance-based contracts structured to pay
for the receipt of deliverables. However, the agreements’ payment method
was not based on deliverables, but rather the time spent and the salary
costs of the applicable university personnel.
DHS - Social Services Administration Page 13

--- Page 14 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Conclusions
SSA should:
• establish comprehensive quality assurance processes to ensure child
welfare programs are effectively administered by the LDSSs;
• monitor the LDSSs to ensure compliance with foster care requirements,
such as, those related to medical and dental services;
• establish effective procedures to ensure that the LDSSs conduct and
complete investigations of allegations of abuse and neglect and
assessments of controlled substance-exposed newborns in a timely manner;
• establish controls to ensure that LDSSs are promptly notified of children
born to individuals who previously had their parental rights terminated;
• ensure federal reimbursement is obtained for all eligible children;
• pursue for collection provider overpayments;
• ensure that adoption payments are suspended when required; and
• ensure payments made to a State university are supported.
DHS - Social Services Administration Page 14