Title: Department of Juvenile Services
Date: 09/02/2021
Type: Fiscal Compliance
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=61312d0ea1ce5816d02845fb
Extracted: 2025-06-19T11:54:16.838423
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Audit Report
Department of Juvenile Services
May 2025
Public Notice
In compliance with the requirements of the State Government Article Section
2-1224(i), of the Annotated Code of Maryland, the Office of Legislative Audits
has redacted cybersecurity findings and related auditee responses
from this public report.
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Senator Shelly L. Hettleman (Senate Chair) Delegate Jared Solomon (House Chair)
Senator Joanne C. Benson Delegate Steven J. Arentz
Senator Benjamin T. Brooks, Sr. Delegate Andrea Fletcher Harrison
Senator Paul D. Corderman Delegate Steven C. Johnson
Senator Katie Fry Hester Delegate Mary A. Lehman
Senator Cheryl C. Kagan Delegate David H. Moon
Senator Clarence K. Lam, M.D. Delegate Julie Palakovich Carr
Senator Cory V. McCray Delegate Emily K. Shetty
Senator Justin D. Ready Delegate Stephanie M. Smith
Senator Bryan W. Simonaire Delegate M. Courtney Watson
To Obtain Further Information
Office of Legislative Audits
The Warehouse at Camden Yards
351 West Camden Street, Suite 400
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Phone: 410-946-5900
Maryland Relay: 711
TTY: 410-946-5401 ꞏ 301-970-5401
E-mail: webmaster@ola.state.md.us
Website: www.ola.state.md.us
To Report Fraud
The Office of Legislative Audits operates a Fraud Hotline to report fraud, waste, or abuse involving State
of Maryland government resources. Reports of fraud, waste, or abuse may be communicated anonymously
by a toll-free call to 1-877-FRAUD-11, by mail to the Fraud Hotline, c/o Office of Legislative Audits, or
through the Office’s website.
Nondiscrimination Statement
The Department of Legislative Services does not discriminate on the basis of age, ancestry, color, creed,
marital status, national origin, race, religion, gender, gender identity, sexual orientation, or disability in the
admission or access to its programs, services, or activities. The Department’s Information Officer has been
designated to coordinate compliance with the nondiscrimination requirements contained in Section 35.107
of the United States Department of Justice Regulations. Requests for assistance should be directed to the
Information Officer at 410-946-5400 or 410-970-5400.

--- Page 3 ---
May 1, 2025
Senator Shelly L. Hettleman, Senate Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Delegate Jared Solomon, House Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Members of Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Annapolis, Maryland
Ladies and Gentlemen:
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the Department of Juvenile
Services (DJS) for the period beginning April 1, 2020 and ending December 31,
2023. DJS is the central administrative agency for juvenile intake, detention
authorization, probation, protective supervision, and aftercare services. In
addition, DJS provides residential care, diagnosis, training, education, and
rehabilitation to juveniles in State facilities, and supervises community facilities
operated under contractual agreements.
Our audit disclosed that DJS did not have a process to ensure that residential
service facilities timely corrected deficiencies identified by its Office of the
Inspector General (OIG) resulting in numerous deficiencies going uncorrected.
Audits performed for fiscal years 2021 through 2023 by the OIG covering
operations at eight residential services facilities collectively disclosed 330 audit
findings, including 83 repeated findings.
Our audit also noted that DJS did not ensure background checks were properly
completed for contractors providing youth care services, and contracts did not
require ongoing updates on any subsequent criminal activity for employees. We
noted one employee working for a contractor that provided youth care services
who had a previous conviction in 2021 that may have made this individual
ineligible to work on the contract. DJS advised that it was not aware of this
conviction and as of January 3, 2025, this individual was still working for the
contractor.

--- Page 4 ---
In addition, our audit disclosed several deficiencies with DJS procurement and
disbursement practices. For example, DJS did not always maintain critical
procurement documentation, such as technical evaluation support, for five
contracts tested totaling $27.6 million and could not justify a $1.5 million
payment to a vendor that was originally rejected. In addition, DJS did not have
adequate controls over employee overtime and its materials and supplies
inventory. Certain of these conditions were noted in our prior report but not
corrected.
Furthermore, our audit disclosed cybersecurity-related findings. However, in
accordance with the State Government Article, Section 2-1224(i) of the
Annotated Code of Maryland, we have redacted the findings from this audit
report. Specifically, State law requires the Office of Legislative Audits to redact
cybersecurity findings in a manner consistent with auditing best practices before
the report is made available to the public. The term “cybersecurity” is defined in
the State Finance and Procurement Article, Section 3.5-301(b), and using our
professional judgment we have determined that the redacted findings fall under
the referenced definition. The specifics of the cybersecurity findings were
previously communicated to those parties responsible for acting on our
recommendations.
DJS’ response to this audit is included as an appendix to this report. Consistent
with State law, we have redacted the elements of DJS’ response related to the
cybersecurity audit findings. We reviewed the response and noted general
agreement to our findings and related recommendations, and while there are other
aspects of DJS’ response which will require further clarification, we do not
anticipate that these will require the Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee’s
attention to resolve.
We wish to acknowledge the cooperation extended to us during the course of this
audit by DJS.
Respectfully submitted,
Brian S. Tanen
Brian S. Tanen, CPA, CFE
Legislative Auditor
2

--- Page 5 ---
Table of Contents
Background Information 5
Agency Responsibilities 5
Organizational Change 6
Case Management System Replacement 6
Certain Costs for Residential Rehabilitation Services Could Not 7
Be Submitted for Federal Reimbursement
Office of Program Evaluation and Government Accountability (OPEGA) 8
Evaluation of the Department of Juvenile Services (DJS)
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report 8
Findings and Recommendations 10
Residential Service Facility Operations
Finding 1 – DJS did not have a process to ensure that residential service 10
facilities timely corrected deficiencies identified by its Office of the
Inspector General (OIG) resulting in numerous deficiencies going
uncorrected.
Criminal Background Checks
Finding 2 – DJS did not ensure criminal background checks were 11
properly completed for contractors providing youth care services,
resulting in at least one individual with a previous conviction
working directly with children.
Procurements and Disbursements
Finding 3 – DJS could not document critical components of five 12
procurements to support the propriety of the award and did not
publish six awards as required.
* Finding 4 – DJS paid vendors using a method that was not in 13
accordance with State policies and which circumvented available
system controls.
Finding 5 – DJS could not justify a $1.5 million payment that was 14
originally rejected, and paid certain invoices without verifying that goods
or services were received and the related charges were proper.
* Denotes item repeated in full or part from preceding audit report
3

--- Page 6 ---
Information Systems Security and Control
Finding 6 – Redacted cybersecurity-related finding. 16
Finding 7 – Redacted cybersecurity-related finding. 16
Payroll
Finding 8 – DJS did not approve employees working double shifts on 16
four or more consecutive days in accordance with its Overtime
Policy and did not analyze overtime activity to identify and evaluate
the consistently high levels of overtime.
Materials and Supplies
* Finding 9 – DJS did not have adequate procedures and controls over its 18
materials and supplies.
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology 21
Exhibit A – Performance Measures Audited by the Office of 24
Inspector General
Exhibit B – Summary of OIG Audit Findings at Residential 55
Service Facilities
Exhibit C – Summary of OIG Audit Findings by Performance 56
Measure
Agency Response Appendix
* Denotes item repeated in full or part from preceding audit report
4

--- Page 7 ---
Background Information
Agency Responsibilities
The Department of Juvenile Services (DJS) is the central administrative agency
for juvenile intake, detention authorization, probation, protective supervision, and
aftercare services. In addition, DJS provides residential care, diagnoses, training,
education, and rehabilitation to juveniles in State facilities, and supervises
community facilities operated under contractual agreements.
DJS has a headquarters office located in Baltimore City and 44 facilities and field
offices located in 5 regions throughout the State. According to DJS’ records, the
number of intake cases (including detention programs, committed programs, and
community supervision) during fiscal year 2024 totaled 14,184. In addition, the
average daily population of youths under its supervision (in both State and
contractual facilities) totaled 418 for the same period.
As noted in Figure 1, according to the State’s records, during fiscal year 2024 DJS
expenditures totaled approximately $333.8 million. Personnel costs accounted for
the majority of these expenditures. During the period December 31, 2019 through
June 30, 2024, DJS had vacancy rates that ranged from 5.9 to 16.3 percent. As of
June 30, 2024, approximately 11.8 percent of the total 2,162 positions were
vacant. These vacancies may have contributed, at least in part, to the findings in
this report.
5

--- Page 8 ---
Figure 1
DJS Positions, Expenditures, and Funding Sources
Full-Time Equivalent Positions as of June 30, 2024
Positions
Filled 1,908
Vacant 254
Total 2,162
Fiscal Year 2024 Expenditures
Expenditures
Salaries, Wages, and Fringe Benefits $242,786,474
Technical and Special Fees 2,445,431
Operating Expenses 88,561,687
Total $333,793,592
Fiscal Year 2024 Funding Sources
Funding
General Fund $321,421,577
Special Fund 2,534,467
Federal Fund 9,392,914
Reimbursable Fund 444,634
Total $333,793,592
Source: State financial and personnel records
Organizational Change
Chapter 147, Laws of Maryland 2021 effective July 1, 2022 transferred the
Juvenile Services Education Program (JSEP) and Board from the Maryland State
Department of Education to DJS. JSEP is responsible for overseeing and
providing comprehensive educational services to all juveniles placed in a DJS-
operated detention or residential facility. The activities of JSEP from July 1, 2022
through December 31, 2023 were included in the scope of this audit. The
activities of JSEP from April 1, 2020 to June 30, 2022 were included in the scope
of our Maryland State Department of Education audit.
Case Management System Replacement
Since 1999, DJS has used the Automated Statewide System of Information
Support Tools (ASSIST) as its client case management database for youth placed
in its care. DJS planned to replace ASSIST with the Child, Juvenile and Adult
6

--- Page 9 ---
Management Systems (CJAMS) application hosted on the Department of Human
Services’ MD THINK cloud platform in calendar year 2021. However, the
transition was delayed by problems with the development of MD THINK,1
ultimately resulting in DJS deciding to withdraw from the CJAMS project in
April 2024.
According to DJS management, it does not anticipate recovering any of the $6.7
million paid towards the implementation of CJAMS as of June 30, 2024. DJS has
engaged with the Department of Information Technology (DoIT) to determine the
best course of action to replace ASSIST.
Certain Costs for Residential Rehabilitation Services Could Not
be Submitted for Federal Reimbursement
DJS has been unable to submit certain residential rehabilitation services
expenditures for federal reimbursement since fiscal year 2015. As noted in our
two preceding audit reports, an August 2011 audit by the U.S. Department of
Health and Human Services (HHS) concluded that the State’s use of a flat per
diem rate for Medical Assistance Program (Medicaid) claims for all residential
rehabilitation services from October 1, 2005 through September 30, 2007,
regardless of the specific services received by each client, made it unclear
whether such services were eligible for Medicaid reimbursement. DJS continued
to use the old per diem rate through fiscal year 2015, at which point it stopped
recovering funds until a new rate is developed in order to avoid potential federal
penalties.
The issue was subsequently referred to the State’s Rate Setting Reform
Stakeholders Workgroup, of which DJS is a member.2 In fiscal year 2015, the
Workgroup determined that most of the services that were reimbursed and
included in the per diem rates, such as residential rehabilitation room, board and
recreation, were not Medicaid-covered services. The Workgroup concluded that
the small portion of Medicaid-covered services (such as mental health counseling)
should be recovered directly by the providers as fee-for-service claims and a
reduced State per diem rate should be established for the non-Medicaid eligible
service portion.
1 Significant deficiencies regarding MD THINK’s development were commented upon in our
March 29, 2024 fiscal compliance audit report of DoIT.
2 The Workgroup was created under the State’s Interagency Rates Committee and is comprised of
the Departments of Health, Human Services, Juvenile Services, Budget and Management,
Education, and the Governor’s Office for Children.
7

--- Page 10 ---
Although the Workgroup has developed a new rate structure for residential
rehabilitation services, these rates will not be effective until the Medicaid State
Plan is formally amended by the Maryland Department of Health. As of
September 2024, DJS expects this amendment to take effect on July 1, 2025.
Since the end of fiscal year 2015, the costs associated with these services that
could be eligible for reimbursement under Medicaid have been funded solely by
the State’s General Fund. DJS could not readily determine the amount of funds
eligible for federal funding that have been paid for with State general funds.
Office of Program Evaluation and Government Accountability
(OPEGA) Evaluation of DJS
On December 16, 2024, the Department of Legislative Services’ OPEGA issued a
report on its evaluation of DJS. OPEGA’s evaluation focused on long-term trends
in juvenile justice, contractual community-based services, and Child in Need of
Supervision referrals. This report contained several recommendations to DJS,
including the following:
 consider expanding the capability of the ASSIST database to capture
placements with contracted providers and referrals to non-contracted
community-based providers;
 identify and replicate best-practices from local offices to ensure
equitable treatment of DJS-involved youth throughout Maryland;
 support the Governor’s Office for Children with the development of a
public centralized database of all State, local, and private resources
available for children, youth and families in the State as mandated by
State law; and
 collect data that allows for provider-level assessment of effectiveness
based on youth outcomes.
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report
Our audit included a review to determine the current status of the six findings
contained in our preceding audit report dated September 2, 2021. See Figure 2 for
the results of our review.
8

--- Page 11 ---
Figure 2
Status of Preceding Findings
Preceding
Finding Description Implementation Status
Finding
DJS did not consolidate procurements and
publish contract awards to maximize State
Finding 1 purchasing power and enhance transparency, Not repeated
oversight, and control; and could not support
certain contract modifications.
DJS did not have a process in place to verify the
propriety or reasonableness of certain services
Finding 2 prior to payment, and could not justify the Not repeated
subsequent payment of certain invoices that
were originally rejected for payment.
DJS did not use available automated controls to
Repeated
Finding 3 ensure the propriety of purchasing and
(Current Finding 4)
disbursement transactions.
DJS’ use of certain intergovernmental
agreements circumvented State procurement
Finding 4 regulations. In addition, DJS did not ensure Not repeated
services were provided and related charges were
proper.
The youth case management application and
database were not properly maintained and
Finding 5 secured. In addition, related logging and Status Redacted3
monitoring controls and settings for application
passwords and accounts were not adequate.
DJS did not maintain materials and supplies Repeated
Finding 6
inventory records as required. (Current Finding 9)
3 Specific information on the current status of this cybersecurity–related finding has been redacted
from this publicly available report in accordance with State Government Article, Section 2-
1224(i) of the Annotated Code of Maryland.
9

--- Page 12 ---
Findings and Recommendations
Residential Service Facility Operations
Finding 1
Department of Juvenile Services (DJS) did not have a process to ensure that
residential service facilities timely corrected deficiencies identified by its
Office of the Inspector General (OIG) resulting in numerous deficiencies
going uncorrected.
Analysis
DJS did not have a process to ensure that residential service facilities timely
corrected deficiencies identified by its OIG resulting in numerous deficiencies
going uncorrected. DJS relied primarily on audits conducted by the OIG to
provide oversight of the residential service facilities’ operations. Audits include a
review of 111 performance measures developed by OIG and DJS across 6 major
operational areas to evaluate critical operational standards set forth in State law,
regulation, and policy (see Exhibit A of this report for a list of performance
measures).
As shown in Figure 3, the OIG audits identified 330 reportable conditions in all 6
areas, including 83 repeat findings (see Exhibit B of this report for a summary and
Exhibit C for a detailed listing of findings by residential service facility and
performance measure). While DJS required each facility to submit a corrective
action plan to address the audit findings, DJS management did not formally
monitor the implementation of these plans or take additional action to ensure
findings were addressed.
Figure 3
OIG Residential Service Facility Audit Findings
Fiscal Years 2021 through 2023
Performance Total Total
Operational Area Measures Findings Repeats
Care 39 93 19
Security 26 155 45
Justice and Order 18 10 0
Programs and Services 11 17 3
Safety 11 32 6
Administration and
6 23 10
Management
Totals 111 330 83
Source: OIG Audit Reports
10

--- Page 13 ---
Given that certain findings were repeated in multiple audits, we believe additional
action by DJS management was warranted. For example, 14 findings related to 7
performance measures identified in the 2021 audits were also repeated in the 2022
and 2023 audits. DJS management concurred with our assessment that additional
oversight of the residential service facilities was required and advised that it was
revising its monitoring procedures to ensure that the OIG’s audit findings were
appropriately addressed.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that DJS establish a process to monitor the implementation
of corrective action plans to address deficiencies identified by its OIG and
take additional appropriate action when deficiencies are repeated.
Criminal Background Checks
Finding 2
DJS did not ensure criminal background checks were properly completed for
contractors providing youth care services, resulting in at least one individual
with a previous conviction working directly with children.
Analysis
DJS did not ensure criminal background checks were properly completed for
contractors providing youth care services, resulting in at least one individual with
a previous conviction interacting directly with children. State regulations require
individuals who care for, or supervise, children at a juvenile detention, correction,
or treatment facility to obtain a criminal background check and specify crimes
that disqualify individuals from providing services. DJS’ youth care service
contracts4 require the vendors to report these results to DJS. As of January 2024,
DJS contracted with 78 youth care services vendors.
Our review of nine contracts5 disclosed that DJS did not ensure that the required
background checks were properly completed and reported by the contractor.
Specifically, as of August 2024, DJS had not verified that the required
background checks were obtained for 10 vendor employees on two contracts. For
the other seven contracts, DJS did not document that the vendor employees
assigned to the contracts at the time of award had passed the criminal background
4 Youth care services include nursing, behavioral health, reporting center, and sex offense
treatment services.
5 These contracts were selected for review based on significance of services being provided to
youth, and were awarded between November 2020 and August 2023.
11

--- Page 14 ---
checks. Rather DJS only ensured that vendor employees added subsequent to the
original contract award had background checks.
We further noted that DJS did not require or obtain ongoing updates (referred to
as alerts) on any subsequent criminal activity for employees. Consequently, DJS
would only be aware of individuals who subsequently committed a disqualifying
crime if they were voluntarily reported by the individual or the vendor.
We obtained a list of vendor employees actively working on these 9 contracts (as
of August 2024) and matched these individuals against Department of Public
Safety and Correctional Services (DPSCS) conviction records6 for the period from
September 25, 2019 to May 16, 2024. Our match identified one vendor employee
who worked directly with children who was convicted of second-degree assault
and possession of a dangerous weapon with the intent to injure in 2021. DJS
advised that it was not aware of this conviction and as of January 3, 2025, this
individual is still working for the vendor.
Recommendation 2
We recommend that DJS
a. ensure vendors comply with criminal background check requirements for
all employees, and take appropriate action when disqualifying criminal
activity is identified; and
b. require vendors to receive alerts of subsequent criminal activity by their
employees and timely report such activity to DJS.
Procurements and Disbursements
Finding 3
DJS could not document critical components of five procurements to support
the propriety of the award and did not publish six awards as required.
Analysis
DJS did not always comply with State procurement regulations. According to
State records, DJS competitively procured approximately $58.7 million between
October 2020 and July 2023. Our test of nine competitively procured contracts
totaling $42.7 million7 during this period disclosed the following conditions:
6 Our Data Analytics Unit independently obtained these records from DPSCS. We determined
that the conviction records we received from DPSCS were sufficiently reliable for the purposes
of our match.
7 We generally selected procurements for testing based on dollar amount significance.
12

--- Page 15 ---
 DJS could not provide all required procurement documentation, including
technical evaluation committee member names, scores and evaluations, and
committee members’ signed recommendations for five contracts totaling
$27.6 million. In addition, DJS could not provide the technical and/or
financial proposals submitted by losing bidders for two of these contracts
totaling $6.3 million. As a result, we could not readily determine the
propriety of any of these five awards.
 As of May 2024, DJS had not published three contract awards totaling $7.7
million on eMaryland Marketplace Advantage (eMMA) that were awarded
between 1.5 to 3.5 years prior to that date. In addition, three other awards
totaling $9.6 million were published between 35 and 82 days beyond the 30-
day requirement. Publishing awards on eMMA provides improved
transparency over State procurements including information about winning
bidders and the amount of the related awards.
State procurement regulations require all critical procurement documentation,
such as technical and price proposals and bid evaluations be maintained in the
procurement file. State procurement laws and regulations also require awards to
be published on eMMA within 30 days after approval of the contract.
Recommendation 3
We recommend that DJS comply with State procurement regulations.
Specifically, we recommend that DJS
a. ensure all required procurement documentation, such as technical and
price proposals and bid evaluations, is maintained; and
b. publish contract awards on eMMA within 30 days after approval, as
required.
Finding 4
DJS paid vendors using a method that was not in accordance with State
policies and which circumvented available system controls.
Analysis
DJS’ use of direct voucher payments to vendors was not in accordance with State
policies and circumvented available system controls. Direct vouchers are
payments made without matching a correlating purchase order, invoice, or
receiving report. According to the State’s accounting records, during the period
from April 1, 2020 through December 31, 2023, DJS processed approximately
$125.3 million (57 percent) of its $219.9 million in disbursement transactions on
13

--- Page 16 ---
the State’s Financial Management Information System (FMIS) using direct
vouchers.
Our analysis of DJS expenditure transactions disclosed that $75.3 million of the
aforementioned direct voucher payments were not in accordance with the
Department of Information Technology’s (DoIT) Internal Control and Security
Policy and Procedures Manual, of which $72.3 million (96 percent) related to
contractual services. The Manual restricts the use of direct vouchers to specific
types of transactions, such as, utilities, tuition reimbursement, or travel. DJS
management advised that direct vouchers are used if certain line items under a
purchase order are exhausted (meaning costs associated with a specific part of the
contract are fully paid), the related purchase order has not been created at the time
of payment processing, or the direct voucher method was used in error.
This practice is not consistent or authorized by the Manual and resulted in a lack
of assurance that the payments were consistent with the purchase order and the
related goods were received. A similar condition was commented upon in our
preceding audit report. In its response to that report, DJS stated that by December
31, 2021 it would establish procedures to restrict the use of direct voucher
payments to transactions authorized by the Manual. However, as detailed above,
DJS continued to routinely use direct vouchers improperly.
Recommendation 4
We recommend that DJS restrict the use of direct vouchers to transactions
authorized by the DoIT Manual (repeat).
Finding 5
DJS could not justify a $1.5 million payment that was originally rejected, and
paid certain invoices without verifying that goods or services were received
and the related charges were proper.
Analysis
DJS could not justify a $1.5 million payment that was originally rejected, and
paid certain invoices without verifying that goods or services were received and
the related charges were proper. Our test of 23 invoices totaling approximately
$10.9 million8 during the period from June 2020 to January 2024, disclosed the
following conditions:
8 We selected payments for testing based on dollar amount significance, the type of service being
rendered, and risk identified during our analysis of expenditure activity.
14

--- Page 17 ---
 DJS management authorized a $1.5 million payment for an invoice that
was previously denied by the contract monitor because the services
(installation of modular homes at a DJS facility) had not been provided at
the time the vendor requested payment. The contract terms required
services to be provided prior to payment. DJS management subsequently
authorized that $1.5 million of the $1.7 million invoice be paid
(accounting for ninety percent), with the remaining amount to be paid
upon actual delivery and installation. However, justification for
overriding the contract monitor’s decision and the decision not to follow
the contract terms was not documented or supported. The vendor
ultimately provided the required service four months after the payment.
 DJS did not always verify that services obtained through interagency
agreements were received and the related charges were proper. Our test of
11 payments totaling approximately $426,2009 made to 4 vendors
obtained via interagency agreement disclosed that DJS paid 3 invoices
totaling $54,800 to one vendor without obtaining documentation to
support payroll charges as required by the related interagency agreement.
As a result, we could not readily determine that amounts paid were proper.
Recommendation 5
We recommend that DJS
a. stop overriding contract monitor payment rejections unless there is a
documented justification for the payment; and
b. adequately document that goods and services are received prior to
payment, and obtain and review source documents to substantiate the
charges, including those noted above.
Information Systems Security
We determined that the Information Systems Security section, including Findings
6 and 7, related to “cybersecurity,” as defined by the State Finance and
Procurement Article, Section 3.5-301(b) of the Annotated Code of Maryland, and
therefore are subject to redaction from the publicly available audit report in
accordance with the State Government Article 2-1224(i). Consequently, the
specifics of the following findings, including the analysis, related
recommendations, along with DJS’ responses, have been redacted from this report
copy.
9 We selected payments for testing based on dollar amount significance, and whether services
were provided by a subcontractor. The payments selected occurred between September 2022
and January 2024.
15

--- Page 18 ---
Finding 6
Redacted cybersecurity-related finding.
Finding 7
Redacted cybersecurity-related finding.
Payroll
Finding 8
DJS did not approve employees working double shifts on four or more
consecutive days in accordance with its Overtime Policy and did not analyze
overtime activity to identify and evaluate consistently high levels of overtime.
Analysis
DJS did not approve employees working double shifts on four or more
consecutive days in accordance with its Overtime Policy and did not analyze
overtime activity to evaluate the Figure 4
necessity of consistently high levels of
Overtime Activity ($ in millions)
overtime. According to State
Fiscal Years 2021 through 2023
accounting records, DJS’ annual
Fiscal Year Budgeted Actual
overtime expenditures have been
2021 $12.8 $10.4
increasing resulting in DJS exceeding
2022 $10.7 $11.5
its overtime budget in fiscal years
2023 $10.2 $14.9
2022 and 2023 (see Figure 4).
Source: State financial records
DJS Did Not Approve Employees Who Worked Double Shifts
DJS did not ensure that employees who worked double shifts on four or more
consecutive days received approval from the Director of Residential Services, as
required by the DJS Overtime Policy. Our test of overtime earned by 10
employees10 during 5 pay periods between March 2021 and December 2023
disclosed that 6 employees worked double shifts on four or more consecutive days
in a pay period 23 times without obtaining prior approval from the Director of
Residential Services. For example, one employee worked double shifts on 5 and
6 consecutive days in the same pay period, resulting in the employee working a
total of 206 hours (including 124 hours of overtime) and being paid overtime
totaling $5,622. The remaining 4 employees did not work double shifts on four or
more consecutive days.
10 We selected these 10 employees for testing based on the high levels of overtime earned in total,
and when compared to their regular earnings.
16

--- Page 19 ---
DJS’ Overtime Policy requires employees to obtain approval from their
immediate supervisor prior to working the overtime and to obtain approval from
DJS’ Director of Residential Services before working double shifts on four or
more consecutive days. According to the Overtime Policy, a fair policy for the
awarding and mandating of overtime is critical for just and healthy workplaces.
DJS Did Not Analyze Employee Overtime
DJS did not analyze overtime to identify employees who received significant
overtime payments and possible steps to reduce the amount of overtime worked.
We noted that in calendar year 2023, 10 employees received overtime payments
that exceeded their regular earnings, including 5 employees who also received
more overtime than regular earnings in calendar year 2022 (see Figure 5).
Furthermore, we noted that the number of employees who received overtime
payments that totaled more than 50 percent of their regular earnings has increased
by 510 percent between calendar years 2021 (40 employees) and 2023 (244
employees).
Figure 5
Employees With Overtime Exceeding Regular Earnings
Calendar Year 2023 Overtime Percent of Overtime
Employee
Regular Gross Earnings Payments to Regular
Employee 1* $56,750 $86,903 153.1%
Employee 2* 62,536 93,079 148.8%
Employee 3 57,807 75,492 130.6%
Employee 4 61,773 70,887 114.8%
Employee 5* 59,095 62,904 106.4%
Employee 6* 62,308 66,162 106.2%
Employee 7 59,558 61,620 103.5%
Employee 8* 65,852 67,937 103.2%
Employee 9 58,471 59,352 101.5%
Employee 10 49,190 49,520 100.7%
Total $593,340 $693,856
Source: Central Payroll Bureau Payroll Records
*These employees received overtime that exceeded their regular earnings in calendar year 2022
DJS management advised that overtime is necessary to comply with certain
staffing level requirements at its facilities, and attributed the aforementioned
increase to vacancies,11 turnover, leave usage, and medical leave (related to
injuries on the job). However, without a comprehensive analysis of the overtime
11 As noted in the Background Information of this report, between December 31, 2019 and June
30, 2024, DJS had vacancy rates that ranged from 5.9 to 16.3 percent.
17

--- Page 20 ---
activity, DJS could not readily determine if overtime was worked in accordance
with its Overtime Policy, effectively used, and accurately budgeted.
Recommendation 8
We recommend that DJS
a. develop comprehensive procedures to routinely monitor overtime activity
to identify employees with consistently high levels of overtime;
b. investigate the necessity and propriety of high levels of overtime,
including the 10 employees noted above, and take appropriate action; and
c. ensure overtime is worked and approved in accordance with the Overtime
Policy.
Materials and Supplies
Finding 9
DJS did not have adequate procedures and controls over its materials and
supplies.
Analysis
DJS did not control and account for its materials and supplies inventory in
accordance with the Department of General Services’ Inventory Control Manual.
Materials and supplies at DJS were mostly comprised of clothes, medicines, food,
recreational supplies, and office supplies. According to State records for fiscal
years 2021 through 2023, DJS’ average annual expenditures for materials and
supplies totaled approximately $5.8 million.
 Our review of two residential service facilities12 with significant materials and
supplies expenditures during our audit period disclosed that the facilities had
not segregated duties for purchasing, receiving, storing, disbursing, and
inventorying items. We also noted that required physical inventories were not
always performed and disposals were not documented, approved, or accounted
for. For example, at both facilities DJS did not periodically conduct physical
inventories or maintain a record of food on hand as required, which would
allow for DJS to avoid over-purchasing and waste, and to detect theft. In
addition, our survey of the other six residential service facilities disclosed
similar deficiencies.
12 We focused our reviews on the inventory procedures over food, medicines, facility maintenance,
and youth consumption items (such as clothing, hygiene products, and games).
18

--- Page 21 ---
 DJS did not maintain perpetual inventory records of materials and supplies
and did not accurately report the value of its materials and supplies to DGS on
the Annual Report of State Property Materials and Supplies as required.
Specifically, our review of the aforementioned two facilities disclosed that
DJS maintained materials and supplies, but DJS filed reports for fiscal years
2020 through 2023 indicating that its three-year average annual materials and
supplies expenditures was below the $250,000 threshold established in the
Manual.
The Manual requires agencies to segregate duties related to inventory record
keeping, custody and physical inventory taking. It further requires agencies to
maintain perpetual inventory records that accurately reflect the materials and
supplies on hand and to periodically conduct physical inventories.
Similar conditions regarding the lack of materials and supplies perpetual
inventory, physical inventory, and annual reporting were commented upon in our
preceding audit report. In its response to that report, DJS stated that by July 1,
2022 it would comply with the Manual requirements for physical inventory and
annual reporting. DJS also indicated that it would pursue an exemption from
DGS for maintaining perpetual inventory records. DJS advised that it believed it
was exempt from the perpetual inventory requirements because its three-year
average annual materials and supplies expenditures was below the $250,000
threshold established in the Manual. However, DJS calculated this average
independently for each facility and each type of material and supplies, which is
not prescribed by the Manual.
During our current audit, DJS requested an exemption from the perpetual
inventory record keeping requirements in May 2021, but the exemption was
denied because DJS had not properly reported its materials and supplies balances
annually. In August 2024, DGS advised DJS that it was required to comply with
the Manual because the amount of materials and supplies expenditures had far
exceeded the threshold.
Recommendation 9
We recommend that DJS
a. implement internal controls over materials and supplies at each facility as
required by the Manual,
b. perform required physical inventories and submit accurate valuation
information to DGS on the Annual Report of State Property Materials and
Supplies (repeat), and
19

--- Page 22 ---
c. ensure perpetual inventory records are established and maintained for
materials and supplies in accordance with the Manual requirements
(repeat).
20

--- Page 23 ---
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the Department of Juvenile
Services (DJS) for the period beginning April 1, 2020 and ending December 31,
2023. The audit was conducted in accordance with generally accepted
government auditing standards. Those standards require that we plan and perform
the audit to obtain sufficient, appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis
for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives. We believe that
the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and
conclusions based on our audit objectives.
As prescribed by the State Government Article, Section 2-1221 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, the objectives of this audit were to examine DJS’ financial
transactions, records, and internal control, and to evaluate its compliance with
applicable State laws, rules, and regulations.
In planning and conducting our audit, we focused on the major financial-related
areas of operations based on assessments of significance and risk. The areas
addressed by the audit included audits of facility operations and education
programs, background checks, disbursements, budgetary and year-end closing,
corporate purchasing cards, payroll, purchase of care, information systems
security and control, materials and supplies, and equipment. We also determined
the status of the findings contained in our preceding audit report.
Our audit did not include an evaluation of internal controls over compliance with
federal laws and regulations for federal financial assistance and programs and an
assessment of DJS compliance with those laws and regulations because the State
of Maryland engages an independent accounting firm to annually audit such
programs administered by State agencies, including DJS.
Our assessment of internal controls was based on agency procedures and controls
in place at the time of our fieldwork. Our tests of transactions and other auditing
procedures were generally focused on the transactions occurring during our audit
period of April 1, 2020 and ending December 31, 2023, but may include
transactions before or after this period as we considered necessary to achieve our
audit objectives.
To accomplish our audit objectives, our audit procedures included inquiries of
appropriate personnel, inspection of documents and records, tests of transactions,
and to the extent practicable, observations of DJS’ operations. Generally,
transactions were selected for testing based on auditor judgment, which primarily
considers risk, the timing or dollar amount of the transaction, or the significance
21

--- Page 24 ---
of the transaction to the area of operation reviewed. As a matter of course, we do
not normally use sampling in our tests, so unless otherwise specifically indicated,
neither statistical nor non-statistical audit sampling was used to select the
transactions tested. Therefore, unless sampling is specifically indicated in a
finding, the results from any tests conducted or disclosed by us cannot be used to
project those results to the entire population from which the test items were
selected.
We also performed various data extracts of pertinent information from the State’s
Financial Management Information System (such as revenue and expenditure
data) and the State’s Central Payroll Bureau (payroll data), as well as from the
contractor administering the State’s Corporate Purchasing Card Program (credit
card activity). The extracts are performed as part of ongoing internal processes
established by the Office of Legislative Audits and were subject to various tests to
determine data reliability. We determined that the data extracted from these
sources were sufficiently reliable for the purposes the data were used during this
audit.
We also extracted data from various key DJS internal systems, such as the case
management, timekeeping, and equipment systems. We performed various tests
of the relevant data and determined that the data were sufficiently reliable for the
purposes the data were used during the audit. Finally, we performed other
auditing procedures that we considered necessary to achieve our audit objectives.
The reliability of data used in this report for background or informational
purposes was not assessed.
DJS’ management is responsible for establishing and maintaining effective
internal control. Internal control is a process designed to provide reasonable
assurance that objectives pertaining to the reliability of financial records;
effectiveness and efficiency of operations, including safeguarding of assets; and
compliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations are achieved. As
provided in Government Auditing Standards, there are five components of
internal control: control environment, risk assessment, control activities,
information and communication, and monitoring. Each of the five components,
when significant to the audit objectives, and as applicable to DJS, were
considered by us during the course of this audit.
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate.
22

--- Page 25 ---
Our reports are designed to assist the Maryland General Assembly in exercising
its legislative oversight function and to provide constructive recommendations for
improving State operations. As a result, our reports generally do not address
activities we reviewed that are functioning properly.
This report includes findings relating to conditions that we consider to be
significant deficiencies in the design or operation of internal control that could
adversely affect DJS’ ability to maintain reliable financial records, operate
effectively and efficiently, and/or comply with applicable laws, rules, and
regulations. Our report also includes a finding regarding a significant instance of
noncompliance with applicable laws, rules, or regulations. Other less significant
findings were communicated to DJS that did not warrant inclusion in this report.
State Government Article Section 2-1224(i) requires that we redact in a manner
consistent with auditing best practices any cybersecurity findings before a report
is made available to the public. This results in the issuance of two different
versions of an audit report that contains cybersecurity findings – a redacted
version for the public and an unredacted version for government officials
responsible for acting on our audit recommendations.
The State Finance and Procurement Article, Section 3.5-301(b), states that
cybersecurity is defined as “processes or capabilities wherein systems,
communications, and information are protected and defended against damage,
unauthorized use or modification, and exploitation.” Based on that definition, and
in our professional judgment, we concluded that certain findings in this report fall
under that definition. Consequently, for the publicly available audit report all
specifics as to the nature of cybersecurity findings and required corrective actions
have been redacted. We have determined that such aforementioned practices, and
government auditing standards, support the redaction of this information from the
public audit report. The specifics of these cybersecurity findings have been
communicated to DJS and those parties responsible for acting on our
recommendations in an unredacted audit report.
DJS’ response our findings and recommendations, is included as an appendix to
this report. Depending on the version of the audit report, responses to any
cybersecurity findings may be redacted in accordance with State law. As
prescribed in State Government Article, Section 2-1224 of the Annotated Code of
Maryland, we will advise DJS regarding the results of our review of its response.
23

--- Page 26 ---
Exhibit A
Performance Measures Audited by the Office of Inspector General
Excerpt of the Quality Assurance Facility Audit Tool (as of December 2024)
SAFETY
1A. Physical Environment DJS Authority
1. FM-1A-01 Sanitary and Safe Facility (Mandatory) Facility Environment,
Mandatory 1. The Superintendent shall coordinate with the Food Service Supervisor to ensure that MGT-633-18
sanitation inspections of the food service department are completed in accordance with Inspections-
federal, state and local regulations. Sanitation, Safety and
2. Liquid and solid waste shall be collected, stored, and disposed of in a manner that Security,
will avoid nuisance and hazards and protect the health and safety of youth and staff. RF-730-18
3. The facility’s potable water source and supply, whether owned and operated by the
public water department or the institution, is approved by an independent outside source
to be in compliance with jurisdictional laws and regulations.
2. FM-1A-02 Facility Maintenance Program Facility Environment,
1. The facility shall have a proactive, written, preventive-maintenance plan. MGT-633-18.
2. The facilities are equipped with an active email work order request and response system
to document and track needed repairs.
3. FM-1A-03 Janitorial Services Inspections-
Janitorial staff must complete the Facility Daily Janitorial Checklist to document the Sanitation, Safety and
cleaning of the facility. Security,
RF-730-18
1B. Fire Safety and Emergencies DJS Authority
4. FM-1B-01 Fire Safety Codes and Inspections (Mandatory) Facility Environment,
Mandatory 1. A State Fire Marshall conducts an annual inspection of the facility. MGT-633-18
2. A qualified Fire and Safety Officer conducts monthly inspections.
3. A trained departmental staff conducts weekly inspections.
24

--- Page 27 ---
Exhibit A
Performance Measures Audited by the Office of Inspector General
Excerpt of the Quality Assurance Facility Audit Tool (as of December 2024)
5. FM-1B-02 Fire Alarm and Fire Detection Systems (Mandatory) Facility Environment,
Mandatory 1. A Certified Fire/Testing Protection company inspects: MGT-633-18
a. Smoke/ duct detectors and fire alarms boxes annually;
b. Inspects sprinkler systems quarterly; and
c. The food service hood suppression system semiannually.
2. Fire extinguishers, exit signs, emergency lighting, sprinkler system, and food service
hoods are inspected monthly.
3. Power generators are inspected weekly and load tested quarterly.
6. FM-1B-03 Fire and Emergency Evacuation Drills (Mandatory) Emergency
Mandatory 1. Fire and emergency evacuation drills of all occupied areas are conducted monthly on Management,
each shift; document staff and youth response times, significant events of the exercise, RF-743-18
and the effectiveness of alerts and communication on the Fire and Emergency
Evacuation Drills Report.
2. Occupied buildings have evacuation maps posted indicating primary and secondary
routes for egress.
7. FM-1B-04 Fire Prevention - Flammable and Combustible Substances (Mandatory) Control and Use of
Mandatory Flammable and combustible substances such as gasoline, flammable/combustible paints, Flammable, Toxic, and
cleaning solvents, kerosene, or motor oil shall be stored outside of the secure perimeter. Caustic Materials,
RF-802-20
8. FM-1B-05 Toxic and Caustic Materials (Mandatory) Control and Use of
Mandatory 1. Personal protective equipment, emergency spill kits and eyewash stations are available as Flammable, Caustic, &
required by law. Toxic Materials,
2. Material Safety Data Sheets (MSDS)/Safety Data Sheets (SDS) for each cleaning supply RF-802-20.
stored and used on the unit are retained in a binder on the unit. Inspections-Sanitation,
3. Staff and youth are trained in the proper use and safe handling of toxic and caustic Safety and Security,
materials. RF-730-18
1C. Housing and Adequate Space DJS Authority
25

--- Page 28 ---
Exhibit A
Performance Measures Audited by the Office of Inspector General
Excerpt of the Quality Assurance Facility Audit Tool (as of December 2024)
9. FM-1C-01 Janitorial Closets Ref. ACA 4JCF-1C-10
The closets are tidy, free of debris and odor, equipped with a sink, cleaning equipment, and
vented.
10. FM-1C-02 Youth Property Storage Personal Property and
A completed Personal Property Inventory Form, clothing and shoes are placed in a chain of Disposition,
custody bag and maintained in a secure area designated for safe storage of personal property. RF-709-13
11. FM-1C-03 Facility State Vehicles State Vehicles –
1. All drivers must have a valid government-issued driver's license. Driver’s Guidelines,
2. The Pool Vehicle Coordinators of the DJS unit or the employee to which the vehicle is MGT-616-13
assigned shall:
a. Ensure that all preventative maintenance is performed on schedule and State
vehicles are to be properly maintained in accordance with state laws and
manufacturer’s specifications.
b. Submit a completed, signed Vehicle Inspection Report by the 5th of each month
SECURITY
2A. Security Practices DJS Authority
26

--- Page 29 ---
Exhibit A
Performance Measures Audited by the Office of Inspector General
Excerpt of the Quality Assurance Facility Audit Tool (as of December 2024)
12. FM-2A-01 Emergency Response Manual Emergency
The facility Emergency Response Manual includes emergency plans for procedural Management,
responses the following situations: RF-743-18
a. Fire and Emergency Evacuation– Plan A;
b. Relocation- Plan B;
c. Severe Weather, Flooding, Weather Emergency- Plan C;
d. Group Disturbance- Plan D;
e. Hostage Situations- Plan E;
f. Loss of Power, Water, Communications, or Other Utilities- Plan F;
g. Active Shooter – Plan G;
h. Hunger Strikes- Plan H; and
i. Escape and Apprehension – Plan I.
13. FM-2A-02 Face Sheets Emergency
The facility maintains a manual of up-to-date face sheets with a photo for each youth in the Management,
facility. RF-743-18
14. FM-2A-03 Perimeter Security Perimeter Security,
At a minimum, two-perimeter security checks are conducted each shift and documented on RF-734-17
the DJS Perimeter Checklist form.
27

--- Page 30 ---
Exhibit A
Performance Measures Audited by the Office of Inspector General
Excerpt of the Quality Assurance Facility Audit Tool (as of December 2024)
15. FM-2A-04 Youth Counts Physical Counts of
1. The facility daily report indicates the number of juveniles in the facility to include name, Youth,
date of entry, date of birth, age, race, ASSIST number, unit assignment, jurisdiction, RF-702-14
length of stay, court date, legal status and alerts. All youth admission and release
information shall be documented on the facility daily report.
2. Facility population counts shall account for all youth assigned to the facility, to include
youth who may be off-grounds for educational purposes, medical appointments, and
other off grounds activities at the time of the physical count of youth.
3. Official counts must be taken at the change of each shift and are documented in the
facility logbook.
4. A master count of all youth assigned to the facility is completed daily at 2:00 AM and
documented in the facility logbook.
16. FM-2A-05 Safety/Security Checks of Youth During Sleeping Hours Supervision and
During sleeping hours, staff will make visual safety and security checks of youth at least Movement of Youth,
every 30 minutes unless otherwise directed. RF-740-17
a. Visual safety and security checks shall be electronically documented using the Guard
Tour system.
b. If the Guard Tour system is not available, staff shall document the visual safety and
security checks on an “Observation Sheet – Room” posted by each youth’s door, or
on the “Observation Sheet – Dorm”, as appropriate.
17. FM-2A-06 Direct Supervision Supervision and
Staff shall be posted in youth living quarters to facilitate personal contact, to observe, to Movement of Youth,
hear, and to respond promptly RF-740-17
18. FM-2A-07 Post Orders Post Orders Policy,
Each facility shall establish post orders that detail specific and general instructions and RF-708-13
responsibilities for the operation of identified posts within the facility.
28

--- Page 31 ---
Exhibit A
Performance Measures Audited by the Office of Inspector General
Excerpt of the Quality Assurance Facility Audit Tool (as of December 2024)
19. FM-2A-08 Logbooks Log Books,
1. If a designee such as a control center staff is maintaining the Facility Log, the RF-733-17
Shift Commander shall review the log at least once during the shift and at the end
of the shift to ensure that required information is accurately documented. Reviews
shall be documented in the log using red ink.
2. The Shift Commander or designee shall complete unannounced tours of each living
unit at least once during their shift. The Shift Commander or designee shall log
completion of the tour in the Unit Log Book. The entry shall be made in red ink.
20. FM-2A-09 Unit Rounds & Inspections Inspections-Sanitation,
1. Supervisory staff conducts daily sanitation, safety and security inspections of the living Safety and Security,
units occupied by youth. Inspections are documented on Supervisor Daily Sanitation and RF-730-18
Security Inspection Report form.
2. Supervisory staff conducts weekly inspections of areas unoccupied by youth. Inspections
are documented on the Weekly Sanitation and Security Inspection Report form.
21. FM-2A-10 Administrative Inspections Inspections-Sanitation,
The Superintendent, Assistant Superintendent and designated department heads will conduct Safety and Security,
weekly visits to the facility's living units and activity areas. The visits should be documented RF-730-18
in the unit log book in red ink. Log Books,
RF-733-17
22. FM-2A-11 Security-Equipment Storage Inspections-Sanitation,
An inventory of all security equipment shall be established. Safety and Security,
RF-730-18
23. FM-2A-12 Security-Device Inspections Inspections-Sanitation,
Inspections of security devices are documented in the Weekly Sanitation and Security Safety and Security,
Inspection Report - Security Equipment Inspections. RF-730-18
29

--- Page 32 ---
Exhibit A
Performance Measures Audited by the Office of Inspector General
Excerpt of the Quality Assurance Facility Audit Tool (as of December 2024)
24. FM-2A-13 Incident Reporting & Administrative Review Incident Reporting –
1. Completed DJS Incident Reporting Forms shall be dated, and signed by the staff person Residential Facilities
reporting the incident. and Community
2. The Superintendent or designee shall complete an administrative review of all Incident Operations,
Reports within three (3) working days of the incident’s occurrence, with the exception CSRS-900-19
of incidents of physical altercations and physical restraints.
3. The Superintendent or designee shall complete an administrative review of all Incident
Reports and a video review of all recorded incidents involving physical altercations and
physical restraints within 24 hours of the incident’s occurrence or the next business
day after the incident.
25. FM-2A-14 Incident Reporting - Parental Notification Incident Reporting –
The parent, legal guardian, or custodian of the youth involved in an incident (e.g. illness or Residential Facilities
injury) is notified within two (2) hours of the incident’s occurrence. and Community
Operations,
CSRS-900-19
26. FM-2A-15 Contraband Control Searches of Youth,
1. A notice shall be posted at the entrance of all DJS residential facilities informing Employees, and
individuals that they are subject to a search at any time. Visitors,
2. A sign shall be posted at the point of entry listing items prohibited from being brought RF-712-18
into the facility. Perimeter Security,
RF-734-17
27. FM-2A-16 Preservation of Evidence Searches of Youth,
The facility has a secure area for storing contraband. Employees, and
Visitors,
RF-712-18
30

--- Page 33 ---
Exhibit A
Performance Measures Audited by the Office of Inspector General
Excerpt of the Quality Assurance Facility Audit Tool (as of December 2024)
28. FM-2A-17 Key Control (Mandatory) DJS Key Control,
Mandatory 1. Emergency key sets shall be checked at least quarterly to make sure that the keys RF-739-17
function properly to open locks.
2. The staff assigned to distribute facility keys shall maintain a log book with bounded
pages to record the following at the time of issuance and return as appropriate:
a. The date of issuance, date of return;
b. To whom the keys are issued and by whom issued;
c. By whom the keys are returned and by whom received;
d. Key ring inventory number;
e. Time of issuance; and
f. Time of return.
29. FM-2A-18 Tool Control (Mandatory) Tool Control,
Mandatory 1. Each facility shall ensure a system is established that governs the control and use of RF-719-17
tools, including culinary and medical equipment that can cause death or serious injury.
2. Provisions are made for checking tools and utensils in and out.
30. FM-2A-19 Use of Physical Force (Mandatory) Restraints - Use of
Mandatory 1. Only direct care staff who completed DJS approved entry level CPM training, and semi- Physical and
annual refresher training may physically restrain youth. Mechanical Restraints,
2. Staff shall document the use of physical and mechanical restraints in an Incident Report. RF-718-18
31. FM-2A-20 Use of Physical Force – Notifications Restraints - Use of
1. Upon release from a restraint, staff shall immediately request assistance from the nurse. Physical and
2. The Shift Commander or designee shall immediately inform a QBHP of a restraint of a Mechanical Restraints,
youth. RF-718-18
31

--- Page 34 ---
Exhibit A
Performance Measures Audited by the Office of Inspector General
Excerpt of the Quality Assurance Facility Audit Tool (as of December 2024)
32. FM-2A-21 Use of Physical Force –Medical Assessments Restraints - Use of
1. Nursing staff shall complete an assessment of youth involved in a physical restraint as Physical and
soon as possible and no later than 15 minutes after notification, except in emergency Mechanical Restraints,
situations. RF-718-18
2. If nursing staff are not on grounds to evaluate a youth following a restraint, the Shift
Commander or designee shall contact the on-call medical staff, advise them of the
restraint and any observed or youth reported injury.
33. FM-2A-22 Use of Physical Force –Behavioral Health Assessments Restraints - Use of
1. A Qualified Behavioral Health Professional (QBHP) shall assess a youth who has been Physical and
restrained as soon as possible and no later than 30 minutes after notification. Mechanical Restraints,
2. If a QBHP is not on-site, the Shift Commander/designee shall notify the on-call QBHP: RF-718-18
a. The on-call QBHP shall complete an assessment by phone with the Shift
Commander or designee as soon as possible and within one hour of notification;
b. The Shift Commander/designee shall document the instructions given by the
QBHP on the Behavioral Health On-Call Notification Form; and
c. The QBHP shall complete a follow up face-to-face assessment with youth the next
workday.
32

--- Page 35 ---
Exhibit A
Performance Measures Audited by the Office of Inspector General
Excerpt of the Quality Assurance Facility Audit Tool (as of December 2024)
34. FM-2A-23 Use of Seclusion Seclusion,
1. Seclusion shall not be used as punishment or as a disciplinary sanction and the period of RF-720-18
seclusion shall not be a predetermined amount of time.
2. The Shift Commander shall document approval for the use of Seclusion by signing the
Seclusion Observation Form.
3. Direct care staff makes visual contact with a youth in seclusion at least every ten minutes
at staggered time intervals and document each visual contact on the Seclusion
Observation Form.
4. If seclusion is required beyond four (4) hours, authorization must be obtained from the
Executive Director of Residential Services
5. The Shift Commander shall complete a Seclusion Release Form for each youth released
from seclusion.
In addition, our audit disclosed several deficiencies with DJS procurement and payment practices. For example, DJS did not always maintain critical
35. FM-2A-24 Use of Seclusion – Medical Assessments Seclusion,
1. The nurse shall complete an assessment of a youth placed in seclusion as soon as RF-720-18
possible and no later than 15 minutes after notification from the Shift Commander or
other staff, except in emergency situations.
2. Unless medical attention is needed more frequently, each youth in seclusion shall receive
a visit from a nurse or other health care professional every two (2) hours.
3. The nurse shall document the medical assessment of a youth in seclusion on the
Seclusion Observation Form.
4. In the absence of a nurse, the Shift Commander shall make the initial and follow up
assessments by interviewing and observing the youth to determine if an injury exists;
document the interview and assessment in the section titled “Shift Commander-
Condition Checks” on the Seclusion Observation Form and the Crisis Behavioral Health
Referral Form.
5. The nurse shall assess the youth during the next on-site visit to the facility.
33

--- Page 36 ---
Exhibit A
Performance Measures Audited by the Office of Inspector General
Excerpt of the Quality Assurance Facility Audit Tool (as of December 2024)
36. FM-2A-25 Use of Seclusion – Behavioral Health Assessments Seclusion,
1. The QBHP shall complete an assessment of the youth as soon as possible and no later RF-720-18
than 30 minutes after notification from the Shift Commander. The QBHP shall document
the assessment contact with the youth on the Seclusion Observation Form.
2. If the QBHP is not on-site, the Shift Commander or designee shall notify the on-call
qualified behavioral health professional. The on-call QBHP shall complete an assessment
by phone with the Shift Commander/designee as soon as possible and within one (1)
hour of notification. The Shift Commander/designee shall document the instructions
given by the QBHP on the Seclusion Observation Form.
3. The QBHP shall assess youth placed in seclusion less than 8 hours on the next business
day. If a youth is in seclusion for more than 8 hours, the QBHP shall assess the youth
within 24 hours of initial placement in seclusion.
37. FM-2A-26 Critical Incident Debriefing Incident Reporting –
A debriefing occurs for each critical incident which must include but is not limited to: Residential Facilities
a. A review of staff and youth actions during the incident; and Community
b. A review of the incidents impact on staff and youth; Operations,
c. A review of corrective actions taken and still needed; and CSRS-900-19
d. Plans for improvement to avoid another incident.
JUSTICE & ORDER
3A. Accountability DJS Authority
38. FM-3A-01 Mail Youth Access to
1. A youth’s ability to send and receive correspondences is specified in writing, and be Telephone Calls, Mail,
made available to all staff, youth, and their families. Legal Counsel, and
2. The facility guidelines are mailed to family members within 24 hours of the youth’s Notification of Family
admission. Death or Illness Policy,
RF-749-21
34

--- Page 37 ---
Exhibit A
Performance Measures Audited by the Office of Inspector General
Excerpt of the Quality Assurance Facility Audit Tool (as of December 2024)
39. FM-3A-02 Withheld Mail Youth Access to
The youth shall be notified in writing of the reasons for withholding their incoming and Telephone Calls, Mail,
outgoing mail in part or in full. Legal Counsel, and
Notification of Family
Death or Illness Policy,
RF-749-21
40. FM-3A-03 Mail Delivery Youth Access to
Incoming and outgoing mail shall be distributed to youth within 24 hours of receipt, Telephone Calls, Mail,
excluding weekends and holidays. Legal Counsel, and
Notification of Family
Death or Illness Policy,
RF-749-21
41. FM-3A-04 Approved Visitors Visitation,
Approved visitation lists are retained in the youth’s base file. RF-706-18
3B. Youth Discipline DJS Authority
42. FM-3B-01 Youth Behavior Management Handbook Behavior Management –
Receipt of the Youth Behavior Management Handbook is documented by a statement signed Rules and Discipline,
and dated by the youth. RF-741-18
43. FM-3B-02 Rules and Incentives Are Posted Behavior Management –
All facility rules, moderate and major rule infractions, incentives, and reinforcements shall Rules and Discipline,
be conspicuously posted in the facility. RF-741-18
35

--- Page 38 ---
Exhibit A
Performance Measures Audited by the Office of Inspector General
Excerpt of the Quality Assurance Facility Audit Tool (as of December 2024)
44. FM-3B-03 Major Rule Infraction – Seclusion Behavior Management –
Youth who present the following behaviors may be subject to placement in a room with a Rules and Discipline,
locked door, defined as seclusion: RF-741-18
a. Presents an imminent threat of physical harm to themselves or other individuals; Seclusion,
b. Has not responded to less restrictive methods of control or for whom less restrictive RF-720-18
measures cannot reasonably be tried; or
c. Has escaped or are attempting to escape.
3C. Special Management DJS Authority
45. FM-3C-01 Youth Notified of Violation in Writing Behavior Management –
The youth are informed and given a copy of the Behavioral Response Form with a Rules and Discipline,
description of the incident and the rules violated within 24 hours of the report of the alleged RF-741-18
infraction.
46. FM-3C-02 Behavior Management Behavior Management –
1. DJS residential facilities shall implement a departmental approved behavioral Rules and Discipline,
management program (i.e.: CHALLENGE - Detention and STARR – Committed) RF-741-18
2. The facility’s disciplinary process shall provide appropriate procedural safeguards, to
include:
a. A system for progressive discipline, which specifies behaviors that are
prohibited and behavior responses.
b. Behavioral Review Reports for rule infractions.
c. Notice of behavior review.
d. Time and assistance to prepare for review, as needed.
36

--- Page 39 ---
Exhibit A
Performance Measures Audited by the Office of Inspector General
Excerpt of the Quality Assurance Facility Audit Tool (as of December 2024)
e. Timely administrative review.
f. Opportunity to present witnesses and evidence.
g. Fair and unbiased decision.
h. Written notice of decision.
i. Opportunity to appeal.
3. The disposition will be documented on the Behavioral Response Form
and a copy will be placed in the youth’s file and a copy will
be maintained in the facility’s disciplinary records for at least six (6)
months
4. If the youth is found not responsible of an alleged rule infraction, the
Behavioral Response Form is not placed in any of the youth’s records.
3D. Child Abuse and Neglect DJS Authority
47. FM-3D-01 Child Abuse and Neglect Reporting and
All instances of suspected/reported child abuse and neglect are reported consistent with Investigating Child
appropriate State law or local laws. Abuse and Neglect,
OPS-913-15
48. FM-3D-02 Sexual Abuse and Assault (PREA) Admission and Release
Orientation for youth shall include advising the youth of the availability of medical of Youth in DJS
screenings and supportive counseling services should they become a victim of sexual abuse Facilities,
or harassment. RF-747-20
49. FM-3D-03 Screening for Aggressive Behavior Classification of Youth
The Vulnerability Assessment Instrument (VAI) is administered within 24 hours of in DJS Residential
admission and guides decision-making regarding the appropriate housing assignment for Facilities,
each youth. RF-716-18
50. FM-3D-04 Investigation of Sexual Assault Elimination and
Reports of alleged sexual abuse and harassment are documented in an Incident Report and Reporting of Sexual
reported to CPS, Maryland State Police (MSP) and OIG for investigation. Abuse and Harassment,
RF-701-18
37

--- Page 40 ---
Exhibit A
Performance Measures Audited by the Office of Inspector General
Excerpt of the Quality Assurance Facility Audit Tool (as of December 2024)
51. FM-3D-05 High-Risk Assessed Elimination and
A behavioral health evaluation of all known youth-on-youth abusers is completed within 60 Reporting of Sexual
calendar days of learning such abuse history and offer treatment when deemed appropriate. Abuse and Harassment,
RF-701-18
52. FM-3D-06 Risk of Victimization Admission and Release
If a Vulnerability Assessment Instrument (VAI) screening indicates the youth has of Youth in DJS
experienced prior victimization, whether it occurred in a residential setting or the Facilities,
community, the youth is offered a follow up meeting with a health care professional and RF-747-20
QBHP within 14 calendar days of the admission screening. Elimination and
Reporting of Sexual
Abuse and Harassment,
RF-701-18
53. FM-3D-07 Staff Misconduct Elimination and
1. Staff is subject to disciplinary sanctions up to and including termination for violating Reporting of Sexual
departmental sexual abuse and harassment policies and procedures. Abuse and Harassment,
2. Any contractor or volunteer who engages in sexual abuse are prohibited from contact RF-701-18
with youth and are reported to law enforcement and to relevant licensing bodies unless
the activity was clearly not criminal.
54. FM-3D-08 Reporting by Youth Elimination and
Youth have at least two internal methods and at least one external method (e.g. 211 phones) Reporting of Sexual
to safely and privately report sexual abuse and harassment. Abuse and Harassment,
RF-701-18
55. FM-3D-09 Abuse Case Records Elimination and
All sexual abuse records including, incident reports, investigative reports, youth information, Reporting of Sexual
case disposition, medical and counseling evaluation findings, and/or recommendations for Abuse and Harassment,
post release treatment and/or counseling are retained in accordance with the Department’s RF-701-18
record keeping schedule.
CARE
4A. Food Service DJS Authority
38

--- Page 41 ---
Exhibit A
Performance Measures Audited by the Office of Inspector General
Excerpt of the Quality Assurance Facility Audit Tool (as of December 2024)
56. FM-4A-01 Single Menus Food Service
Direct care employees mandated to supervise youth during meal service, shall eat only Operations,
those foods served to youth as part of the planned menus and snacks unless HC-301-17
employees have a special dietary need (religious, medical, etc.) or a medical condition
which prohibits the planned meal.
57. FM-4A-02 Therapeutic Diets – Food Services (Mandatory) Food Service
Mandatory The Nutrition Care and Diet Manual is kept in the food service area. Operations,
HC-301-17
58. FM-4A-03 Meals Served Food Service
1. At least three meals, of which two are hot, and an evening snack are provided Operations,
during a 24 hour period. HC-301-17
2. Meals will be served with no more than 14 hours between dinner and breakfast the
following day.
3. Youth will have at least 20 minutes of dining time for each meal.
59. FM-4A-04 Sanitation and Health Codes (Mandatory) Food Service
Mandatory Health protection for all youth and staff in the facility and youth and other persons working Operations,
in food service shall include the following: HC-301-17
a. All persons involved in preparation of food receive a pre-assignment health
examination and an annual re-examination;
b. All food handlers are instructed to wash their hands upon reporting to duty and
after using toilet facilities; and
c. The Food Service Manager or designee monitors youth and other persons working
in food service each day for health and cleanliness.
39

--- Page 42 ---
Exhibit A
Performance Measures Audited by the Office of Inspector General
Excerpt of the Quality Assurance Facility Audit Tool (as of December 2024)
60. FM-4A-05 Sanitation Inspections Food Service
1. The facility Food Service Administrator or designee conducts a weekly sanitation Operations,
inspection of all food service equipment and areas, including: HC-301-17
a. Dining and food preparation areas using the Food Safety Checklist;
b. Water temperatures are checked and recorded daily; and
c. Water temperature on the final dishwasher rinse should be at least 180 degrees
Fahrenheit, or between 140 degrees and 160 degrees Fahrenheit if a sanitizer is
used on the final rinse.
2. The weekly sanitation inspection shall be documented using the HACCP-Based SOP –
Food Safety Checklist.
61. FM-4A-06 Meal Counting and Claiming [7 CFR 210.9(b) (9)]
1. Dietary Staff will count meals at the point of service to provide an accurate claim for Food Service
reimbursement. Operations,
HC-301-17
62. FM-4A-07 Menu and Production Records [7 CFR 210.10 (3)]
1. Dietary staff will maintain the production and menu records in accordance
with FNS and USDA guidance.
2. Production Records include the following information:
a. Name of site;
b. Age/grade group;
c. Date and meal type;
d. Menu;
e. All served menu items;
f. Recipe/Product number;
g. Portion size of all menu items served;
h. Number of meals prepared, served, discarded, and leftover; and
i. Signature and date.
40

--- Page 43 ---
Exhibit A
Performance Measures Audited by the Office of Inspector General
Excerpt of the Quality Assurance Facility Audit Tool (as of December 2024)
63. FM-4A-08 Meal Components and Quantities [7 CFR 210.10(b) (1)(i)]
Dietary staff will record the minimum meal pattern requirements to ensure it is met and
recorded on both menus and production records.
64. FM-4A-09 Professional Standards/Training [7 CFR 210.30(c)
1. Dietary Program Managers complete 10 hours of continuing education/annual training (1)(2)(3)(4)(5)]
within the required training topic areas. Clinical Services will provide the training and [7 CFR 210.30
maintain the documentation. (d)(1)(2)(3)(4)(5)(6)]
2. Any facility staff who assist with meal delivery and with responsibility for school
nutrition programs will complete annual training in areas applicable to their job. Full
time staff working an average of 20 hours per week complete six hours of annual
training. Part-time staff working an average of less than 20 hours per week complete
four hours of annual training. Clinical Services will provide the training and maintain
the documentation.
41

--- Page 44 ---
Exhibit A
Performance Measures Audited by the Office of Inspector General
Excerpt of the Quality Assurance Facility Audit Tool (as of December 2024)
65. FM-4A-10 Civil Rights [7 CFR 210.18(h)(2)(E)
1. The appropriate USDA “And Justice for All” non-discrimination posters displayed in (ii), 7 CFR 210.23(b)]
youth eating areas and dining halls.
2. Dietary staff must complete civil rights training is conducted annually and includes all
required civil rights topics. Clinical Services will provide the training and maintain the
documentation. Documentation must indicate that the following subjects were covered:
a. Collection and Use of Data;
b. Effective Public Notification Systems;
c. Compliant Procedures;
d. Compliance Review Techniques;
e. Resolution of Noncompliance;
f. Requirements for Reasonable Accommodations;
g. Language Assistance;
h. Conflict Resolution; and
i. Customer Service.
66. FM-4A-11 Food Safety [7 CFR 210.13(c)]
1. Clinical Services will develop a written food safety program that covers any facility or Food Service
part of a facility where food is stored (i.e. dry storage, refrigerator, and freezer), Operations,
prepared, or served. HC-301-17
42

--- Page 45 ---
Exhibit A
Performance Measures Audited by the Office of Inspector General
Excerpt of the Quality Assurance Facility Audit Tool (as of December 2024)
2. The facility Food Service Administrator conducts a daily inspection of all
temperature-controlled storage areas and appliances, including refrigerators, freezers,
and dry storage areas. Temperatures are recorded with each inspection.
a. Stored shelf goods shall be maintained at 45 degrees to 80 degrees
Fahrenheit.
b. Refrigerated foods shall be maintained at 35 degrees to 40 degrees
Fahrenheit.
c. Frozen foods shall be maintained at 0 degrees Fahrenheit or below, unless
national or state health codes specify otherwise.
3. The food safety plan regarding temperature documentation is followed.
4B. Hygiene DJS Authority
67. FM-4B-01 Stored Clothing Youth Hygiene in
Each facility shall maintain a supply of clothing and shoes that exceeds the supply Residential Facilities,
needed to serve the maximum rated population. A clothing inventory shall be RF-729-17
maintained.
68. FM-4B-02 Bedding and Linen Issue Youth Hygiene in
1. At admission, youth will receive clean linen to include: Residential Facilities,
a. Two sheets RF-729-17
b. One pillow, one pillow case, and one fire resistant mattress (not to include a
mattress with an integrated pillow).
c. Sufficient blankets to provide comfort under existing temperature controls.
d. One set of clean towels and washcloths.
69. FM-4B-03 Showers and Bathing Youth Hygiene in
At a minimum youth shall have an opportunity for morning hygiene (wash up and brushing Residential Facilities,
of teeth) and one shower and hygiene period daily and after strenuous activity. RF-729-17
4C. Medical Care Services DJS Authority
(Administration; Fair Treatment; Training; and Qualifications)
43

--- Page 46 ---
Exhibit A
Performance Measures Audited by the Office of Inspector General
Excerpt of the Quality Assurance Facility Audit Tool (as of December 2024)
70. FM-4C-01 Health Screens (Mandatory) Admission Health
Mandatory 1. Admission nursing assessment, physical examination, and admission diagnostic testing Screening, Nursing
shall commence upon the youth’s arrival at the facility and shall be completed within Assessment, and
fourteen (14) calendar days. Physical Examination,
2. All findings shall be recorded by the nurse on the Admission Health Screening and HC-312-18
Nursing Assessment form, as applicable.
71. FM-4C-02 Sick Call Access to Health Care
1. Facilities with 24/7 nursing shall have non-emergency sick call requests triaged and Outside Referrals,
seven (7) days per week. HC-311-18
2. Non-emergency sick call requests should be triaged the same day and within
seventy-two hours on weekends at facilities that do not have a nurse on duty
Saturday, Sunday or Holidays.
72. FM-4C-03 24 Hour Emergency Care (Mandatory) Emergency Health Care
Mandatory 1. A nurse, a nurse practitioner, physician, and dentist shall provide medical/dental Services to Youth,
coverage 24 hours a day, 7 days a week (24/7), either on site or on call. Their emergency HC-323-18
phone numbers shall be posted in the Health Center.
2. Emergency phone numbers for designated hospital emergency rooms and community
health care providers shall be posted in the Health Center.
73. FM-4C-04 Dental Care Dental Care,
1. The facility nurse shall schedule youth for preventative care by a dentist or dental-trained HC-314-18
personnel within 14 calendar days of admission, unless documentation exists that dental
preventative care was completed within the last six months.
2. The scheduling of the youth shall be maintained on the Dental Clinic Sheet.
44

--- Page 47 ---
Exhibit A
Performance Measures Audited by the Office of Inspector General
Excerpt of the Quality Assurance Facility Audit Tool (as of December 2024)
74. FM-4C-05 Therapeutic Diets – Health Services (Mandatory) Therapeutic Modified
Mandatory 1. A physician shall prescribe all therapeutic modified diets, nutrition consults and food Diets and Food
allergy substitutions for youth. Allergies,
2. The Nutrition Care and Diet Manual is kept in the Nursing area. HC-327-18
75. FM-4C-06 Female Health Care & Pregnancy (Mandatory) Female Health Care and
Mandatory 1. DJS shall ensure that each facility housing female youth shall have the necessary Pregnancy Management,
equipment, supplies, health care professionals, and referral resources to provide somatic HC-335-18
health services and OB/GYN care.
2. Female youth shall have access to family planning, counseling, and contraceptive care
either on-site or by referral to an off-site provider in the community.
3. DJS health care professionals shall follow written guidelines established by the DJS
Medical Director on the provision of postpartum care.
76. FM-4C-07 Communicable & Infectious Disease Management (Mandatory) Communicable and
Mandatory Each DJS facility shall have a multidisciplinary infection control team that meets at least Infectious Disease
quarterly to discuss the prevention of communicable and infectious diseases and facility Management,
infection control activities. HC-331-18
77. FM-4C-08 Health Education Health Education,
1. Nursing staff shall maintain documentation of health education facilitated by health HC-318-18
care practitioners, health care professionals and other designated staff.
2. This information shall be included on the health care monthly statistical reports.
78. FM-4C-09 Pharmaceuticals (Mandatory) Pharmaceutical
Mandatory The pharmaceutical management shall include, at a minimum, the following: Services,
a. The person administering medications shall be a nurse, LAP, or a currently HC-334-18
Certified Medical Technician (CMT);
b. Medication rooms, cabinets, carts and/or medication cassette reservoirs shall be
equipped with a lock keyed separately from other facility locks; and
45

--- Page 48 ---
Exhibit A
Performance Measures Audited by the Office of Inspector General
Excerpt of the Quality Assurance Facility Audit Tool (as of December 2024)
c. Controlled substance inventory shall be completed every shift when the licensed
nurse or CMT is on duty. The controlled substance inventory shall be recorded on
the CDS Inventory Shift Verification Form.
(Comment: Certified Medical Technicians are only located at the Youth Centers.)
79. FM-4C-10 Confidentiality of Medical Health Information (Mandatory) Confidentiality,
Mandatory 1. The front of all youth health records shall be marked as CONFIDENTIAL. MGT-623-15
2. All Youth Health Records, both active and inactive, shall be stored in a locked file Youth Health Records,
cabinet labeled confidential and located in a secure area. HC-328-18
80. FM-4C-11 Quarterly Meetings Quarterly Meetings with
1. The Nursing Supervisor shall meet with Superintendent at least quarterly and submit a Superintendents,
summary report of each meeting to the Superintendent. HC-316-19
2. A copy of the summary shall be kept on file at the facility in the medical center.
81. FM-4C-12 Statistical Reports Health Care Statistical
The on-site facility Nursing Supervisor shall complete the Health Care Monthly Statistical Reports,
Report to document health care services each month. HC-324-18
82. FM-4C-13 Medical Grievances Youth Grievance,
The Superintendent shall ensure youth have unimpeded access to grievance forms and may OPS-907-15
write a grievance at any reasonable time for any concerns to include health care.
83. FM-4C-14 Health Status Alert (Special Health Care Need) Chronic Care and
1. When a youth has a special health care need identified, the Health Status Alert (HSA) Special Health Care
form shall be completed and distributed by the nurse to the appropriate facility staff as Needs,
indicated on the form. HC-325-18
2. The distributed copies of the Health Status Alert (HSA) form shall be maintained by the
recipient in a binder designated for that purpose.
46

--- Page 49 ---
Exhibit A
Performance Measures Audited by the Office of Inspector General
Excerpt of the Quality Assurance Facility Audit Tool (as of December 2024)
84. FM-4C-15 Emergency Response Drills (Mandatory) Emergency Response
Mandatory 1. Designated direct care staff and all health care staff shall be trained to respond to health- Drills – Somatic Health
related emergency situations within a four-minute response time. and Behavioral Health,
2. At least two health-related emergency drills shall be conducted annually. HC-333-18
85. FM-4C-16 Injury Prevention Employee Risk
1. Each facility shall designate one primary employee and one alternate to serve as the Management Program,
Safety Officer(s) for the facility. MGT-619-13
2. The Safety Officer shall make monthly inspections of the work site and report safety
hazards to their facility’s safety Maintenance Director, Superintendent and the
Department Risk Management Coordinator.
86. FM-4C-17 First Aid Kits and Automated External Defibrillators First Aid Kits,
1. The Superintendent and the Nurse Supervisor shall ensure that the facility to which they HC-303-15
are assigned has a written procedure governing the number, location, contents, Emergency Health Care
inspections, and the replacement of contents of First Aid Kits. This written procedure Services for Youth,
shall include instructions for use of First Aid Kits by staff that are not professional health HC-323-18
employees.
2. Each DJS facility shall be equipped with one or more AEDs at designated locations to
provide support during an emergent situation.
87. FM-4C-18 Medical Equipment & Supplies Internal Review and
The Nursing Supervisor shall complete the following monthly: Quality Assurance for
a. Inventory and test equipment to ensure that it is in good working order and Health Care Services,
document on the Monthly Inventory Checklist. HC-330-18
47

--- Page 50 ---
Exhibit A
Performance Measures Audited by the Office of Inspector General
Excerpt of the Quality Assurance Facility Audit Tool (as of December 2024)
88. FM-4C-19 Medical and Dental Instrument Control (Mandatory) Tool Control,
Mandatory 1. Surgical, dental and other medical equipment shall be kept in locked cabinets, drawers, RF-719-17
or closets.
2. A perpetual sharps inventory count is completed at the beginning and end of each
nursing shift. Inventory of dental instruments shall be completed at the beginning and
end of each dental clinic. The inventory checks shall be documented on the Sharps
Inventory Sheet.
89. FM-4C-20 Bio-Hazardous Waste and Equipment/Instrument Handling/Disposing of
1. Cleaned dental equipment shall be subjected to heat or cold sterilization, prior to its Contaminated Medical
return to normal use. Waste,
2. Containers of contaminated sharps and bags of contaminated trash shall be retained in HC-01-06
the medical center until picked up by the hazardous/biomedical waste contractor.
4D. Behavioral Health Services DJS Authority
90. FM-4D-01 Mental Health Screen (Mandatory) Behavioral Health and
Mandatory The following screenings are administered at a youth’s admission: Substance Abuse
a. The Massachusetts Youth Screening Inventory, 2nd Edition (MAYSI-2); and Screening,
b. The Substance Abuse Subtle Screening Inventory for Adolescents (SASSI-A2). BH-210-18
91. FM-4D-02 Mental Health Appraisal (Committed Facilities) Behavioral Health
1. A qualified behavioral health professional (QBHP) completes the youth’s Behavioral Assessment and
Health Assessment. The assessment must be completed and filed within seven (7) days Evaluations,
of the youth’s admission date. BH-209-18
2. The completed Behavioral Health Assessment will be filed in the Behavioral Health
section of the medical file upon completion.
48

--- Page 51 ---
Exhibit A
Performance Measures Audited by the Office of Inspector General
Excerpt of the Quality Assurance Facility Audit Tool (as of December 2024)
92. FM-4D-03 Suicide Prevention and Intervention (Mandatory) Suicide Prevention and
Mandatory 1. Each facility shall develop Facility Operating Procedures (FOP) in accordance with the Intervention,
DJS Suicide Prevention and Intervention Policy and Procedure. BH-211-21
2. Mandated staff who have regular direct contact with youth shall complete suicide
prevention refresher training annually.
93. FM-4D-04 Suicide Prevention and Intervention – Behavioral Health Assessment Suicide Prevention and
1. A Crisis Behavioral Health Referral Form is completed if a youth attempts suicide, Intervention,
expresses suicidal ideation verbally or in writing, demonstrates behaviors such as self- BH-211-21
injurious behavior, or other unusual behavior.
2. If the QBHP is on site, a face-to-face assessment must occur within 30 minutes of notice.
All face-to-face crisis behavioral health assessments are documented on the Crisis
Behavioral Health Referral Form.
3. When a QBHP is not on site, the Shift Commander shall immediately contact the on-call
QBHP by phone, document the notification and the QBHP intervention instructions on the
Crisis Behavioral Health Referral Form, in the unit logbook, and the facility logbook in
red ink.
4E. Substance-Abuse & Chemical Dependency DJS Authority
94. FM-4E-01 Alcohol and Drug Abuse Education Substance Abuse
1. A Qualified Behavioral Health Professional (QBHP) or behavioral health substance Treatment Services
abuse counselor (BHSAC) shall ensure that all youth receive substance abuse Policy,
prevention psycho-education. The group shall occur at least once a week for no less BH-207-18
than one (1) hour and shall not exceed ten (10) youth to one (1) QBHP.
PROGRAMS & SERVICES
5A. Reception and Orientation DJS Authority
49

--- Page 52 ---
Exhibit A
Performance Measures Audited by the Office of Inspector General
Excerpt of the Quality Assurance Facility Audit Tool (as of December 2024)
95. FM-5A-01 Admission Process Admission and Release
1. Upon entry into the system the admission process includes, but is not limited to, the of Youth in DJS
following: Facilities,
a. Authorize the admission of a youth upon receipt of a valid Authorization for RF-747-20
Detention Document (detention facilities) or a Commitment Order (committed
programs);
b. Administer the FIRRST to determine if the youth has any emergency
medical, mental health or substance abuse conditions that would render
admission unsafe;
c. Inventory of the youth’s personal property;
d. Visual body searches of youth shall be conducted;
e. Youth shall receive personal hygiene items upon arrival on the unit;
f. Youth shall be permitted to shower;
g. Youth will be issued clean, laundered, and properly fitted state issued clothing
h. Shall contact the parent/guardian/custodian by telephone
2. A youth base file to be created for each youth with the above documentation.
96. FM-5A-02 Inventory Personal Property Personal Property and
1. The Admissions Officer and the youth shall sign the inventory. If the youth refuses to Disposition,
sign, the Admissions Officer shall note the refusal on the form. RF-709-13
2. The Personal Property Inventory shall be placed in the youth base file.
5B. Classification DJS Authority
97. FM-5B-01 Initial Classification Classification of Youth
1. The Admission’s Officer will make an initial classification decision utilizing the results in DJS Residential
of screening instruments, such as Housing Classification Assessment tools and the Facilities,
Vulnerability Assessment Instrument (VAI), within 24 hours of admission. RF-716-18
2. Copies of the completed Vulnerability Assessment Instrument (VAI) and the Housing
Classification Assessment Forms shall be placed in the youth’s base file.
50

--- Page 53 ---
Exhibit A
Performance Measures Audited by the Office of Inspector General
Excerpt of the Quality Assurance Facility Audit Tool (as of December 2024)
98. FM-5B-02 Housing Classification Re-Assessment Classification of Youth
The Facility Case Management Specialist (CMS) and the Treatment Team shall complete in DJS Residential
routine classification reassessments not more than 60 days from the date of completion of the Facilities,
initial VAI, and the Housing Classification Assessment. RF-716-18
5C. Social Services DJS Authority
99. FM-5C-01 Case Planning (Committed Facilities) Assessment and
1. The Facility CMS shall document a summary in the Circumstances at Admission Section Comprehensive
of the TSP and include the following: Treatment Service
a. Reason for commitment; Planning for
b. Background information; youth’s family history and current situation (Social Adjudicated Youth,
History Investigation information); OPS-921-18
c. Education history and current status (grade placement & Behavioral adjustment in
school); and
d. Social history to include prior placements, treatment, and significant life events,
such as separations and losses. (Social History Investigation).
2. The Facility CMS shall obtain the signatures of the youth and members of the Treatment
Team on the Residential TSP.
100. FM-5C-02 Treatment Team (Committed Facilities) Assessment and
1. The Facility CMS shall schedule and serve as the chair of Treatment Team meeting to Comprehensive
develop a residential Treatment Service Plan (TSP) for each youth within 30 calendar Treatment Service
days of the date of admission to the facility. Planning for
2. The Facility CMS shall schedule and maintain a monthly calendar of all youth Treatment Adjudicated Youth,
Team meetings. OPS-921-18
5D. Religious Programs DJS Authority
101. FM-5D-01 Religious Schedule Religious Services,
Religious and faith-based services shall be listed on the Master Facility Schedule. RF-731-18
51

--- Page 54 ---
Exhibit A
Performance Measures Audited by the Office of Inspector General
Excerpt of the Quality Assurance Facility Audit Tool (as of December 2024)
102. FM-5D-02 Religious Preference Religious Services,
1. The youths are given an opportunity to indicate their religious preference on the RF-731-18
Religious Preference form. The completed Religious Preference form is maintained in
the youth’s base file.
2. Youth participation in religious services shall be documented on the Youth Tracking
Form.
103. FM-5D-03 Religious Services -Space and Equipment Religious Services,
When not in use, religious apparel and/or equipment, publications and materials shall be RF-731-18
stored on the living unit within the facility to ensure accessibility to youth.
5E. Recreation DJS Authority
104. FM-5E-01 Large Muscle Activity and Leisure Recreation Recreational Activities,
1. The recreation and leisure-time schedule shall include, at a minimum: RF-722-15
a. One hour of large muscle activity;
b. One hour of structured leisure-time activities daily; and
c. Additional recreational and leisure-time activities shall be provided during
weekends, educational breaks and holidays
2. Unless medically excused, all youth shall be given the opportunity to participate in
recreation. Staff shall document a youth’s refusal to participate in the unit log book.
3. Supervising staff shall document all recreation and leisure-time activities in the unit’s log
book.
105. FM-5E-02 Recreation Schedules Recreational Activities,
A monthly recreation and leisure-time activities schedule will be developed and posted in RF-722-15
each living unit of the facility.
ADMINISTRATION & MANAGEMENT
6A. Facility Administration & Management Practices DJS Authority
52

--- Page 55 ---
Exhibit A
Performance Measures Audited by the Office of Inspector General
Excerpt of the Quality Assurance Facility Audit Tool (as of December 2024)
106. FM-6A-01 Organization and Mission Administration and
1. Each facility shall develop an operating procedure entitled Facility Administration Management of
and Management that includes the facility mission statement and a program Residential Facilities,
description that identifies programs and services available at the facility. RF-736-17
2. The procedure shall also include an organization chart that groups similar functions,
services, and activities in administrative subunits.
3. The facility operating procedure shall be reviewed at least annually, and updated, as
needed.
107. FM-6A-02 Quarterly Reports Administration and
At least quarterly, the Superintendent shall submit the Facility Administration and Management of
Management Quarterly Activity Report to the assigned Executive Director of Residential Residential Facilities,
Services. RF-736-17
108. FM-6A-03 Monthly Meeting Administration and
1. The Superintendent shall conduct regular meetings, at least monthly, with facility Management of
department heads. Residential Facilities,
2. Minutes of the meeting shall be maintained. RF-736-17
6B. Staff Treatment DJS Authority
109. FM-6B-01 Staffing Requirements Direct Care Staffing,
1. Each Superintendent shall develop a Staffing Plan to ensure adequate staffing levels. RF-713-14
2. The Superintendent shall ensure the development and implementation of a five (5) week
schedule.
3. The facility will utilize a Daily Shift Roster to account for the daily assignment of each
direct care staff, reasons for absences, and an explanation for time worked beyond the
scheduled workday.
6C. Staff Training DJS Authority
53

--- Page 56 ---
Exhibit A
Performance Measures Audited by the Office of Inspector General
Excerpt of the Quality Assurance Facility Audit Tool (as of December 2024)
110. FM-6C-01 Specialist Training Staff Training,
All mandated staff are required to complete a minimum of 40 hours of annual in-service MGT-640-18
training based on their classification.
111. FM-6C-02 Volunteer Liaison and Volunteers’ Identification Records Volunteer Services,
1. Each facility has a designated Volunteer Liaison. OPS-908-14
2. The facility will maintain a notebook in central control with each volunteer(s)
identification record that includes a photograph, address, current telephone number
and volunteer schedule.
54

--- Page 57 ---
Exhibit B
Summary of OIG Audit Findings at Residential Service Facilities
Fiscal Years 2021 to 2023
Number of OIG Reportable Findings by Area
Total
DJS Detention Center OIG
Administration Programs Justice
Findings
Security Care Safety and and and
Management Services Order
Charles H. Hickey, Jr. School 25 19 2 2 0 1 49
Victor Cullen Center 22 14 4 3 3 1 47
Baltimore City Juvenile Justice Center 25 11 4 3 3 0 46
Lower Eastern Shore Children's Center 23 11 3 4 3 2 46
Western Maryland Children's Center 21 10 2 3 2 0 38
Cheltenham Youth Detention Center* 11 8 9 2 2 5 37
Backbone Mountain Youth Center 13 10 6 3 2 1 35
Green Ridge Youth Center 15 10 2 3 2 0 32
TOTAL 155 93 32 23 17 10 330
Source: OIG Audit Records
*Cheltenham Youth Detention Center did not have an audit in 2023, due to extenuating circumstances related to restarting audits after COVID. The
findings presented for this facility are from audits performed in 2021 and 2022.
55

--- Page 58 ---
Source: OIG Audit Records
*Cheltenham Youth Detention Center did not have an audit in 2023, due to extenuating circumstances related to restarting audits after COVID. The findings presented for this facility are from
audits performed in 2021 and 2022.
56

--- Page 59 ---
Source: OIG Audit Records
*Cheltenham Youth Detention Center did not have an audit in 2023, due to extenuating circumstances related to restarting audits after COVID. The findings presented for this facility are from
audits performed in 2021 and 2022.
57

--- Page 60 ---
Source: OIG Audit Records
*Cheltenham Youth Detention Center did not have an audit in 2023, due to extenuating circumstances related to restarting audits after COVID. The findings presented for this facility are from
audits performed in 2021 and 2022.
58

--- Page 61 ---
APPENDIX
217 East Redwood Street
Baltimore, MD 21202
Aruna Miller Wes Moore Vincent Schiraldi
Lt. Governor Governor Secretary
April 29, 2025
Mr. Brian Tanen, CPA, CFE
Legislative Auditor
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
351 West Camden Street, Suite 400
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Dear Mr. Tanen,
On behalf of the Department of Juvenile Services, I would like to express our sincere appreciation for the
thoroughness and professionalism demonstrated by your office during the recent audit covering the period
from April 1, 2020 through December 31, 2023.
The findings and recommendations contained in your report, as well as the exit conferences, were handled
with the utmost professionalism and clarity. We particularly appreciate the open communication and
constructive engagement maintained throughout the audit process.
I would like to take this opportunity to highlight that the vast majority of the audit period preceded the current
administration. Since coming on board, our team has made it a priority to identify and address operational
weaknesses both prior to and throughout the audit period. Upon receipt of the preliminary findings, we acted
swiftly and proactively to begin correcting the deficiencies outlined in the report. The Department researched
and has built a logistics unit from within that will be responsible for the ordering, inventory, distribution of
supplies and materials utilizing three hubs strategically located throughout the State of Maryland. Utilizing
technology enhancements to record and track equipment, supplies, and materials, the Department aims to
reduce fraud, waste, and purchasing abuses, while ensuring adhering to the DGS inventory control and
property manuals.
The Agency Response Form (ARF) details and demonstrates additional action the Department has and will
be taking in response to the findings, and as instructed, the agency’s formal response has been submitted and
is attached for your review.
Sincerely,
Vincent Schiraldi
Secretary
Department of Juvenile Services
Attachment
cc: Tiffani Johnson, Deputy Secretary of Support Services
Marc Schindler, Assistant Secretary and Chief of Staff
Cory Fink, Chief Operating Officer
Sheri Sanford, Acting Director of the Office of the Inspector General
Michael DiBattista, Chief Financial Officer
Kelly Massey, Director, Internal Audit, Office of the Inspector General
Phone: 410-230-3100 Toll Free: 1-888-639-7499 TDD: 1-800-735-2258

--- Page 62 ---
Department of Juvenile Services
Agency Response Form
Residential Service Facility Operations
Finding 1
Department of Juvenile Services (DJS) did not have a process to ensure that
residential service facilities timely corrected deficiencies identified by its
Office of the Inspector General (OIG) resulting in numerous deficiencies
going uncorrected.
We recommend that DJS establish a process to monitor the implementation
of corrective action plans to address deficiencies identified by its OIG and
take additional appropriate action when deficiencies are repeated.
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 1 Agree Estimated Completion Date: 6/30/2025
Please provide details of After each facility audit, another OIG audit team will work with the
corrective action or facility, in an advisory capacity, to develop their Corrective Action
explain disagreement. Plan (CAP). Once the CAP is submitted to OIG, a staff person
assigned to Residential Services will follow up routinely and OIG
will continue conducting the 6 month corrective action follow up.
The OIG will be updating policies to reflect the same.
Page 1 of 13

--- Page 63 ---
Department of Juvenile Services
Agency Response Form
Criminal Background Checks
Finding 2
DJS did not ensure criminal background checks were properly completed for
contractors providing youth care services, resulting in at least one individual
with a previous conviction working directly with children.
We recommend that DJS
a. ensure vendors comply with criminal background check requirements for
all employees, and take appropriate action when disqualifying criminal
activity is identified; and
b. require vendors to receive alerts of subsequent criminal activity by their
employees and timely report such activity to DJS.
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 2a Agree Estimated Completion Date: 1/31/2026
Please provide details of We agree with the recommendation and have developed a generic
corrective action or email address for all vendors to report the findings of their criminal
explain disagreement. background checks as part of the employment process. DJS will
determine if contract modifications should be made to address
background checks, notifications, and frequency of their staff. The
agency will develop a policy and process for the review and actions
to be taken and document the decision.
Recommendation 2b Agree Estimated Completion Date: 1/31/2026
Please provide details of We agree, and will incorporate this requirement into contracts
corrective action or moving forward utilizing the process as outlined in our response to
explain disagreement. recommendation 2a.
Page 2 of 13

--- Page 64 ---
Department of Juvenile Services
Agency Response Form
Procurements and Disbursements
Finding 3
DJS could not document critical components of five procurements to support
the propriety of the award and did not publish six awards as required.
We recommend that DJS comply with State procurement regulations.
Specifically, we recommend that DJS
a. ensure all required procurement documentation, such as technical and
price proposals and bid evaluations, is maintained; and
b. publish contract awards on eMMA within 30 days after approval, as
required.
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 3a Agree Estimated Completion Date: 6/30/2025
Please provide details of The Department of Juvenile Services (DJS) will implement a
corrective action or procurement checklist that clearly outlines all essential components
explain disagreement. required for compliance with procurement regulations in the
documentation of procurement files. This checklist will be included
in every procurement file to ensure adherence and maintain high
standards of accountability.
Procurement staff will be trained on all updated procedures for
record keeping requirements.
The Department is exploring possible software programs to better
streamline and document the process.
Recommendation 3b Agree Estimated Completion Date: 6/30/2025
Please provide details of The Department of Juvenile Services (DJS) will implement a
corrective action or mandatory timeline for all procurement activities, which must be
explain disagreement. included in the procurement file. This timeline is essential and will
be part of the procurement file review by the procurement
supervisors. Procurement supervisors are accountable for ensuring
the completion and accuracy of eMMA publishing, and this will be
reviewed on a bi-weekly basis.
Page 3 of 13

--- Page 65 ---
Department of Juvenile Services
Agency Response Form
Page 4 of 13

--- Page 66 ---
Department of Juvenile Services
Agency Response Form
Finding 4
DJS paid vendors using a method that was not in accordance with State
policies and which circumvented available system controls.
We recommend that DJS restrict the use of direct vouchers to transactions
authorized by the DoIT Manual (repeat).
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide DJS acknowledges the auditors finding regarding the use of direct
additional comments as voucher payments and remains committed to ensuring compliance
deemed necessary. with the Department of Information Technology’s (DoIT) Internal
Control and Security Policy and Procedures Manual. DJS
understands the importance of maintaining financial controls and
ensuring that all payments are properly authorized and
documented.
DJS notes that the Comptroller’s Office has reduced the timeframe
for agencies to process and pay vendor invoices from 25 days to 15
days, which has presented operational challenges in ensuring that
purchase orders (POs) are always in place and addressing
underlying issues with POs before payments are processed.
However, an internal review of the direct voucher payments made
during the audit period (April 1, 2020 – December 31, 2023)
indicates that nearly 80% of the direct vouchers processed were
supported by either purchase orders (POs), blanket purchase
orders (BPOs) at both the agency and state levels, contractual
agreements, interagency agreements, or memorandums of
understanding (MOUs). Additionally, 33% of these transactions
involved Per Diem contracted vendors, where a BPO is available
for reference in processing of a DV. These findings demonstrate
that a significant portion of DJS’s direct voucher payments were, in
fact, tied to properly authorized agreements and procurement
mechanisms.
DJS is actively working to strengthen internal processes to further
align payments with established POs and ensure that proper
controls are maintained at all times.
Recommendation 4 Agree Estimated Completion Date: 6/30/2025
Please provide details of DJS agrees with OLA’s recommendation to restrict the use of direct
corrective action or vouchers to transactions explicitly authorized by the DoIT Manual.
explain disagreement. In support of this, DJS has implemented the following measures to
ensure compliance:
Page 5 of 13

--- Page 67 ---
Department of Juvenile Services
Agency Response Form
 Daily Encumbrance Reviews: DJS conducts daily reviews of
encumbrance lists to identify any necessary POs that need to
be established or updated before processing payments.
 Enhanced Procurement Coordination: DJS will take extra
steps to secure and communicate the need for Procurement to
ensure the timely availability of POs in FMIS-ADPICS to
align with DoIT policies.
 Process Improvement Initiatives: DJS continues to refine its
internal procedures to minimize the use of direct vouchers
except in cases where explicitly permitted under DoIT
guidelines.
 Ongoing Monitoring and Compliance Reviews: Routine
audits and reviews of payment transactions are conducted to
verify that all payments are properly authorized and backed
by the necessary documentation.
Accounts Payable staff will receive updated training on the use of
direct vouchers.
DJS remains committed to enhancing financial controls and
ensuring that all vendor payments adhere to state policies and
procurement best practices.
Page 6 of 13

--- Page 68 ---
Department of Juvenile Services
Agency Response Form
Finding 5
DJS could not justify a $1.5 million payment that was originally rejected, and
paid certain invoices without verifying that goods or services were received
and the related charges were proper.
We recommend that DJS
a. stop overriding contract monitor payment rejections unless there is a
documented justification for the payment; and
b. adequately document that goods and services are received prior to
payment, and obtain and review source documents to substantiate the
charges, including those noted above.
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide DJS management acknowledges the finding; however, DJS does not
additional comments as believe it accurately reflects the full context of the payment decision.
deemed necessary. The invoice submitted by the vendor was for $1.68 million. In
coordination with Procurement, and at the request of the vendor,
management reviewed the original $1.68 million invoice and agreed
that authorizing payment for 90% of the total amount ($1.5 million)
was appropriate to facilitate the timely delivery of the contracted
modular units. The remaining 10% was withheld from processing
until receipt and inspection of the units on-site to ensure compliance
with contract specifications. Management provided clear
instructions to accounts payable staff on processing the invoice.
Moving forward, additional supporting documentation will be
included to provide a more comprehensive picture of the decision-
making process. DJS remains committed to transparency,
accountability, and adherence to financial controls.
Additionally, DJS recognizes the significance of verifying that goods
and services are received prior to processing payments. To
strengthen internal controls, the department will implement routine
audits and random checks of paid invoices to confirm that all
necessary supporting documentation is properly maintained. DJS
continuously evaluates and refines its financial oversight practices to
prevent future instances where documentation may be insufficient.
Recommendation 5a Agree Estimated Completion Date: 3/30/2025
Please provide details of DJS acknowledges OLA’s recommendation to cease overriding
corrective action or contract monitor payment rejections without sufficient justification.
explain disagreement. Moving forward, DJS will ensure that any override decisions are
thoroughly documented with a clear rationale, including specific
Page 7 of 13

--- Page 69 ---
Department of Juvenile Services
Agency Response Form
details on why a payment was authorized despite an initial rejection.
This documentation will be maintained as part of the invoice
approval process to provide an auditable record of decision-making.
To reinforce compliance, DJS will provide additional instructions to
relevant personnel on procurement policies, internal controls, and
the necessity of properly substantiating any deviations from
standard approval procedures.
Recommendation 5b Agree Estimated Completion Date: 9/30/2025
Please provide details of DJS agrees with the need to fully document the receipt of goods and
corrective action or services before authorizing payments. To address this, the
explain disagreement. department has enhanced its invoice review procedures to ensure
that all required supporting documentation is obtained and verified
prior to processing payments. Specifically:
For interagency agreements: DJS will require detailed payroll
documentation before approving invoices, ensuring compliance
with contractual terms.
For general procurements: DJS will enforce stricter verification
measures, including requiring signed receiving reports, packing
slips, or other appropriate documentation confirming delivery of
goods and completion of services.
Accounts Payable staff will receive updated training on the
requirements related to appropriate supporting documentation.
DJS has also implemented periodic internal reviews and spot audits
to verify compliance with these enhanced procedures. These efforts
will help ensure that all payments are properly substantiated,
reducing the risk of unverified expenditures in the future.
Page 8 of 13

--- Page 70 ---
Department of Juvenile Services
Agency Response Form
Information Systems Security
The Office of Legislative Audits (OLA) has determined that the Information
Systems Security section, including Findings 6 and 7 related to “cybersecurity,”
as defined by the State Finance and Procurement Article, Section 3.5-301(b) of
the Annotated Code of Maryland, and therefore are subject to redaction from the
publicly available audit report in accordance with State Government Article 2-
1224(i). Although the specifics of the following findings, including the analysis,
related recommendations, along with DJS’ responses, have been redacted from
this report copy, DJS’ responses indicated agreement with the findings and related
recommendations.
Finding 6
Redacted cybersecurity-related finding.
Agency Response has been redacted by OLA.
Finding 7
Redacted cybersecurity-related finding.
Agency Response has been redacted by OLA.
Page 9 of 13

--- Page 71 ---
Department of Juvenile Services
Agency Response Form
Payroll
Finding 8
DJS did not approve employees working double shifts on four or more
consecutive days in accordance with its Overtime Policy and did not analyze
overtime activity to identify and evaluate consistently high levels of overtime.
We recommend that DJS
a. develop comprehensive procedures to routinely monitor overtime activity
to identify employees with consistently high levels of overtime;
b. investigate the necessity and propriety of high levels of overtime,
including the 10 employees noted above, and take appropriate action; and
c. ensure overtime is worked and approved in accordance with the Overtime
Policy.
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 8a Agree Estimated Completion Date: 9/30/2025
Please provide details of The Department began reviewing OT usage in December 2024 and
corrective action or has done so every pay period since. The data is broken down by
explain disagreement. division and unit and tracked. Facility Superintendents are required
to submit a bi-weekly sheet outlining the reasons for OT, and the
Community staff do the same via a shared google spreadsheet.
DJS will review the current process to ensure it is reasonable and
provides adequate data to the appropriate staff to make informed
assessments of overtime utilization.
The Department is also reviewing the existing policies and reporting
capabilities for consecutive double shifts being worked
Recommendation 8b Agree Estimated Completion Date: 9/30/2025
Please provide details of The Department began reviewing OT usage in December 2024 and
corrective action or has done so every pay period since. The data is broken down by
explain disagreement. division and unit and tracked. Facility Superintendents are required
to submit a bi-weekly sheet outlining the reasons for OT, and the
Community staff do the same via a shared google spreadsheet. DJS
will review the current process to ensure it is reasonable and
Page 10 of 13

--- Page 72 ---
Department of Juvenile Services
Agency Response Form
provides adequate data to the appropriate staff to make informed
assessments of overtime utilization.
Recommendation 8c Agree Estimated Completion Date: 12/31/2025
Please provide details of The Department will conduct a review of the current Overtime
corrective action or Policy to ensure that requirements established are feasible given the
explain disagreement. current timekeeping systems. Once the review is complete, the
policy will be updated, shared and distributed to staff. In addition,
procedures will be established to verify compliance.
Page 11 of 13

--- Page 73 ---
Department of Juvenile Services
Agency Response Form
Materials and Supplies
Finding 9
DJS did not have adequate procedures and controls over its materials and
supplies.
We recommend that DJS
a. implement internal controls over materials and supplies at each facility as
required by the Manual,
b. perform required physical inventories and submit accurate valuation
information to DGS on the Annual Report of State Property Materials and
Supplies (repeat), and
c. ensure perpetual inventory records are established and maintained for
materials and supplies in accordance with the Manual requirements
(repeat).
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide DJS has since established clear segregated duties for purchasing,
additional comments as receiving, storing, disbursing and the counting of material and
deemed necessary. supplies to ensure perpetual inventory items.
Recommendation 9a Agree Estimated Completion Date: 12/31/2025
Please provide details of DJS has established regional hubs around the state to address
corrective action or deficiencies. DJS has begun implementation of a new evidence-
explain disagreement. based materials/supplies management system through Hi-Tech, Inc.
The new system will automate tracking (scan upon receipt) to
significantly improve the efficiencies of inventory management.
The implemented system will provide internal controls in
compliance with DGS Inventory Control Manual.
Recommendation 9b Agree Estimated Completion Date: 12/31/2025
Please provide details of DJS has established regional hubs around the state to address
corrective action or deficiencies. DJS has begun implementation of a new evidence-based
explain disagreement. materials/supplies management system through Hi-Tech, Inc. The
new system will automate tracking from time of receipt to
distribution location and significantly improve the efficiencies of
inventory management. The implemented system will establish and
maintain perpetual inventory records in compliance with DGS
Inventory Control Manual.
Page 12 of 13

--- Page 74 ---
Department of Juvenile Services
Agency Response Form
Recommendation 9c Agree Estimated Completion Date: 12/31/2025
Please provide details of Physical inventories and reporting will be accomplished using the
corrective action or new system and process to ensure compliance with the DGS
explain disagreement. Inventory Control Manual.
Page 13 of 13

--- Page 75 ---
A T
UDIT EAM
Catherine M. Clarke, CPA, CIA, CFE
Audit Manager
R. Brendan Coffey, CPA, CISA
Edwin L. Paul, CPA, CISA
Information Systems Audit Managers
David R. Fahnestock, CPA
Data Analytics Manger
Adam M. Auerback
Senior Auditor
Eric Alexander, CPA, CISA
Michael K. Bliss, CISA
Information Systems Senior Auditors
Charles H. Hinds, IV, CPA
Data Analytics Senior Auditor
Nicole D. Bishop
Jordan Duke, CFE
Owen M. Long-Grant
Jonathan D. Souders
Staff Auditors
Joshua A. Nicodemus, CISA
Christopher C. Pitre
Information Systems Staff Auditors