Title: Comptroller of Maryland - Field Enforcement Division


NOTE:  Effective January 1, 2021, authority to enforce the State's laws concerning alcoholic beverages and tobacco products was transferred, by law, to the newly established Alcohol and Tobacco Commission.  All other authority and responsibilities of the Field Enforcement Division (FED) remain with the Comptroller, although the name of FED was effectively changed at that time to the Field Enforcement Bureau.
Date: 09/07/2021
Type: Fiscal Compliance
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=6138af5ea1ce580d00a8988f
Extracted: 2025-06-19T11:54:28.302597
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Audit Report
Comptroller of Maryland
Field Enforcement Division
September 2021
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Senator Clarence K. Lam, M.D. (Senate Chair) Delegate Carol L. Krimm (House Chair)
Senator Malcolm L. Augustine Delegate Steven J. Arentz
Senator Adelaide C. Eckardt Delegate Mark S. Chang
Senator George C. Edwards Delegate Nicholas P. Charles II
Senator Katie Fry Hester Delegate Andrea Fletcher Harrison
Senator Cheryl C. Kagan Delegate Trent M. Kittleman
Senator Benjamin F. Kramer Delegate David Moon
Senator Cory V. McCray Delegate Julie Palakovich Carr
Senator Justin D. Ready Delegate Geraldine Valentino-Smith
Senator Craig J. Zucker One Vacancy
To Obtain Further Information
Office of Legislative Audits
301 West Preston Street, Room 1202
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Phone: 410-946-5900 ꞏ 301-970-5900 ꞏ 1-877-486-9964 (Toll Free in Maryland)
Maryland Relay: 711
TTY: 410-946-5401 ꞏ 301-970-5401
E-mail: OLAWebmaster@ola.state.md.us
Website: www.ola.state.md.us
To Report Fraud
The Office of Legislative Audits operates a Fraud Hotline to report fraud, waste, or abuse involving State
of Maryland government resources. Reports of fraud, waste, or abuse may be communicated anonymously
by a toll-free call to 1-877-FRAUD-11, by mail to the Fraud Hotline, c/o Office of Legislative Audits, or
through the Office’s website.
Nondiscrimination Statement
The Department of Legislative Services does not discriminate on the basis of age, ancestry, color, creed,
marital status, national origin, race, religion, gender, gender identity, sexual orientation, or disability in the
admission or access to its programs, services, or activities. The Department’s Information Officer has been
designated to coordinate compliance with the nondiscrimination requirements contained in Section 35.107
of the United States Department of Justice Regulations. Requests for assistance should be directed to the
Information Officer at 410-946-5400 or 410-970-5400.

--- Page 3 ---
September 7, 2021
Senator Clarence K. Lam, M.D., Senate Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Delegate Carol L. Krimm, House Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Members of Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Annapolis, Maryland
Ladies and Gentlemen:
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the Comptroller of Maryland
(COM) – Field Enforcement Division (FED) for the period beginning October 3,
2016 and ending December 31, 2020.
Prior to January 1, 2021, the Comptroller’s FED was responsible for the
enforcement of trade practice regulations and revenue laws related to alcoholic
beverages, tobacco, motor fuel, and sales and use taxes. Additionally, FED was
responsible for monitoring and enforcing the use of business licenses and for
testing motor fuel quality. Effective January 1, 2021, authority to enforce the
State’s laws concerning alcoholic beverages and tobacco products was
transferred, by law, to the newly established Alcohol and Tobacco Commission.
All other authority and responsibilities of FED remain with the Comptroller,
although the name of FED was effectively changed at that time to the Field
Enforcement Bureau (FEB), which we will refer to for the remainder of the audit
report.
Our audit disclosed that FEB did not periodically conduct formal comprehensive
analyses of all alcohol and tobacco retailers inspected to identify retailers that had
not been inspected for extended periods without justification, as well as
duplication of inspections at the same retailers without justification. For example,
according to FEB’s records as of March 2021, of the 9,049 alcohol retailers in the
State, 6,067 had not been inspected in the past four and a half years. There are
legitimate reasons for not conducting inspections, but periodic comprehensive
analyses are necessary to evaluate inspection frequency and related justifications.

--- Page 4 ---
Inspections of alcohol and tobacco retailers are conducted to ensure a fair
operating environment for all retailers and to protect State revenue by enforcing
related laws and regulations.
The sole finding in this audit report related to the alcohol and tobacco inspection
and enforcement activities which were under the authority of COM during the
audit period, but for which the implementation of the related audit
recommendations will be the responsibility of the newly established Alcohol and
Tobacco Commission (ATC). As a result, we shared this report with ATC. In
addition, we obtained responses to this report from both COM, on behalf of FEB,
and from ATC, and they are included as an appendix to this report. We have
reviewed the responses to our findings and related recommendations, and have
concluded that the corrective actions identified are sufficient to address all audit
issues.
We wish to acknowledge the cooperation extended to us during the audit by FEB.
We also wish to acknowledge ATC’s willingness to address the audit issues and
implement appropriate corrective actions.
Respectfully submitted,
Gregory A. Hook, CPA
Legislative Auditor
2

--- Page 5 ---
Background Information
Agency Responsibilities and Organizational Change
Prior to January 1, 2021, the Comptroller of Maryland (COM) - Field
Enforcement Division (FED) was responsible for the enforcement of trade
practice regulations and revenue laws related to alcoholic beverages, tobacco,
motor fuel, and sales and use taxes. Additionally, FED was responsible for
monitoring and enforcing the use of business licenses and for testing motor fuel
quality. Effective January 1, 2021, authority to enforce the State’s laws
concerning alcoholic beverages and tobacco products was transferred, by law, to
the newly established Alcohol and Tobacco Commission. All other authority and
responsibilities of FED remain with the Comptroller, although the name of FED
was effectively changed at that time to the Field Enforcement Bureau (FEB).
According to the State’s records, FED’s expenditures totaled approximately $6.4
million during fiscal year 2020.
Findings and Recommendations
Alcohol and Tobacco Retailer Inspections
Finding 1
The Comptroller of Maryland - Field Enforcement Bureau (FEB), did not
periodically conduct formal comprehensive analyses of all alcohol and
tobacco retailers it inspected to identify retailers that had not been inspected
for extended periods without justification, as well as duplication of
inspections at the same retailers without justification.
Analysis
FEB did not periodically conduct formal comprehensive analyses of all alcohol
and tobacco retailers inspected to identify retailers that had not been inspected for
extended periods without justification, as well as duplication of inspections at the
same retailers without justification. According to FEB’s records as of March
2021, of the 9,049 alcohol retailers in the State, 6,067 had not been inspected in
the past four and a half years. Similarly, out of 6,334 tobacco retailers, 2,785 had
not been inspected during the same period. Furthermore, approximately 1,800
alcohol and 4,400 tobacco retailers were re-inspected during the period even
though they did not have violations reported in their inspections prior to re-
inspection.
3

--- Page 6 ---
FEB’s written procedures indicate that judgment as well as complaints received
are primary factors in determining which businesses to inspect, and that an
aggressive but random inspection process helps promote voluntary compliance.
We recognize the importance of judgment and the benefit of a random approach
in selecting businesses for inspection. However, without a periodic
comprehensive analysis of which businesses have and have not been inspected,
there is no assurance that certain businesses will ever be inspected, resulting in
possible complacency. In addition, duplication of inspections without
justification may occur without management’s knowledge. In this regard, FEB’s
procedures indicate that inspection documentation should be monitored and
tracked to avoid multiple inspections at the same retailers without justification.
Inspections of alcohol and tobacco retailers are conducted to ensure a fair
operating environment for all retailers and to protect State revenue by enforcing
laws and regulations regarding, for example, proper licensing and record keeping.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that
a. the newly established Alcohol and Tobacco Commission (ATC)
periodically perform formal comprehensive analyses of all alcohol and
tobacco retailers in order to help identify retailers that have not been
inspected for extended periods without justification, as well as re-
inspections of the same retailers without justification; and
b. to help facilitate these analyses, FEB provide ATC with available data
regarding retail establishments subject to inspection, as well as historical
data regarding retailers it has and has not inspected during the past
several years.
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the Comptroller of Maryland
(COM) – Field Enforcement Division (FED), now the Field Enforcement Bureau
(FEB), for the period beginning October 3, 2016 and ending December 31, 2020.
The audit was conducted in accordance with generally accepted government
auditing standards. Those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to
obtain sufficient, appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our
findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives. We believe that the
evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions
based on our audit objectives.
4

--- Page 7 ---
As prescribed by the State Government Article, Section 2-1221 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, the objectives of this audit were to examine FEB’s financial
transactions, records, and internal control, and to evaluate its compliance with
applicable State laws, rules, and regulations.
In planning and conducting our audit, we focused on the major financial-related
areas of operations based on assessments of significance and risk. The areas
addressed by the audit included confiscated property, business licenses, and
routine inspections.
Our audit did not include certain support services provided to FEB by COM –
Office of the Comptroller. These support services (such as procurement,
processing of invoices, maintenance of accounting records, human resources,
related fiscal functions, and payroll processing prior to January 1, 2018) are
included within the scope of our audits of the Office of the Comptroller. In
addition, our audit did not include certain support services provided to FEB by
COM – Central Payroll Bureau, effective January 1, 2018. These support services
(payroll processing) are included within the scope of our audits of the Central
Payroll Bureau since that date. Furthermore, our audit did not include certain
support services provided to FEB by COM – Information Technology Division
related to the monitoring of information technology equipment and services and
the operation of the Annapolis Data Center. The operation of the Annapolis Data
Center includes the development and maintenance of FEB applications and
maintenance of the operating system and security software environment. These
support services are included in the scope of our audits of the Information
Technology Division.
Our assessment of internal controls was based on agency procedures and controls
in place at the time of our fieldwork. Our tests of transactions and other auditing
procedures were generally focused on the transactions occurring during our audit
period of October 3, 2016 to December 31, 2020, but may include transactions
before or after this period as we considered necessary to achieve our audit
objectives.
To accomplish our audit objectives, our audit procedures included inquiries of
appropriate personnel, inspections of documents and records, tests of transactions,
and to the extent practicable, observations of FEB’s operations. Generally,
transactions were selected for testing based on auditor judgment, which primarily
considers risk, the timing or dollar amount of the transaction, or the significance
of the transaction to the area of operation reviewed. As a matter of course, we do
not normally use sampling in our tests, so unless otherwise specifically indicated,
neither statistical nor non-statistical audit sampling was used to select the
5

--- Page 8 ---
transactions tested. Therefore, unless sampling is specifically indicated in a
finding, the results from any tests conducted or disclosed by us cannot be used to
project those results to the entire population from which the test items were
selected.
We also performed various data extracts of pertinent information from the State’s
Financial Management Information System (such as revenue data). The extracts
are performed as part of ongoing internal processes established by the Office of
Legislative Audits and were subject to various tests to determine data reliability.
We determined that the data extracted from this source were sufficiently reliable
for the purposes the data were used during this audit. We also extracted data from
FEB’s systems for the purpose of testing certain areas, such as inspection activity.
We performed various tests of the relevant data and determined that the data were
sufficiently reliable for the purposes the data were used during the audit. Finally,
we performed other auditing procedures that we considered necessary to achieve
our audit objectives. The reliability of data used in this report for background or
informational purposes was not assessed.
FEB’s management is responsible for establishing and maintaining effective
internal control. Internal control is a process designed to provide reasonable
assurance that objectives pertaining to the reliability of financial records,
effectiveness and efficiency of operations including safeguarding of assets, and
compliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations are achieved. As
provided in Government Auditing Standards, there are five components of
internal control: control environment, risk assessment, control activities,
information and communication, and monitoring. Each of the five components,
when significant to the audit objectives, and as applicable to FEB, were
considered by us during the course of this audit.
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate.
Our reports are designed to assist the Maryland General Assembly in exercising
its legislative oversight function and to provide constructive recommendations for
improving State operations. As a result, our reports generally do not address
activities we reviewed that are functioning properly.
This report includes a finding relating to a condition that we consider to be a
significant deficiency in the design or operation of internal control that could
adversely affect FEB’s ability to maintain reliable financial records, operate
6

--- Page 9 ---
effectively and efficiently, and/or comply with applicable laws, rules, and
regulations. As the recommendations to this finding would fall to the Alcohol and
Tobacco Commission (ATC) to implement, this report was also shared with the
ATC. Our audit did not disclose any significant instances of noncompliance with
applicable laws, rules, or regulations. Other less significant findings were
communicated to FEB that did not warrant inclusion in this report.
The response from COM, on behalf of FEB, and from ATC to our findings and
recommendations, respectively, are included as an appendix to this report. As
prescribed in the State Government Article, Section 2-1224 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, we will advise COM and ATC regarding the results of our
review of their responses.
7

--- Page 10 ---
APPENDIX
Peter Franchot
Comptroller
Jeffrey A. Kelly
Director
Field Enforcement Bureau
August 25, 2021
Mr. Gregory A. Hook, CPA
Legislative Auditor
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
301 West Preston Street, Room 1202
Baltimore, MD 21201
Dear Mr. Hook:
We acknowledge receipt of the draft audit report on the Field Enforcement Bureau for the period
beginning October 3, 2016 and ending December 31, 2020 and have submitted a written response to
the audit report.
The Comptroller and the Executive Director of the Alcohol and Tobacco Commission appreciate
your objective appraisal of our operations and commends your auditors for their professionalism
and thorough review.
Sincerely,
Emmanuel M. Welsh
Chief of Staff
Jeffrey A. Kelly
Director, Field Enforcement Bureau (previously)
Executive Director, Alcohol and Tobacco Commission
cc: Honorable Peter V. R. Franchot, Comptroller
P.O. Box 2397 Annapolis, Maryland 21404-2999 410-260-7388 1-888-784-0017 Fax: 410-974-5564
fed@comp.state.md.us  MRS 711  TTY 410-260-7157 www.marylandtaxes.com

--- Page 11 ---
Comptroller of Maryland
Field Enforcement Division
Agency Response Form
Alcohol and Tobacco Retailer Inspections
Finding 1
The Comptroller of Maryland - Field Enforcement Bureau (FEB), did not periodically
conduct formal comprehensive analyses of all alcohol and tobacco retailers it inspected to
identify retailers that had not been inspected for extended periods without justification, as
well as duplication of inspections at the same retailers without justification.
We recommend that
a. the newly established Alcohol and Tobacco Commission (ATC) periodically perform
formal comprehensive analyses of all alcohol and tobacco retailers in order to help
identify retailers that have not been inspected for extended periods without
justification, as well as re-inspections of the same retailers without justification; and
b. to help facilitate these analyses, FEB provide ATC with available data regarding retail
establishments subject to inspection, as well as historical data regarding retailers it has
and has not inspected during the past several years.
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide The OLA analysis is accurate in that there are no documented
additional comments as comprehensive analyses, and subsequent documented justification, as it
deemed necessary. relates to those retailers who have not been inspected, as well as those
who have been inspected more than once, in any given cycle or period.
While we readily acknowledge the benefit of such documented analyses,
repetitive inspections that are seemingly “without justification” to an
observer may in fact be anything than that. These repeat inspections
may be driven by observations the agent/inspector has made or
suspicious activity he/she has seen, information provided by industry
competitors, complaints from nearby citizens/residents indicating a
problem location with disorderly or other criminal activity but not a
violation of items that we enforce including trade practices, requests
from elected officials on behalf of their constituents for additional
inspections, concerns of our partners in regulation - the local boards, or
other reasons.
To restate, FEB and ATC agree that no documented comprehensive
analyses were conducted and could prove beneficial moving forward.
Recommendation 1a Agree Estimated Completion Date: 07/01/2021
Page 1 of 2

--- Page 12 ---
Comptroller of Maryland
Field Enforcement Division
Agency Response Form
Please provide details of Effective January 1, 2021, the Maryland General Assembly reassigned
corrective action or the responsibility for regulating the alcohol and tobacco industries to the
explain disagreement. newly formed Alcohol and Tobacco Commission (ATC). While FEB
agrees with the recommendation, it no longer has regulatory
responsibility to effectively implement or require the formal
comprehensive analyses. However, FEB will provide historical, non-tax
related information to the ATC to facilitate their formal comprehensive
analyses.
Effective July 1, the ATC will implement a system for documented
supervisory analyses of alcohol and tobacco retailer inspections.
Recommendation 1b Agree Estimated Completion Date: 6/28/2021
Please provide details of On June 28, 2021, FEB Director Jeffery A. Kelly memorialized via a
corrective action or letter to ATC Acting executive Director, Anthony V. Hatcher an
explain disagreement. agreement to provide data the FEB has on alcohol and tobacco retail
locations that are subject to inspection and the historical, non-tax related
information of those locations previously inspected.
Page 2 of 2

--- Page 13 ---
A T
UDIT EAM
Michael J. Murdzak, CPA
Audit Manager
Walter L. Horan, IV
Senior Auditor
Benjamin H. Straube
Staff Auditor