Title: Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services - Information Technology and Communications Division
Date: 09/10/2021
Type: Fiscal Compliance
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=613b66bba1ce580f582d8cc3
Extracted: 2025-06-19T11:54:48.607246
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Audit Report
Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services
Information Technology and Communications Division
September 2021
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Senator Clarence K. Lam, M.D. (Senate Chair) Delegate Carol L. Krimm (House Chair)
Senator Malcolm L. Augustine Delegate Steven J. Arentz
Senator Adelaide C. Eckardt Delegate Mark S. Chang
Senator George C. Edwards Delegate Nicholas P. Charles II
Senator Katie Fry Hester Delegate Andrea Fletcher Harrison
Senator Cheryl C. Kagan Delegate Trent M. Kittleman
Senator Benjamin F. Kramer Delegate David Moon
Senator Cory V. McCray Delegate Julie Palakovich Carr
Senator Justin D. Ready Delegate Geraldine Valentino-Smith
Senator Craig J. Zucker One Vacancy
To Obtain Further Information
Office of Legislative Audits
301 West Preston Street, Room 1202
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Phone: 410-946-5900 ꞏ 301-970-5900 ꞏ 1-877-486-9964 (Toll Free in Maryland)
Maryland Relay: 711
TTY: 410-946-5401 ꞏ 301-970-5401
E-mail: OLAWebmaster@ola.state.md.us
Website: www.ola.state.md.us
To Report Fraud
The Office of Legislative Audits operates a Fraud Hotline to report fraud, waste, or abuse involving State
of Maryland government resources. Reports of fraud, waste, or abuse may be communicated anonymously
by a toll-free call to 1-877-FRAUD-11, by mail to the Fraud Hotline, c/o Office of Legislative Audits, or
through the Office’s website.
Nondiscrimination Statement
The Department of Legislative Services does not discriminate on the basis of age, ancestry, color, creed,
marital status, national origin, race, religion, gender, gender identity, sexual orientation, or disability in the
admission or access to its programs, services, or activities. The Department’s Information Officer has been
designated to coordinate compliance with the nondiscrimination requirements contained in Section 35.107
of the United States Department of Justice Regulations. Requests for assistance should be directed to the
Information Officer at 410-946-5400 or 410-970-5400.

--- Page 3 ---
September 10, 2021
Senator Clarence K. Lam, M.D., Senate Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Delegate Carol L. Krimm, House Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Members of Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Annapolis, Maryland
Ladies and Gentlemen:
We have audited the Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services
(DPSCS) – Information Technology and Communications Division (ITCD). Our
audit included an internal control review of the DPSCS data center and the
network administered by the ITCD that supports both ITCD and DPSCS. ITCD
provides computing and network resources and operates as a computer services
provider for DPSCS.
Our audit disclosed that sensitive personally identifiable information maintained
by ITCD was stored without adequate safeguards. In addition, intrusion detection
prevention system coverage did not exist for certain untrusted encrypted traffic
entering the DPSCS network.
Our audit included a review to determine the status of five findings that were
contained in certain preceding audit reports. Specifically, our audit included a
review to determine the status of the three findings contained in our preceding
audit report on DPSCS – ITCD, dated January 6, 2016 and two findings from our
DPSCS – Office of the Secretary and Other Units audit report, dated November
18, 2015. We determined that ITCD satisfactorily addressed four of these
findings. The remaining finding is repeated in this report.
DPSCS’ response to this report, on behalf of ITCD, is included as an appendix to
this report. We reviewed the response to our findings and recommendations and
have concluded that the corrective actions identified are sufficient to address all
issues. However, we remain concerned that the corrective actions indicated to

--- Page 4 ---
provide adequate safeguards over personally identifiable information will take an
extended period to implement. As a result, as noted in an Auditor Comment
inserted in the DPSCS response, we believe there is a need to implement
compensating controls in the interim to provide appropriate safeguards.
Additionally, we have edited DPSCS’ response to remove certain detailed
information regarding information systems security, as allowed by our policy.
We wish to acknowledge the cooperation extended to us during the audit by
ITCD. We also wish to acknowledge DPSCS’ and ITCD’s willingness to address
the audit issues and implement appropriate corrective actions.
Respectfully submitted,
Gregory A. Hook, CPA
Legislative Auditor
2

--- Page 5 ---
Background Information
Agency Responsibilities and Financial Activity
The Information Technology and Communications Division (ITCD) of the
Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services (DPSCS) operates the
DPSCS data center as a computer service provider for DPSCS operating agencies.
ITCD provides data, information, and communications services to DPSCS,
criminal justice entities, and the public. In addition, ITCD maintains numerous
application systems containing sensitive information.
Furthermore, ITCD operates a wide area network (WAN) that connects with
many statewide remote sites, such as local law enforcement agencies, and the
DPSCS data center’s local network. DPSCS, through its WAN, offers its users
access to various information technology services including mainframe computer-
based applications (for example, the Criminal Justice Information System),
database management, network services, email, and the internet. Finally, ITCD
maintains the mainframe operating system and security software environment in
which many agency applications are executed. According to the State’s records,
ITCD’s fiscal year 2020 expenditures totaled $42 million.
Our audit focused exclusively on ITCD computer and network operations. An
audit of ITCD fiscal operations was conducted as part of the audit of DPSCS –
Central Operations, and a separate report was issued on November 20, 2019.
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Reports
Our audit included a review to determine the status of the three findings contained
in our preceding audit report on DPSCS – ITCD, dated January 6, 2016 and two
findings from our DPSCS – Office of the Secretary and Other Units audit report,
dated November 18, 2015.
As disclosed in Figure 1 on page 4, we determined that four of the five findings
were satisfactorily addressed. The remaining finding is repeated in this report.
3

--- Page 6 ---
Figure 1
Status of Preceding Findings
Preceding Implementation
Finding Description
Finding Status
DPSCS – ITCD
Audit Report dated January 6, 2016
Personally identifiable information was not Repeated
Finding 1
appropriately safeguarded. (Current Finding 1)
Procedures for logging and monitoring critical
Finding 2 database and mainframe security events were not Not repeated
sufficient.
Finding 3 The DPSCS network was not properly secured. Not repeated
DPSCS – Office of the Secretary and Other Units
Audit Report dated November 18, 2015
Personally identifiable information was not
Finding 5 Not repeated
appropriately safeguarded.
Account, password, and monitoring controls were
Finding 6 Not repeated
not sufficient.
Findings and Recommendations
Sensitive Personally Identifiable Information (PII)
Finding 1
ITCD maintained sensitive PII in a manner that did not provide adequate
safeguards.
Analysis
ITCD maintained sensitive PII in a manner that did not provide adequate
safeguards. ITCD supported computer operations for multiple mainframe
applications and a server application, which processed such sensitive information,
but without adequate safeguards. As of March 2020, we noted that four of these
applications’ databases included a significant number of unique sensitive
information records which were maintained in a manner that made the
information vulnerable to improper disclosure. ITCD personnel advised us that
this sensitive PII was not subject to other substantial mitigating controls. Similar
conditions were commented upon in our preceding audit report.
4

--- Page 7 ---
Detailed aspects of this finding were omitted from this report; however, the
related detailed information, including a sensitive information record count, was
previously shared with ITCD for purposes of implementing the following
recommendations.
The State of Maryland Information Technology Security Manual requires that
agencies protect confidential data using adequate safeguards and/or other
substantial mitigating controls.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that ITCD implement appropriate information security
safeguards for the sensitive PII it maintains (repeat).
Network Security
Finding 2
Intrusion detection prevention system coverage did not exist for certain
untrusted encrypted traffic.
Analysis
Intrusion detection prevention system (IDPS) coverage did not exist for certain
untrusted encrypted traffic entering the DPSCS network. ITCD operated a
network appliance having integrated IDPS. Although the network-based IDPS
used by ITCD had the capability to decrypt and analyze encrypted network traffic
received, this feature was not enabled for a significant portion of such traffic.
Additionally, server host-based intrusion prevention system coverage was not
used for this untrusted encrypted traffic. We identified 11 firewall rules that
allowed encrypted traffic from any source to 27 unique network destinations
within DPSCS’ internal network without IDPS coverage.
The aforementioned absence of IDPS coverage creates network security risk as
the untrusted encrypted traffic could contain undetected malicious data. The State
of Maryland Information Technology Security Manual requires protection against
malicious code and attacks by using IDPS to monitor system events, detect
attacks, and identify unauthorized use of information systems and/or confidential
information.
Recommendation 2
We recommend that ITCD perform a documented review and assessment of
its network security risks and identify how IDPS coverage should be applied
5

--- Page 8 ---
to its network for all untrusted traffic, including encrypted traffic, and
implement this coverage.
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We have audited of the Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services
(DPSCS) – Information Technology and Communications Division (ITCD).
Fieldwork associated with our audit of ITCD was conducted during the period
from February 2020 to September 2020. The audit was conducted in accordance
with generally accepted government auditing standards. Those standards require
that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient, appropriate evidence to
provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit
objectives. We believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for
our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives.
As prescribed by the State Government Article, Section 2-1221 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, the objectives of this audit were to examine ITCD’s internal
control over the DPSCS data center and network and to evaluate its compliance
with applicable State laws, rules, and regulations for the computer systems that
support DPSCS and its user agencies.
In planning and conducting our audit, we focused on the major areas of operations
based on assessments of significance and risk. The areas addressed by the audit
included security procedures and controls over the mainframe operating system,
security software, and critical databases. Our audit also included an assessment of
the security controls for critical routers, firewalls, switches, and virtual private
network appliances, as well as an assessment of the security controls related to
ITCD’s wireless connectivity. We also determined the status of the three findings
contained in our preceding audit report on ITCD as well as the status of two
findings included in our audit report of DPSCS – Office of the Secretary and
Other Units dated November 18, 2015.
ITCD’s fiscal operations are audited separately as part of our audit of DPSCS –
Central Operations. The most recent report on DPSCS – Central Operations was
issued on November 20, 2019.
To accomplish our audit objectives, our audit procedures included inquiries of
appropriate personnel, inspections of documents and records, and to the extent
practicable, observations of ITCD operations. We also performed other auditing
procedures that we considered necessary to achieve our audit objectives. The
6

--- Page 9 ---
reliability of data used in this report for background or informational purposes
was not assessed.
ITCD’s management is responsible for establishing and maintaining effective
internal control. Internal control is a process designed to provide reasonable
assurance that objectives pertaining to the reliability of financial records;
effectiveness and efficiency of operations, including safeguarding of assets; and
compliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations are achieved. As
provided in Government Auditing Standards, there are five components of
internal control: control environment, risk assessment, control activities,
information and communication, and monitoring. Each of the five components,
when significant to the audit objectives, and as applicable to ITCD, were
considered by us during the course of this audit.
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate.
Our reports are designed to assist the Maryland General Assembly in exercising
its legislative oversight function and to provide constructive recommendations for
improving State operations. As a result, our reports generally do not address
activities we reviewed that are functioning properly.
This report includes findings relating to conditions that we consider to be a
significant deficiencies in the design or operation of internal control that could
adversely affect ITCD’s ability to operate effectively and efficiently, and/or
comply with applicable laws, rules, and regulations. Our report also includes
findings regarding significant instances of noncompliance with applicable laws,
rules, or regulations. Other less significant findings were communicated to ITCD
that did not warrant inclusion in this report. Aspects of certain findings contained
in this report address issues of a sensitive nature, and we have omitted that
detailed information from this report. However, for the purposes of implementing
the related recommendations that information was previously shared with ITCD.
The response from DPSCS, on behalf of ITCD, to our findings and
recommendations is included as an appendix to this report. As prescribed in the
State Government Article, Section 2-1224 of the Annotated Code of Maryland,
we will advise DPSCS regarding the results of our review of its response.
7

--- Page 10 ---
APPENDIX
Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services
Office of the Secretary
6852 4th Street, Sykesville, Maryland 21784
(410) 339-5000 • www.dpscs.maryland.gov
STATE OF MARYLAND
August 27, 2021
LARRY HOGAN
GOVERNOR
BOYD K. RUTHERFORD
LT. GOVERNOR
Mr. Gregory A. Hook, CPA
Legislative Auditor
ROBERT L. GREEN
SECRETARY
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
RACHEL SESSA
CHIEF OF STAFF
301 West Preston Street, Room 1202
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
CHRISTOPHER McCULLY
DEPUTY SECRETARY
ADMINISTRATION
Dear Mr. Hook:
WAYNE HILL
DEPUTY SECRETARY
OPERATIONS
The Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services (DPSCS) has
reviewed the Draft Audit Report dated August 11, 2021 for the DPSCS –
CAROLYN J. SCRUGGS
ASSISTANT SECRETARY
Information Technology and Communications Division. We appreciate the
constructive findings and recommendations that were made as the result of
GARY W. McLHINNEY
ASSISTANT SECRETARY
this audit.
Please find attached Chief Information Officer Stanley Lofton’s itemized
responses to the findings and recommendations. Corrective action has or will
be taken for the findings noted by the Legislative Auditor, and we will closely
monitor their reported status in order to prevent any repeat audit findings in
the next audit.
If you have any questions regarding this response, please contact me.
Sincerely,
Robert L. Green
Secretary
Attachment
Cc: Walter Pete Landon, Deputy Chief of Staff

--- Page 11 ---
Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services
Information Technology and Communications Division
Agency Response Form
Sensitive Personally Identifiable Information (PII)
Finding 1
ITCD maintained sensitive PII in a manner that did not provide adequate safeguards.
We recommend that ITCD implement appropriate information security safeguards for the
sensitive PII it maintains (repeat).
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 1 Agree Estimated Completion Date: 12/31/2025
Please provide details of By March 2022, the Department’s distributed servers will be
corrective action or corrected to provide adequate protection of the PII data.
explain disagreement.
The Department will also implement new systems to provide
adequate protection for the PII data now associated to mainframe
systems. This will include:
a. Submitting a grant application for funds to implement a fully
web based restitution module by 12/31/22. While it is the
Department’s desire to implement this by 12/31/22, this may
not occur until sometime in 2023, depending on funding; and
b. Awarding a project to implement a fully web based criminal
history system. This project, once awarded, is estimated to
take four years to implement, and will provide sufficient
safeguards of PII data. The Department expects to award the
contract for this system by the end of November 2021, and it
should be in operation by 12/31/2025.
Page 1 of 3

--- Page 12 ---
Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services
Information Technology and Communications Division
Agency Response Form
Auditor’s Comment: ITCD’s response addressed the safeguarding of PII across both
server-based and mainframe systems. We are concerned that ITCD’s resolution timeline
goes far out into the future for both systems (December 2022 and December 2025,
respectively). Since the timing of this resolution is based on replacing the respective
systems, the delay is understandable. However, we remain concerned that until the
system replacements are accomplished, the PII security risk, part of which was also cited
in the prior audit, will continue for projected long periods without adequate safeguards in
place. Accordingly, during the system replacement periods, ITCD needs to take prompt
action to implement other substantial mitigating controls, to the extent possible, as
required by the State of Maryland Information Technology Security Manual. We
discussed the need to implement this compensating controls approach during the audit
exit meeting. This approach would require ITCD to consistently implement three
mitigating controls, which involve performing data loss prevention, network security
event monitoring, and strict database change monitoring. We believe that ITCD has
adequate tools and personnel necessary to support most of those controls, but may require
additional assets to achieve appropriate data loss prevention control.
Page 2 of 3

--- Page 13 ---
Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services
Information Technology and Communications Division
Agency Response Form
Network Security
Finding 2
Intrusion detection prevention system coverage did not exist for certain untrusted
encrypted traffic.
We recommend that ITCD perform a documented review and assessment of its network
security risks and identify how IDPS coverage should be applied to its network for all
untrusted traffic, including encrypted traffic, and implement this coverage.
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 2 Agree Estimated Completion Date: 12/31/2021
Please provide details of DPSCS will perform a documented quarterly review and assessment
corrective action or of its network security risks relative to IDPS coverage. Additionally,
explain disagreement. we will identify how network IDPS coverage (including coverage for
encrypted traffic) should be best applied to its network, and
subsequently implement IDPS coverage for all critical portions of its
network, which were assessed as needing such coverage.
Page 3 of 3

--- Page 14 ---
A T
UDIT EAM
R. Brendan Coffey, CPA, CISA
Edwin L. Paul, CPA, CISA
Information Systems Audit Managers
Edward O. Kendall, CISA
Matthew D. Walbert, CISA
Information Systems Senior Auditors
Dominick R. Abril
Charles O. Price
Information Systems Staff Auditors