Title: Maryland Transportation Authority
Date: 09/13/2021
Type: Fiscal Compliance
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=6140bacea1ce580b84c93f72
Extracted: 2025-06-19T11:54:59.313576
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Audit Report
Maryland Transportation Authority
September 2021
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Senator Clarence K. Lam, M.D. (Senate Chair) Delegate Carol L. Krimm (House Chair)
Senator Malcolm L. Augustine Delegate Steven J. Arentz
Senator Adelaide C. Eckardt Delegate Mark S. Chang
Senator George C. Edwards Delegate Nicholas P. Charles II
Senator Katie Fry Hester Delegate Andrea Fletcher Harrison
Senator Cheryl C. Kagan Delegate Trent M. Kittleman
Senator Benjamin F. Kramer Delegate David Moon
Senator Cory V. McCray Delegate Julie Palakovich Carr
Senator Justin D. Ready Delegate Geraldine Valentino-Smith
Senator Craig J. Zucker One Vacancy
To Obtain Further Information
Office of Legislative Audits
301 West Preston Street, Room 1202
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Phone: 410-946-5900 ꞏ 301-970-5900 ꞏ 1-877-486-9964 (Toll Free in Maryland)
Maryland Relay: 711
TTY: 410-946-5401 ꞏ 301-970-5401
E-mail: OLAWebmaster@ola.state.md.us
Website: www.ola.state.md.us
To Report Fraud
The Office of Legislative Audits operates a Fraud Hotline to report fraud, waste, or abuse involving State
of Maryland government resources. Reports of fraud, waste, or abuse may be communicated anonymously
by a toll-free call to 1-877-FRAUD-11, by mail to the Fraud Hotline, c/o Office of Legislative Audits, or
through the Office’s website.
Nondiscrimination Statement
The Department of Legislative Services does not discriminate on the basis of age, ancestry, color, creed,
marital status, national origin, race, religion, gender, gender identity, sexual orientation, or disability in the
admission or access to its programs, services, or activities. The Department’s Information Officer has been
designated to coordinate compliance with the nondiscrimination requirements contained in Section 35.107
of the United States Department of Justice Regulations. Requests for assistance should be directed to the
Information Officer at 410-946-5400 or 410-970-5400.

--- Page 3 ---
September 13, 2021
Senator Clarence K. Lam, M.D., Senate Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Delegate Carol L. Krimm, House Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Members of Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Annapolis, Maryland
Ladies and Gentlemen:
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the Maryland Transportation
Authority (MDTA) for the period beginning May 10, 2016 and ending March 4,
2020. MDTA is responsible for the supervision, financing, construction,
operation, maintenance, and repair of the State’s toll facilities.
We received allegations on our fraud, waste, and abuse hotline alleging that
MDTA was not taking sufficient action to detect and address the overbilling of
customers for electronic tolling due to issues with its new toll equipment. Our
audit disclosed that MDTA was inconsistent in its actions related to the impact of
issues with its electronic toll collection system on its customers and potential
customer overbillings. We noted where MDTA’s response to tolling problems at
four facilities during several time periods was not consistent for each event. For
example, in one situation at the Thomas J. Hatem Memorial Bridge, significant
overbillings of $67,000 were identified and returned to customers, while at other
facilities the extent of the overbilling issue was not determined. In each case,
once aware of the issue, it does appear that MDTA did take timely action to
resolve the toll equipment or software deficiencies responsible for the problems.
Although, our review found operational deficiencies regarding certain MDTA
actions, we did not identify any issues that warranted a referral to the Office of the
Attorney General – Criminal Division.
Our audit also disclosed that MDTA did not perform periodic documented
reviews of system access capabilities granted to State and contractor employees
on the old electronic tolling and customer service system used during our audit
period.

--- Page 4 ---
For this audit we conducted our fieldwork entirely during the period of the State’s
COVID-19 pandemic health crisis. The crisis also had an impact on MDTA’s
operations. Specifically, a Governor’s executive order effective March 5, 2020
resulted in MDTA closing its Customer Service Centers, ceasing the collection of
cash tolls, suspending notifications of video tolls due, and suspending collection
efforts of unpaid tolls previously billed. According to MDTA management, on
October 15, 2020, MDTA resumed the mailing of video toll notices and collection
efforts on previously unpaid tolls. Additionally, on August 6, 2020 the Governor
announced a permanent cessation of cash toll collection and that electronic tolling
(E-ZPass or Video Tolling) would be the exclusive method for toll collection
across the State.
The Maryland Department of Transportation’s (MDOT) response to this audit, on
behalf of MDTA, is included as an appendix to this report. We reviewed the
response and noted general agreement to our findings and related
recommendations, and while there are other aspects of MDOT’s response which
will require further clarification, we do not anticipate that these will require the
Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee’s attention to resolve.
We wish to acknowledge the cooperation extended to us during the audit by
MDTA. We also wish to acknowledge MDOT’s and MDTA’s willingness to
address the audit issues and implement appropriate corrective actions.
Respectfully submitted,
Gregory A. Hook, CPA
Legislative Auditor
2

--- Page 5 ---
Background Information
Agency Responsibilities
Title 4 of the Transportation Article, Annotated Code of Maryland, establishes the
Maryland Transportation Authority (MDTA) as an agency of the State, to act on
behalf of the Maryland Department of Transportation with regard to the
supervision, financing, construction, operation, maintenance, and repair of the
State’s toll facilities. The governing board of MDTA consists of eight members
who are appointed by the Governor with the advice and consent of the Senate.
The Secretary of Transportation serves as the Chairman.
Financial Statement Audits
MDTA engaged an independent accounting firm to perform audits of its financial
statements for the fiscal years ended June 30, 2017, 2018, 2019, and 2020. In the
related audit reports, the firm stated that MDTA’s financial statements presented
fairly, in all material respects, the respective financial position of the business
type activities of the MDTA as of June 30, 2017, 2018, 2019, and 2020, and the
respective changes in financial position and cash flows thereof for the years then
ended in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United
States of America.
According to the audited financial statements, MDTA’s operating revenues and
expenses totaled $733 million (including $584.6 million in toll revenue) and $475
million, respectively, during fiscal year 2020, and its net position totaled $5.1
billion as of June 30, 2020. MDTA’s operating expenditures primarily consisted
of payroll, contractual services, and according to the State’s budget books, bond
debt service. The majority of MDTA’s net position represents a net investment in
capital assets; the unrestricted portion of this net position is approximately $622
million. Finally, according to the State’s budget books, MDTA’s capital
expenditures totaled $464.8 million during fiscal year 2020.
Resource Sharing Agreements
On August 3, 2018, we issued a performance audit report on Telecommunication
Resource Sharing Agreements to evaluate the State’s use and oversight of
telecommunications resource sharing agreements between multiple State agencies
and private companies. This report included a number of findings related to
selected agencies, but emphasized the need for the Department of Information
Technology to exercise greater oversight of resource sharing agreements entered
3

--- Page 6 ---
into by State agencies in general. The performance audit included the following
select findings related to MDTA.
 MDTA did not treat certain agreements as resource sharing resulting in
lost opportunities to maximize compensation,
 MDTA did not verify all monetary compensation was received in
accordance with the agreements and failed to collect all compensation,
 MDTA did not always include adequate provisions in its agreements to
protect the State,
 MDTA executed and renewed resource sharing agreements without proper
approvals, and
 MDTA allowed telecommunications companies to continue using State
resources after agreements had expired.
The Maryland Department of Transportation, on behalf of MDTA, agreed to the
findings and recommendations in the report.
Significant Decline in Toll Transactions
MDTA’s toll facilities experienced a system-wide 17.4 percent decline in traffic
volume from 167 million toll transactions (or trips) to 138 million transactions
between fiscal year 2019 to 2020 (see Figure 1), which MDTA attributed to the
COVID-19 pandemic health crisis. As a result, MDTA’s fiscal year 2020 revenue
was $129.5 million less than fiscal year 2019.
Figure 1
Annual Operating Revenues, Expenses, and Toll Transactions
(dollar amounts expressed in thousands)
Source: MDTA’s Fiscal Year 2020 Comprehensive Annual Financial Report
4

--- Page 7 ---
Findings and Recommendations
Toll Collections
Background
The Maryland Transportation Authority (MDTA) is responsible for the collection
of toll revenue at the State’s nine toll collection facilities. During the audit
period, customers paid tolls via cash at toll booths, electronically through E-
ZPass, or through video tolling billing notices. MDTA also operates twelve walk-
in Customer Service Centers (six at toll facilities and six at Motor Vehicle
Administration offices) and one Customer Service Call Center. During fiscal year
2020 toll collections totaled $584.6 million (see Figure 2). E-ZPass collections
are recorded when a vehicle with a transponder travels through a toll facility.
Video Tolling occurs when a customer drives through a toll booth or toll lane
without paying cash or using an E-ZPass transponder, triggering an image to be
taken of the front and rear license plate. Video tolls are billed to vehicle owners
after being manually reviewed and verified.
Figure 2
Toll Collections by Facility
Fiscal Year 2020
(expressed in millions of dollars)
Cash E-ZPass Video Total Toll
Toll Facility
Tolls Tolls Tolls Revenue
Fort McHenry Tunnel $26.2 $157.8 $9.6 $193.6
John F. Kennedy
19.1 128.8 5.5 153.4
Memorial Highway/I-95
Intercounty Connector - 50.0 6.2 56.3
Francis Scott Key Bridge 3.4 40.3 4.2 47.8
Baltimore Harbor Tunnel 10.1 34.3 3.0 47.4
William Preston Lane Jr.
8.8 34.6 2.6 46.0
Memorial (Bay) Bridge
Governor Harry W. Nice
Memorial / Senator
5.3 11.3 0.9 17.6
Thomas “Mac” Middleton
(Nice) Bridge
Thomas J. Hatem
0.7 9.5 1.5 11.7
Memorial (Hatem) Bridge
I-95 Express Toll Lanes - 10.4 0.4 10.8
Total $73.7 $476.9 $34.0 $584.6
Note: Numbers may not sum to total due to rounding.
Source: MDTA Fiscal Year 2020 Financial Statements
5

--- Page 8 ---
During our audit fieldwork, MDTA’s operations were significantly impacted by
the COVID-19 pandemic health crisis. Specifically, a Governor’s executive order
effective March 5, 2020 resulted in MDTA closing its Customer Service Centers,
ceasing the collection of cash tolls, suspending notifications of video tolls due,
and suspending collection efforts of unpaid tolls previously billed. According to
MDTA management, on October 15, 2020, MDTA resumed the mailing of video
toll notices and collection efforts on previously unpaid tolls. Additionally, on
August 6, 2020 the Governor announced a permanent cessation of cash toll
collection and that electronic tolling (E-ZPass or Video Tolling) would be the
exclusive method for toll collection across the State. Consequently, our audit
objective and scope focused on MDTA’s electronic tolling operations.
In February 2018, the Board of Public Works (BPW) approved two separate
contracts totaling $359.4 million to replace MDTA’s existing contractor that
provided both the toll collection system (hardware and software for toll facilities)
and the customer service center (including related software to process toll
transactions). Specifically, one contractor was awarded a nine-year contract for
the customer service center totaling $200.4 million with two renewal options
valued at an additional $72.4 million. A separate contractor was awarded a nine-
year contract for the toll collection system totaling $71.9 million with two
renewal options valued at an additional $14.7 million.
The transition to the new toll collection system contractor began in May 2019,
which involved installing new tolling system equipment and software. As of
December 31, 2020, although the installation of the equipment and software was
completed in July 2020, MDTA was still in the process of testing and calibrating
the toll collection system. Additionally, the new customer service center
contractor was still in the development and testing phase of its system. Therefore,
in order to maintain continuity of services, MDTA obtained BPW approval in
January 2021 to extend the contract of the previous tolling contractor until March
2022 at a cost of $38 million.
We received allegations on our fraud, waste, and abuse hotline alleging that
MDTA was not taking sufficient action to detect and address the overbilling of
customers for electronic tolling due to issues with its new toll equipment. We
reviewed MDTA’s processes to monitor its electronic tolling system and the
actions taken to address any deficiencies it had identified. Based on our review,
we were able to substantiate the allegations regarding certain insufficient MDTA
actions. Specifically, although we noted that MDTA investigated certain errors
during the implementation of the new system and took action to correct those
errors with tolling equipment, it did not ensure all customers were refunded for
any overbilling (see Finding 1). While our review found operational deficiencies
6

--- Page 9 ---
regarding the scope of certain MDTA actions, we did not identify any issues that
warranted a referral to the Office of the Attorney General – Criminal Division.
Finding 1
MDTA actions did not determine the impact of electronic toll collection
system issues on its customers and identify and correct certain related
customer overbillings.
Analysis
MDTA did not sufficiently determine the impact of certain issues with its
electronic toll collection system on its customers and identify and correct related
customer overbillings. MDTA began transitioning to the new electronic tolling
contractor in a series of scheduled facility upgrades from approximately May
2019 to July 2020. The tolling system has edits and other processes designed to
proactively detect and automatically correct tolling mischarges (such as,
customers charged twice for the same toll event). MDTA also operates a service
center for customer complaints, and center staff have the ability to correct
customer E-ZPass accounts when tolling errors occur that are not automatically
detected and corrected by the system.
In December 2019, MDTA became aware of issues with its new system
implementation (including overbilling of customers due to tolling equipment or
software failures) through observations of toll transactions and customer
complaints. For example, according to MDTA records, during the period from
December 2019 to October 2020, it documented certain incidents of tolling errors
resulting from problems with tolling equipment at four facilities (the Fort
McHenry Tunnel, Intercounty Connector, the I-95 Express Toll Lanes, and the
Thomas J. Hatem Memorial (Hatem) Bridge). Our review of these incidents also
disclosed an issue at the Francis Scott Key Bridge that MDTA had not previously
documented. Although MDTA worked with its vendor to implement corrective
action, the resultant actions were not always sufficient to determine the impact of
these issues on customers during its investigation of the tolling errors as further
described below.
Fort McHenry Tunnel
In December 2019, MDTA conducted an investigation of a tolling equipment
malfunction that resulted in incorrect axle counts causing customer
overbillings (that is, two axle vehicles being charged for additional axles).
MDTA records indicated it had questioned its new tolling contractor about the
extent of preventative tolling equipment maintenance and employee training
performed, pointing out that even though there was no loss of revenue, the
7

--- Page 10 ---
possibility of customer overbillings could potentially generate unwanted
publicity for MDTA.
While MDTA could provide documentation that the tolling equipment was
fixed, it could not provide us with documentation that it researched the impact
of the problem on customers until the corrective actions were taken. After we
brought our concern about the impact on customers to MDTA’s attention in
April 2021, it further investigated the issue and determined it related to
equipment malfunctions in one of the twenty-two lanes over a period of 25
hours. MDTA advised us that it subsequently identified approximately 7,700
customers were overbilled $84,400. As of August 2021, MDTA advised us it
was in the process of correcting these customers’ accounts.
In addition, we identified another concern with customers being billed twice
on certain dates in January, March, August, and September 2020 due to
cameras misreading vehicles in other toll lanes (similar to the issue noted
below at the Francis Scott Key Bridge). MDTA management advised us that
they were not aware of this issue and that these types of errors are extremely
rare since its tolling system is supposed to automatically detect and correct
such errors. Nevertheless, upon us bringing the issue to MDTA’s attention in
April 2021, it performed limited research (two separate 24-hour periods
during March and September 2020) to determine if the errors resulted in
customers being overbilled. MDTA advised us that a small number of
customers were overbilled but it did not determine the amount of the
overbillings or conduct further research by reviewing other time periods.
Francis Scott Key Bridge
We identified customers being billed twice on certain dates in April and May
2020 due to cameras misreading vehicles in other toll lanes (similar to the
issue noted above at the Fort McHenry Tunnel). In this instance, customers
were both correctly charged for a 2-axle vehicle ($3), and then incorrectly
charged again for a 5-axle vehicle ($24) one second later. As with the
aforementioned Fort McHenry Tunnel issue, MDTA management advised us
that they were not aware of this issue and that these types of errors are
extremely rare since its tolling system is supposed to automatically detect and
correct such errors. Nevertheless, upon us bringing the issue to MDTA’s
attention in April 2021, it performed limited research (two separate 24-hour
periods during April and May 2020) to determine if the errors resulted in
customers being overbilled. MDTA again advised us that a small number of
customers were overbilled, but it did not determine the amount of the
overbillings or conduct further research by reviewing other time periods.
8

--- Page 11 ---
Intercounty Connector and the I-95 Express Toll Lanes
According to MDTA’s records, during the period from April 6, 2020 to
August 18, 2020, there were issues with the equipment (such as camera
cables) at the Intercounty Connector that resulted in vehicle misreads, which
could have caused incorrect toll charges or overbillings. A similar situation
was noted for the I-95 Express Toll Lanes during the period from October 6,
2020 to October 9, 2020. While MDTA could document that the equipment
issues were fixed, it had not determined the extent of customer overbillings.
Thomas J. Hatem Memorial (Hatem) Bridge
MDTA identified an overbilling issue due to the miscounting of axles at the
Hatem Bridge. In this instance, MDTA proactively performed a review of
transactions for commuter plan customers between October 21, 2019 and
November 26, 2019 and identified 5,646 transactions for 2-axle vehicles that
may have been overbilled. MDTA management advised the related accounts
were credited $67,000.
We were unable to quantify the potential overbilling related to these issues due to
the lack of available data; however, MDTA acknowledged that it would be
expected that tolling errors would increase during the new system implementation
and there was a general increase in tolls dismissed from tolling errors, but could
not cite the above issues as the cause. Specifically, according to MDTA records,
during the period September 2019 to December 2019 there was a significant
increase in the amount of tolls dismissed due to errors compared to September
2018 to December 2018 (see Figure 3). The dismissed tolls in 2019 represented
almost five percent of tolls billed compared to one percent in 2018.
Figure 3
Comparison of Tolls Dismissed
2018-2019
$300,000
$250,000
$200,000
$150,000
$100,000
$50,000
$0
September October November December
2018 2019
Source: MDTA Records
9

--- Page 12 ---
Recommendation 1
We recommend that MDTA
a. review and evaluate significant tolling issues (such as, an increase in
similar customer complaints or a pattern of tolling abnormalities). For
example, MDTA may want to consider developing a formal policy to
review and evaluate tolling issues and determine the extent of customer
overbillings for appropriate corrective actions (such as making
restitution); and
b. review previously identified electronic toll issues to determine the extent
of customer overbillings and in consultation with legal counsel, assess the
practicality of related customer restitution.
System Access
Finding 2
MDTA did not perform periodic documented reviews of system access
capabilities granted to State and contractor employees on the old electronic
tolling and customer service system used during our audit period.
Analysis
MDTA did not perform periodic documented reviews of system access
capabilities granted to State and contractor employees on the old electronic tolling
and customer service system used during our audit period. The electronic tolling
and customer service system was used to record vehicles traveling through its
various tolling facilities and collect tolls through its E-ZPass and video toll
applications. Customers are assessed and billed for tolls by the system, which is
also used to collect tolls and maintain electronic accounts receivable records.
According to available system records, as of July 2020, there were 296 active
users that had access to the old system, and the new systems had not yet been
fully implemented.
We could not readily determine the propriety of the system access, because
MDTA could not provide us with a detailed system report of user capabilities.
For example, MDTA provided us with a report that identified 121 users that had
the ability to dismiss a toll violation, but MDTA could not confirm whether this
capability was subject to appropriate supervisory review and approval.
The State of Maryland Information Technology Security Manual requires
agencies to perform system access reviews at least annually. The Manual also
requires agencies to ensure that access is strictly controlled, audited, and that it
supports the concept of “least privilege.”
10

--- Page 13 ---
Recommendation 2
We recommend that MDTA perform periodic documented reviews of user
access to its electronic tolling and customer service system, including the new
systems once implemented, and take appropriate corrective action for any
improper or unnecessary user access.
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the Maryland Transportation
Authority (MDTA) for the period beginning May 10, 2016 and ending March 4,
2020. The audit was conducted in accordance with generally accepted
government auditing standards. Those standards require that we plan and perform
the audit to obtain sufficient, appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis
for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives. We believe that
the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and
conclusions based on our audit objectives.
As prescribed by the State Government Article, Section 2-1221 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, the objectives of this audit were to examine MDTA’s financial
transactions, records, and internal control, and to evaluate its compliance with
applicable State laws, rules, and regulations.
In planning and conducting our audit, we focused on the major financial-related
areas of operations based on assessments of significance and risk. The areas
addressed by the audit included procurements and disbursements for construction,
architecture and engineering contracts, as well as MDTA’s operating expenses,
and certain cash receipts and payroll activities.
MDTA engages an independent accounting firm to audit its annual financial
statements. In the related audit reports for the fiscal years ended June 30, 2017,
2018, 2019, and 2020 the firm stated that MDTA’s financial statements presented
fairly, in all material respects, the respective financial position of the business-
type activities of the MDTA as of June 30, 2017, 2018, 2019, and 2020 and the
respective changes in financial position and cash flows thereof for the years then
ended in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United
States of America. We relied on the work of the independent accounting firm to
provide audit coverage pertaining to bank and investment accounts, debt
issuances and related debt covenants, and certain cash receipts and payroll
activity. Our audit procedures in those areas were generally limited, therefore, to
obtaining a sufficient basis for that reliance.
11

--- Page 14 ---
Our assessment of internal controls was based on agency procedures and controls
in place at the time of our fieldwork. Our tests of transactions and other auditing
procedures were generally focused on the transactions occurring during our audit
period of May 10, 2016 to March 4, 2020, but may include transactions before or
after this period as we considered necessary to achieve our audit objectives.
To accomplish our audit objectives, our audit procedures included inquiries of
appropriate personnel, inspections of documents and records, tests of transactions
and to the extent practicable, observations of MDTA’s operations. Generally,
transactions were selected for testing based on auditor judgment, which primarily
considers risk, the timing or dollar amount of the transaction, or the significance
of the transaction to the area of operation reviewed. As a matter of course, we do
not normally use sampling in our tests, so unless otherwise specifically indicated,
neither statistical nor non-statistical audit sampling was used to select the
transactions tested. Therefore, unless sampling is specifically indicated in a
finding, the results from any tests conducted or disclosed by us cannot be used to
project those results to the entire population from which the test items were
selected.
We also performed various data extracts of pertinent information from the State’s
Central Payroll Bureau (payroll data), as well as from the contractor administering
the State’s Corporate Purchasing Card Program (credit card activity). The
extracts are performed as part of ongoing internal processes established by the
Office of Legislative Audits and were subject to various tests to determine data
reliability. We determined that the data extracted from these various sources were
sufficiently reliable for the purposes the data were used during the audit. We also
extracted data from MDTA’s general ledger and purchasing and disbursement
systems for the purpose of testing purchases and disbursements. We performed
various tests of the relevant data and determined that the data were sufficiently
reliable for the purposes the data were used during the audit. Finally, we
performed other auditing procedures that we considered necessary to achieve our
audit objectives. The reliability of data used in this report for background or
informational purposes was not assessed.
MDTA’s management is responsible for establishing and maintaining effective
internal control. Internal control is a process designed to provide reasonable
assurance that objectives pertaining to the reliability of financial records;
effectiveness and efficiency of operations, including safeguarding of assets; and
compliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations are achieved. As
provided in Government Auditing Standards, there are five components of
internal control: control environment, risk assessment, control activities,
information and communication, and monitoring. Each of the five components,
12

--- Page 15 ---
when significant to the audit objectives, and as applicable to MDTA, were
considered by us during the course of this audit.
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate.
Our reports are designed to assist the Maryland General Assembly in exercising
its legislative oversight function and to provide constructive recommendations for
improving State operations. As a result, our reports generally do not address
activities we reviewed that are functioning properly.
This report includes a finding related to conditions that we consider to be a
significant deficiency in the design or operation of internal control that could
adversely affect MDTA’s ability to maintain reliable financial records, operate
effectively and efficiently, and/or comply with applicable laws, rules, and
regulations. Our report also includes a finding regarding a significant instance of
noncompliance with applicable laws, rules, or regulations. Other less significant
findings were communicated to MDTA that did not warrant inclusion in this
report.
We conducted our audit fieldwork from March 5, 2020 to December 31, 2020.
During this period of time, MDTA’s operations were significantly impacted by
the COVID-19 pandemic health crisis. Specifically, the Governor’s executive
order effective March 5, 2020 resulted in MDTA closing its Customer Service
Centers, ceasing the collection of cash tolls, suspending notifications of video
tolls due, and suspending collection efforts of unpaid tolls previously billed.
According to MDTA management, on October 15, 2020, it resumed mailing video
toll notices and performing collection efforts on previously unpaid tolls.
Additionally, on August 6, 2020 the Governor announced a permanent cessation
of cash toll collection and that electronic tolling (E-ZPass or Video Tolling) was
the only method for toll collection. Consequently, our audit objective and scope
focused on MDTA’s electronic tolling operations.
The response from the Maryland Department of Transportation (MDOT), on
behalf of MDTA, to our findings and recommendations is included as an
appendix to this report. As prescribed in the State Government Article, Section 2-
1224 of the Annotated Code of Maryland, we will advise MDOT regarding the
results of our review of its response.
13

--- Page 16 ---
APPENDIX

--- Page 17 ---
Maryland Transportation Authority
Agency Response Form
Toll Collections
Finding 1
MDTA actions did not determine the impact of electronic toll collection system issues on its
customers and identify and correct certain related customer overbillings.
We recommend that MDTA
a. review and evaluate significant tolling issues (such as, an increase in similar customer
complaints or a pattern of tolling abnormalities). For example, MDTA may want to
consider developing a formal policy to review and evaluate tolling issues and determine
the extent of customer overbillings for appropriate corrective actions (such as making
restitution); and
b. review previously identified electronic toll issues to determine the extent of customer
overbillings and in consultation with legal counsel, assess the practicality of related
customer restitution.
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide The Maryland Transportation Authority (MDTA) acknowledges that in
additional comments as certain limited circumstances, customers were charged an incorrect toll
deemed necessary. rate; however, the MDTA respectfully disagrees with the suggestion
from the Office of Legislative Audits (OLA) that these identified issues
are part of a larger unknown problem. Although hardware or software
problems may occur on occasion, MDTA’s tolling system has a robust
real-time monitoring system that alerts to anomalies so that issues can be
quickly identified and corrected to minimize any potential errors.
During the audit period, MDTA processed an average of 158 million
transactions per year. In a detailed analysis provided to OLA covering
four specific days at two different facilities, MDTA identified 15
occurrences of customers being overcharged out of a total of 230,687
transactions. This reflects an error rate of 0.000098.
During the COVID-19 pandemic, the MDTA quickly transitioned to all-
electronic tolling (AET) for the safety of its customers and employees
and undertook a major transition from the old tolling system to the new
one, including the replacement of toll equipment at 131 toll locations.
While numerous controls were in place with the contractors during the
toll equipment transition, transaction accuracy is most at risk when new
equipment is installed as it must go through a tuning and calibration
process. MDTA maintains a robust, statistical sampling-based quality
assurance and quality control program, including multiple layers of
Page 1 of 5

--- Page 18 ---
Maryland Transportation Authority
Agency Response Form
verification, automated alerts, business intelligence analytics, and system
safety nets to achieve the highest degree of accuracy from its tolling
system. In addition, the new tolling system provides MDTA enhanced
ability to perform system monitoring and auditing compared to its
previous system.
The MDTA seeks to deliver excellent customer service. If it is
determined that a customer was charged a higher toll rate than was
appropriate, the MDTA refunds the difference to the customer. If it is
determined that a customer was charged a lower toll rate than was
appropriate, the MDTA does not seek additional funds from the
customer. It is also important to note that the processing of some
customer refunds were delayed due to the backlog of transactions
associated with the switch to AET as a result of COVID-19 and a
scheduled delay in processing due to the transition to the new tolling
system.
MDTA Issue Analysis Summary
One tracking tool utilized by MDTA is an Issue Analysis Summary
(IAS), which documents known system issues. MDTA provided its IAS
tracker to OLA, which included 25 issues (4 resulting in overcharges and
21 in undercharges). The relevance is that the analysis includes the four
overcharge issues identified by the MDTA and statistically
unidentifiable errors.
Fort McHenry Tunnel (FMT) Equipment Malfunction
From the initial identification of the issue by the MDTA in December
2019, the MDTA analyzed, isolated, and corrected the equipment failure,
except for crediting customers’ accounts. When questioned by OLA the
MDTA recognized the oversight and determined the number of
customers impacted, amount overbilled, and began to process credits
owed to customers.
Intercounty Connector (ICC) and I-95 Express Toll Lanes (ETL)
MDTA is not aware of any discussions with OLA involving these
transactions to date. The ICC transactions were part of the backlog of
transactions and as such, credits could not be processed until posted. In
total, 703 ICC transactions require a credit totaling $425.54. In total,
1,720 ETL transactions require a credit totaling $3,440.21. In both
cases, the MDTA identified and fixed the issue and documentation exists
supporting our actions.
Page 2 of 5

--- Page 19 ---
Maryland Transportation Authority
Agency Response Form
Thomas J. Hatem Memorial (Hatem) Bridge
MDTA agrees with the analysis and as indicated the MDTA identified
and resolved the issue and credited all 5,646 impacted transactions
totaling $67,000.
Potential Overcharges Cited by OLA
At the time of the exit conference, OLA provided the MDTA with
information regarding customers being billed twice. OLA provided a 3-
hour time window for four dates, lane numbers, and indicated the
duplicate transactions were all E-ZPass®. Information was not provided
to the MDTA regarding FMT January or August transactions. Since one
of the lanes indicated was permanently closed during the timeframe
identified by OLA, the MDTA created a report looking for transactions,
with the same transponder, within minutes of each other for the entire
toll facility. The report spanned 24-hours for each date provided. Due
to automated filters and blocks in place, most cases of duplicate charges
are prevented at a point in the transaction processing prior to posting to
the customer’s E-ZPass account. In this case, the MDTA traced each
transaction to the customer’s E-ZPass account to verify if duplicate
charges occurred. A rigorous analysis was performed, and a detailed
spreadsheet was provided to OLA identifying 15 overcharge
transactions, including 8 duplicate transactions and 7 misclassifications,
out of 230,687 transactions, along with supporting documentation for
every transaction reviewed.
Incorrect
Toll Total
Date Transactions Error Rate
Facility Transactions
Count Amount
FMT 3/12/20 83,946 5 $ 13.80 0.000060
FMT 9/2/20 101,533 1 $ 21.00 0.000010
FSK 4/23/20 25,082 6 $ 126.00 0.000239
FSK 5/30/20 20,126 3 $ 54.00 0.000149
Total 230,687 15 $ 214.80 0.000098
Detection of issues at these low error rates requires rigorous analysis far
exceeding conventional standards (e.g. ANSI/ASQ Z1.9, GAO/PCIE Financial
Audit Manual GAO-08-585G, 2020 AICPA AU-C Section 530, etc.). Today, when
the report (duplicate transponder read) is run, no transactions are
identified, consistently demonstrating an extremely low error rate.
The analysis also discusses an increase in tolls dismissed. The
dismissals are for video toll transactions and not E-ZPass transactions,
which is the primary focus of the aforementioned issues.
Page 3 of 5

--- Page 20 ---
Maryland Transportation Authority
Agency Response Form
Recommendation 1a Agree Estimated Completion Date: 12/1/21
Please provide details of The MDTA has an established process to ensure significant tolling
corrective action or issues are identified, stopped, and fixed; customer accounts that are
explain disagreement. negatively impacted are credited; and lost revenue is recovered from
MDTA’s contractors. The MDTA will formalize the process in
documented procedures.
Recommendation 1b Agree Estimated Completion Date: 12/1/21
Please provide details of The MDTA will review and reconcile previously identified electronic
corrective action or toll issues from the tolling transition to ensure the customer credits
explain disagreement. identified in this finding and not already processed, are processed.
Page 4 of 5

--- Page 21 ---
Maryland Transportation Authority
Agency Response Form
System Access
Finding 2
MDTA did not perform periodic documented reviews of system access capabilities granted
to State and contractor employees on the old electronic tolling and customer service system
used during our audit period.
We recommend that MDTA perform periodic documented reviews of user access to its
electronic tolling and customer service system, including the new systems once
implemented, and take appropriate corrective action for any improper or unnecessary user
access.
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide The analysis states the MDTA did not perform periodic documented
additional comments as reviews of contractor and MDTA employee system access rights in its
deemed necessary. prior tolling and customer service system. MDTA did perform reviews
which were documented, although there is agreement that these reviews
should be strengthened/improved. Specifically, the MDTA has sound
procedures to ensure access rights align with a user’s job duties upon
granting initial access and that access is disabled for separated
employees. Additionally, on a monthly basis, MDTA ensures access
rights were disabled for all MDTA separated (no longer employed)
employees by comparing a system access report to an employee
separation report. MDTA’s procedures were deficient in that they did
not identify situations in which a user’s job duties changed and their
access no longer aligned with his/her job duties or situations in which a
contractor employee separated, and his/her access was not disabled.
Recommendation 2 Agree Estimated Completion Date: 11/1/21
Please provide details of The MDTA will establish documented procedures that require the
corrective action or periodic review of user access (MDTA and contractor employees) to its
explain disagreement. electronic tolling and customer service systems. The reviews will be
documented and retained for audit verification. The reviews will serve as
a second level defense. That is, the MDTA has sound procedures to
ensure appropriate or disabled access when granting access, an
employee’s job duties change, and an employee separates from the
MDTA or its contractor. The periodic reviews will detect if these
procedures are not followed at which time corrective action will be
taken.
Page 5 of 5

--- Page 22 ---
A T
UDIT EAM
Raymond G. Burton, Jr., CPA, CFE
Audit Manager
Edwin L. Paul, CPA, CISA
Information Systems Audit Manager
Lisa M. Beers, CFE
Walter L. Horan, IV
Senior Auditors
Peter W. Chong
Information Systems Senior Auditor
Ashley M. Darby, CFE
Albert E. Davison
Tony M. Kinsler
Oluwafemi E. Ogundolie
Staff Auditors