Title: Office of People's Counsel
Date: 09/16/2021
Type: Fiscal Compliance
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=614353eea1ce580cd0e2bd99
Extracted: 2025-06-19T11:55:18.009879
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Audit Report
Office of People’s Counsel
April 2025
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Senator Shelly L. Hettleman (Senate Chair) Delegate Jared Solomon (House Chair)
Senator Joanne C. Benson Delegate Steven J. Arentz
Senator Benjamin T. Brooks, Sr. Delegate Andrea Fletcher Harrison
Senator Paul D. Corderman Delegate Steven C. Johnson
Senator Katie Fry Hester Delegate Mary A. Lehman
Senator Cheryl C. Kagan Delegate David H. Moon
Senator Clarence K. Lam, M.D. Delegate Julie Palakovich Carr
Senator Cory V. McCray Delegate Emily K. Shetty
Senator Justin D. Ready Delegate Stephanie M. Smith
Senator Bryan W. Simonaire Delegate M. Courtney Watson
To Obtain Further Information
Office of Legislative Audits
The Warehouse at Camden Yards
351 West Camden Street, Suite 400
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Phone: 410-946-5900
Maryland Relay: 711
TTY: 410-946-5401 ꞏ 301-970-5401
E-mail: webmaster@ola.state.md.us
Website: www.ola.state.md.us
To Report Fraud
The Office of Legislative Audits operates a Fraud Hotline to report fraud, waste, or abuse involving State
of Maryland government resources. Reports of fraud, waste, or abuse may be communicated anonymously
by a toll-free call to 1-877-FRAUD-11, by mail to the Fraud Hotline, c/o Office of Legislative Audits, or
through the Office’s website.
Nondiscrimination Statement
The Department of Legislative Services does not discriminate on the basis of age, ancestry, color, creed,
marital status, national origin, race, religion, gender, gender identity, sexual orientation, or disability in the
admission or access to its programs, services, or activities. The Department’s Information Officer has been
designated to coordinate compliance with the nondiscrimination requirements contained in Section 35.107
of the United States Department of Justice Regulations. Requests for assistance should be directed to the
Information Officer at 410-946-5400 or 410-970-5400.

--- Page 3 ---
April 8, 2025
Senator Shelly L. Hettleman, Senate Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Delegate Jared Solomon, House Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Members of Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Annapolis, Maryland
Ladies and Gentlemen:
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the Office of People’s Counsel
(OPC) for the period beginning February 22, 2021 and ending December 8, 2024.
OPC is an independent State agency that represents Maryland’s residential
consumers of certain regulated services (including electricity, natural gas,
telephone, and private water services) on matters and in proceedings before the
Public Service Commission, federal agencies, the appellate courts, and the
General Assembly.
Our audit disclosed that OPC awarded contracts to vendors that were not
registered or in good standing with the State. Additionally, OPC did not obtain
prior approval from the Office of the Attorney General for sole source
procurements and did not solicit and publish contract awards on eMaryland
Marketplace Advantage as required.
Finally, our audit included a review to determine the status of the two findings
contained in our preceding audit report. We determined that OPC satisfactorily
addressed both of these findings.

--- Page 4 ---
OPC’s response to this audit is included as an appendix to this report. We
reviewed the response to our finding and related recommendations, and have
concluded that the corrective actions identified are sufficient to address all audit
issues. We wish to acknowledge the cooperation extended to us during the audit
by OPC.
Respectfully submitted,
Brian S. Tanen
Brian S. Tanen, CPA, CFE
Legislative Auditor
2

--- Page 5 ---
Background Information
Agency Responsibilities
The Office of People’s Counsel (OPC) is an independent State agency that
represents Maryland’s residential consumers of certain regulated services
(including electricity, natural gas, telephone, and private water services). OPC
advocates on behalf of residential consumers and their interests on matters and in
proceedings before the Public Service Commission, federal agencies, the
appellate courts, and the General Assembly. According to the State’s records,
OPC’s expenditures were approximately $7.1 million during fiscal year 2024 (see
Figure 1).
Figure 1
OPC Positions, Expenditures, and Funding Source
Full-Time Equivalent Positions as of June 30, 2024
Positions Percent
Filled 20 90.9%
Vacant 2 9.1%
Total 22
Fiscal Year 2024 Expenditures
Expenditures Percent
Salaries, Wages, and Fringe Benefits $3,306,075 46.3%
Technical and Special Fees 3,321,194 46.6%
Operating Expenses 506,977 7.1%
Total $7,134,246
Fiscal Year 2024 Funding Source
Funding Percent
Special Fund $7,134,246 100.0%
Total $7,134,246
Source: State financial and personnel records
3

--- Page 6 ---
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report
Our audit included a review to determine the status of the two findings contained
in our preceding audit report dated September 16, 2021. We determined that OPC
satisfactorily addressed both of these findings.
Findings and Recommendations
Consulting Services Contracts
Background
The Office of People’s Counsel (OPC) procures consulting services to assist with
matters for which it does not have technical expertise in cases before various
regulatory bodies and the courts. For example, these consulting services could
include expert testimony from economists, accountants, telecommunication
experts, or engineers on utility rate cases presented before the Public Service
Commission. The need for these services may vary from year to year depending
on case activity and is often unknown in advance.
According to OPC records, between July 2021 and December 2024, OPC
awarded 236 contracts primarily for consulting services to 48 vendors totaling
approximately $10.6 million. Specifically, OPC awarded 167 sole source
contracts totaling $7.8 million and 69 competitively procured contracts totaling
$2.8 million.
Finding 1
OPC awarded consulting services contracts to vendors that were not
registered or in good standing with the State, without required approval, and
without publishing the solicitation and/or award as required.
Analysis
OPC awarded certain contracts to vendors that were not registered or in good
standing with the State, without required approvals, and without publishing the
solicitation and/or award on eMaryland Marketplace Advantage (eMMA).1 We
tested 11 consulting services contracts 2 procured during fiscal year 2023 and
1 eMMA is an internet-based, interactive procurement system managed by the Department of
General Services.
2 We primarily selected contracts based on materiality of the procurement and method used for the
procurement.
4

--- Page 7 ---
2024 (including 6 sole source procurements totaling $640,000 and 5 competitive
procurements totaling $541,000) and noted the following conditions.
 OPC awarded two contracts to vendors that were not registered or in good
standing with the State. Specifically, our testing disclosed that OPC awarded
a $109,200 contract in March 2023 to a vendor that was not registered with
the State Department of Assessments and Taxation (SDAT). In addition, OPC
awarded a $97,305 contract in April 2024 to another vendor that had not been
in good standing with SDAT3 since November 2021. According to State
records, OPC awarded these vendors 11 contracts totaling $385,000 and 13
contracts totaling $579,000, respectively, between February 2021 and
December 2024.
State procurement regulations and policies require vendors to be registered
with SDAT and in good standing to be eligible for an award. Registration
with the State helps to ensure that vendors meet all State obligations (such as
paying applicable taxes) and that the owners and officers of the business are
appropriately disclosed.
 OPC did not obtain prior written approval from the Office of the Attorney
General (OAG) for the 6 sole source contracts which were procured in
response to threatened litigation. State law requires OAG approval prior to
awarding sole source contracts for threatened litigation. Our review disclosed
that OAG approval was not obtained until 5 to 13 months after the contracts
were awarded. For example, one contract awarded in October 2023 was not
approved by OAG until November 2024.
 OPC did not publish contract solicitations and awards on eMMA, as required.
Specifically, OPC did not publish the solicitations for the 5 competitive
procurements tested and as of January 2025, had not published any of the 11
awards on eMMA (awarded between 7 and 22 months earlier). State laws and
regulations require State agencies to publish competitive solicitations for
contracts expected to exceed $50,000 on eMMA and publish awards
(including sole source contracts) within 30 days after approval of the contract.
Although OPC management advised us that it believed it was exempt from
these requirements due to the confidential nature of the consulting services,
State laws and regulations do not include such an exemption. Publishing
solicitations and awards on eMMA provides improved transparency over State
3 According to SDAT, “Not in Good Standing” means the business entity is not in compliance
with one or more Maryland laws that apply to businesses and their responsibilities in this State.
5

--- Page 8 ---
procurements, including information about winning bidders and the amount of
the related award.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that OPC
a. ensure vendors are registered and in good standing with the State prior to
being selected for award,
b. obtain required OAG approval for sole source contracts prior to award,
and
c. publish contract solicitations and awards (including those noted above)
on eMMA as required.
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the Office of People’s Counsel
(OPC) for the period beginning February 22, 2021 and ending December 8, 2024.
The audit was conducted in accordance with generally accepted government
auditing standards. Those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to
obtain sufficient, appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our
findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives. We believe that the
evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions
based on our audit objectives.
As prescribed by the State Government Article, Section 2-1221 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, the objectives of this audit were to examine OPC’s financial
transactions, records, and internal control, and to evaluate its compliance with
applicable State laws, rules, and regulations.
In planning and conducting our audit, we focused on the major financial-related
areas of operations based on assessments of significance and risk. The areas
addressed by the audit included purchases and disbursements and payroll. We
also determined the status of the findings contained in our preceding audit report.
Our assessment of internal controls was based on agency procedures and controls
in place at the time of our fieldwork. Our tests of transactions and other auditing
procedures were generally focused on the transactions occurring during our audit
period of February 22, 2021 to December 8, 2024, but may include transactions
before or after this period as we considered necessary to achieve our audit
objectives.
6

--- Page 9 ---
To accomplish our audit objectives, our audit procedures included inquiries of
appropriate personnel, inspections of documents and records, tests of transactions,
and to the extent practicable, observations of OPC’s operations. Generally,
transactions were selected for testing based on auditor judgment, which primarily
considers risk, the timing or dollar amount of the transaction, or the significance
of the transaction to the area of operation reviewed. As a matter of course, we do
not normally use sampling in our tests, so unless otherwise specifically indicated,
neither statistical nor non-statistical audit sampling was used to select the
transactions tested. Therefore, unless sampling is specifically indicated in a
finding, the results from any tests conducted or disclosed by us cannot be used to
project those results to the entire population from which the test items were
selected.
We also performed various data extracts of pertinent information from the State’s
Financial Management Information System (such as revenue and expenditure
data) and the State’s Central Payroll Bureau (payroll data), as well as from the
contractor administering the State’s Corporate Purchasing Card Program (credit
card activity). The extracts are performed as part of ongoing internal processes
established by the Office of Legislative Audits and were subject to various tests to
determine data reliability. We determined that the data extracted from these
sources were sufficiently reliable for the purposes the data were used during this
audit. Finally, we performed other auditing procedures that we considered
necessary to achieve our audit objectives. The reliability of data used in this
report for background or informational purposes was not assessed.
OPC’s management is responsible for establishing and maintaining effective
internal control. Internal control is a process designed to provide reasonable
assurance that objectives pertaining to the reliability of financial records;
effectiveness and efficiency of operations, including safeguarding of assets; and
compliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations are achieved. As
provided in Government Auditing Standards, there are five components of
internal control: control environment, risk assessment, control activities,
information and communication, and monitoring. Each of the five components,
when significant to the audit objectives, and as applicable to OPC, were
considered by us during the course of this audit.
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate.
7

--- Page 10 ---
Our reports are designed to assist the Maryland General Assembly in exercising
its legislative oversight function and to provide constructive recommendations for
improving State operations. As a result, our reports generally do not address
activities we reviewed that are functioning properly.
This report includes a finding related to a condition that we consider to be a
significant deficiency in the design or operation of internal control that could
adversely affect OPC’s ability to maintain reliable financial records, operate
effectively and efficiently, and/or comply with applicable laws, rules, and
regulations. Our report also includes a finding regarding a significant instance of
noncompliance with applicable laws, rules, or regulations. Other less significant
findings were communicated to OPC that did not warrant inclusion in this report.
OPC’s response to our finding and recommendations is included as an appendix
to this report. As prescribed in the State Government Article, Section 2-1224 of
the Annotated Code of Maryland, we will advise OPC regarding the results of our
review of its response.
8

--- Page 11 ---
APPENDIX
April 7, 2025
Brian S. Tanen, CPA, CFE
Legislative Auditor
Office of Legislative Audits
351 West Camden Street, Suite 400
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Dear Mr. Tanen,
Enclosed please find the Office of People’s Counsel’s response to the draft Legislative
Auditor’s report for the period beginning February 22, 2021 and ending December 8, 2024. OPC
is actively working to implement changes to internal procedures to address concerns identified in
the audit.
OPC extends its gratitude to you and your professional staff for the manner in which the
audit was conducted, and for the constructive recommendations that were made as a result of the
audit.
Sincerely,
David S. Lapp, Esq.
People’s Counsel
DSL/clr
Enclosure
cc: William F. Fields, Deputy People’s Counsel
Carissa Ralbovsky, Chief Operating Officer
______________________________________________________________________________
Office of People’s Counsel • 410-767-8150 / 800-207-4055 • opc@maryland.gov

--- Page 12 ---
Office of People’s Counsel
Agency Response Form
Consulting Services Contracts
Finding 1
OPC awarded consulting services contracts to vendors that were not
registered or in good standing with the State, without required approval, and
without publishing the solicitation and/or award as required.
We recommend that OPC
a. ensure vendors are registered and in good standing with the State prior to
being selected for award,
b. obtain required OAG approval for sole source contracts prior to award,
and
c. publish contract solicitations and awards (including those noted above)
on eMMA as required.
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 1a Agree Estimated Completion Date: June 1, 2025
Please provide details of OPC will undergo a review of all vendors currently under contract with
corrective action or OPC and provide guidance for corrective action for those who either are
explain disagreement. not registered with the State or are not in good standing with SDAT.
OPC will also revise its award review process to include a mandatory
step when proposals are received to research (1) whether the vendor is
currently registered with the State, and (2) whether the vendor is in good
standing with SDAT, to ensure a vendor is eligible for State contracts
before approving an award.
Recommendation 1b Agree Estimated Completion Date: May 1, 2025
Please provide details of There are multiple reasons why OAG approval for sole source
corrective action or procurements was received retroactively for the contracts tested by
explain disagreement. OLA. OPC’s caseload has grown significantly over the past 5 years, as
described in the agency’s December 2023 Joint Chairman’s Report
(JCR) response to the General Assembly on staffing levels. Between FY
2019 and FY 2023 spending on consulting for legal proceedings grew by
131% in response to OPC’s obligations with respect to the growing
number and increased complexity of matters and proceedings (as well as
rising consultant rates). Adding to the difficulty of keeping up with
extraordinary caseload without additional staffing resources throughout
Page 1 of 2

--- Page 13 ---
Office of People’s Counsel
Agency Response Form
the audit period, during this time there was also a prolonged vacancy in
OPC’s Administrator/Chief Operating Officer position. From December
2021 to April 2023, this role was filled for less than 4 months after an
employee hired in September 2022 left in December 2022. This
confluence of circumstances resulted in a backlog and delays in
processing contract approvals from OAG.
Another reason why OAG approvals for sole source procurements have
been sought retroactively is due to the short timeframes for litigation,
where expert witnesses need to be engaged quickly to meet procedural
deadlines. In some circumstances, it may be difficult to meet these
deadlines and sufficiently advocate on behalf of residential utility
customers without swift approval of sole source procurements for legal
consultants.
OPC, now with additional staffing resources and no critical vacancies,
will adjust its internal procurement procedures to prioritize the OAG
approval process to ensure that OPC receives OAG approval before
awards are made, in coordination with OAG to ensure a reasonable
timeframe for those approvals.
Recommendation 1c Agree Estimated Completion Date: June 1, 2025
Please provide details of OPC agrees with this recommendation, with the caveat that confidential
corrective action or information contained in proposal solicitations cannot be published
explain disagreement. publicly on eMMA without compromising OPC litigation strategy. OPC
is in agreement that the agency can publish contract awards on eMMA,
and believes it can do so without revealing litigation strategy.
OPC will endeavor to post a less detailed Request for Information (RFI)
in lieu of publishing its full Request for Proposal (RFP) documentation
on eMMA for sensitive procurements. When vendors contact OPC about
the RFI, then OPC can share the more detailed RFP.
Page 2 of 2

--- Page 14 ---
A T
UDIT EAM
Robert J. Smith, CPA
Audit Manager
Owen M. Long-Grant
Senior Auditor