Title: Presentation to the Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee - Maryland Higher Education Commission


Related Report Dated (6/24/2021)

Video Presentation (Maryland Higher Education Commission)
Date: 10/19/2021
Type: Presentations to the Legislature
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=616dab33a1ce58057cb51800
Extracted: 2025-06-19T11:55:47.228519
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Maryland Higher Education Commission (MHEC)
Report Dated June 24, 2021
Presentation to Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Gregory A. Hook, CPA
Adam J. Westover, CPA
R. Brendan Coffey, CPA, CISA
Tu N. Vuong
October 19, 2021

--- Page 2 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Report Overview
 MHEC provides statewide planning, leadership, coordination, and advocacy
for Maryland’s postsecondary educational institutions. MHEC also
administers several aid programs to these institutions and provides financial
assistance to students.
 In fiscal year 2019, MHEC provided approximately $392 million in financial
assistance to public and non-public institutions of higher education (including
community colleges) and more than 51,990 financial aid awards totaling
approximately $116.6 million to students pursuing postsecondary education.
 The audit report covers activity during the period from November 5, 2015
through March 31, 2020. The report contains eight findings, including five
repeat findings from our preceding audit report.
Maryland Higher Education Commission Page 2

--- Page 3 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Key Findings
 MHEC did not always take steps, in accordance with its established policies,
to monitor students’ fulfillment of their service obligations agreed to as a
condition for receiving certain career-based financial aid awards.
 MHEC lacked procedures to ensure that its record of repayments due from
students who failed to fulfill service obligations were accurate and
complete.
 MHEC did not establish sufficient controls over user access to the
automated system used to record and store personal, academic, and
financial information of students applying for financial aid.
 MHEC did not have effective procedures for ensuring that all payments
made to community colleges for retirement and pension contributions as
well payments for certain grant funds were proper.
 MHEC did not adequately safeguard certain personally identifiable
information and did not use a web application firewall to secure its financial
aid system.
Maryland Higher Education Commission Page 3

--- Page 4 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Career-Based Financial Aid (Finding 1) Repeat Finding
MHEC did not monitor student service obligation compliance in a timely and
comprehensive manner, and consequently did not ensure that either service
obligations were being fulfilled or that repayment of financial aid was pursued
when required.
 MHEC did not generate and review all available service obligation monitoring
reports during calendar year 2019. The reports show, for example, aid
recipients who have not submitted required employment information.
 We noted delays of 10 to 29 days in sending the initial service obligation
request to 4 of 17 recipients reviewed and delays of 74 to 208 days in
sending subsequent required annual notices to 5 of the 17.
 Follow-up notices for 12 of the 17 aid recipients who did not respond to the
initial service obligation request were issued between 14 to 442 days late.
Maryland Higher Education Commission Page 4

--- Page 5 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Career-Based Financial Aid (Finding 2)
MHEC did not have a process for the independent review and approval of
adjustments made to accounts receivable due from aid recipients who had not
met their service obligations, and MHEC did not ensure that all repayments due
were posted to its accounts receivable system.
 MHEC processed 1,609 adjustments totaling approximately $5.1 million in
its accounts receivable system during our audit period. However, MHEC did
not have a process to ensure that adjustments posted to the accounts
receivable system, along with supporting documentation, were reviewed and
approved by independent supervisory personnel.
 MHEC could not document that, during the audit period, it had reconciled the
total amount due from students on its financial aid system to the
corresponding amount in its standalone accounts receivable system, as was
required by its policies. Consequently, MHEC lacked assurance that all
amounts due had been recorded in its accounts receivable system.
Maryland Higher Education Commission Page 5

--- Page 6 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Maryland College Aid Processing System (Finding 3) Repeat Finding
Sufficient controls were not established over user access to the Maryland
College Aid Processing System (MDCAPS) that stores personal, academic, and
financial information for individuals applying for financial aid.
 MHEC did not have a policy requiring requests from external users (such as a
Maryland college) for the assignment or modification of system access to be
approved by authorized personnel at the external entity.
 MHEC could not provide a user agreement form for 8 of 25 external and
internal user accounts we reviewed to support the existing user access.
 MHEC did not use available automated output reports for its periodic review
of user access granted to MHEC employees.
 MHEC did not require external entities to periodically review system access
granted to their employees to ensure access was still appropriate. As of
September 2020, there were 650 active external users that had not logged
into MDCAPS for at least six months, calling into question the need for this
access.
Maryland Higher Education Commission Page 6

--- Page 7 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Maryland College Aid Processing System (Finding 4) Repeat Finding
MHEC did not adequately restrict user access to the Service Obligation Loan
Repayment (SOLR) module of MDCAPS.
 Eight users were assigned capabilities to process adjustments in SOLR
even though they did not need the access to perform their job duties.
 Seven additional users could process adjustments without independent
supervisory review and approval. As a result, these employees could
unilaterally forgive, defer, or record as fulfilled a recipient’s service
obligation.
 MHEC did not use available output reports of adjustments processed in
SOLR to verify their propriety. During fiscal year 2019, MHEC made 627
adjustments in SOLR to designate a recipient’s service obligation status as
fulfilled, paid-in full, forgiven, or deferred. These 627 recipients had been
awarded financial aid totaling $5.2 million.
Maryland Higher Education Commission Page 7

--- Page 8 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Aid to Community Colleges (Finding 5) Repeat Finding
MHEC had not implemented effective procedures for ensuring the propriety of
payments made to community colleges for retirement and pension contributions,
which totaled $60.8 million in fiscal year 2019.
 OLA audit reports dating back to 2001 have identified issues regarding
MHEC’s process for ensuring the propriety of these costs. Beginning in fiscal
year 2015, MHEC required the community colleges’ independent auditors to
provide certain assurances regarding costs incurred, and MHEC instituted a
reconciliation of the auditor-reported information to MHEC’s records.
 MHEC discontinued the reconciliation process in January 2018. We found the
audited data for fiscal year 2019 disclosed differences that MHEC had not
investigated and resolved. For example, that year’s audited data indicated that
the colleges received $14,242,547 from MHEC for employees in an optional
retirement plan, but MHEC’s records indicated payments of $16,357,940, a
difference of $2,115,393.
Maryland Higher Education Commission Page 8

--- Page 9 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Other Findings (Findings 6, 7, and 8)
Aid to Community Colleges
 Finding 6 – MHEC did not ensure that community colleges returned unspent
English for Speakers of Other Languages grant funds as required. Our review
of program data reported by 11 colleges disclosed 4 colleges that appear to
have been paid $403,968 in excess of program costs, but only 1 of the 4
remitted its excess balance of $4,992.
Information Systems Security and Control
 Finding 7 – MHEC maintained sensitive personally identifiable information
(PII) in a manner that did not provide adequate safeguards, and lacked
assurance that adequate security protections existed over PII on the vendor-
hosted development servers. Repeat Finding
 Finding 8 – MHEC did not use a web application firewall to provide security
over MDCAPS, which is a critical public web-enabled system.
Maryland Higher Education Commission Page 9

--- Page 10 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Conclusions
MHEC should implement the following:
• generate and review all reports of service obligations requiring follow-up
action, and take follow-up action in a timely manner;
• independently review and approve adjustments posted to the accounts
receivable system and SOLR;
• perform periodic reviews of employee system access and ensure access
reviews of external users are performed by external entities;
• remove any unnecessary or improper user system access capabilities;
• review audited retirement and pension contribution data received from
community colleges and resolve differences between the audited data
and corresponding amounts in MHEC’s records; and
• take appropriate action to address the remaining findings in our report,
including enhancing system security over PII and implementing
necessary firewalls.
Maryland Higher Education Commission Page 10