Title: Baltimore Police Department - Evaluation of Purchasing and Disbursement Controls and Transactions
Date: 10/19/2021
Type: Performance
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=6172b15aa1ce58034090a422
Extracted: 2025-06-19T11:55:58.137734
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Performance Audit Report
Baltimore Police Department
Evaluation of Purchasing and Disbursement Controls and
Transactions
October 2021
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Senator Clarence K. Lam, M.D. (Senate Chair) Delegate Carol L. Krimm (House Chair)
Senator Malcolm L. Augustine Delegate Steven J. Arentz
Senator Adelaide C. Eckardt Delegate Mark S. Chang
Senator George C. Edwards Delegate Nicholas P. Charles II
Senator Katie Fry Hester Delegate Andrea Fletcher Harrison
Senator Cheryl C. Kagan Delegate Trent M. Kittleman
Senator Benjamin F. Kramer Delegate David Moon
Senator Cory V. McCray Delegate Julie Palakovich Carr
Senator Justin D. Ready Delegate Elizabeth G. Proctor
Senator Craig J. Zucker Delegate Geraldine Valentino-Smith
To Obtain Further Information
Office of Legislative Audits
301 West Preston Street, Room 1202
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Phone: 410-946-5900 ꞏ 301-970-5900 ꞏ 1-877-486-9964 (Toll Free in Maryland)
Maryland Relay: 711
TTY: 410-946-5401 ꞏ 301-970-5401
E-mail: OLAWebmaster@ola.state.md.us
Website: www.ola.state.md.us
To Report Fraud
The Office of Legislative Audits operates a Fraud Hotline to report fraud, waste, or abuse involving State
of Maryland government resources. Reports of fraud, waste, or abuse may be communicated anonymously
by a toll-free call to 1-877-FRAUD-11, by mail to the Fraud Hotline, c/o Office of Legislative Audits, or
through the Office’s website.
Nondiscrimination Statement
The Department of Legislative Services does not discriminate on the basis of age, ancestry, color, creed,
marital status, national origin, race, religion, gender, gender identity, sexual orientation, or disability in the
admission or access to its programs, services, or activities. The Department’s Information Officer has been
designated to coordinate compliance with the nondiscrimination requirements contained in Section 35.107
of the United States Department of Justice Regulations. Requests for assistance should be directed to the
Information Officer at 410-946-5400 or 410-970-5400.

--- Page 3 ---
October 19, 2021
Senator Clarence K. Lam, M.D., Senate Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Delegate Carol L. Krimm, House Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Members of Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Annapolis, Maryland
Ladies and Gentlemen:
We have conducted a performance audit to evaluate the effectiveness and
efficiency of the financial management practices of the Baltimore Police
Department (BPD) as required by the State Government Article, Section 2-1220
of the Annotated Code of Maryland. This is the first audit of BPD as the audit
requirement took effect July 1, 2020. The scope of this audit focused on
reviewing controls and transactions relating to BPD purchasing and disbursement
activity for the six-year period beginning July 1, 2014 and ending June 30, 2020.
BPD safeguards the lives and properties of persons within the areas under the
control of Baltimore City (City), and assists in securing protection under the law
for all persons. Although a State agency, BPD is not a budgetary unit of State
government, with the City maintaining financial records for BPD and providing
significant budgeting and support services to BPD, including processing of
purchasing and disbursement transactions. In this regard, the City’s Department
of Finance (DOF) is responsible for most of BPD’s procurement and
disbursement activities. As such, our audit evaluated the adequacy of BPD and
City requirements and procedures related to BPD purchasing and disbursement
activity, and determined whether purchases and disbursements by BPD and the
City (on behalf of BPD) were performed in accordance with those requirements
and procedures.
According to City records, BPD’s fiscal year 2020 expenditures totaled
approximately $531.6 million, including $95.2 million for non-payroll related

--- Page 4 ---
expenses. Our overall audit scope, objectives, and methodology (including
additional planned audits of BPD) are explained on page 5.
Our audit disclosed that the City’s purchasing policies and procedures did not
require maintenance of a complete and centralized procurement file for every
procurement; accordingly, we found that such files were not prepared for BPD
purchases. In addition, our testing disclosed that certain critical procurement
documentation was not maintained for several BPD procurements selected for
testing. For example, vendor technical proposals were not maintained for BPD’s
$35 million body worn camera contract (with modifications).
In addition, our audit found that certain controls over disbursements were not
adequate. Specifically, verification that related goods or services had been
received was not always obtained by BPD prior to approving payments to
vendors. In addition, vendor payments were routinely made late, as we found that
for 57 of 117 transactions tested, payments were made between 3 days to over one
year late. Additionally, DOF did not sufficiently control access to a critical
financial system that allowed certain users to both initiate and approve
disbursement transactions without independent approval.
Furthermore, our audit disclosed the City’s Procurement Card Program policy did
not include requirements to use certain additional detailed purchasing data
available to help monitor and ensure the propriety of purchases made.
Additionally, documentation supporting Program expenditures and journal entries
required to properly record expenditures were not always submitted to DOF by
BPD on a timely basis.
Our audit also found that DOF had not established formal policies and procedures
to monitor vendor compliance with minority and women-owned business
enterprise participation goals included in contracts and, although compliance
reviews were performed by DOF in certain cases, these reviews were not
adequate. As a result, assurance was lacking that BPD vendors were meeting
required participation goals.
Finally, our audit disclosed the City has adopted a detailed ethics policy that
conforms to State law, and includes adequate provisions for financial and conflict
of interest disclosures. We also found that all of the financial disclosure
statements and conflict of interest disclosures forms that we selected for testing
were completed and filed as required.
2

--- Page 5 ---
BPD’s response to this audit, on behalf of itself and DOF, is included as an
appendix to this report. We reviewed the response and noted general agreement
to our findings and related recommendations, and while there are other aspects of
the response which will require further clarification, we do not anticipate that
these will require the Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee’s attention to resolve.
We wish to acknowledge the cooperation extended to us during the audit by BPD
and DOF. We also wish to acknowledge BPD’s and DOF’s willingness to
address the audit issues and implement appropriate corrective actions.
Respectfully submitted,
Gregory A. Hook, CPA
Legislative Auditor
3

--- Page 6 ---
4

--- Page 7 ---
Table of Contents
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology 7
Audit Scope 7
Objectives and Methodology 7
Fieldwork and Agency Response 9
Background Information 11
Agency Responsibilities 11
Expenditure and Procurement Activity 11
Department of Finance 12
Procurement Assessment and Transformation Initiative 14
Findings and Recommendations 16
Objective 1 – Purchasing Process
Background 16
Objective and Methodology 18
Conclusion 19
Findings
Finding 1 – The City’s purchasing policies and procedures did not 20
require maintenance of a complete and centralized procurement file
for each procurement. Accordingly, we found that such files were
not prepared for Baltimore Police Department (BPD) purchases and
certain critical procurement documentation was not maintained for
several BPD procurements selected for testing.
Objective 2 – Disbursements
Background 23
Objective and Methodology 25
Conclusion 27
Findings
Finding 2 – Verification that related goods or services had been received 27
was not always obtained prior to making payments to vendors, and
payments were routinely made late.
Finding 3 – Certain critical access to the CoreIntegrator System was not 29
sufficiently controlled by the Department of Finance (DOF).
5

--- Page 8 ---
Objective 3 – Procurement Cards
Background 31
Objective and Methodology 32
Conclusion 32
Findings
Finding 4 – The City’s Procurement Card Program policy for monitoring 33
Program expenditures did not include a requirement to review
available data, and documentation supporting expenditures was not
always forwarded to DOF by BPD on a timely basis.
Objective 4 – Minority and Women-Owned Business Enterprises
Background 36
Objective and Methodology 36
Conclusion 37
Findings
Finding 5 – Formal policies and procedures had not been established by 38
DOF to monitor vendor compliance with minority and women-owned
business enterprise participation goals, consequently compliance
reviews were not performed on all contracts, and although compliance
reviews were performed by DOF in certain cases, these reviews were
not comprehensive.
Objective 5 – Ethics and Financial Disclosures
Background 40
Objective and Methodology 42
Conclusion 43
Agency Response Appendix
6

--- Page 9 ---
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
Audit Scope
Chapter 535 of the Laws of Maryland, 2020, effective July 1, 2020, requires the
Office of Legislative Audits (OLA), at least once every six years, to conduct an
audit or audits of the Baltimore Police Department (BPD) to evaluate the
effectiveness and efficiency of the financial management practices of BPD. The
law also states the scope and objectives of the audit or audits shall be determined
by the Legislative Auditor.
OLA identified four separate audits to be conducted of BPD during the first audit
cycle of BPD (in the following order).
1. Evaluation of Purchasing and Disbursement Controls and Transactions,
2. Asset Forfeiture and Property Control,
3. Surveillance Equipment, and
4. Human Resource Activities and Overtime.
The scope of this first audit focused on reviewing controls and transactions
relating to BPD purchasing and disbursement activity for the six-year period
beginning July 1, 2014 and ending June 30, 2020. In this regard, BPD receives
significant support services for its procurement and disbursement activity from
several Baltimore City (City) agencies, primarily the City’s Department of
Finance (DOF) where most of BPD’s procurement and disbursement activities
were processed. As such, our audit evaluated the adequacy of BPD and City
requirements and procedures related to BPD purchasing and disbursement
activity, and determined whether purchases and disbursements by BPD and the
City (on behalf of BPD) were performed in accordance with those requirements
and procedures.
Our audit was performed in accordance with generally accepted government
auditing standards. Those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to
obtain sufficient, appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our
findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives. We believe that the
evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions
based on our audit objectives.
Objectives and Methodology
Our audit included the following objectives:
7

--- Page 10 ---
1. Evaluate the adequacy of BPD and City requirements and procedures for
procurements, and determine whether procurements selected for review
were performed in accordance with these requirements and procedures.
2. Evaluate the adequacy of BPD and City requirements and procedures for
payment processing, and determine whether vendor payments selected for
testing were subject to adequate controls and performed in accordance
with these requirements and procedures.
3. Evaluate the adequacy of BPD and City requirements and procedures for
procurement card (P-Card) usage, and determine whether P-Card usage
was in accordance with these requirements and procedures.
4. Evaluate the adequacy of requirements and procedures used by BPD and
the City to monitor compliance with minority and women-owned business
enterprise participation goals, and determine whether monitoring was
performed in accordance with City requirements and procedures.
5. Determine whether BPD and City requirements and procedures for ethics
and financial disclosure filings conformed with State law, and determine
whether financial and conflict of interest disclosures were filed, as
required and, if not, whether appropriate follow-up was taken.
To accomplish our objectives, we reviewed the Baltimore City Charter and
applicable laws and regulations governing procurement and disbursement
processes. We also reviewed pertinent sections of the Baltimore City
Administrative Manual that communicates official City policies and procedures
affecting City operations and its employees for all financial practices, including
procurement and disbursement (payment processing) activity. City requirements
regarding procurements and disbursements were compared, for evaluation
purposes, to corresponding State requirements, including State procurement and
disbursement laws and regulations, as well as applicable Statewide procurement
and disbursement policies promulgated by State control agencies.
We interviewed BPD, and City staff at the DOF, Baltimore City Comptroller’s
Office, Office of the Inspector General, and Law Department to determine the
processes used to procure goods and services, and to issue payments. We
obtained the following data for our testing of the purchasing and disbursement
processes:
 BPD’s general ledger activity from the City’s financial system for the
period from July 1, 2014 to June 30, 2020.
 Reports of purchasing activity for selected periods from the City’s
procurement system (CitiBuy).
8

--- Page 11 ---
 P-Card activity from the City P-Card vendor’s online account for the
period of July 1, 2016 to June 30, 2020 (activity prior to July 1, 2016
could not be provided).
We performed various tests of the relevant data and determined these data files
and reports were sufficiently reliable for the purposes used during the audit.
We also obtained view-only access to three critical automated City systems used
to process, control, and perform key purchasing and disbursement activities. This
access was used to review system controls (such as approval paths) and user
access, purchasing and disbursement records, and other critical information
pertaining to evaluating procedures and testing specific transactions.
Our assessment was based on the requirements and procedures in place at the time
of our fieldwork and the compliance with these requirements and procedures.
Our tests of transactions and other auditing procedures were generally focused on
the transactions occurring during our audit period of July 1, 2014 to June 30,
2020, but may include transactions before or after this period as we considered
necessary to achieve our audit objectives.
Generally, transactions were selected for testing based on auditor judgment,
which primarily considers risk, the timing or dollar amount of the transaction, or
the significance of the transaction to the area of operation reviewed. As a matter
of course, we do not normally use sampling in our tests, so unless otherwise
specifically indicated, neither statistical nor non-statistical audit sampling was
used to select the transactions tested. Therefore, unless sampling is specifically
indicated in a finding, the results from any tests conducted or disclosed by us
cannot be used to project those results to the entire population from which the test
items were selected. The reliability of data used in this report for background or
informational purposes was not assessed. In addition to the conditions included in
this report, other findings were communicated to BPD and DOF that were not
deemed significant and, consequently, did not warrant inclusion in this report.
More detailed descriptions of the specific objectives and related methodologies,
including the time period covered by our test work, are discussed in the Findings
and Recommendations section of this report.
Fieldwork and Agency Response
We conducted our fieldwork from July 1, 2020 to February 26, 2021. A copy of
the draft report was provided to BPD and DOF. The responses to our findings
and recommendations from BPD and DOF appear as an appendix to this audit
9

--- Page 12 ---
report. As prescribed in the State Government Article, Section 2-1224 of the
Annotated Code of Maryland, we will advise BPD and DOF regarding the results
of our review of the responses.
10

--- Page 13 ---
Background Information
Agency Responsibilities
The Baltimore Police Department (BPD) is an agency and instrumentality of the
State, established under Article 4 ‐ Section 16 of the Code of Public Local Laws
of Maryland. BPD safeguards the lives and properties of persons within the areas
under the control of Baltimore City (City), and assists in securing protection
under the law for all persons. Authority to appoint the Police Commissioner was
transferred from the Governor to the Mayor of Baltimore, effective July 1, 1978.
The Police Commissioner has the full authority and responsibility for directing
and supervising the operations and affairs of BPD. Although a State agency, the
BPD is not a budgetary unit of State government, with the City maintaining
financial records for BPD and providing significant budgeting and support
services to BPD, including processing of purchasing and disbursement
transactions.
Expenditure and Procurement Activity
According to City records, BPD’s fiscal year 2020 expenditures totaled
approximately $531.6 million, including $95.2 million for non-payroll related
expenses. BPD expenditures are primarily funded through the City’s general
fund, accounting for $508.3 million of the aforementioned total expenditures. As
depicted in Figure 1, the portion of non-payroll procurements directly made by
BPD each year is significantly less than BPD’s total non-payroll expenditures.
This difference is attributable to most of BPD’s non-payroll procurements being
made through the City’s Department of Finance, such as by using City contracts.
In this regard, direct BPD procurements generally ranged between $8.6 million
and $13.2 million a year during the audit period, except for fiscal year 2016 when
procurements were $53.4 million primarily due to the procurement of the Body
Worn Camera contract, which had a total contract value (after amendments) of
$35.2 million.
11

--- Page 14 ---
Department of Finance
The Baltimore City Department of Finance (DOF) is responsible for the
management of the City’s financial operations including payroll, revenues and
receivables, procurements and disbursements, and grants management through
five Bureaus. DOF processes the majority of BPD’s critical procurement and
disbursements functions (referred to as support services) itself through the City’s
financial and purchasing systems. These support services are primarily provided
by the DOF’s Bureau of Procurement and Bureau of Accounting and Payroll
Services.
Bureau of Procurement (BOP) – BOP serves as the City procurement unit, and is
responsible for performing critical procurement functions and ensuring each
procurement complies with City purchasing requirements. In general, BOP
handles the solicitation and bid evaluation functions, establishment of the contract
including approval or recommendations to the Board of Estimates, and creates a
purchase order in the City’s purchasing system. BPD’s involvement in the
procurement process is generally limited to making requisitions, developing
specifications, and serving as a supporting member on bid evaluation committees
when applicable.
12

--- Page 15 ---
Bureau of Accounting and Payroll Services (BAPS) – BAPS is responsible for
approving all payments and disbursements made by the City. BPD is responsible
for ensuring that goods or services have actually been received, contract
monitoring, and for providing approval for payment at an agency level. Once
approved, the payment goes to BAPS for the final approval, which results in
payment through the City’s Treasurer’s Office.
Financial and Purchasing Systems – The City uses three systems for processing
procurement and disbursement activity. The three systems are managed by DOF.
 CitiBuy – CitiBuy is the City’s procurement system that controls critical
procurement processes such as requisition, public solicitation, receipt of
electronic bid documentation and bid tabulation, and creation of purchase
orders. CitiBuy is also used to document the receipt of goods or services
and approve payments against purchase orders and is used as a repository
for support for procurements and payments against purchase orders.
 CoreIntegrator – CoreIntegrator is used by the City to control and
process virtually all material payments to vendors. Payments are initiated,
supported, and approved for payment through workflows established in
CoreIntegrator. In addition, CoreIntegrator accounts for other
disbursement activity that occurs outside the system such as petty cash and
purchasing card transactions, as well as non-disbursement activity such as
end-of-year closing and allocation of shared expenditures between
agencies through journal entry transactions.
 CityDynamics – CityDynamics is the City’s accounting and payment
system used to request and transmit payment information for payments
approved in CoreIntegrator to the City Treasury Department.
BAPS and BOP are responsible for establishing user access and automated
controls over these systems, such as workflows and approval paths.
In June 2019, the City awarded a contract to replace its automated systems
through the Baltimore City Workday Project. Workday is enterprise resource
planning software used by many State and local governments, (including
Maryland for its payroll system). The Workday Project was planned to be
implemented in three distinct phases1 as depicted in Figure 2:
1 Phase I was deployed in December 2020. However, as of July 2021, the City was continuing
efforts to stabilize the platform. Due to that situation, Phase 1 systems will be considered during
the scope of our fourth BPD audit related to human resource activities and overtime.
13

--- Page 16 ---
Phase II includes the replacement of CitiBuy, CoreIntegrator, and CityDynamics.
According to DOF management, as of June 2021, the targeted timeline was for
Phase II development to begin in June 2021 and for implementation to be
completed in March 2022.
Additional support services are provided by other DOF Bureaus and City
agencies, such as the Baltimore City Office of Information and Technology, the
Comptroller’s Office, and the Law Department. More detailed descriptions of the
respective agency responsibilities are discussed as applicable in the Background
sections of each objective in this report.
Procurement Assessment and Transformation Initiative
In March 2021, the Mayor’s Office announced its plan to overhaul the City’s
procurement practices referred to as the Procurement Assessment and
Transformation Initiative. A request for proposals was issued on March 12, 2021
and the assessment was to include the procurement code, policies, systems,
administrative processes, technology tools and capacity to optimize procurement
services within BOP.
This assessment was also intended to review procurement activity and centralized
coordination opportunities within all City agencies to include an end-to-end
procurement process with a focus on the following key areas:
14

--- Page 17 ---
 People and organization;
 Category management, strategic sourcing and spend analysis;
 Technology;
 Governance and risk;
 Internal stakeholder management;
 Purchase-to-pay;
 Performance management; and
 Strategic direction.
We were advised that the results of this assessment will be used to facilitate
change to the City’s procurement practices such as to streamline the process,
ensure proper controls and policies are in place, drive efficiencies, increase
stakeholder satisfaction, and drive additional savings. Due to the timing of this
initiative, the results are not included within the scope of our audit.
15

--- Page 18 ---
Findings and Recommendations
Objective 1 – Purchasing Process
Background
According to Baltimore City (City) records, the Baltimore Police Department
(BPD) had 58 active contracts totaling approximately $59.0 million as of
September 1, 2020. In addition, non-payroll disbursements totaled $95.2 million
in fiscal year 2020. In general, purchases greater than $5,000 are required to be
made in accordance with the following City purchasing requirements.
Posting of Solicitations
For competitive procurements anticipated to result in a contract exceeding
$50,000, solicitations are required to be published electronically on the City
purchasing system (known as ‘CitiBuy’), between 10 and 90 days before bid
openings, and advertised at least twice in local newspapers. For competitive
procurements less than $50,000, publishing and advertising are not specifically
required.
Receipt of Bids and Proposals, and Opening
For competitive procurements less than $50,000, vendors are required to submit
bids electronically through CitiBuy, which are subsequently received and opened
by the Department of Finance (DOF) – Bureau of Procurement (BOP). For
competitive procurements greater than $50,000, bids and proposals are required to
be submitted in hardcopy to the City Board of Estimates (BOE) and the City
Comptroller’s Office, which is responsible for physically securing, and publicly
opening and recording bids and proposals.
Evaluation
In conjunction with BPD, BOP is required to appoint a bid and proposal
evaluation committee made up of three or more individuals, of whom no more
than 50 percent can be BPD personnel. BOP is responsible for reviewing the
evaluation committee’s recommendations and the related vendor bids and
proposals, and determining the winning vendor.
Contract Approvals
The City Purchasing Agent, who is the Chief Procurement Officer at BOP, has
been delegated the authority to approve contracts up to $25,000. Contracts that
exceed $25,000 require BOE approval.
16

--- Page 19 ---
Award Posting and Purchase Orders
After all approvals have been obtained, BOP posts the award and creates a
purchase order in CitiBuy, which is used in the disbursement process. For certain
procurements, generally less than $25,000, the purchase order serves as the
contract between the City and vendor.
Non-Competitive Procurements
City purchasing regulations define a non-competitive procurement as a
procurement which is of such a nature that no advantage will result in seeking
additional bids or proposals, or it is not practicable to obtain competitive
responses. In general, non-competitive procurements are one of two types, as
depicted in Figure 3. City regulations also permit a noncompetitive procurement
when the need for supplies, materials, equipment, services, or public works is of
an emergency nature.
Figure 3
Non-Competitive Procurement Types and Uses
Sole Source Select Source
Item is copyrighted intellectual property No advantage to seeking competition
Compatibility of equipment Not practicable to obtain competition
Items or services unique to vendor Urgently needed but not of emergency nature
Public utility Not applicable
Source: City purchasing requirements, and BOP Non-Competitive Procurement Justification Form
When a non-competitive procurement is made, written justification must be
provided to the BOE (prepared by the requisitioning agency and approved by
BOP) detailing why the procurement met the criteria for a non-competitive
procurement.
Purchasing Controls
BPD uses a combination of manual and automated procedures for processing
requisitions to purchase goods and services. Manual requisitions are prepared by
BPD documenting the need and are subject to supervisory approval. Specifically,
the approved requisitions are entered on CitiBuy by BPD personnel, and approved
by BPD procurement, fiscal, and/or budget personnel. The approved requisitions
are then sent to BOP through CitiBuy. BOP generally handles the solicitation and
bid evaluation functions, establishes the contract, and creates a purchase order in
CitiBuy. BOP is ultimately responsible for ensuring each procurement complies
with City purchasing requirements.
17

--- Page 20 ---
Objective and Methodology
Our objective for the purchasing process was to evaluate the adequacy of BPD
and City requirements and procedures for procurements, and to determine, based
on this evaluation and transaction testing, whether procurements were performed
in accordance with these requirements and procedures.
To accomplish our objective, we reviewed excerpts of the City charter, laws, and
regulations governing the City’s purchasing process. We also reviewed pertinent
sections of the City’s Administrative Manual that communicates official City
policies and procedures that affect the City’s operations and its employees. We
then compared City purchasing requirements to corresponding State requirements
for four key purchasing categories. Specifically, we judgmentally identified 15
key purchasing areas as depicted in Figure 4 and compared the City’s purchasing
requirements to corresponding State purchasing laws and regulations, and the
State Department of General Services’ Maryland Procurement Manual.
We interviewed BPD, DOF, Baltimore City Comptroller’s Office, Office of the
Inspector General (OIG), and Law Department staff to determine the typical
processes used to procure goods and services, including but not limited to
requisitions, solicitations, bid opening, and contract award. We evaluated the
adequacy of the related procedures and controls by comparing these typical
processes to City and State requirements.
18

--- Page 21 ---
We also obtained reports of purchasing activity from the City’s purchasing
system, such as a current contract listing and a report of purchase orders for
selected periods of time within our audit period. We performed various tests of
the relevant data, including tracing and vouching data directly to the City
purchasing system and comparing data to BOE contract approvals, and
determined that the data were sufficiently reliable for the purposes used during the
audit. In addition, we obtained view-only access to the City’s automated
purchasing system which we used to review system controls (such as approval
paths) and user access, procurement records, and other critical information
pertaining to evaluating procedures and transaction testing.
Finally, we tested 17 BPD procurements (10 non-competitive and 7 competitive)
totaling approximately $80.3 million2 including contract modifications and
renewals to evaluate whether purchases were made in accordance with key City
and State purchasing requirements. Our testing was based on a review of
available electronic and hardcopy procurement records and data within the City’s
purchasing system, and interviews with key personnel involved in the related
purchases.
Conclusion
Overall, we determined that BPD and City purchasing requirements were
adequate for 14 of the 15 key purchasing areas we reviewed. Specifically, these
requirements were generally similar to State requirements (with certain
differences in terminology and dollar thresholds). For the remaining purchasing
area, we found that requirements had not been established by the City for
maintaining a complete and centralized procurement file for each procurement,
which is required by State purchasing regulations.
Our review of procedures in place determined that processes used to procure
goods and services including, but not limited to requisitions, solicitations, bid
openings, and awards, were in accordance with key procurement requirements. In
addition, we found that CitiBuy online controls (such as approval paths) and user
access appeared to be appropriate.
Our review and test of 17 procurements totaling approximately $80.3 million
disclosed that the procurements were generally made in accordance with key
procurement requirements. However, we identified 7 procurements totaling $40.2
million for which certain critical procurement documentation was not maintained
by BPD or the aforementioned City units.
2 Test selection was based on auditor judgment, and considerations included, for example,
expected cost, nature of purchase, potential risk, and diversity of selection source. The related
beginning contract dates spanned from January 21, 2015 to June 17, 2020.
19

--- Page 22 ---
Findings
Finding 1
The City’s purchasing policies and procedures did not require maintenance
of a complete and centralized procurement file for every procurement.
Accordingly, we found that such files were not prepared for BPD purchases
and certain critical procurement documentation was not maintained for
several BPD procurements selected for testing.
Analysis
The City’s purchasing policies and procedures did not require maintenance of a
complete and centralized procurement file for every procurement; accordingly, we
found that such files were not prepared for BPD purchases. In addition, our
testing disclosed that certain critical procurement documentation was not
maintained for several BPD procurements selected for testing. According to City
records, BPD had 58 active contracts valued in total at approximately $59.0
million as of September 1, 2020.
Inadequate City Requirements
Our review of City policies and procedures disclosed that they did not include a
requirement to maintain a complete and centralized procurement file for each
procurement. Although a general financial record retention policy was
established by DOF that required bid requests, contracts, and correspondence to
be maintained for seven years, this policy lacked sufficient specificity, such as a
requirement to maintain a separate procurement file in some manner for each
procurement, and clarification as to what each file should contain. In addition, the
policy was not established in any of the aforementioned formal City purchasing
requirements.
In comparison, State procurement regulations require that a procurement file for
each procurement be created, which may be kept electronically. The requirement
further specifies that the procurement file include a record of all inquiries, a
listing of every bidder or offeror solicited, all bids or offers received, all internal
and external correspondence regarding the procurement, written documentation
from the procurement officer describing efforts to confirm the information in the
affidavits submitted by the successful bidder or offeror, and the final contract.
The Maryland Procurement Manual further states that the procurement officer is
responsible for creating, updating, and maintaining the procurement file from the
beginning to the end of the procurement process.
20

--- Page 23 ---
Insufficient Record Retention
Our test of 17 BPD procurements (10 non-competitive and 7 competitive) totaling
$80.3 million, including contract modifications and renewals, disclosed that
certain critical procurement documentation was not maintained for 7
procurements totaling $40.2 million.
 Our test of the 10 non-competitive procurements totaling $39.6 million
disclosed 5 procurements totaling $4.2 million for which certain required
critical procurement documentation could not be provided. Specifically, for 4
procurements totaling $3.0 million a justification form (for a non-competitive
procurement) was prepared and approved by BPD, but there was no
documentation of the required BOP approval. In addition, certain
documentation required by BPD to support the need for the items procured
and the BPD approval could not be located for 4 procurements totaling $4.0
million. Finally, neither BPD nor the City could provide us with price quotes
and a fully executed copy of the final contract for one procurement totaling
$2.3 million. DOF subsequently obtained the missing documents for this
procurement from the vendor as a result of our inquiry. Based on our review
of documents that were available for the 5 procurements, we were able to
determine that each procurement appeared to be reasonable and appropriate
for BPD despite the missing documentation.
 Our test of the 7 competitive procurements totaling $40.7 million disclosed 2
procurements totaling $36.0 million for which certain critical documentation
could not be provided. Specifically, neither BPD nor the City could provide
us with vendor technical proposals for its $35.0 million (with subsequent
modifications) body worn camera contract. According to DOF management,
these records were believed to have been destroyed as a result of a flood in
2017. We were able to review documentation of technical evaluations
performed (including field testing by BPD officers) which mentioned that
vendor technical proposals were submitted. For another $1 million
procurement related to BPD’s workforce management and scheduling system,
neither BPD nor the City could provide documentation of the evaluation of the
bidder technical proposals. While we were provided with certain
communications and documentation, such as evaluation team disclosure
letters, the actual technical evaluation documentation was not provided.
In our opinion, procurement records were maintained in a decentralized manner.
For example, BPD maintained requisition documentation it had prepared, as well
as certain other related internal and external correspondence, whereas BOP
21

--- Page 24 ---
generally maintained procurement records relating to functions occurring after
BPD’s electronic submission of its requisition, including solicitation of bids, bid
evaluation, and contract award. In addition, certain procurement records were
maintained in the City purchasing system (CitiBuy), while others were maintained
on various shared drives, local drives, and/or in hardcopy form. As such, a single
procurement file including all pertinent records was not maintained by either BPD
or BOP, and based on our observations these conditions created inconsistency and
disorganization in record retention, and delays in obtaining requested procurement
records.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that DOF
a. modify City purchasing policies and procedures to require a
comprehensive central file or repository of critical documents for each
procurement consistent with State procurement regulations and the
Maryland Procurement Manual; and
b. ensure that all critical procurement documentation, including those
required of BPD, is maintained in each centralized City procurement
file.
22

--- Page 25 ---
Objective 2 - Disbursements
Background
DOF – Bureau of Accounting and Payroll Services (BAPS) is responsible for
approving all payments and disbursements made by the City. BPD is responsible
for ensuring that goods or services have actually been received and for providing
approval for payment at an agency level. Once approved by BPD, Procurement,
and the Bureau of the Budget and Management Research (when applicable), the
transaction is forwarded to BAPS for the final approval, which results in payment
through the City’s Treasurer’s Office. According to the City’s records, BPD’s
non-payroll disbursements totaled $95.2 million in fiscal year 2020, as depicted in
Figure 1.
The City Administrative Manual details the disbursement processes and
requirements to be followed by City agencies. In general, disbursements are
processed as either an expenditure authorization or release against an existing
purchase order. City agencies initiate and approve disbursement transactions
through the City’s two financial and purchasing systems (CoreIntegrator and
CitiBuy). User access and automated controls, such as workflows and approval
requirements for both systems are established by BAPS and BOP.
Expenditure Authorizations (EA)
The City Administrative Manual provides that acceptable uses of an EA include:
 purchases up to $5,000 of a non-recurring nature;
 obligations approved by the Board of Estimates of a non-recurring nature
(even if this amount is more than $5,000); and
 certain Special Authority purchases regardless of the amount, such as
payment of utility bills and court-related legal costs.
23

--- Page 26 ---
EAs are processed and controlled entirely through the CoreIntegrator System and
generally follow a 7-step process as depicted in Figure 5.
Release against a Purchase Order (RPO)
For purchases from an existing citywide or BPD awarded contract, an RPO is
used to request goods and services, or to process periodic payments in accordance
with contract terms. RPOs are processed and controlled through CitiBuy and
CoreIntegrator, and generally follow a 9-step process that is depicted in Figure 6.
24

--- Page 27 ---
Objective and Methodology
Our objective for the disbursement process was to evaluate the adequacy of BPD
and City requirements and procedures for disbursements (invoice processing), and
to determine, based on this evaluation and transaction testing, whether
disbursements were subject to adequate controls and performed in accordance
with these requirements and procedures.
To accomplish our objective, we reviewed applicable City charter excerpts, laws,
and regulations governing the City’s disbursement process. We also reviewed
pertinent sections of the City’s Administrative Manual and financial system
25

--- Page 28 ---
guides that communicate official City policies and procedures that affect the
City’s operations and its employees, including disbursement activity.
Furthermore, we reviewed the Comptroller of Maryland’s Accounting Procedures
Manual to help evaluate City disbursement requirements and procedures.
We interviewed BPD, DOF, Baltimore City Comptroller’s Office, OIG, and Law
Department staff to determine the disbursement processes currently in place,
including initial authorization, the receipt, verification, and processing of
invoices, and the actual payment process. Furthermore, we examined the
processes for preparing and recording the related journal entries. We evaluated
the adequacy of the related procedures and controls and compared these processes
to City and State requirements.
We also obtained from the City’s financial systems, reports of disbursement
activity, such as BPD’s general ledger activity for the period of July 1, 2014 to
June 30, 2020, to perform various tests of the disbursement processes. We
performed various tests of the data, including tracing and vouching data directly
to the City’s financial systems and comparing data totals to City Budget Books,
and determined that the data were sufficiently reliable for the purposes the data
were used during the audit.
In addition, we obtained view-only access to the City’s automated purchasing and
financial systems which was used to review system controls (such as approval
paths) and user access, payment records (such as invoices), and other critical
information pertaining to evaluating procedures and transaction testing.
Finally, we performed 15 tests of BPD disbursements and disbursement-related
journal entries, for various attributes, that included a review of 232 judgmentally
selected transactions3 with a net value totaling $89.2 million to evaluate whether
disbursements and journal entries were made in accordance with key City
requirements, and were consistent with significant State disbursement
requirements. Each test performed was tailored to address certain risks and
processes associated with an individual activity or payment type. While each test
may have included certain differences in scope, the tests generally included the
following attributes:
 were disbursements paid from the proper account;
 were disbursements supported and appeared proper;
 were disbursements approved by independent supervisory personnel;
 were disbursements made timely; and
3 Test selection was based on auditor judgment and considerations included, for example,
materiality, potential risk, and diversity of selection source.
26

--- Page 29 ---
 when applicable, were checks paid to and cashed by the proper recipient?
Conclusion
Overall, we determined that City disbursement requirements adequately address
the various disbursement types and methods used by the City, the receipt of goods
and services, documentation requirements, necessary approvals, journal entry
processing, and the timeliness of invoice payment.
However, our review and testing of BPD and DOF procedures disclosed that these
requirements were not always followed. Specifically, receipt of goods and
services were not always verified prior to payment, and vendor payments were
routinely made late. Based on discussions with City and BPD staff, it appears that
the untimely payment of invoices is a longstanding issue and seems to be
systemic in nature (our review did not include a determination as the cause of this
longstanding problem).
Furthermore, although the City had established certain system controls within its
CoreIntegrator, such as the use of approval paths and controls over user access,
certain critical user access was not sufficiently controlled. We noted six system
users who had the ability to initiate and approve the same disbursement
transaction, and no mitigating controls were in place.
Findings
Finding 2
Verification that related goods or services had been received was not always
obtained prior to making payments to vendors, and payments were routinely
made late.
Analysis
Verification that related goods or services had been received was not always
obtained prior to making payments to vendors, and payments were routinely made
late. Of the 232 disbursements subject to testing, we examined 137 transactions
for documentation to support receipt of goods or services prior to payment and
117 transactions for timely payment (some disbursements were tested for both
attributes).
Documentation of Receipt of Goods/Services Was Not Obtained
Our tests of 137 transactions totaling approximately $33.7 million disclosed that
for 35 transactions totaling $3.0 million documentation could not be provided by
BPD to support the receipt of the related goods and services prior to payment,
27

--- Page 30 ---
such as a signed invoice (a permitted document for evidence of receipt).
Consequently, there was a lack of assurance that goods and services paid for had
been received.
Invoices Were Not Paid Timely
Our tests of 117 transactions totaling approximately $23.7 million disclosed that
57 transactions totaling $15.1 million were paid from 3 days to over a year late as
depicted in Figure 7. City disbursement requirements dictate that payment shall
be made by the City to the vendor within 30 days of receipt of a proper invoice, or
as specified in the related contract.
Figure 7
Summary of Untimely Payments
Number of Disbursement
Range of Delay
Test Items Amount
1 month or less 35 $10.2 million
1 month to 3 months 13 4.4 million
3 months to 1 year 6 424,200
More than 1 year 3 32,400
Totals 57 $15.1 million
Source: City financial and purchasing systems
We were advised by all parties that late payment of invoices has been a
longstanding and known systemic issue. Based on available documentation, we
were not able to readily identify the specific causes attributable to each test item
for these delays, or the primary party responsible (the City or BPD), but we
believe that the delays could in part be attributable to the lack of a centralized
process for handling and tracking all invoices from receipt (at BPD) through the
invoice verification process (BPD) to payment (City).
According to DOF and BPD management, late payments generally occur because
of deficiencies in process flow, vendor submission, and certain other related
procedures. For example:
 Workflow Process – A related EA or RPO may not have been created or
created timely by BPD or approved by DOF in the financial system for the
payment to be processed against, causing delays in processing. In addition
certain payments require multiple actions and approval by authorized
personnel across various entities, such as approval by BOE, which often take
an extended amount of time.
28

--- Page 31 ---
 Vendor Submission – Invoices do not always have appropriate identifying
information included by the vendor as specifically instructed by DOF, such as
related contract or purchase order reference, and invoices are not always
submitted by vendors to both DOF and BPD as required, causing further
delay.
 Procedural Issues – Invoices are sometimes routed to the wrong BPD
individuals for verification and approval, or the appropriate individuals take
too long to verify, approve, and submit documentation back to DOF.
The most egregious delays from testing (delays of more than one year) all
pertained to certain electronic surveillance services, such as wire taps, performed
by telecommunication vendors. Telecommunication vendors often invoice for
each service provided resulting in hundreds of invoices routed to different units
and personnel within BPD for approval. Without a centralized process for
tracking and processing these invoices from telecommunication vendors,
significant delays in payment have occurred. According to one vendor’s records,
as of September 2019 BPD had 195 invoices outstanding totaling $117,100 dating
back to 2016, which BPD was attempting to resolve. BPD advised us that it is
working with certain telecommunication vendors to develop a more streamlined
process to help expedite the invoice processing.
Recommendation 2
We recommend that
a. BPD verify the receipt of goods and services prior to approving the
related payment, and that this verification be documented; and
b. BPD and DOF take the necessary steps to ensure that invoices are paid in
accordance with the City’s disbursement requirements.
Finding 3
Certain critical access to the CoreIntegrator System was not sufficiently
controlled by DOF.
Analysis
DOF did not sufficiently control certain critical access to the CoreIntegrator
System. Our review disclosed that six DOF employees had system access
capabilities that allowed them to both initiate and approve disbursement
transactions without independent approval.
Specifically, these employees could access the system and process transactions
using capabilities explicitly granted to other users without the six employees
being readily identified. In effect, these employees had capabilities allowing
29

--- Page 32 ---
them to initiate a transaction as one user and to approve the same transaction as
another user. While the online controls established for the transaction were
followed, in effect these controls could be circumvented using this feature.
According to DOF management, this feature exists to facilitate processing
transactions when a user normally responsible for initiating or approving a
transaction is not available. However, controls to ensure the propriety of these
transactions, such as generating output reports of transactions initiated and
approved by the same employee for review by an independent third party, had not
been established. Consequently, errors or improper transactions could occur
without timely detection. DOF could not readily identify or quantify the number
of times this feature had been used, or those transactions initiated and approved
by the same individual.
Recommendation 3
We recommend that controls be established by the City to ensure all critical
disbursement-related transactions are subject to independent review and
approval. For example, develop a system-generated output report of all
transactions initiated and approved by the same employee for use in a
subsequent independent review and approval process.
30

--- Page 33 ---
Objective 3 – Procurement Cards
Background
DOF established the purchasing card program (PCP) to facilitate the purchasing
of goods and services on a direct or emergency basis; the payment of recurring
expenditures; and the payment of invoices as set by the terms of an approved
purchase order. The PCP is designed to save the City time and money by
providing authorized personnel a convenient alternative to the City’s standard
purchasing process described in Objective 1. According to the City’s purchasing
card (P-Card) vendor, BPD had 15 cardholders with related expenditures totaling
approximately $590,200 in fiscal year 2020.
Program Policy and Controls
BOP is responsible for administering the PCP for the City including card
issuance, training, monitoring; whereas BAPS is responsible for paying the
citywide PCP invoice. BOP established certain policies and practices to help
ensure that P-Cards are used for appropriate purposes. The policies stipulate the
acceptable P-Card uses, and include automated and manual process controls.
Some controls are preventive, such as automatically limiting the type of
merchants where the P-Cards can be used, limiting the amounts that can be
purchased by each cardholder, and requiring multiple authorizations to establish
an individual cardholder account. Other controls are detective, such as
recordkeeping requirements for each transaction and a monthly post-purchase
review of each transaction by supervisory personnel.
While BOP is responsible for administering the PCP for the City, the integrity of
the PCP relies primarily on cardholders, including those at BPD, using their P-
Cards in accordance with the City’s acceptable use policies, and on independent
and thorough supervisory reviews of individual cardholder transactions to ensure
compliance with those policies.
Significant Changes to the Program
In June 2020, BOE approved a contract with a new vendor to administer the
City’s PCP for the period of July 1, 2020 to June 30, 2025. The incumbent
vendor continued to provide certain transition services through September 15,
2020. In addition, effective January 1, 2020, the PCP section of the City
Administrative Manual was updated to provide more detail regarding the program
and program policy, such as strictly prohibiting the purchase of gift cards which
was previously only an informal policy.
31

--- Page 34 ---
Objective and Methodology
Our objective for the P-Card process was to evaluate the adequacy of BPD and
City requirements and procedures for P-Card usage, and to determine, based on
this evaluation and transaction testing, whether P-Card usage by BPD personnel
was in accordance with these requirements and procedures.
To accomplish our objective, we reviewed applicable sections of the City’s
Administrative Manual that communicates official City policies and procedures
that affect the City’s operations and its employees, including the PCP. City PCP
requirements were compared, for evaluation purposes, to corresponding State
requirements. Specifically, we judgmentally identified six key areas of
requirements covering 1) eligibility, 2) restrictions and controls, 3) monitoring, 4)
training, 5) documentation and procedure, and 6) other general requirements, and
compared the City’s PCP requirements to corresponding State requirements found
in the State’s Comptroller of Maryland Corporate Purchasing Card Program
Policy and Procedures.
Additionally, we interviewed BPD and DOF staff to determine the processes used
for P-Card expenditures including requests for purchases, transaction
documentation and recordation, supervisory review, and corresponding
accounting. We evaluated the adequacy of the related procedures and controls by
comparing these processes to City and State requirements.
We also obtained from the City’s PCP vendor a report of BPD’s P-Card
expenditures made between July 1, 2016 and June 30, 2020. We performed
various tests of the relevant data, and determined that the data were sufficiently
reliable for the purposes the data were used during this audit. In addition, we
obtained view-only access to the City’s automated financial system which was
used to review documentation supporting P-Card expenditures and related
accounting entries.
Finally, we tested 22 P-Card statements from BPD cardholders that collectively
included 407 purchases totaling approximately $264,8004 to evaluate whether P-
Card purchases were made in accordance with key City and State requirements.
Conclusion
Overall, we determined that City PCP requirements (and consequently
requirements for BPD P-Card expenditures) adequately addressed 5 of the 6 key
purchasing areas we identified for review: 1) eligibility, 2) restrictions and
controls, 3) training, 4) documentation and procedure, and 5) other general
4 Test selection considerations included, for example, statements (transactions) with potentially
higher risk.
32

--- Page 35 ---
requirements. Our comparison to State requirements disclosed that City
requirements were generally similar. For the remaining key purchasing area
pertaining to monitoring efforts, we found that requirements had not been
established by the City for the use of Level-3 purchasing data. Often Level-3 data
can be obtained from the card vendor and provides additional detailed information
about purchases made, and can be used to help ensure the propriety of the
purchases. Although Level-3 data were not available from the City’s prior PCP
vendor, we determined that, effective September 15, 2020, the new PCP vendor
had the ability to provide Level-3 purchasing data.
Our test of 22 P-Card statements disclosed that all tested P-Card transactions
generally complied with City PCP requirements, were reasonable and supported,
and were approved by supervisory personnel. However, for 11 of the statements,
certain documentation and supporting journal entries required by DOF were
submitted by BPD between 2 and 23 days after their required due date and 1
additional statement was not submitted until 72 days after the required date. This
late submission affects the timely posting of journal entries that are necessary for
the proper allocation and accounting of P-Card expenditures in the City’s
financial system, and late submission of supporting documentation likewise
delays the additional review of BPD PCP activity by DOF.
Findings
Finding 4
The City’s Procurement Card Program policy for monitoring P-Card
expenditures did not include a requirement to review Level-3 data, and
documentation required to properly record expenditures was not always
forwarded to DOF by BPD on a timely basis.
Analysis
The City’s Procurement Card Program policy did not include requirements to use
Level-3 data to help monitor and ensure the propriety of purchases made.
Additionally, documentation supporting P-Card expenditures and journal entries
required to properly record expenditures were not always submitted to DOF by
BPD on a timely basis.
City Policy Did Not Require Review of Level-3 Data
Requirements had not been established by the City for the use of Level-3
purchasing data to help monitor and ensure the propriety of PCP purchases.
Although Level-3 data were not available from the City’s prior PCP vendor, the
new PCP vendor (effective September 15, 2020) had the ability to provide Level-
33

--- Page 36 ---
3 purchasing data, but the related contract and the City’s policy were silent on the
regular reporting of Level-3 data and as of November 2020, the City had not
requested or obtained such data. Level-3 data provides detailed purchasing
information, including invoice-level line item details (such as item descriptions
and item quantities), which can be used by supervisory personnel to help detect
questionable purchases.
The use of Level-3 purchasing data for monitoring purposes has been required by
the State’s Corporate Purchasing Card (CPC) Program since 2014. The State’s
Corporate Purchasing Card Program Policy and Procedures Manual required
the use of Level-3 purchasing data during monthly reviews of cardholder logs to
ensure that each item purchased as reported on the logs is accurate. This process
has helped identify several instances of fraud and abuse in the State’s CPC
program.5
All of the purchases we examined were made prior to the availability of Level-3
purchasing data to the City. Accordingly, our testing relied on reviewing copies
of receipts and other documentation provided by the cardholder, which appeared
to support the transactions recorded on the monthly transaction logs.
Supporting Documentation and Journal Entries Were Not Submitted Timely
Our test of the aforementioned 22 P-Card statements disclosed that documentation
supporting expenditures on 11 statements, and the related BPD-prepared journal
entries required to properly record those expenditures, were submitted to DOF
between 2 and 23 days after the required submission date and one additional
statement was submitted 72 days after the required date. This late submission
inhibits the timely posting of journal entries that are necessary for the proper
allocation and accounting of P-Card expenditures in the City’s financial system,
and late submission of supporting documentation likewise delays the additional
review of BPD PCP activity by DOF.
The City’s Administrative Manual requires that copies of purchasing card
statements, the related activity logs, and the journal entries necessary to properly
record those expenditures in the City’s financial system be forwarded to DOF
within 15 work days of receiving the P-Card statement. A similar condition was
commented upon by the City Auditor’s Office in its report dated August 30, 2018
on its audit of calendar year 2017 PCP expenditures made by various City
agencies including BPD. BPD agreed with the finding as it related to the
Department.
5 For example, various Office of Legislative Audits (OLA) audits have reported improper
purchases, which were identified by other State employees or OLA through the use of Level 3
data.
34

--- Page 37 ---
Recommendation 4
We recommend that
a. the City’s Administrative Manual be amended to require the use of Level-
3 purchasing data to help monitor and ensure the propriety of PCP
purchases, and
b. required documentation and journal entries supporting PCP purchases
be submitted to DOF by BPD within the timeframe required by the
City’s Administrative Manual.
35

--- Page 38 ---
Objective 4 - Minority and Women-Owned Business Enterprises
Background
The City’s Minority and Women’s Business Opportunity Office (MWBOO)
functions under the City Law Department and is responsible for operating the
Minority6 and Women’s Business Opportunity Program. MWBOO
responsibilities include certification of businesses, maintaining a directory of
certified businesses, annual reporting, and investigating alleged violations. In
addition, for procurements expected to exceed $50,000, MWBOO sets minority
and women-owned business enterprise (MWOBE) participation goals, and
reviews proposals and bids to determine if they include the required participation
goals. Waivers from participation are permitted during the pre-solicitation and
pre-award processes if certain criteria are met as set forth by City regulations.
We were advised by MWBOO management that, during our audit period, each
contracting agency was responsible for monitoring compliance with MWOBE
participation goals established in their respective contracts. DOF (specifically
BOP as a unit within DOF) is responsible for performing procurements on BPD’s
behalf and is considered the contracting agency for BPD for purposes of this
Program. As such, during the audit period, DOF was responsible for monitoring
compliance with MWOBE participation goals established in BPD contracts.
However, according to DOF management, effective October 2020, all
responsibilities for monitoring compliance with MWOBE participation goals for
all City contracts were transferred to MWBOO.
As of September 1, 2020, BPD had two active contracts, totaling approximately
$727,000, with MWOBE participation goals. In addition, there were 10 active
citywide contracts totaling $119.7 million, with MWOBE participation goals,
which BPD had used for disbursements totaling $20.3 million. A report of all
BPD and citywide contracts with MWOBE participation goals that were active
during the audit period could not be readily provided.
Objective and Methodology
Our objective was to evaluate the adequacy of the requirements and procedures
used by the City to monitor compliance with MWOBE participation goals, and to
determine, based on this evaluation and transaction testing, whether monitoring
was performed in accordance with City requirements and procedures.
6 Baltimore City Code specifies the criteria defining a minority business enterprise including
ownership, operation, and control by one or more minority group members and location in
Baltimore City. The Code further indicates that a minority group member is a member of a
minority group, such as African American, Hispanic American, Asian American, or Native
American, for which a utilization disparity has been identified.
36

--- Page 39 ---
To accomplish our objective, we reviewed applicable City charter excerpts, laws,
and regulations governing the City’s minority and women-owned business
enterprise process. City minority and women-owned business enterprise
requirements were compared, for evaluation purposes, to corresponding State
requirements. Specifically, we judgmentally identified six key areas, such as
eligibility, oversight, and reporting requirements, and compared the City’s related
MWOBE requirements to corresponding or similar requirements in State laws and
regulations.
Additionally, we interviewed BPD, DOF, and Law Department staff to determine
the responsibilities and procedures to monitor vendor compliance with minority
and women-owned business enterprise participation goals included in contracts.
We evaluated the adequacy of the related procedures and controls by comparing
them to City and State requirements.7
In addition, we obtained view-only access to the City’s automated purchasing
system data on procurement and compliance reviews for contracts with
established MWOBE participation goals, and other critical information pertaining
to evaluating procedures and transaction testing.
Finally, we tested four BPD contracts awarded totaling $3.7 million with
MWOBE participation goals8 ranging from 5 to 16 percent to evaluate whether
monitoring of vendor compliance was performed. Our testing was based on a
review of available electronic and hardcopy records and data within the City’s
purchasing system, and interviewing key personnel involved in the related
monitoring process.
Conclusion
Overall, we determined that City MWOBE requirements addressed all six key
areas reviewed and appeared adequate. Our comparison to State MWOBE
requirements disclosed that City requirements were generally similar.
However, our review disclosed that adequate policies and procedures had not
been established by DOF to monitor vendor compliance for all contracts with
MWOBE participation goals, and certain BPD contracts tested were not subject to
any monitoring.
7 Our review did not include an evaluation of procedures and controls in place at (MWBOO) such
as its processes for certification, reporting, and investigating because we determined that these
were not support services, and we considered these functions to be beyond the scope of our audit.
Our evaluation of procedures and testing was limited to the monitoring efforts by DOF, on behalf
of BPD, to ensure vendor compliance.
8 The number of BPD contracts with MWOBE participation goals in effect during our audit period
that we were readily able to identify was minimal. Our test selection focused on those contracts.
37

--- Page 40 ---
Our test of four BPD contracts with awards totaling $3.7 million with MWOBE
participation goals ranging from 5 to 16 percent, disclosed that, as of February
2021, two contracts totaling $2.3 million, which had been awarded in November
2017 and March 2018, respectively, had not had a compliance review performed
and consequently, achievement of the respective participation goals could not be
assessed.
These reviews were only required under certain circumstances, and for those
performed by DOF that we tested (two contracts totaling $1.4 million) we
concluded that they were not sufficiently comprehensive to ensure that vendors
met required participation goals. In this regard, in February 2020, the Baltimore
City OIG reported that a BPD towing contractor had reported approximately
$191,200 in subcontractor payments to minority or women-owned businesses, but
had actually paid only $39,300.
Findings
Finding 5
Formal policies and procedures had not been established by DOF to monitor
vendor compliance with MWOBE participation goals, consequently
compliance reviews were not performed on all contracts, and although
compliance reviews were performed by DOF in certain cases, these reviews
were not comprehensive.
Analysis
DOF had not established formal policies and procedures to monitor vendor
compliance with MWOBE participation goals included in contracts, consequently
compliance reviews were not performed on all contracts, and although
compliance reviews were performed by DOF in certain cases, these reviews were
not comprehensive. As a result, assurance was lacking that BPD vendors were
meeting required participation goals.
We were advised by MWBOO management that each contracting City agency
must establish procedures to monitor compliance with MWOBE participation
goals established in each contract, and that compliance reviews should be
conducted each time a prime contractor is paid by the City in an effort to identify
issues early. Compliance reviews include obtaining payment information to
determine whether payments made by the prime contractor to the subcontractor
meet the participation goals established in each contract.
38

--- Page 41 ---
Compliance reviews were not performed on all BPD contracts with participation
goals by the DOF as required. Rather, we were advised that compliance reviews
were only performed by DOF for those contracts (BPD and other City agencies)
that required BOE action subsequent to the initial award, such as for renewing,
extending, or modifying the contract. Conversely, for contracts without BOE
action prior to expiration, a vendor compliance review would not be performed.
Our test of four BPD contracts totaling $3.7 million with participation goals
ranging from 5 to 16 percent, disclosed that, as of February 2021, two contracts
totaling $2.3 million that had been awarded in November 2017 and March 2018,
respectively, had not had a compliance review performed by DOF.
The other two contracts we tested had reviews performed by DOF because certain
BOE action was required during the contract term. However, we concluded these
reviews were not sufficiently comprehensive because subcontractor payment
information was not independently verified as part of those reviews. Rather,
vendors self-reported payment information by phone or email when requested by
DOF without providing supporting documentation to substantiate the accuracy of
reported payments. City regulations and contract terms include requirements that
when requested, vendors submit proof verifying payments to subcontractors to
achieve contract participation goals.
Without formal policies and procedures requiring comprehensive compliance
reviews of all contracts with MWOBE participation goals, noncompliance with
City requirements may go undetected. In February 2020, the City OIG reported
that its investigation into an allegation of a vendor falsely reporting subcontractor
payment information for a citywide police requested towing contract, disclosed a
vendor that had falsely reported approximately $191,200 in subcontractor
payments to minority or women-owned businesses when actual payments totaled
only $39,300. In that report, the OIG determined that, although three separate
compliance reviews had been performed of the contractor compliance with the
goals, reported subcontractor payments had not been verified during those
reviews.
Recommendation 5
We recommend that
a. formal policies and procedures be established to actively monitor all
contracts for vendor compliance with MWOBE participation goals, and
b. existing policies and procedures be modified to include a requirement
that reported subcontractor payments be verified to adequate supporting
documentation.
39

--- Page 42 ---
Objective 5 – Ethics and Financial Disclosures
Background
As prescribed by the General Provisions Article, Section 5-807 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, each local jurisdiction is required to enact its own provisions
to govern the public ethics of local officials relating to conflicts of interest,
financial disclosure, and lobbying. The City’s Public Ethics Law was established
in Article 8 of the City Code, and establishes the City Board of Ethics to oversee
and enforce the Public Ethics Law.
The City Board of Ethics consists of five members appointed by the Mayor and
confirmed by the City Council. Pursuant to legislation passed by the City Council
in April 2020, effective October 10, 2020 the City Inspector General became the
Executive Director of the Ethics Board, and is responsible for providing the
necessary staffing to carry out the responsibilities of the Ethics Board including,
but not limited to, investigating ethics complaints, providing ethics training, and
collecting and reviewing financial disclosure filings.
Annual Financial Disclosure Statements - The City’s Public Ethics Law requires
certain individuals to file annual financial disclosure statements on or before April
30 of each year covering the preceding calendar year. Those individuals include
elected and appointed senior City officials, many non-clerical City employees
(including those with procurement responsibilities), and members of most City
boards and commissions. In addition, more specific filing requirements were
established for certain City agencies including BPD and DOF as depicted in
Figure 8 on the following page. According to Board of Ethics records, 64 BPD
employees and 104 DOF employees were required to file an annual financial
disclosure statement for calendar year 2019.
40

--- Page 43 ---
Conflict of Interest Disclosure Form – In addition to required annual financial
disclosure statements, BOP developed other disclosure requirements to further
ensure compliance with the City’s Public Ethics Law by its procurement
employees.
41

--- Page 44 ---
 For competitive procurements with a technical evaluation - each member of
the bid or proposal evaluation committee is required to complete a Conflict of
Interest Disclosure Form disclosing any relationships with any of the bidding
vendors.
 For non-competitive procurements - the BPD Commissioner or designee is
required to certify there was no conflict of interest regarding the
recommended contract award. This certification is included on the Non-
Competitive Procurement Justification Form that is processed by BOP.
Objective and Methodology
Our objective was to determine whether BPD and City requirements and
procedures for ethics and financial disclosure filings conformed to State law. In
addition, we determined whether financial and conflict of interest disclosures
were filed, as required, and if not, whether appropriate follow-up was taken. We
considered this type of disclosure to be a key component of the procurement
process.
To accomplish our objective, we reviewed applicable City charter excerpts, laws,
and regulations governing the City’s ethics and financial and conflict of interest
disclosure filings to determine whether the City had conformed to State law
requiring local jurisdictions to enact laws concerning the ethics of local officials,
including conflicts of interest, financial disclosure, and lobbying.
Additionally, we interviewed BPD, DOF, OIG, and City Board of Ethics support
staff to determine the processes used to ensure annual financial disclosure
statements were properly filed by individuals required to do so, and the follow-up
process for noncompliance. In addition, we determined the processes used by
BOP to ensure that conflict of interest disclosures, which are required for certain
individual procurements, were completed prior to contract award. We evaluated
the adequacy of the related procedures and controls by comparing these processes
to City requirements. We also obtained from the Board of Ethics certain listings
of required financial disclosure filings for BPD and DOF personnel we identified
as being involved in the procurement and disbursement process. We used these
listings to perform tests of financial disclosure filings.
We tested 25 BPD and DOF employees involved in BPD procurement and
disbursements required to file annual financial disclosure statements for at least
one of the following calendar years; 2017, 2018, and 2019, to determine whether
they submitted the required filings. We also tested 8 non-competitive and 3
competitive procurements totaling approximately $40.9 million (including
42

--- Page 45 ---
contract modifications and renewals) that required a conflict of interest disclosure
to evaluate whether required conflict of interest disclosures were completed.
Conclusion
Based on our review, the City has adopted a detailed ethics policy that conforms
to State law, which includes provisions for financial and conflict of interest
disclosures. Our test of the financial disclosure statements filed by 25 BPD and
DOF employees disclosed that all required filings were submitted as required.
Finally, our test of the 11 procurements disclosed that all conflict of interest
disclosures forms were completed as required.
43

--- Page 46 ---
APPENDIX
BALTIMORE POLICE DEPARTMENT
Brandon M. Scott Michael S. Harrison
Mayor Police Commissioner
October 12, 2021
Gregory A. Hook, CPA
Legislative Auditor
Department of Legislative Services
301 West Preston Street, Room 1202
Baltimore, MD 21201
Dear Mr. Hook:
Enclosed please find responses from the Baltimore Police Department (BPD) to the audit
report from the Office of Legislative Audits for the period beginning July 1, 2014 and ending
June 30, 2020.
If you have any additional questions or concerns, please contact Ms. Shallah L. Graham, BPD
Chief Financial Officer, at 443-602-4280 or shallah.graham@baltimorepolice.org. Ms. Graham
will be happy to assist you. Of course, you may always contact me directly.
Respectfully,
Michael S. Harrison
Police Commissioner
Enclosure
Cc: Henry J. Raymond, Director and Chief Financial Officer, Baltimore City Department of
Finance
Eric Melancon, Chief of Staff, BPD
Shallah Graham, Chief Financial Officer, BPD
Yoanna Moisides, Chief of Staff, Baltimore City Department of Finance
c/o 242 West 29th Street  Baltimore, Maryland 21211-2908

--- Page 47 ---
Baltimore Police Department
Evaluation of Purchasing Disbursement Controls and Transactions
Agency Response Form
Finding 1
The City’s purchasing policies and procedures did not require maintenance of a complete
and centralized procurement file for every procurement. Accordingly, we found that such
files were not prepared for BPD purchases and certain critical procurement documentation
was not maintained for several BPD procurements selected for testing.
We recommend that DOF
a. modify City purchasing policies and procedures to require a comprehensive central
file or repository of critical documents for each procurement consistent with State
procurement regulations and the Maryland Procurement Manual; and
b. ensure that all critical procurement documentation, including those required of BPD,
is maintained in each centralized City procurement file.
Agency Response
Analysis Factually Accurate
Please provide The City’s purchasing policies do require maintenance of a complete
additional comments as procurement file. However, the City does not require internal agency
deemed necessary. workflow documents to be submitted to Procurement, these approvals
are recorded through the requisition workflow which requires sign off
and approval from the agency requestor, agency approver, and assigned
agency budget analyst. The Baltimore Police Department has an internal
workflow for procurement requests that requires sign off by multiple
roles before the requisition can be entered in CitiBuy, these documents
are examples of the type of documentation not retained in the central
system.
In the test of justification forms, 4 of the 5 forms were retained without
DOF signature. However, all of the forms were submitted as an agenda
item to the Board of Estimates, by the Department of Finance or
Baltimore Police with a corresponding signed memo from Procurement
or the Commissioner, were subject to the BOE publication and public
approval process and were approved. That approval was retained.
Recommendation 1a Agree Estimated Completion Date: 12/31/2021
Please provide details of The recommendation to review City purchasing policies to require a
corrective action or comprehensive central file with certain critical documents will be
explain disagreement. reviewed in the Procurement study process. This will also be reviewed in
the business process analysis during Workday implementation to ensure
that the process of record retention is implemented to provide a
centralized, electronic repository.
Page 1 of 7

--- Page 48 ---
Baltimore Police Department
Evaluation of Purchasing Disbursement Controls and Transactions
Agency Response Form
Recommendation 1b Agree Estimated Completion Date: 12/31/2021
Please provide details of Procurement will modify City Procurement SOP’s to clarify procedures
corrective action or for what documents are designated critical and are required to be
explain disagreement. maintained in the centralized City Procurement file.
Page 2 of 7

--- Page 49 ---
Baltimore Police Department
Evaluation of Purchasing Disbursement Controls and Transactions
Agency Response Form
Finding 2
Verification that related goods or services had been received was not always obtained prior
to making payments to vendors, and payments were routinely made late.
We recommend that
a. BPD verify the receipt of goods and services prior to approving the related payment,
and that this verification be documented; and
b. BPD and DOF take the necessary steps to ensure that invoices are paid in accordance
with the City’s disbursement requirements.
Agency Response
Analysis Factually Accurate
Please provide
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 2a Agree Estimated Completion Date: 8/31/2021
Please provide details of According to BPD’s procurement SOP section 4.3, since the initial
corrective action or finding, BPD fiscal is enforcing invoices for goods and services to be
explain disagreement. signed by the receiving unit to certify receipt as approval to pay for
service or product. The BPD procurement staff will attach the invoice to
the receipt entry in CitiBuy.
Recommendation 2b Agree Estimated Completion Date: 10/31/2021
Please provide details of BPD has updated its procurement SOP (section 4.3.1) to require that
corrective action or invoices sent for certification must be turned around in 7 days and BPD
explain disagreement. fiscal has 7 days to submit approval to pay signed invoices to accounts
payable.
The Department of Finance continues to work on a prompt payment
initiative that includes all stakeholders (vendors, agencies,etc.) and
focuses on enhancing data measures, vendor and agency education and
transparency. As noted, delays often occur due to multiple factors in the
required approval steps in the business process. In addition to the
targeted efforts to improve prompt payment, the implementation of
Workday will reduce processing times once fully implemented as all the
steps in the process occur within one system allowing for a more
efficient and transparent workflow. Continual and ongoing.
Page 3 of 7

--- Page 50 ---
Baltimore Police Department
Evaluation of Purchasing Disbursement Controls and Transactions
Agency Response Form
Finding 3
Certain critical access to the CoreIntegrator System was not sufficiently controlled by
DOF.
We recommend that controls be established by the City to ensure all critical disbursement-
related transactions are subject to independent review and approval. For example, develop
a system-generated output report of all transactions initiated and approved by the same
employee for use in a subsequent independent review and approval process.
Agency Response
Analysis Factually Accurate
Please provide
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 3 Agree Estimated Completion Date: 07/01/2021
Please provide details of The CoreIntegrator workflow is set up to include independent review
corrective action or and approval of the disbursement. As noted, there are several super user
explain disagreement. accounts who had system level access to initiate an approve transactions.
These roles were designed to address backlog issues related to
systemwide issues; for example, issues occurring during ransomware or
other emergencies. The DOF previously worked with the existing vendor
to identify options for enhancing controls related to this category of
access, but the vendor was not able to implement additional system
controls without significantly impairing system operations. This issue
will be resolved with the citywide implementation of WD modules in
2022 which allows for increased functionality in defining and
maintaining user security roles.
Finance did review existing super user access and confirmed the
appropriateness of designated access, which is not provided to the
agencies, such as BPD, but rather is limited to selected managers within
the Bureau of Accounting and Payroll Services (BAPS). Restrictions are
placed on all other staff within the City and their access level.
Proxy rights are limited as well to the same individuals above and the
Lead in Accounts Payable is able to proxy as needed to return invoices
to the correct staff member. Proxy rights do not allow the person,
without an audit trail, to perform any task. All tasks performed in Core
Integrator show who performed the task and on behalf of whom. No one
Page 4 of 7

--- Page 51 ---
Baltimore Police Department
Evaluation of Purchasing Disbursement Controls and Transactions
Agency Response Form
outside of BAPS has the proxy permissions the permission is limited to
an as needed level. The log of “delegated” access is the documentation
maintained in CoreIntegrator. No permissions are delegated, but are
proxied and the system fully documents this modification. Again, no
one outside of BAPS can perform this task.
Page 5 of 7

--- Page 52 ---
Baltimore Police Department
Evaluation of Purchasing Disbursement Controls and Transactions
Agency Response Form
Finding 4
The City’s Procurement Card Program policy for monitoring P-Card expenditures did not
include a requirement to review Level-3 data, and documentation required to properly
record expenditures was not always forwarded to DOF by BPD on a timely basis.
We recommend that
a. the City’s Administrative Manual be amended to require the use of Level-3 purchasing
data to help monitor and ensure the propriety of PCP purchases, and
b. required documentation and journal entries supporting PCP purchases be submitted
to DOF by BPD within the timeframe required by the City’s Administrative Manual.
Agency Response
Analysis Factually Accurate
Please provide
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 4a Agree Estimated Completion Date: 12/31/2021
Please provide details of Procurement will review and amend the City’s Administrative Manual
corrective action or and/ or Procurement SOP’s to include a requirement to review Level-3
explain disagreement. data as appropriate.
Recommendation 4b Agree Estimated Completion Date: 9/30/2021
Please provide details of BPD will re-enforce compliance with its procurement SOP (section 4.8),
corrective action or as it pertains to timelines and expectations for the processing of
explain disagreement. Baltimore City Purchasing Card activity. Specifically, BPD cardholders
are required to reconcile their monthly statements on a timely basis so as
to allow the BPD Agency Administrator to process the statement and
submit it to DOF. Failure to submit reconciled statements on time may
result in suspension of the card.
Page 6 of 7

--- Page 53 ---
Baltimore Police Department
Evaluation of Purchasing Disbursement Controls and Transactions
Agency Response Form
Finding 5
Formal policies and procedures had not been established by DOF to monitor vendor
compliance with MWOBE participation goals, consequently compliance reviews were not
performed on all contracts, and although compliance reviews were performed by DOF in
certain cases, these reviews were not comprehensive.
We recommend that
a. formal policies and procedures be established to actively monitor all contracts for
vendor compliance with MWOBE participation goals, and
b. existing policies and procedures be modified to include a requirement that reported
subcontractor payments be verified to adequate supporting documentation.
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide BOP was not a final compliance reviewer, but did have compliance
additional comments as oversight during increase, renewals, and extensions. A prior
deemed necessary. administration established a Supplier Management Team, to support the
compliance reviews, however, the final compliance decision rests with
MWBOO. If a contract has goals Procurement was required to present
the compliance review with each BOE action for increase, renewals,
extensions and goal setting for awards. Subsequent to the time period of
this audit, the Supplier Management Team was transferred from
Procurement to LAW/MWBOO however one position remained with
BOP. The remaining position in Procurement is assigned a role in
“setting goals” on a contract prior to advertising the solicitation.
Recommendation 5a Agree Estimated Completion Date: ongoing
Recommendation 5b Agree Estimated Completion Date: 01/31/2022
Please provide details of The Department of Finance will support and continue discussions with
corrective action or the Department of Law in the development of policies and procedures
explain disagreement. that require reported subcontractor payments be verified to supporting
documentation is accurate. MWBOO is also implementing a system to
track payments from the prime to any subcontractors to ensure accurate
and timely payments to subcontractors; information that will be
accessible to the contract managers and project managers within the
agencies. This system is currently scheduled for a January go live date.
Page 7 of 7

--- Page 54 ---
A T
UDIT EAM
Robert A. Wells, Jr., CPA
Audit Manager
Adam M. Auerback
Senior Auditor
Ashley M. Darby
John B. Wachter, CFE
Staff Auditors