Title: State Grants


Cover letter for Maryland Department of Labor response that was received after report issuance
Date: 11/10/2021
Type: Performance
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=618c4c62a1ce580a0c9f23c5
Extracted: 2025-06-19T11:56:10.028648
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Performance Audit Report
State Grants
November 2021
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Senator Clarence K. Lam, M.D. (Senate Chair) Delegate Carol L. Krimm (House Chair)
Senator Malcolm L. Augustine Delegate Steven J. Arentz
Senator Adelaide C. Eckardt Delegate Mark S. Chang
Senator George C. Edwards Delegate Nicholas P. Charles II
Senator Katie Fry Hester Delegate Andrea Fletcher Harrison
Senator Cheryl C. Kagan Delegate Trent M. Kittleman
Senator Benjamin F. Kramer Delegate David Moon
Senator Cory V. McCray Delegate Julie Palakovich Carr
Senator Justin D. Ready Delegate Elizabeth G. Proctor
Senator Craig J. Zucker Delegate Geraldine Valentino-Smith
To Obtain Further Information
Office of Legislative Audits
301 West Preston Street, Room 1202
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Phone: 410-946-5900 ꞏ 301-970-5900 ꞏ 1-877-486-9964 (Toll Free in Maryland)
Maryland Relay: 711
TTY: 410-946-5401 ꞏ 301-970-5401
E-mail: OLAWebmaster@ola.state.md.us
Website: www.ola.state.md.us
To Report Fraud
The Office of Legislative Audits operates a Fraud Hotline to report fraud, waste, or abuse involving State
of Maryland government resources. Reports of fraud, waste, or abuse may be communicated anonymously
by a toll-free call to 1-877-FRAUD-11, by mail to the Fraud Hotline, c/o Office of Legislative Audits, or
through the Office’s website.
Nondiscrimination Statement
The Department of Legislative Services does not discriminate on the basis of age, ancestry, color, creed,
marital status, national origin, race, religion, gender, gender identity, sexual orientation, or disability in the
admission or access to its programs, services, or activities. The Department’s Information Officer has been
designated to coordinate compliance with the nondiscrimination requirements contained in Section 35.107
of the United States Department of Justice Regulations. Requests for assistance should be directed to the
Information Officer at 410-946-5400 or 410-970-5400.

--- Page 3 ---
November 10, 2021
Senator Clarence K. Lam, M.D., Senate Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Delegate Carol L. Krimm, House Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Members of Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Annapolis, Maryland
Ladies and Gentlemen:
We have conducted a performance audit to assess the State’s policies and
guidance for advertising, awarding, and monitoring State-funded grants. During
fiscal years 2015 through 2020, State-funded grant expenditures subject to this
audit totaled approximately $5.0 billion. In view of the significant amount of
grant expenditures and deficiencies related to grantee monitoring and
accountability previously identified primarily during our routine Office of
Legislative Audits’ fiscal compliance audits, we reviewed and evaluated existing
statewide laws, policies, and procedures over these grants. We also reviewed
grant activity at select State agencies to determine if appropriate mechanisms
were in place for awarding, administering, and monitoring their specific grants.
Our audit concluded that the State needs to implement comprehensive laws,
regulations, policies, and procedures over State grants. We noted that there was
no control agency established in State law with the authority to promulgate
statewide grant-related regulations, policies and procedures, engage in grant
oversight, and monitor State agency’s grant-related activities to ensure
accountability with related grant terms and conditions. For example, the
Governor’s Grants Office (GGO) provides resources, training, research, and
guidance to agencies, but lacks the legal authority to implement formal policies or
enforce agency compliance with its guidance. Our report includes several specific
recommendations on establishing statewide policies and procedures over the
awarding and administering of grants, such as requiring competition when making
awards, and use of standardized grant agreements that contain provisions to
protect the State’s interests.

--- Page 4 ---
Our report also includes a recommendation to require agencies to use a
centralized grant management system (GMS) to administer and track grant awards
and related expenditures. During our audit, GGO was in the process of procuring
a GMS, which is intended to include multiple functions for agencies to improve
their grant management practices. For example, a GMS should assist with the
agencies tracking and monitoring sub-grantee activities. GGO advised us that
once the GMS is operational, agencies will have the option to use this system;
however, without the establishment of legal authority, GGO could not require
agencies to use the system.
In our opinion, the lack of sufficient and formal statewide grant oversight resulted
in inconsistent grant management practices at the State agencies we reviewed;
impacting grantor and grantee accountability. Specifically, our review disclosed
several State agencies lacked policies and procedures over the grant awards
process, and consequently awarded grants without competition. Furthermore, our
testing revealed that four State agencies had a lack of documentation to support
grant payments totaling $22.3 million and payments totaling $220,000 that were
not made in accordance with the related grant agreements. Finally, the
Department of General Services (DGS), which processes a large number of State
Capital Grants, did not obtain support for the grantees’ selection of vendors for
work performed on capital projects, nor did they perform documented site visits
of these projects.
As explained in more detail in our report, State law established the Maryland
Efficient Grant Application Council to report on matters involving
recommendations to improve the State’s grant processes. The Department of
Budget and Management (DBM) is required to submit progress reports to the
General Assembly and the Council will submit a final report by July 1, 2024.
Accordingly, our recommendations regarding the establishment of comprehensive
statewide policies and procedures are made to the GGO and DBM, under the
direction of this Council. In addition, we included agency specific
recommendations based on our review of their respective procedures, as
appropriate.
The responses to this audit from all involved agencies are included as an appendix
to this report. Agencies were only requested to respond when recommendations
were made that specifically related to their agency. In accordance with State law,
we have reviewed the responses and noted general agreement to our findings and
related recommendations. However, we identified certain instances in which the
Department of Human Services’(DHS) and DGS’ responses indicated
disagreements with certain report findings. In these instances, we reviewed and
reassessed our audit documentation and reaffirmed the validity of the findings. In
2

--- Page 5 ---
accordance with generally accepted auditing standards, we have included an
“auditor comment” within DHS’ and DGS’ responses to explain our position. We
will advise the Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee of any outstanding issues
that we cannot resolve with any of the audited agencies.
We wish to acknowledge the cooperation extended to us by these agencies during
our audit and their willingness to address the audit issues and implement
appropriate corrective actions.
Respectfully submitted,
Gregory A. Hook, CPA
Legislative Auditor
3

--- Page 6 ---
4

--- Page 7 ---
Table of Contents
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology 7
Audit Scope 7
Objectives and Methodology 11
Fieldwork and Agencies’ Responses 12
Background Information 13
Overview and Responsibilities for State Grants Awarded by Executive 13
Department Agencies
Maryland Efficient Grant Application Council 15
Common Types of State Grants 16
Grant Life Cycle 17
Findings and Recommendations 20
Objective 1 – To determine if the State has comprehensive policies and
procedures governing the awarding and administration of State grants,
and to assess the adequacy of those policies and procedures.
Methodology 20
Conclusion 20
Finding 1 – The State does not have statewide comprehensive laws, 21
regulations, policies or procedures governing the creation, award,
and administration of State grants.
Finding 2 – The State does not have standardized grant applications and 22
grant agreements. As a result, we noted critical provisions that were
not included in certain State agencies’ grant agreements.
Finding 3 – The State did not have a statewide grants management system 24
to help administer and track grant awards and related expenditures.
Objective 2 – To determine if State agencies had appropriate mechanisms
in place when creating, awarding, and administering State grants to ensure
adequate accountability.
Methodology 26
Conclusion 27
Finding 4 – Individual agencies awarded certain grants without 28
competition and required documentation was not always available
5

--- Page 8 ---
to support the propriety of the award, including one award which was
not calculated correctly.
Finding 5 – DGS did not ensure that grantees submitted required 30
documents to explain or support the basis used to select vendors to
work on certain capital projects funded by State capital grants. In
addition, DGS did not perform documented routine site visits.
Finding 6 – Certain State agencies did not maintain documentation to 31
support grant payments totaling approximately $22.3 million and
made payments totaling $220,000 that were not in accordance with
the related grant agreement.
Exhibit 1 – Summary of State Grant Findings in Audit Reports Issued 34
July 1, 2015 to December 31, 2020
Exhibit 2 – Comptroller Object Code 12 - Sub-object Definitions and 37
Descriptions
Exhibit 3 – Major Grant Programs at Selected State Agencies in Figure 1 39
Exhibit 4 – Summary of Grant Guidance and Practices Implemented by 45
the Federal Government and Certain Other States
Agency Responses Appendix
Governor’s Grants Office
Department of Budget and Management
Department of Commerce
Department of Human Services
Maryland Department of Labor
Department of General Services
Maryland State Department of Education
6

--- Page 9 ---
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
Audit Scope
We conducted a performance audit to assess if comprehensive guidance and/or
policies were in place to oversee State grants and whether agencies were properly
creating, awarding, and administering the grants. State grants are intended to help
State agencies fulfill their objectives and missions. State regulations define a
grant as the bestowing of a power, money, privilege, property, or other item of
value that may be conditional, although without other consideration, by the State
upon another party. Grants are identified specifically by formula, a specific
allocation in law, or in the annual operating budget act, bond authorizations, or
other acts of the legislature. State regulations further specify that a grant is not a
contract. However, a grant is similar to a contract as it is a legally binding
agreement funded with State monies that is between the agency and a recipient
(such as, individuals, nonprofit organizations, or corporations) in order to carry
out a public purpose and specifies the scope of work and allowable costs.
This audit was initiated by the Office of Legislative Audits (OLA) as a result of
various issues with the awarding and monitoring of State grants identified during
our routine fiscal compliance audits, and in our February 7, 2020 review report on
the Opioid Operational Command Center. Specifically, during the period July 1,
2015 to December 31, 2020 OLA audit reports disclosed 26 findings primarily
related to grant awards and monitoring at 14 State agencies (see Exhibit 1 for a
summary of grant related findings from previously issued audit reports).
State agency expenditures are recorded in the State’s Financial Management
Information System (FMIS) using object codes. Object code 12 is used to
account for grants, subsidies, and contributions. We analyzed statewide
expenditures from all funding sources that were charged to object code 12 during
the six-year period from July 1, 2014 to June 30, 2020, which totaled $68.2
billion.
We excluded certain object 12 non-grant expenditures for subsidies and
contributions (such as, employer share of health insurance), grants that were
federally funded, and grants to local municipalities. In addition, we excluded
expenditures totaling $3.7 billion that were not related to State grants. For
example, we excluded $2.0 billion at the Department of Human Services related
to Child Support payments, foster care subsidies, funding to local departments of
social services and public assistance programs, and $1 billion at the Maryland
State Lottery related primarily to payments to lottery winners. Finally, our review
focused only on grants by Executive Department agencies. Our review did not
7

--- Page 10 ---
include grants by State Universities since we found these expenditures were
primarily financial aid to students or related to university sanctioned research.
After excluding the aforementioned expenditure activity, the remaining
expenditures subject to audit totaled $5.0 billion, which were primarily processed
at 22 State agencies (See Figure 1 for a summary of the State agency grant
expenditures subject to audit and see Exhibit 3 for a summary of the major grant
programs at the agencies).
8

--- Page 11 ---
Figure 1
Summary of State Grant Expenditures Subject to Audit
by State Agency
Fiscal Year 2015 to Fiscal Year 2020
(Dollar amounts in millions)
Grant Expenditures
State Agency
Operating Capital Total
1 Department of the Environment $692.0 $181.0 $873.0
2 Maryland State Department of Education 727.2 36.7 763.9
3 Department of General Services 2.4 508.7 511.1
4 Department of Natural Resources 128.2 361.6 489.8
5 Department of Commerce 302.4 4.0 306.4
6 Maryland Higher Education Commission 300.3 300.3
7 Maryland Department of Labor 282.2 282.2
8 Maryland Department of Agriculture 248.8 29.5 278.3
9 Department of Housing and Community Development 155.7 80.0 235.7
10 Maryland Department of Health 221.1 221.1
11 Maryland Energy Administration 131.7 131.7
12 Maryland Technology Development Corporation 121.5 121.5
13 Maryland Department of Transportation 111.6 111.6
14 Maryland State Library Agency 90.6 90.6
15 Department of Human Services 70.2 70.2
16 Board of Public Works 37.5 37.5
17 Maryland Health Benefit Exchange 30.7 30.7
18 Maryland Department of Planning 25.0 5.5 30.5
19 Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services 17.2 17.2
20 Maryland State Police 12.3 12.3
21 Office of the Attorney General 12.1 12.1
22 Executive Department Boards, Commissions, and Offices 10.6 10.6
23 Other Departments 16.7 0.2 16.9
TOTALS $3,748.0 $1,207.2 $4,955.2
Source: State records
9

--- Page 12 ---
We judgmentally selected 40 of these grants at 6 State agencies for testing based
on our assessment of risk and significance, and consideration of our coverage of
certain grant activity during our routine fiscal compliance audits of the respective
State agencies (for example, certain large grant programs historically are subject
to review during our regular fiscal compliance audits). The grants selected for
testing included awards totaling $206.8 million, and we tested related payments
totaling $69.5 million (see Figure 2).
Figure 2
Summary of Grants Selected for Testing
(Dollar amounts in millions)
Grants Tested
Type Grant Program Description Award Payments
Count
Amount Tested
Department of Human Services
Child Welfare - Substance Use Services and
Operating 2 $4.1 $0.7
Technical Assistance
Department of Commerce
Operating Promote Tourism 6 2.0 1.6
Maryland State Department of Education
Family Support Centers - Management and
Operating 2 5.3 3.0
Monitoring
Maryland Department of Labor
Maryland Employment Advancement Right Now
(EARN) - To advance the skills of the State's
Operating 15 4.3 0.6
workforce, grow the State's economy, and increase
sustainable employment for working families
Maryland Department of Health
Statewide Academic Health Center Research
Operating 2 5.2 2.1
Grants (SAHC) - Cancer Research
Department of General Services
Capital Construction and Renovation Projects 12 185.9 61.5
Totals 39 $206.8 $69.5
We conducted this audit under the authority of the State Government Article,
Section 2-1221 of the Annotated Code of Maryland and performed it in
accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards. Those
10

--- Page 13 ---
standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient,
appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and
conclusions based on our audit objectives. We believe that the evidence obtained
provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit
objectives.
Objectives and Methodology
Our audit included the following objectives:
1. To determine if the State has comprehensive policies and procedures
governing the awarding and administration of State grants, and to assess the
adequacy of those policies and procedures.
2. To determine if State agencies had appropriate mechanisms in place when
creating, awarding, and administering State grants to ensure adequate
accountability.
To accomplish our objectives, we conducted interviews of selected State agency
employees. We also conducted tests, analyses, and inspections of documents and
records to achieve our objectives. Finally, we performed other auditing
procedures that we considered necessary to achieve our audit objectives. The data
we obtained were subject to various tests to determine data reliability. Based on
these tests, we determined the data were sufficiently reliable for use in our audit.
Generally, grant agreements and related transactions were selected for testing
based on auditor judgment, which primarily considers risk, the timing or dollar
amount of the transaction, or the significance of the transaction to the area of
operation reviewed. As a matter of course, we do not normally use sampling in
our tests, so unless specifically indicated neither statistical nor non-statistical
audit sampling was used to select the agreements and related transactions tested.
Therefore, unless sampling is specifically indicated in a finding, the results from
any tests conducted or disclosed by us cannot be used to project those results to
the entire population from which the test items were selected.
Finally, to identify best practices regarding the management and monitoring of
State grants, we identified other states that, based on web searches, appeared to
have comprehensive policies and procedures for State grants. In addition, we
obtained a general understanding of federal government grant policies. See
Exhibit 4 for a summary of our research.
11

--- Page 14 ---
More detailed descriptions of the specific objectives and related methodologies
are discussed in the Findings and Recommendations section of this report.
In addition to the conditions included in this report, other less significant findings
were communicated to the Department of General Services and the Department of
Commerce that did not warrant inclusion in this report.
Fieldwork and Agencies’ Responses
Our fieldwork was completed during the period from January 2020 to March 2021
(the timing of this audit work was impacted by OLA scheduling considerations
related to COVID). The responses from the agencies selected for review during
this audit are included as an appendix to this report. As prescribed in the State
Government Article, Section 2-1224 of the Annotated Code of Maryland, we will
advise these agencies regarding the results of our review of their responses.
12

--- Page 15 ---
Background Information
Overview and Responsibilities for State Grants Awarded by
Executive Department Agencies
The State does not have a single agency designated to provide centralized
comprehensive oversight and guidance to agencies on how to manage and
monitor the State grants’ life cycles. Rather, each State agency or unit is
responsible for the management of its grants. Several State agencies and offices
(such as, the Governor’s Grants Office, Maryland Department of Planning,
Department of Budget and Management, and Department of General Services) are
responsible for overseeing a portion of the State grants life cycle as further
described below.
Governor's Grants Office (GGO)
GGO was created on February 1, 2004 through the State budget process under the
Office of the Governor with no specific responsibilities or requirements defined in
State law or regulations. Since inception, the GGO has assumed a limited role
involving State grants; essentially serving the public as a repository of available
State grants. Specifically, State agencies self-report information regarding
available grants to GGO for inclusion in a summary directory of State grant
information published on its website. The GGO’s website includes information
on each available grant such as the grant name, applicable state agency, and links
to additional information on the related State agency websites, such as program
descriptions, effective dates, available funding, and application instructions.
However, GGO advised us that State agencies are not required to notify them of
all available grants and it does not have statutory authority to require State agency
compliance.
Proactively, GGO has issued a Grants Manual, updated January 23, 2015, that
provides information on best practices and other federal grants information in one
reference document, which includes instructions and guidance for each stage of a
grant from pre-award to closeout. Although the Manual is primarily intended to
provide guidance on the federal grant processes, some of the content could be
useful to assist in the administration of State grants. For example, the Manual
explains methods for monitoring grants by State agencies that includes conducting
site visits to observe program activities and implementation. However, as with
the notification of available grants, State agencies are not required to adhere to
any best practices contained in the Manual.
13

--- Page 16 ---
Maryland Department of Planning (MDP)
The MDP State Clearinghouse for Intergovernmental Assistance (Clearinghouse)
coordinates the timeliness and accuracy of grant information, as required by State
law, with a network of more than 80 sponsoring State agencies. According to the
MDP website, the primary mission of the Clearinghouse is to ensure that financial
(including grants), and non-financial assistance projects operating within
Maryland are consistent with State and local policies and programs. This is
accomplished by circulating requests for financial assistance, plans and
development projects to State, regional, and local public officials. The
Clearinghouse provides access to information regarding these projects through the
Maryland InfoPortal, a digital catalog which contains links to over 700 programs
providing financial, non-financial and technical assistance and direct development
to local government, civic and private organizations, and individuals.
Department of Budget and Management (DBM)
DBM’s role in State grants is primarily limited to the budget process. DBM’s
Office of Capital Budgeting (OCB) prepares the Governor’s annual capital
budget, and five-year Capital Improvement Program, which includes numerous
State-owned construction projects and grant and loan programs. Each State
agency under its authority is assigned a capital budget analyst, who provides
technical assistance for the related budget submissions. OCB reviews and
approves facility plans, inspects sites, holds hearings, and prepares testimony for
presentation by Executive Department officials to the General Assembly for
capital projects that are funded by a grant as well as other funding. For example,
DBM reviews requests for community college construction grants and approves
the justification and scope of the project.
In addition, DBM, in conjunction with the Department of Information Technology
(DoIT), launched an internet portal during fiscal year 2019 that allows the public
to access expenditure data for the State operating budget, grants and loans, and
payment information by vendor. The portal provides interactive charts, graphs,
and tables. For example, in the grants and loans section of the portal, users can
review lists of recipients by amounts received, and amounts expended by each
State agency. For State grants, State agencies are only required to submit
expenditure data to DBM for individual grant awards with total payments of
$50,000 or more, and the portal does not include payments to local or State
government entities or reimbursements to providers in a State program.
Department of General Services (DGS) – Capital Grants
The Board of Public Works (BPW) has delegated the oversight function for State
capital grants awarded to non-profit organizations, local governments, private
colleges, hospitals, and detention centers to DGS (nevertheless, the Comptroller
14

--- Page 17 ---
of Maryland performs some financial responsibilities related to these grants).
These projects typically provide employment, community development, economic
gain, and contracting opportunities for local businesses. Funds for capital grants
are authorized through the State capital budget process. Government entities may
qualify for capital grants for a variety of projects such as funding the cost of
construction for public schools, community colleges, and correctional facilities.
Non-profit organizations such as historical sites, private colleges, and universities
and hospitals may also qualify for these grants in order to provide funding for
their capital costs.
The Joint Chairmen’s Report (JCR) from the 2021 Session, stated that the Capital
Grants and Loan (CGL) process administered by DGS, as delegated by the BPW,
is overly cumbersome, difficult for grant recipients to navigate, and results in
delayed access to authorized State grant funds and unnecessary project
implementation delays. The budget committees requested BPW undertake a full
evaluation of the CGL process with the purpose of developing and implementing
new and revised internal controls and procedures that enhance DGS’ project
management and the assistance the department provides to grant recipients. The
new and revised procedures should emphasize reducing the time it takes to bring
executed grant agreements to BPW for approval, and expediting the internal
review and documentation of project expenditures required prior to grant fund
disbursement determinations. The JCR did not provide a date for the
implementation of this request. BPW management advised us that as of
September 17, 2021, they had started working on the request and expected to
issue a report on their progress prior the start of the 2022 Legislative session.
Maryland Efficient Grant Application Council
Chapter 484, Laws of Maryland, effective July 1, 2020, established the Maryland
Efficient Grant Application Council to advise and report on matters involving the
grants life cycle to GGO and DBM. The Council’s members include employees
from key State agencies, including the Director of GGO, or designee, who shall
serve as the Chair of the Council.
The purpose of the Council is to improve efficiency, streamline and reduce
redundant processes, reduce paperwork and administrative burdens on granting
agencies and grant recipients, and facilitate the development and implementation
of a statewide centralized grants management and accountability system. The
Council is required to study and make recommendations to GGO and DBM
regarding the creation of:
 a uniform grant application form,
15

--- Page 18 ---
 uniform financial controls and reporting requirements for grant
recipients, including performance progress reporting,
 regulations adopting uniform guidance for grant activities,
 timeframes and deadlines for the various tasks related to grant activity.
The law requires the Council to submit a report on its full recommendations to
DBM and the General Assembly by July 1, 2024. The law further requires DBM
to submit progress reports to the General Assembly on or before December 31 of
the calendar years 2022 through 2026.
Common Types of State Grants
State grants help fund either operating activities or capital projects.
 Operating Grants are intended to provide funding for an organization's
administrative and operating costs, assist with strategic financial and
organizational capacity, and/or help maintain core programs and essential
staff.
 Capital Grants are intended for building construction, building renovation,
refurbishing, maintenance, land purchases, or the purchase of large
equipment such as building furnishings and materials.
Grants are generally awarded through one of five methods; competitive, formula,
pass-through, discretionary, or statutory. See Figure 3 below for a description of
these methods.
16

--- Page 19 ---
Figure 3
Common Methods for Awarding State Grants
Method Description
Grants are awarded based upon an evaluation of the grant applications and are awarded
Competitive to the most advantageous applicant. They include grants given for scientific research,
technical assistance grants, planning grants, etcetera.
Grants are awarded through a prescribed methodology (typically established in law or
Formula regulation) according to a predetermined formula. Often these grants are allocated
automatically based on the factors entered into the formula.
Grants are awarded based on funding provided by State agencies to local governments for
Pass-Through
further distribution. The funds can be provided through formulas or a competitive process.
State agencies decide how much money is to be granted to each recipient based upon the
Discretionary merit of the recipient’s application which, although not necessarily required, is typically
based on a competitive process.
Statutory grants receive authority from enacted laws or regulations that require agencies to
administer government programs. Some statutes require that an agency issue regulations
Statutory on a particular grant-related subject, while others leave enforcement decisions to the
agency in question. These grants are usually awarded based upon a formula or a
predetermine award amount for each grantee.
Source: GGO Grants Manual and general internet searches.
Grant Life Cycle
A typical grant life cycle includes pre-award stage and a post-award stage. Since
each grant may have different criteria and payment mechanisms, we present
examples under each stage that may represent actions taken by the awarding
agency of a competitive grant, but may not be applicable to all grants.
Figure 4
Grant Life Cycle
Pre-Award Post-Award
Creation Application Award Payments Monitoring Closeout
Source: GGO Grants Manual and general internet searches including Grants.gov (a federal government
website).
17

--- Page 20 ---
Creation
A State agency plans and develops a funding mechanism and then obtains an
appropriation in its budget. The agency will publish grant opportunities including
critical information to explain the application process, the purpose of the grant,
and necessary skills or requirements of prospective respondents.
Application
Prospective respondents complete and submit a grant application to the agency in
order to express their interest in obtaining the grant award. The agency reviews
and evaluates the applications. The specific processes vary based on the type of
grant but generally involve a review panel that assesses and scores each
application independently, then convenes to compare the merits of each
application.
Award
Based on their assessment of the applications, agencies select the applicant (or
multiple applicants) deemed most advantageous to complete the grant’s
responsibilities (or intended purpose), and notify the applicant of the award. The
agency will typically issue a written grant agreement to the applicant with the
details of the work to be conducted under the grant, the dollar amount of the
grant, and the effective period. The grant agreement, once signed by all parties, is
a legal document that binds the agency and grantee to the grant provisions.
Payment
Grantees request payment based on the terms of the grant agreement, such as on a
cost reimbursable basis or payments based on defined installments (monthly or
quarterly). Grantees may be required to submit documentation to support
activities that were performed and costs incurred. This documentation may be
reviewed prior to payment, and can be used by the agency for monitoring.
Monitoring
Agencies are responsible for monitoring grant activities to determine that the
grant purposes were achieved and the funds were spent appropriately. Agencies
may conduct various monitoring procedures such as:
 Reviewing required reports submitted by the grantee (financial and
programmatic) and verifying the information provided to ensure performance
measures were achieved,
 Conducting site visits to observe program activities and implementation,
 Conducting client surveys to determine if services were provided at a
satisfactory level.
18

--- Page 21 ---
Closeout
Typically, the grantee is required to submit final financial and programmatic
reports after the grant award expires or is terminated. At times, the grantee may
be required to submit audited financial statements to the agency. The agency
verifies the reports to ensure compliance with all the grant terms and conditions as
well as to ensure costs were appropriate. Certain grants require a settlement
process, where the agency pays amounts due or bills the grantee for amounts
owed.
19

--- Page 22 ---
Findings and Recommendations
Objective 1 — Guidance and Policies for State Grants
Objective: To determine if the State has comprehensive policies and
.p rocedures governing the awarding and administration of State grants,
and to assess the adequacy of those policies and procedures.
Methodology
To accomplish our objective, we performed the following procedures.
 We reviewed the Annotated Code of Maryland and State regulations to
identify applicable laws and regulations applicable to grants.
 We reviewed grant information on the websites of the key State agencies
previously identified in Figure 2.
 We interviewed personnel at several State agencies to determine if
comprehensive statewide policies and procedures existed to guide State
agencies in awarding and administering grants.
 We reviewed the websites of various federal government agencies and
other selected states to identify best practices, comprehensive policies, and
procedures that could be applicable to State grants. See Exhibit 4 for a
summary of our research.
 We judgmentally selected and obtained grant agreements at five state
agencies and tested to determine if they contained critical provisions that
we determined to be best practices
Conclusion
We determined that the State lacks comprehensive policies and procedures and
standardized grant applications and agreements to ensure grants were properly
created, awarded, and administered. Generally, individual State agencies (for
example, departments or units and programs within a larger department) are
responsible for establishing appropriate records and processes. As a result, we
noted inconsistencies in the way State agencies created, awarded, and
administered their grants, and critical provisions that were not included in certain
grant agreements.
We also determined that the State lacks a statewide grants management system
(GMS) to assist in administering and tracking of grant awards and related
expenditures. As a result, agencies use a variety of methods and tools, of
inconsistent effectiveness in our opinion, to award and monitor grants including
20

--- Page 23 ---
manual records, spreadsheets, databases, and other software. One noteworthy
event that occurred during our audit fieldwork, was that the Governor’s Grants
Office (GGO) recognized the need for a GMS and initiated the procurement of a
GMS in order to improve management of grant programs. However, related
policies and procedures were not yet finalized during the audit fieldwork, and we
found that GGO still lacked formal authority to mandate grant reporting,
administration, and monitoring policies and best practices.
Finding 1
The State does not have statewide comprehensive laws, regulations, policies
or procedures governing the creation, award, and administration of State
grants.
Analysis
The State does not have statewide comprehensive laws, regulations, policies, or
procedures governing the creation, award, and administration of State grants.
Grants represent a fiscal relationship between the State and the grantee similar to
a contract with a vendor. Although there are comprehensive laws and regulations
for all aspects of contract procurement and administration, similar laws and
regulations were not in place for grants to help safeguard the State’s interests, and
available guidance was minimal. For example the Comptroller of Maryland’s
Accounting Procedures Manual provides limited direction for establishing
controls over grant activity, and the Manual does not have specific directions for
determining when a State grant is appropriate instead of a State contract for
achieving desired results.
We identified certain elements from our past grant-related findings (see Exhibit
1), various grant agreement best practices, and several key criteria that were
included in State law and regulations for contracts for which similar criteria did
not exist in any statewide policy for grants. We believe that additional guidance
regarding these elements and criteria would be useful in establishing appropriate
accountability over State grants, including the following examples.
 Public solicitation and award of grants
 Conflict of interest prohibitions
 Requirements for grantee submission of supporting documents of their
grant expenditures and deliverables
 Sub-grantee reporting and accountability requirements
 Requirement for use of minority businesses
 Grant performance measurements
 Monitoring requirements (such as site visits, annual reporting, audited
financial statements)
21

--- Page 24 ---
In addition, we reviewed several states that had comprehensive laws, regulations,
policies, or procedures for awarding and monitoring grants (see Exhibit 4). For
example, Texas has policies addressing grant awards, such as requirements to
consider minority business vendors in certain instances, as well as sub-grantee
requirements. Texas and Arizona both require publishing notice of certain grant
awards.
All the states we reviewed had some standard requirements for the award process
and generally had more comprehensive requirements and guidelines for
monitoring grants than Maryland. For example, Minnesota requires agencies to
develop procedures and templates to document their monitoring process, and also
requires state agency site visits to grantees for all state grants over $50,000.
Finally, Arizona requires each granting agency to monitor their grantees based on
standardized criteria and is required to perform site visits to ensure grant funds are
being used as intended. Consequently, we concluded sufficient, third-party
evidence existed of best practices that Maryland should emulate to improve its
own grant-related policies and processes.
Recommendation 1
We recommend the GGO and DBM, under the direction of the Maryland
Efficient Grant Application Council, develop a statewide framework which
encompasses comprehensive laws, regulations, and formal policies and
procedures for awarding and administering grants (including the key
elements/criteria mentioned above).
Finding 2
The State does not have standardized grant applications and grant
agreements. As a result, we noted critical provisions that were not included
in certain State agencies’ grant agreements.
Analysis
The State does not have standardized grant applications and grant agreements. As
a result, we noted what we consider to be critical provisions that were not
included in certain agencies’ grant agreements. We reviewed a number of grant
agreements at five State agencies, certain of which were either agency or an
agency’s grant specific standardized template, to determine if nine provisions we
deemed critical were included in the agreements. These nine provisions are
required for State contracts and we believe these provisions are necessary for
ensuring the State is protected when awarding grants, in a similar fashion to
contracts.
22

--- Page 25 ---
As noted in Figure 5, our review disclosed that each agency lacked one or more of
the critical provisions including one agency (MSDE) that lacked 8 of the 9
provisions. A statewide uniform grant application and agreement could aid in
establishing consistency, and include standard mandatory grant provisions
applicable to all State agencies, as well as an agency-specific section customized
to the specifications of each grant program (as deemed necessary). Additionally,
separate standardized applications and agreements could be tailored to meet the
specific need for different types of grants; for example, grants for capital
construction may require different provisions than grants to non-profit
organizations.
As previously stated, the GGO and DBM each have a have limited role for State
grants, and neither has legal authority over other State agencies’ grant activity.
We believe that DBM’s role in the budget process could be useful in helping to
ensure that grant agreements include such language to protect the State’s interest.
For example, since DBM is responsible for approving operating and capital
budgets, including grant activity, it could have policies regarding inclusion of
certain critical provisions for grant agreements.
Figure 5
Critical Provisions Missing from Grant Agreements
(Missing provision indicated by “”)
State Agency
Provisions
MSDE DOC DHS DGS MDL
Non-hiring of State Employees  
Dispute Resolution Procedures  
Termination Clause for Default 
Termination Clause for Convenience   
Political Contribution Disclosures  
Approval for Legal Sufficiency   
Conflict of Interest   
Liquidated Damages    
Sub-grantee Requirements    
TOTAL 8 7 3 2 2
23

--- Page 26 ---
Recommendation 2
We recommend the GGO and DBM, under the direction of the Maryland
Efficient Grant Application Council, work to develop a uniform grant
application and agreement that incorporate critical mandatory provisions
(including the provisions mentioned above) and require State agencies to use
these documents.
Finding 3
The State did not have a statewide grants management system to help
administer and track grant awards and related expenditures.
Analysis
The State did not have a statewide grants management system (GMS) to help
administer and track grant awards and related expenditures. A statewide GMS
would provide a centralized record of all State grants and could improve statewide
grant management by enabling State agencies to record grant awards, various
approvals, and grantee monitoring documentation. Consequently, we found
agencies were using a variety of methods to award and monitor grants including
manual records, electronic spreadsheets, databases, and other software. As
highlighted in the audit findings under Objective 2, we believe that certain
omissions or deficiencies in these various methods could negatively impact the
effectiveness of the monitoring of grants.
In addition, although most agencies recorded grant expenditures in the State’s
Financial Management Information System (FMIS), approximately $2.6 billion
(52 percent) of the $5.0 billion State grant expenditures we identified previously
(see Figure 1 in the Audit Scope, Objectives and Methodology section) were
recorded as miscellaneous grants (“1299 - Other Grants”). According to the
Comptroller of Maryland Accounting Procedures Manual, this code is intended
for recordation of costs that cannot be attributed to other more specific object 12
codes (such as, education or health grants).1 We also identified one State agency
(DGS) that in fiscal years 2016 through 2020 incorrectly recorded capital grants
totaling approximately $294.9 million as “1210 – Pension System Grants.”
Recordation of expenditures in an incorrect sub-object, including significant use
of the 1299 sub-object, does not provide the necessary granularity to determine
the nature of the grant activity.
Realizing the need for a GMS to manage federal and State grant programs, on
October 14, 2020, DoIT, on behalf of GGO, issued a Request for Proposal for
1 See Exhibit 2 for Comptroller Object Code 12 - Sub-object Definitions and Descriptions.
24

--- Page 27 ---
such a system. The scope of the GMS was to include managing grants in all
phases of the grant life cycle; including the pre-award, award, post award,
monitoring, and closeout. GGO management advised that they are anticipating a
contract award in December 2021.
Based on our research of other states GMS solutions, some of the critical
functionality of the future GMS related to Maryland State grants should include:
 interfacing with FMIS and other State information systems;
 creating and disseminating grant award packages, including but not limited to,
letter of notice of award, terms and conditions, payment method;
 submitting reports on any aspect of the monitoring phase relevant to the grant,
including site visits;
 generating various ad-hoc reports and data mining features on any aspect of
grants;
 tracking and monitoring direct and indirect costs;
 monitoring sub-grantees;
 a repository of grant award and monitoring documents (such as, applications,
audits, and financial and performance data).
GGO personnel indicated that there are currently no legal requirements for State
agencies to use the GMS when it becomes operational. However, the GGO plans
on incorporating such a requirement in the Maryland Efficient Grant Application
Council recommendations. We were advised by GGO personnel that other states
such as Illinois and Arizona use GMS applications to formally manage their
federal and State grant programs.
Recommendation 3
We recommend that the GGO and DBM, under the direction of the
Maryland Efficient Grant Application Council,
a. procure and implement a comprehensive GMS;
b. take appropriate action to ensure that agencies are required to use the
GMS; and
c. develop the necessary policies, procedures, and regulations to ensure the
GMS is used as intended.
25

--- Page 28 ---
Objective 2 – State Grant Award and Monitoring Processes at
Selected Agencies
Objective: To determine if State agencies had appropriate mechanisms in
place when creating, awarding, and administering State grants to ensure
adequate accountability.
Methodology
As explained in the Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology section on page 7,
this audit was initiated by OLA as a result of concerns identified during our
routine fiscal compliance audits of state agencies, which reported various findings
related to the creating, awarding, and administering of State grants. See Exhibit 1
for a summary of the State grant findings identified in our reports issued during
the period July 1, 2015 to December 31, 2020 (excluding State Universities and
the Judicial Branch). Our review of these reports disclosed 26 findings primarily
related to grant awards and monitoring at 14 State agencies. For example, our
Special Review of the Opioid Operational Command Center (OOCC) issued on
February 7, 2020 disclosed issues with OOCC’s procedures for awarding,
monitoring, and accounting for grants and questionable activities relating to grant
awards to combat the opioid crisis in Maryland.
To accomplish our objective, we first summarized grant expenditures by State
agency as shown in Figure 1. Next, we identified grant programs at these
agencies by reviewing financial data in the State budget books, the State’s FMIS,
and contacting agency personnel. Based on our determination of the grant
activity, types of grants, coverage of these grants during our recent audits of State
agencies, and our assessment of risk, we judgmentally selected 40 grants at 6
State agencies for testing. The grant awards selected for testing totaled $206.8
million and we tested related grant payments totaling $69.5 million (see Figure 2).
We did not always test the award and related expenditures for each grant. For
example, if the grant was awarded prior to fiscal year 2015, we only tested the
expenditures that have been later paid by the State agency. Our general approach
to testing the selected grants included the following procedures.
Pre-Award
We reviewed grant award procedures at selected State agencies to determine if
they had formal written procedures and, if so, whether those procedures provide
sufficient guidance for the process. For example, we reviewed agency procedures
to determine if they required the recipient of capital grant funds to conduct
competitive solicitations when subsequently selecting vendors, when applicable.
We obtained award documentation from each agency for the grants selected for
26

--- Page 29 ---
testing and determined if the award process was adequate, (that is, the basis of the
award was reasonable), advertised, documented, and properly approved. For
example, grants are typically approved directly by the legislature or through the
budget process, and most capital grants require BPW approval.
Post-Award
We judgmentally selected grant expenditures for our tested grants, and obtained
related documentation from the respective State agencies. We discussed grant
expenditure payment procedures with the applicable agency personnel and
conducted the following steps.
Capital Grants (DGS)
 Reviewed documentation on file to determine if the grantee selected
vendors through a competitive method.
 Ensured that signed contracts existed between the grantee and any
vendors.
 Confirmed the agency verified that grant payments were made in
accordance with the agreement prior to approval for payment.
Operating Grants (DHS, DOC, MSDE, MDL, MDH)
 Determined if the agency adequately monitored the grantee to ensure that
goods and/or services were provided in accordance with the related grant
agreement.
 Reviewed the grant language to understand the specific deliverables
unique to each grant. For example, certain grantees were required to
provide qualified personnel to conduct programmatic research and other
grantees funded organizations to operate programs, such as campaigns to
increase tourism or to teach skills to the workforce. We reviewed the
methods used by the respective agency to monitor compliance with the
grant agreement and ensure payments were made in accordance with the
agreement.
Conclusion
Our testing of 40 grants at 6 State agencies disclosed that State grants were not
always adequately advertised, awarded, and administered (similar findings were
reported upon at other State agencies during prior fiscal compliance audits,
providing further evidence of certain common deficiencies in the grant process).
We concluded the following:
27

--- Page 30 ---
 Certain agencies, (DGS, DOC, MDL, and DHS) lacked comprehensive
policies and/or procedures over the grant award process resulting in grants
awarded without competition. For example, based on our test of 6 capital
grants awarded by DGS totaling $32.3 million, DGS did not require grant
recipients to conduct and document competitive solicitations when using grant
funds to pay for services from vendors. As a result, recipient sub-awards may
not be made in the best interest of the State (that is, State grant funds may not
have been spent in the most efficient or effective manner).
 DOC - Office of Tourism Development did not have adequate procedures or
guidelines for evaluating discretionary grant applications and determining the
award amounts. For two grants tested totaling $625,000, DOC did not
document the methodology used to evaluate the grant applications or
document how the grant award amount was determined.
 DGS did not require or ensure that documented site visits were conducted for
capital grants. Failure to adequately conduct and document site visits of
grantees could expose the State to unnecessary and avoidable litigation2,
excessive expenditures, overreliance on unverified grantee reporting, and
could result in construction delays.
 DGS, DOC, and DHS did not maintain documentation to support grant
payments totaling approximately $22.3 million. In addition, MSDE and DHS
made payments totaling $182,000 and $37,000, respectively that were not in
accordance with the related grant agreements.
Finding 4
Individual agencies awarded certain grants without competition and
required documentation was not always available to support the propriety of
the award, including one award which was not calculated correctly.
Analysis
DOC, MDL, and DHS awarded grants without ensuring grantees used a
competitive procurement to obtain the services of vendors, and documentation
was not always available to support the propriety of the original State grant
award. In the absence of statewide requirements for competition, we reviewed the
award process for certain grants at State agencies selected for testing and found
the following conditions at three agencies.
2 For example, if site visits were not performed, improper changes to the construction or
substitution of materials would not be identified timely and the vendor may have already been
paid for related work. In such a case, litigation may be necessary to obtain a remedy.
28

--- Page 31 ---
Department of Commerce (DOC)
DOC did not use a competitive method to award discretionary tourism grants.
Rather, DOC management advised us that the awards were based on conclusions
reached during internal management meetings. DOC could not provide
documentation of these meetings or support how the grantees were selected and
award amounts were calculated.
Our test of two discretionary tourism grants totaling $625,000 disclosed that one
grantee submitted a grant application budget for eligible costs totaling $386,500,
but DOC awarded this grantee $500,000 ($113,500 more that the amount
supported). DOC advised us that it incorrectly included ineligible costs from the
application in its determination of the grant award amount. For the other grant
totaling $125,000, DOC could not document how the award amount was
determined and the application did not include a list of eligible costs as required.
DOC’s written policy for discretionary grants requires grantees to submit an
application that includes the purpose of the event, background or history of the
event, marketing plan, amount of the request, total budget, and an explanation of
how grant funds will be used.
Maryland Department of Labor (MDL)
MDL did not notify all grantees that received Maryland Employment
Advancement Right Now (EARN) grant awards of the opportunity to receive
supplemental grant funds. MDL policy requires MDL to notify existing grantees
of the opportunity to apply for supplemental funds as they become available
during the year. Supplemental awards represent the majority of the EARN grant
funds awarded. According to MDL’s records, during fiscal years 2017 through
2020, $21.9 million of the $27.3 million EARN grant funds awarded were
supplemental awards.
Our review of supplemental grants awarded in 2019 disclosed that MDL only
notified 10 of the then existing 56 EARN grantees of the opportunity to apply for
these supplemental funds. According to MDL records, 9 of the 10 grantees that
applied received $2.2 million in 2019.
Department of Human Services (DHS)
Our review of one $3.0 million grant to provide technical assistance for child
welfare strategies disclosed that DHS did not publicly solicit applications for this
grant. DHS management advised us that it did not solicit applications because it
believed the services provided by its current grantee were exceptional and the
vendor is nationally recognized for its expertise in the area of child welfare.
29

--- Page 32 ---
Although there might be justification for such awards, DHS had not documented
its rationale or basis for the award, which precluded us from assessing its
reasonableness.
Recommendation 4
We recommend that DOC, MDL, and DHS implement comprehensive
policies and procedures over the grant award process to include a
requirement for public competitive solicitation, if applicable, and prepare
and retain all documentation to support the award process.
Finding 5
DGS did not ensure that grantees submitted required documents to explain
or support the basis used to select vendors to work on certain capital projects
funded by State capital grants. In addition, DGS did not perform
documented routine site visits to ensure capital projects funded with State
grants were progressing in accordance with the terms of the contract(s)
funded by the grants.
Analysis
DGS did not ensure that grantees submitted required documents to explain or
support the basis used to select vendors to work on certain capital projects funded
by State capital grants. In addition, DGS did not perform or otherwise require site
visits to ensure capital projects funded with State grants were progressing in
accordance with the related contract terms. Consequently, there was no assurance
that State monies awarded as grants were expended in an economical or efficient
manner by the grantees. Our review of the awards process for 6 grants totaling
$32.3 million awarded during fiscal year 2017 through 2019 disclosed the
following conditions.
 DGS did not obtain required procurement documentation from grantees to
support the basis for selecting vendors working under these grants, thus
making it difficult to determine if the vendors were selected via a competitive
procurement process. The DGS Maryland Capital Grants Project Manual
provides that grantees are to provide the basis for the selection of each vendor,
including the name, address, bid amount (or score), and any other selection
criteria used by the grantee.
Although the Manual encourages grantees to use competition, DGS advised
us they do not have authority to require grantees to procure services through
competition, and would need authorization from BPW or a law change.
30

--- Page 33 ---
 DGS could not document the extent to which it conducted site visits to ensure
capital projects funded with State grants were progressing in accordance with
the related contracts. DGS advised us that limited site visits were performed
for some projects, but could not provide supporting documentation of the
visits, the dates the visits were performed, or the related results. DGS
management advised us that it did not have a formal policy or process
requiring site visits because it does not have the necessary personnel resources
to conduct the visits.
Our review of other states’ grant processes disclosed that site visits by State
oversight agencies were incorporated into several states’ grant monitoring
process. For example, Minnesota requires grantor agencies to perform site
visits for monitoring purposes for all State grants over $50,000. A
comprehensive site visit policy should include criteria regarding the
frequency, content and timing of required site visits, documentation of visit
results, as well as the process for the grantee to take corrective actions when
issues are identified.
Recommendation 5
We recommend that DGS
a. work, in conjunction with the BPW, to obtain the necessary authority to
require grantees to conduct competitive solicitations for their selection of
vendors performing work on capital projects;
b. require grantees to submit support for their vendor selection, as
required; and
c. in conjunction with the GGO and DBM, establish a comprehensive site
visit policy for all State capital grants, which includes requirements for
the frequency, content and timing of the visits, documentation of the
results, and steps for taking corrective action when issues are identified;
and seek additional resources, as necessary to implement the policy.
Finding 6
Certain State agencies did not maintain documentation to support grant
payments totaling approximately $22.3 million and made payments totaling
$220,000 that were not in accordance with the related grant agreement.
Analysis
Certain State agencies (DGS, DHS, and DOC) did not maintain adequate
documentation to support the propriety of certain grant payments and two
agencies (DHS and MSDE) made payments that were not in accordance with the
related grant agreement. We tested 39 grant payments made by 6 agencies
31

--- Page 34 ---
totaling $69.5 million (primarily during fiscal years 2019 and 2020). Our test and
subsequent follow up disclosed the following conditions for 9 payments totaling
approximately $22.5 million.
Department General Services (DGS)
DGS could not provide us documentation to support two payments totaling
approximately $21.3 million made in September 2018 for a community college
capital project. In response to our inquiries, DGS obtained the documentation
from the grantee in October 2020 (two years after the payments), which we
concluded did adequately support the payments. For example, DGS obtained
documentation of check payments made by the grantee to pay construction
vendors.
Department of Human Service (DHS)
DHS did not obtain sufficient documentation to support four payments totaling
$661,600 made to two grantees in May and June 2020. Under the terms of the
agreements, payments to the grantees were primarily based on the actual time
spent and the salary costs of the applicable grantee personnel. However, DHS did
not obtain approved time records from the grantees, did not compare the billed
charges to the grantee’s payroll records, even on a test basis, and did not verify
the billed rates were in accordance with the related agreements. In addition, we
found that DHS paid $37,000 for 9 individuals who were not named in the grant
agreement, and could not provide support that it approved these individuals to
work on the grant, as required by the agreement.
Department of Commerce (DOC)
DOC did not obtain documentation for a $373,200 payment to a local government
for tourism marketing (to include print, television, and/or radio advertising) on a
fiscal year 2020 grant. DOC awarded a grant to each of the 23 counties,
Baltimore City, and Ocean City for the purpose of attracting visitors to the State,
and our review of 2 grants to local governments disclosed that DOC reimbursed
one of the grantees $373,200 for television advertisements without obtaining
documentation that the advertisements were aired, as required. DOC’s Direct
Marketing Organization Grant Guidelines requires grantees to submit
documentation in order to be reimbursed, including the dates of the
advertisements and a copy of the advertisements on electronic storage media.
DOC advised us that it typically did not obtain such support.
Maryland State Department of Education (MSDE)
Our testing disclosed MSDE made an advanced payment totaling $91,000 (for a
fiscal year 2020 grant) when the grant agreements only allowed for payments on a
reimbursable basis. Further review for a similar grant (fiscal year 2021) disclosed
32

--- Page 35 ---
an additional advance payment, bringing the total advanced payments noted to
$182,000. MSDE advised us that it made the advance payments because the
grantee had requested the payments in order to provide the necessary services.
The two grants totaled $1.2 million collectively during fiscal years 2020 and
2021.
Recommendation 6
We recommend the aforementioned State agencies
a. ensure all required documentation is obtained to support all grant
payments, including those payments noted above;
b. ensure payments are made in accordance with the terms and conditions
of the grant agreements; and
c. take appropriate corrective action for any grant payments that cannot be
supported.
33

--- Page 36 ---
Exhibit 1 Page 1 of 3
Summary of State Grant Findings in OLA Audit Reports Issued
July 1, 2015 to December 31, 2020
Grant
Audit Finding Life Cycle
Component
Maryland Energy Administration (MEA) – Report Issued December 16, 2020
Finding 1 – MEA did not have written policies and procedures for applying grant
criteria when evaluating discretionary grant applications and for determining the Award
amounts to be awarded.
Maryland Department of Agriculture (MDA) – Report Issued December 14, 2020
Finding 1 – MDA had not established comprehensive procedures for Soil
Conservation Districts to perform inspections of farms in the Cover Crop Program,
did not adequately monitor the inspections, and did not take required action when Monitoring
inspections identified grantees that were noncompliant with the related grant
agreement.
Opioid Operational Command Center (OOCC) - Report Issued February 7, 2020
Finding 1 – OOCC did not have written policies and procedures for the selection of
grantees, amounts awarded, and the monitoring of grantees. We noted numerous Award and
deficiencies with the grant process that raised questions about the overall integrity Monitoring
of grant awards and related payments.
Finding 2 – OOCC did not have adequate justification for a $750,000 grant
Award
awarded to a nonprofit organization for the purchase of a former country club and
golf course.
Finding 3 – OOCC awarded a $100,000 grant to an out-of-state nonprofit
organization that transferred almost all the funds to a for-profit company owned by
senior management of the nonprofit; neither of which were registered to conduct
Award and
business in the State of Maryland. In addition, the payment rate paid to the
Monitoring
nonprofit was higher than the rate included in the grant proposal, without a
reasonable explanation, and more than half of the required services were not
provided.
Finding 4 – OOCC awarded a $40,959 grant to a nonprofit organization that was
not consistent with the related grant proposal. In addition, purchases specified in Award and
the grant agreement appeared to have no correlation to the related performance Monitoring
measures, and certain grant expenditures appeared questionable.
Executive Department: Office of the Governor – Report Issued November 12, 2019
Finding 1 – The Governor’s Office of Crime Control and Prevention did not have a
Award and
comprehensive methodology for awarding certain Local Law Enforcement grants,
Monitoring
and did not verify expenditure and performance data reported by grantees.
34

--- Page 37 ---
Exhibit 1 Page 2 of 3
Summary of State Grant Findings in OLA Audit Reports Issued
July 1, 2015 to December 31, 2020
Grant Life
Audit Findings
Cycle
Component
Department of Commerce (DOC) – Report Issued September 4, 2019
Finding 4 – DOC did not have an established process to ensure that Maryland E-
Nnovation Initiative Fund recipients secured and deposited required private funding Monitoring
and that the related expenditures were made for qualified purposes.
Finding 5 – DOC had not established effective procedures and controls over the
Monitoring
Maryland State Arts Council’s Grants for Organizations program.
Finding 6 – DOC did not have a process to ensure that fund manager agreements
Monitoring
included critical details relating to loan underwriting processes.
Finding 7 – DOC did not establish an effective process to verify fund manager
Monitoring
compensation.
Finding 8 – DOC did not verify data reported by fund managers relating to their
Monitoring
efforts to meet certain specific program lending goals.
Maryland Department of Health: Behavioral Health Administration (BHA) – Report Issued July 9,
2019
Finding 1 – BHA did not adequately monitor grantees to verify actual performance
Monitoring
as required by the grant agreements. In addition, BHA’s monitoring of the grantees
did not ensure that the required mental health and substance use disorder services
were provided to clients.
Maryland State Department of Education (MSDE) – Report Issued July 2, 2019
Finding 3 – MSDE did not verify the accuracy of grantee expenditure data and
Monitoring
performance reports, and did not conduct comprehensive site visits of grantees.
Department of Disabilities (DOD) – Report Issued June 26, 2019
Finding 1 – DOD did not include sufficient details in its annual grant agreements
with one grantee to enable effective monitoring of the grant and did not document Monitoring
that it verified performance of required work by the grantee.
Department of Human Services: Family Investment Administration (FIA) – Report Issued March
21, 2019
Finding 7 – FIA did not verify that certain grant funds were spent as intended. Monitoring
Maryland Health Benefit Exchange (MHBE) – Report Issued October 30, 2018
Finding 6 – MHBE did not verify the propriety of payroll expenditures reported by
Monitoring
one of the seven Connector Program grantees.
Department of Human Services (DHS): Office of the Secretary and Related Units – Report Issued
September 12, 2017
Finding 5 – DHS lacked sufficient procedures and accountability over certain Monitoring
grants.
35

--- Page 38 ---
Exhibit 1 Page 3 of 3
Summary of State Grant Findings in OLA Audit Reports Issued
July 1, 2015 to December 31, 2020
Grant Life
Audit Finding Cycle
Component
Maryland Department of Aging (MDOA) – Report Issued March 9, 2017
Finding 1 – MDOA lacked a comprehensive policy and did not adequately
document annual financial reviews of Area Agencies on Aging (AAAs) it Monitoring
conducted to ensure the appropriate use of State grant funds.
Finding 2 – MDOA did not conduct all required site visits of AAAs to monitor
Senior Assisted Living Group Home Subsidy and Senior Care program activity, and
Monitoring
there was a lack of evidence that deficiencies noted during site visits conducted
were communicated to the applicable AAAs for corrective action.
Finding 3 – MDOA did not ensure that administrative costs incurred by AAAs for
Monitoring
the Senior Care grant program were within the required spending limits.
Maryland Department of Transportation (MDOT): Secretary’s Office – Report Issued February 1,
2016
Finding 1 – MDOT did not establish an adequate process to verify that Washington
Metropolitan Area Transit Authority operating and capital grant award amounts Award and
were properly calculated, and had not audited the grants provided beyond fiscal Monitoring
year 2009.
Department of Housing and Community Development (DHCD) – Report Issued November 16,
2015
Finding 2 – DHCD did not maintain complete documentation of the proposal
evaluation process for certain Home Owners Preserving Equity and Neighborhood Award
Conservation Initiative (NCI) grants.
Finding 3 – DHCD lacked written procedures for performing and documenting
Monitoring
program compliance monitoring of NCI grants.
Department of Commerce (DOC) (formerly the Department of Business and Economic
Development) – Report Issued October 9, 2015
Finding 10 – Procedures and controls over the award and disbursement of program Award and
grants were not adequate. Monitoring
Maryland Health Benefit Exchange (MHBE) – Report Issued October 2, 2015
Finding 3 – MHBE had not verified the propriety of grant expenditures for the Grant
Connector Program paid with State general funds and federal funds. Monitoring
36

--- Page 39 ---
Exhibit 2 Page 1 of 2
Comptroller Object Code 12 - Sub-object Definitions and Descriptions
Sub- Included
object Definition Description in Audit
Code Scope
Social Security To record the grant for non-State employees for the
1201 Contributions employer's share of social security payments based on No
Grants effective rate and base as provided by federal law.
Aid To Political Subsidies, gratuities, and other aid paid by a State
1202 No
Subdivisions agency to a political subdivision.
To record employer's share of the health insurance
Health And subsidy payable to the health insurance carrier on non-
1203 No
Insurance Grants State employees enrolled in the health insurance
program.
Payments distributed to persons designated and covered
1204 Educational Grants No
under an educational grant.
Payments to inmates who are not paid under salaries and
1205 Inmate Payments No
wages.
Grants Other State
Grants given to various State agencies by another State
1206 Government No
agency acting as a grantor.
Programs/Agencies
Grants To Non-
Grants given to non-governmental entities in which
1207 Governmental Yes
the State agency acts as a grantor.
Entities
All indirect costs including fringe benefits, departmental
management support and central services such as central
Statewide Cost
1208 payroll, accounting, and personnel administration costs No
Allocation
chargeable to State agencies receiving federal, special,
and non-budgeted funds.
Employees' To record employer's contributions on non-State
1209 Retirement System employees enrolled in the Employees' Retirement No
Grants System.
Employees' To record employer's contributions on non-State
12103 Pension System employees enrolled in the Employees' Pension Yes
Grants System.
Teachers'
To record contributions on non-State employees enrolled
1211 Retirement System No
in the Teachers' Retirement System.
Grants
Teachers' Pension To record contributions on non-State employees enrolled
1212 No
System Grants in the Teachers' Pension System.
3 We identified one State agency that incorrectly recorded capital grant expenditures totaling
approximately $294.9 million in sub-object 1210. Therefore, we included expenditures from this
sub-object in our audit scope.
37

--- Page 40 ---
Exhibit 2 Page 2 of 2
Comptroller Object Code 12 - Sub-Object Definitions and Descriptions
Sub- Included
object Definition Description in Audit
Code Scope
To record employer's contributions on non-State
Opt Retirement/ employees enrolled in the Teacher Insurance Annuity
1213
Pension System Association (TIAA) Retirement System, the TIAA tax No
Grants deferred retirement system, the TIAA pension system,
and the TIAA tax deferred pension system.
Public Assistance To record all payments to persons receiving public
1214 No
Payments assistance.
Taxable
1288 Agricultural Payment taxable agricultural payments. Yes
Payments 1099g
Energy Efficiency
1291 Improvement Payments for energy rebates. No
Rebates
Grants To
Individuals /
1294 Payments for individual/taxable 1099MISC. Yes
Taxable
1099MISC
Corporate
1295 Credit card expenses – Other. No
Purchasing Cards
Grants For This sub-object is to be used by the Department of
1296 Yes
Subsidized Rents Housing and Community Development.
Grants To Health Any grants, subsidies, or contributions paid to health
1297 Yes
Providers related organizations (excluding hospitals).
Taxable Grants, Any grants, subsidies, or contributions made to
1298 Contributions individuals, sole proprietors, or partnerships which Yes
1099g are considered as taxable income for such entities.
Any other grants, subsidies, and contributions costs
Other Grants, which cannot be specifically identified to another sub-
1299 Subsidies & object. The Department of Budget and Management's Yes
Contributions Office of Budget Analysis should be consulted before
using this sub-object code.
Source: Comptroller of Maryland Accounting Procedures Manual
38

--- Page 41 ---
Exhibit 3 Page 1 of 6
Major Grant Programs at Selected State Agencies in Figure 1
Expenditures from Fiscal Year 2015 to Fiscal Year 2020
(amounts in millions)
Expenditures Description of Major Grant Programs
1. Department of the Environment (MDE)
$772.4 Bay Restoration Fund (Wastewater) - Grants for upgrading, operating, and maintaining Maryland’s wastewater
treatment plants with enhanced nutrient removal technology.
$55.1 Bay Restoration Fund (Septic) - Grants to replace old septic tanks with improved systems.
$45.5 Other - Miscellaneous grant programs.
$873.0
2. Maryland State Department of Education (MSDE)
$249.0 Public Libraries and Library Network - Grants to help fund operations and improvements at Maryland’s
libraries. Effective July, 1, 2017, the State created the Maryland State Library Agency (MSL) to award and monitor
these grants (see comments below under agency number 14 MSL).
$132.8 Maryland School for the Blind - Grant to fund the operations which provide enhanced services for blind students
who have other severe disabilities.
$90.0 SEED School of Maryland - Grant to fund Baltimore City’s residential boarding school.
$42.7 Students with Disabilities - Grants to support the placement of students in nonpublic special education programs
when the State nor local agencies can provide an appropriate program. Funding for the Autism Waiver Program
which provides services to children with autism spectrum disorder. Funding for the Maryland Infants and Toddlers
Program which directs a family-centered system of early intervention services for young children with
developmental delays and disabilities and their families.
$39.8 Early Childhood Development - Grants to improve early education in Maryland so that young children are well
prepared for school.
$37.3 State Aided Institutions - Provides annual grants to nonprofit organizations to provide enriching educational
programs that cannot be replicated in the classroom.
$31.5 Healthy Families America - Home visiting program designed to promote health and development to the families
throughout the communities.
$140.8 Other miscellaneous grant programs.
$763.9
3. Department of General Services (DGS)
Capital Projects (Various) - Grants for various projects funded through a Legislative Bond Initiative, an
$315.0 administration initiative as part of the Maryland Consolidated Capital Bond Loan (MCCBL), or in the Governor's
budget.
The Community College Construction Grant Program - Administers grant funds to local and regional
$193.7 community colleges to assist with the building process to include acquisition, design, construction/renovation, and
furniture.
$2.4 Other miscellaneous grant programs.
$511.1
4. Department of Natural Resources (DNR)
$165.6 Program Open Space - Grants todevelop and grow State parks and forests through new land purchases. Assists
local governments in purchasing a developing recreational land and open space areas.
$104.8 Program Development and Operation - Grants for planting trees along riversides, building wetlands, and
reforesting open fields.
$81.4 Chesapeake and Atlantic Coastal Bays - Grants provide financial assistance for Maryland’s progress in restoring
the Chesapeake Bay and other waterways.
39

--- Page 42 ---
Exhibit 3 Page 2 of 6
Major Grant Programs at Selected State Agencies in Figure 1
Expenditures from Fiscal Year 2015 to Fiscal Year 2020
(amount in millions)
Expenditures Description of Major Grant Programs
$81.0 Rural Legacy Program - Grants to preserve large, contiguous tracts of land and to enhance natural resource,
agricultural, forestry, and environmental protection while supporting a sustainable land base for natural resource
based industries.
$18.6 Community Parks and Playgrounds - Grants to provide assistance to rehabilitate, expand or improve existing
parks, create new parks, develop environmentally oriented parks and recreation projects, or purchase and install
playground equipment in older neighborhoods and intensely developed areas throughout the State.
$11.9 Waterway Improvement Fund - Grants for projects which improve and promote the recreational and commercial
capabilities, conditions, and safety of Maryland’s waterways for the benefit of the general boating public.
$26.5 Other miscellaneous grant programs.
$489.8
5. Department of Commerce (DOC)
Maryland State Arts Council - Encourages and invests in advancement of the arts for all Marylanders. Its grant
$109.3 funded programs support artists and arts organizations in their pursuit of artistic excellence, ensure the accessibility
of the arts to all citizens, and promote statewide awareness of arts resources and opportunities.
Maryland Economic Development Assistance Fund -Capital - Funds grants, loans, and investments to support
$61.1
economic development initiatives in priority funding areas of the State.
Small, Minority, Women-Owned Business (SMWOB) - Grants to eligible fund managers who provide investment
$38.3
capital and loans to SMWOBs in Maryland.
Maryland E-Nnovation Initiative Fund - Offers funds to support Maryland's nonprofit institutions of higher
$34.3
education for research endowments in scientific and technical fields.
The Maryland Tourism Board - Tourism grants, for example funds to Destination Marketing Organizations for
$25.3
the purpose of attracting visitors to the State.
$38.1 Other miscellaneous grant programs.
$306.4
6. Maryland Higher Education Commission (MHEC)
Aid to Non-Public Institutions of Higher Education - This program provides funds to eligible community
$294.4
colleges and independent institutions.
$5.9 Other miscellaneous grant programs.
$300.3
7. Maryland Department of Labor (MDL)
Various Horse Racing Grants - MDL’s Division of Racing is responsible for distributing funds to promote and
$215.8 support the horse racing industry, as required in State law. For example, funds to help increase the purse sizes for
thoroughbred and standard bred horse racing.
$26.5 Racetrack Facility Renewal Account - Funds for racetrack facility capital construction and improvement.
Maryland Employment Advancement Right Now (EARN) - Grant funds are awarded to support regional
$24.1 strategic industry partnerships in implementing workforce training plans designed to address industry workforce
skill gaps and employ or advance workers within a targeted region or sector.
$7.3 Literacy Works - Provides funding for adult education and literacy service programs.
$8.5 Other miscellaneous grant programs.
$282.2
8. Maryland Department of Agriculture (MDA)
Conservation Grants - MDA provides conservation grants to help farmers offset the cost of installing best
$163.5 management practices on their farms to protect natural resources and comply with federal, State, and local
environmental requirements. The Cover Crop program is the most material grant under Conservation Grants.
Maryland Agricultural and Resource Based-Industry Development Corporation - Provides assistance to
$24.8 owners of qualified farms and rural businesses in securing affordable capital and credit for equipment, commercial
facilities, and real estate purchases, and assists with rural land preservation.
40

--- Page 43 ---
Exhibit 3 Page 3 of 6
Major Grant Programs at Selected State Agencies in Figure 1
Expenditures from Fiscal Year 2015 to Fiscal Year 2020
(amounts in millions)
Expenditures Description of Major Grant Programs
Maryland Agricultural Cost-Share Program - Provides financial assistance to Maryland farmers for installing
$27.1
nationally recognized best management practices that reduce soil and nutrient runoff from farmland.
The Maryland Agriculture Education and Rural Development Assistance Fund - Grant funding provides
$16.5
capacity-building funds to rural nonprofit service providers.
Resource Conservation Operations - This program provides financial and technical assistance as well as staffing
support to the State's 24 soil conservation districts in their promotion of soil and water quality programs at the local
$16.5
level and implement conservation practices and programs that balance crop and livestock production with the need
to protect natural resources.
Marketing and Agriculture Development - The Marketing Program assists Maryland farmers and other
agricultural entrepreneurs to develop markets for their products. The Program provides market research, identifies
$12.4
marketing opportunities, and provides a centralized source of business development information for farmers, small
agribusinesses and large agriculture-related businesses.
Maryland Agriculture Fair Board - Gives financial aid to qualifying organizations for premium awards to
$7.8
exhibitors of agricultural displays.
Animal Waste Technology Fund - Provides grants to vendors, businesses, and individuals offering technologies
$2.4
that demonstrate innovative, economically feasible animal waste projects.
$7.3 Other miscellaneous grant programs.
$278.3
9. Department of Housing and Community Development (DHCD)
Neighborhood Programs - Funding for various programs such as the Home Owners Preserving Equity Program -
intended to help homeowners with free housing counseling and mortgage assistance. Also these programs included
$80.6
the Creating Opportunities for Renewal and Enterprise grant, of which the main focus is the demolition and
stabilization of vacant and blighted properties in Baltimore City.
Special Loan Programs - Expenditures related to such program as the Lead Hazard Reduction program, Indoor
$44.3
Plumbing Program, and Housing Rehab Programs. These are loans and/or grant programs.
The Strategic Demolition Fund - Funds for certain economic development and job production activities including
$21.0 demolition of derelict structures, site acquisition, development, and construction for projects that improve the
State’s economy.
Community Legacy - The program provides local governments and community development organizations with
$18.6 funding for essential projects aimed at strengthening communities through activities such as business retention and
attraction, encouraging homeownership, and commercial revitalization.
Energy Loan Program - Multifamily Energy Efficiency and Housing Affordability loan program. The purpose of
$15.3
the program is to increase energy efficiency of multifamily homes of low and moderate income households.
Baltimore Regional Neighborhood Initiative - Program to provide strategic investment in local housing and
$13.2
businesses to provide healthy, sustainable communities with a growing tax base and enhanced quality of life.
Transitional Housing Program - The Shelter and Transitional Housing Facilities Grant Program provides grants
$12.0 to improve or create transitional housing and emergency shelters. The purpose of the program is to reduce
homelessness in the State. Grants may be provided to 501(c)(3) nonprofit organizations and local governments.
$30.7 Other miscellaneous grant programs.
$235.7
10. Maryland Department of Health (MDH)
Family Health and Chronic Disease - Various grants - the most material portion of these expenditures are related
$139.3 to the State's operational funding for the University of Maryland Medical System. These grants also include Cancer
Research - awarded to certain entities for the purpose of enhancing cancer research activities.
Maryland Health Resource Commission - Grants to Maryland health facilities to expand the accessibility of these
$27.2
facilities in underserved areas.
The Maryland Health Care Commission - Grants to trauma centers supported by the Maryland Trauma
$20.7
Physicians Fund and to the Shock Trauma Center.
$33.9 Other miscellaneous grant programs.
41

--- Page 44 ---
Exhibit 3 Page 4 of 6
Major Grant Programs at Selected State Agencies in Figure 1
Expenditures from Fiscal Year 2015 to Fiscal Year 2020
(amounts in millions)
Expenditures Description of Major Grant Programs
$221.1
11. Maryland Energy Administration (MEA)
Renewable and Clean Energy Programs and Initiative - Funding for renewable and clean energy initiatives,
$60.1
energy-related public education and outreach, and climate change programs.
Energy Efficiency and Conservation Programs, Low and Moderate Income Resident Sector - Funding for
energy efficiency and conservation programs, projects, or activities, and demand response programs targeted to the
$44.8
low income residential sector at no cost to the participants and the moderate income residential sector with minimal
cost to the participants.
Energy Efficiency and Conservation Programs, All Other Sectors - Funding for energy efficiency and
$26.5
conservation programs, projects, or activities, and demand response programs.
$0.3 Other miscellaneous grant programs.
$131.7
12. Maryland Technology Development Corporation (TEDCO)
Stem Cell Research Fund - Supports stem cell research and development at Maryland’s research universities and
$55.7
private sector research corporations.
Maryland Innovation Initiative - The program is designed to promote commercialization of research conducted in
$21.9 the partnership universities, encourage qualifying universities to partner on commercialization and other activities,
and facilitate transfer of technology from university to commercial industries.
Technology Development - Supports technology and product development by start-up companies often deemed too
$19.8
early in their development to gain the interest of traditional venture capital investments.
Enterprise Investment Fund (Capital) - Funds provided for emerging high-technology businesses which are
$11.6
either located in or relocating to the State. Investments are based on the market potential of the technology.
$12.5 Other miscellaneous grant programs.
$121.5
13. Maryland Department of Transportation (MDOT)
MDOT Headquarters - Grants primarily to fund various capital projects, including amounts provided to local
$84.7
governments, and transportation related projects.
Maryland Transit Administration - Various transportation related grants, which primarily related to operating,
$10.4
capital and technical assistance for Local Operating Transit Systems.
$5.8 State Highway Administration - Various payments for costs for work performed on highway projects.
$10.7 Other MDOT Transportation Business Units
$111.6
14. Maryland State Library Agency (MSL)
State Aid to Public Libraries - Grants to help fund operations and improvements at Maryland’s libraries. (Prior to
$90.6
fiscal year 2018, this program was under MSDE – see comments under agency number 2 MSDE).
$90.6
15. Department of Human Services (DHS)
Office of Grants Management - The majority of these expenditure were grant to purchase and distribute healthy
nutritious foods to Marylanders in need through feeding Maryland and School Pantry and Pantry on the Go
$37.1
programs. In addition, grants to provide home delivered, medically-tailored meals and nutrition services to persons
living with HIV/AIDS, cancer, and other life challenging illnesses.
$14.2 Child Welfare Services - Grant for child welfare services.
$5.3 General Administration - Grants primarily for technical assistance.
$13.6 Other miscellaneous grant programs.
$70.2
42

--- Page 45 ---
Exhibit 3 Page 5 of 6
Major Grant Programs at Selected State Agencies in Figure 1
Expenditures From Fiscal Year 2015 to Fiscal Year 2020
(amounts in millions)
Expenditures Description of Major Grant Programs
16. Board of Public Works (BPW)
State Grants to Non-Profits - BPW receives an appropriation for various grants included in the budget
$37.0
bill language each fiscal year.
$0.5 Other miscellaneous grant programs.
$37.5
17. Maryland Health Benefit Exchange (MHBE)
$30.7 MHBE Connector Entities - Grant funds for entities to provide in-person application, enrollment,
renewal, and retention assistance to individuals seeking to enroll in health care coverage through the
Maryland Health Connection.
$30.7
18. Maryland Department of Planning (MDP)
The Maryland Historical Trust’s Historic Preservation Capital Grant - Grants to promote preservation
of historic properties in Maryland that serve a high public purpose. The Program offers assistance to non-
$19.3 profit organizations, local jurisdictions, business entities, and private citizens. The programs seek to
promote the acquisition and rehabilitation of historic properties by providing low-interest loans, tax credits,
or grants, depending on the program.
Maryland Historical Trust and African American Preservations grants - Provides capital grants to
$5.5 assist in the preservation of buildings, sites, or communities of historical and cultural importance to the
African American experience in Maryland.
$5.6 Other miscellaneous grant programs.
$30.5
19. Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services (DPSCS)
Criminal Injuries Compensation Board - Payments to reimburse innocent victims of crime who have
$8.7 suffered a physical injury and sustained a financial loss. (Also see agency number 22 Executive
Department Boards, Commissions, and Offices).
Officer's Death Benefits - One-time payment of death benefits to the beneficiary of individuals who died
$3.6
as a result of performing assigned duties for a qualified Maryland Public Safety Organization.
Supporting Ex-Offenders in Employment Training and Transitional Service - Payments to serve
$1.0
formerly incarcerated individuals.
$3.9 Other miscellaneous grant programs
$17.2
20. Maryland State Police (MSP)
Vehicle Theft Prevention Program - Program costs for prevent vehicle theft and other vehicle-related
$10.2
crimes
$2.1 Other miscellaneous grant programs.
$12.3
21. Office of the Attorney General (OAG)
Mortgage Loan Servicing Practice Settlement - Payments related to a mortgage loan servicing practice
$12.1
agreement.
$12.1
22. Executive Department Boards, Commissions, and Offices
Criminal Injuries Compensation Board - The Criminal Injuries Compensation Board transferred to
$3.7 Executive Department Boards, Commissions, and Offices during fiscal year 2019. (See agency number 19
DPSCS).
Victims of Crime Act - Grants to improve the treatment of victims of crime by providing victims with the
$3.5 assistance and services necessary to aid their restoration after a violent criminal act, and to support and aid
them as they move through the criminal justice process.
43

--- Page 46 ---
Exhibit 3 Page 6 of 6
Major Grant Programs at Selected State Agencies in Figure 1
Expenditures from Fiscal Year 2015 to Fiscal Year 2020
(amounts in millions)
Expenditures Description of Major Grant Programs
Victims of Crime Act - Grants to improve the treatment of victims of crime by providing victims with the
$3.5 assistance and services necessary to aid their restoration after a violent criminal act, and to support and aid them as
they move through the criminal justice process.
Community Sexual Assault Awareness - Funds to provide financial support to the State's rape crisis and recovery
$1.2
centers for prevention education and awareness in the community.
$2.2 Other miscellaneous grant programs.
$10.6
23. Other Miscellaneous Departments
Includes the Maryland Institute for Emergency Medical Services Systems, Department of Juvenile
Services, Department of Aging, Department of Disabilities, Military Department, Office of the
$16.9
Comptroller, Department of Veterans Affairs, State Board of Elections, and the Canal Place
Preservation and Development Authority.
$16.9
$4,995.2
Note: Numbers may not sum to totals due to rounding.
Source: State Financial Management Information System records, agency records, and discussions with agency personnel.
44

--- Page 47 ---
Exhibit 4 Page 1 of 3
Summary of Grant Guidance and Practices Implemented by the
Federal Government and Certain Other States4
Government Office of Legislative Audits (OLA) Comments
Federal The Federal Uniform Administrative Requirements, Cost Principles, and Audit
Requirements for Federal Awards (commonly called "Uniform Guidance") was
implemented in December 2014. The Uniform Guidance, a streamlined
government-wide framework for grants management, is an authoritative set of
rules and requirements for Federal awards that aims to provide standards, reduce
the administrative burden on award recipients and, help prevent waste and misuse
of federal funds through focused auditing efforts. As a result of the Uniform
Guidance, Office of Management and Budget (OMB) implemented the following
requirements related to grants:
 Agencies must use OMB-approved forms for applications and information
collection;
 Recipients must disclose in writing potential conflicts of interest to the
awarding agency;
 Awarding agencies must conduct a pre-award review of potential applicants’
financial risk; and
 Agencies must publish all awards and required information on the website
“USAspending.gov”.
Additionally, the Grant Reporting Efficiency and Agreements Transparency
(GREAT) Act, effective December 2019, directs federal agencies to modernize
and improve grantee reporting. When fully implemented, the application of data
standards in the GREAT Act is intended to help provide decision-makers with
critical information about grantee performance and ensure grantees can spend less
time on reporting and more time delivering services that benefit society. The Act
requires improvements to grant data, such as requirements for data to be fully
searchable and machine-readable.
4 During our discussions with State personnel we were advised of certain federal grant practices
and laws designed to improve controls over federal grants. We were also advised of select states
that have implemented certain grant guidance. We conducted an internet search and summarized
some of the best practices, guidance and related laws that may be a resource to serve as a guide
for the State to improve its current practices. We noted that these states typically have one
agency that is responsible for most grant activity and that provides oversight of the grant
processes.
45

--- Page 48 ---
Exhibit 4 Page 2 of 3
Summary of Grant Guidance and Practices Implemented by the
Federal Government and Certain Other States
Government Office of Legislative Audits (OLA) Comments
Arizona Arizona has one designated agency (Office of Grants and Federal Resources)
responsible for maintaining a grants clearinghouse, as well as a comprehensive
grants management manual. The manual provides specific directives on
managing the entire life-cycle of grants; including monitor grantees based on
standardized criteria and perform required site visits. One of the primary
purposes of the agency is to simplify the grant processes. Finally, Arizona
implemented a statewide grants management system.
Illinois The Illinois Grant Accountability and Transparency Act (GATA), effective July
16, 2014, established uniform administrative requirements, cost principles, and
audit requirements for State and federal pass-through grant awards to non-federal
entities. GATA is intended to comply with the Illinois legislature’s directives to
 develop a coordinated, non-redundant process for the provision of effective
and efficient oversight of the selection and monitoring of grant recipients,
thereby ensuring quality programs and limiting fraud, waste, and abuse, and
 define the purpose, scope, applicability, and responsibilities in the life cycle
of a grant and establish uniformity and guidance for all grant-making
agencies.
According to the 2019 annual GATA report, certain practices were implemented –
centralized grant portal; uniform grant application; and codification of grant
management administrative rules. Illinois also recently implemented a statewide
grants management system which provides a list of all grant opportunities
available and connects potential applicants to a uniform, statewide grant
application protocol.
Minnesota Minnesota has one designated agency (Office of Grants Management) to
standardize, streamline and improve State grant-making practices, as well as to
increase public information about State grant opportunities. This agency provides
guidance for grant applications, and has implemented a statewide policy with
specific requirements for monitoring grants. For example, agencies are required
to perform site visits for monitoring purposes for all State grants over $50,000.
The agency maintains a website with guidance over certain practices for granting
agencies to implement internal controls and recordkeeping, such as an internal
control checklist agencies may use to evaluate grantees.
46

--- Page 49 ---
Exhibit 4 Page 3 of 3
Summary of Grant Guidance and Practices Implemented by the
Federal Government and Certain Other States
Government Office of Legislative Audits (OLA) Comments
North North Carolina has one designated agency (Office of State Budget and
Carolina Management) responsible for maintaining a grants clearinghouse, as well as a
comprehensive grants management manual. Grant information is tracked and
reported through a grants management system. The agency also maintains a
public website displaying all State expenditures, with a separate section pertaining
to grants. State law establishes standardized responsibilities for agencies as well
as recipients. For example, agencies are required to develop and implement a
monitoring plan for the terms of the grant. The law also establishes requirements
for recipients of amounts of at least $500,000 to obtain an independent audit of
the grant, and specifies mandatory terms to be included in the written grant
agreements.
Texas Texas has one designated agency (Comptroller of Public Accounts) for providing
uniform grant management standards to promote the efficient use of public funds.
These standards require risk assessments prior to each award greater than $25,000
to determine if a higher level of monitoring is required if the award is made. The
agency maintains a website for posting grant applications and awards for State
grants, however agencies are encouraged rather than required to use this site. The
agency also provides a mandatory set of financial management procedures in
order to ensure consistency among accountability for the expenditure of public
funds.
Source: General internet searches including Grants.gov.
47

--- Page 50 ---
APPENDIX

--- Page 51 ---
State Grants
Agency Response Form
Finding 1
The State does not have statewide comprehensive laws, regulations, policies or procedures
governing the creation, award, and administration of State grants.
We recommend the GGO and DBM, under the direction of the Maryland Efficient Grant
Application Council, develop a statewide framework which encompasses comprehensive
laws, regulations, and formal policies and procedures for awarding and administering
grants (including the key elements/criteria mentioned above).
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 1 Agree Estimated Completion Date:
Please provide details of The Governor’s Grants Office (GGO) agrees there should be a statewide
corrective action or framework which encompasses comprehensive laws, regulations, and
explain disagreement. formal policies and procedures for awarding and administering grants.
As stated in the audit report, there currently is no State entity that has the
legal authority to develop, implement or enforce agency compliance
with such rules and guidelines for awarding and administering grants.
The Maryland Efficient Grant Application Council (“MEGAC”) has
been tasked with studying and making recommendations to GGO, the
Department of Budget and Management (DBM), and the General
Assembly for a statewide centralized grants management and
accountability system. See Md. Code, State Finance and Procurement
Article §§ 2-210(b)(1), (c). The report and recommendations are due on
or before July 1, 2024. See id. at § 2-210(c). In conjunction with DBM,
GGO will work to implement the recommendations made by the
MEGAC.
Additional legislation or actions will be required in order to establish
authority to fully accomplish the audit recommendation.
Page 1 of 4

--- Page 52 ---
State Grants
Agency Response Form
Finding 2
The State does not have standardized grant applications and grant agreements. As a
result, we noted critical provisions that were not included in certain State agencies’ grant
agreements.
We recommend the GGO and DBM, under the direction of the Maryland Efficient Grant
Application Council, work to develop a uniform grant application and agreement that
incorporate critical mandatory provisions (including the provisions mentioned above) and
require State agencies to use these documents.
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide GGO agrees that the State does not have standardized grant applications
additional comments as or agreements, but it does not opine on the provisions that were or were
deemed necessary. not included in the grant agreements reviewed.
Recommendation 2 Agree Estimated Completion Date: 2024
Please provide details of The MEGAC is tasked with studying and making recommendations
corrective action or regarding the grants life cycle, including the creation of a uniform grant
explain disagreement. application form, uniform financial controls and reporting requirements,
uniform performance progress reporting requirements, and regulations
that should be established. See Md. Code, State Finance and
Procurement Article §§ 2-210(b)(1)(i) and (ii). The report and
recommendations are due on or before July 1, 2024. See id. at § 2-
210(c). In conjunction with DBM, GGO will work to implement the
recommendations made by the MEGAC.
As stated in the audit report, there currently is no State entity that has the
legal authority over other State agencies’ grant activity. Additional
legislation or actions will be required in order to establish authority to
fully accomplish the audit recommendation, especially to require State
agencies to use a uniform grant application and agreement.
Page 2 of 4

--- Page 53 ---
State Grants
Agency Response Form
Finding 3
The State did not have a statewide grants management system to help administer and track
grant awards and related expenditures.
We recommend that the GGO and DBM, under the direction of the Maryland Efficient
Grant Application Council,
a. procure and implement a comprehensive GMS;
b. take appropriate action to ensure that agencies are required to use the GMS; and
c. develop the necessary policies, procedures, and regulations to ensure the GMS is used
as intended.
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 3a Agree Estimated Completion Date: 2025
Please provide details of The Governor’s Grants Office, in conjunction with the Departments of
corrective action or Information Technology and Budget and Management, have prioritized
explain disagreement. the implementation of an Enterprise Grants Management System
(EGMS) through the states’ Major IT Development Project (MITDP)
fund. An RFP for a SaaS solution to be used by all grant-making
agencies across the state closed in December 2020. The submission of
the proposed vendor will be made to the BPW as part of the December
1, 2021 agenda. A project team has been hired for this endeavor,
including a project manager, business analysts, Grant Policy SME, as
well as a project coordinator, and is being managed by the GGO with
the assistance of DoIT’s EPMO.
Recommendation 3b Agree Estimated Completion Date:
Please provide details of The Governor’s Grants Office (GGO) agrees with the recommendation
corrective action or that State agencies should use a statewide grants management system.
explain disagreement. The project team referenced above are actively engaged with grant-
making agencies across the State to gather requirements and prepare for
vendor onboarding, so that the EGMS can be implemented state-wide in
a phased approach in alignment with the EGMS project schedule and
state needs.
The Maryland Efficient Grant Application Council (“MEGAC”) has
been tasked with studying and making recommendations to GGO, the
Department of Budget and Management (DBM), and the General
Page 3 of 4

--- Page 54 ---
State Grants
Agency Response Form
Assembly for a statewide centralized grants management and
accountability system. See Md. Code, State Finance and Procurement
Article §§ 2-210(b)(1), (c). The report and recommendations are due on
or before July 1, 2024. See id. at § 2-210(c). In conjunction with DBM,
GGO will work to implement the recommendations made by the
MEGAC.
As mentioned by the auditors, there are currently no legal requirements
for State agencies to use the EGMS when it becomes operational.
Additional legislation or actions will be required in order to establish
authority to accomplish the audit recommendation.
Recommendation 3c Agree Estimated Completion Date:
Please provide details of The Governor’s Grants Office (GGO) agrees with the recommendation
corrective action or that there should be policies, procedures, and regulations to ensure the
explain disagreement. EGMS is used as intended.
A policy and procedure document is under development for use of the
EGMS. It will be available on the GGO Website upon completion of the
EGMS.
The Maryland Efficient Grant Application Council (“MEGAC”) has
been tasked with studying and making recommendations to GGO, the
Department of Budget and Management (DBM), and the General
Assembly for a statewide centralized grants management and
accountability system, that may include recommendations for policies
and regulations related to use of the EGMS. See Md. Code, State
Finance and Procurement Article §§ 2-210(b)(1), (c). The report and
recommendations are due on or before July 1, 2024. See id. at § 2-
210(c). In conjunction with DBM, GGO will work to implement the
recommendations made by the MEGAC.
Additional legislation or actions will be required in order to establish
authority to fully accomplish the audit recommendation, especially with
establishing policies and regulations related to the use of EGMS.
Page 4 of 4

--- Page 56 ---
Department of Budget and Management
Response to Legislative Audit Findings
State Grants Performance Audit
November 2021
Finding 1
The State does not have statewide comprehensive laws, regulations, policies or procedures
governing the creation, award, and administration of State grants.
We recommend the GGO and DBM, under the direction of the Maryland Efficient Grant
Application Council, develop a statewide framework which encompasses comprehensive
laws, regulations, and formal policies and procedures for awarding and administering
grants (including the key elements/criteria mentioned above).
Agency Response
Analysis
Recommendation 1 Agree Estimated Completion Date:
DBM agrees there should be a statewide framework which encompasses
comprehensive laws, regulations, and formal policies and procedures for
awarding and administering grants with the intention of the
recommendation. As stated in the audit report, there currently is no
State entity that has the legal authority to develop, implement or enforce
agency compliance with such rules and guidelines for awarding and
administering grants.
The Maryland Efficient Grant Application Council (“MEGAC”) has
been tasked with studying and making recommendations to the
Governor’s Grants Office (GGO), DBM, and the General Assembly for
a statewide centralized grants management and accountability system.
See Md. Code, State Finance and Procurement Article §§ 2-210(b)(1),
(c). The report and recommendations are due on or before July 1, 2024.
See id. at § 2-210(c). In conjunction with GGO, DBM will work to
implement the recommendations made by the MEGAC.
Additional legislation or actions will be required to establish authority to
fully accomplish the audit recommendation.
Page 1 of 4

--- Page 57 ---
Department of Budget and Management
Response to Legislative Audit Findings
State Grants Performance Audit
November 2021
Finding 2
The State does not have standardized grant applications and grant agreements. As a
result, we noted critical provisions that were not included in certain State agencies’ grant
agreements.
We recommend the GGO and DBM, under the direction of the Maryland Efficient Grant
Application Council, work to develop a uniform grant application and agreement that
incorporate critical mandatory provisions (including the provisions mentioned above) and
require State agencies to use these documents.
Agency Response
Analysis
Recommendation 2 Agree Estimated Completion Date:
. The MEGAC is tasked with studying and making recommendations
regarding the grant life cycle, including the creation of a uniform grant
application form, uniform financial controls and reporting requirements,
uniform performance progress reporting requirements, and regulations
that should be established. See Md. Code, State Finance and
Procurement Article §§ 2-210(b)(1)(i) and (ii). The report and
recommendations are due on or before July 1, 2024. See id. at § 2-
210(c). In conjunction with GGO, DBM will work to implement the
recommendations made by the MEGAC.
As stated in the audit report, there currently is no State entity that has the
legal authority over other State agencies’ grant activity. Additional
legislation or actions will be required to establish authority to fully
accomplish the audit recommendation, especially to require State
agencies to use a uniform grant application and agreement.
Page 2 of 4

--- Page 58 ---
Department of Budget and Management
Response to Legislative Audit Findings
State Grants Performance Audit
November 2021
Finding 3
The State did not have a statewide grants management system to help administer and track
grant awards and related expenditures.
We recommend that the GGO and DBM, under the direction of the Maryland Efficient
Grant Application Council,
a. procure and implement a comprehensive GMS;
b. take appropriate action to ensure that agencies are required to use the GMS; and
c. develop the necessary policies, procedures, and regulations to ensure the GMS is used
as intended.
Agency Response
Analysis
Recommendation 3a Agree Estimated Completion Date: 2025
The Governor’s Grants Office, in conjunction with the Departments of
Information Technology and Budget and Management, are working
together to procure and implement the Enterprise Grants Management
System (EGMS) through the states’ Major IT Development Project
(MITDP) fund. The contract to procure a vendor for this project is
scheduled to be submitted to the Board of Public Works as part of the
December 1, 2021 agenda.
Recommendation 3b Agree Estimated Completion Date:
DBM agrees with the intention of the recommendation that State
agencies should use a statewide grants management system. The GGO
and project team referenced above are actively engaged with grant-
making agencies across the State to gather requirements and prepare for
vendor onboarding, so that the EGMS can be implemented state-wide in
a phased approach in alignment with the EGMS project schedule and
state needs.
The Maryland Efficient Grant Application Council (“MEGAC”) has
been tasked with studying and making recommendations to GGO, the
DBM, and the General Assembly for a statewide centralized grants
management and accountability system. See Md. Code, State Finance
and Procurement Article §§ 2-210(b)(1), (c). The report and
recommendations are due on or before July 1, 2024. See id. at § 2-
210(c). In conjunction with DBM, GGO will work to implement the
recommendations made by the MEGAC.
Page 3 of 4

--- Page 59 ---
Department of Budget and Management
Response to Legislative Audit Findings
State Grants Performance Audit
November 2021
As mentioned by the auditors, there are currently no legal requirements
for State agencies to use the EGMS when it becomes operational. DBM
does not have the legal authority to develop comprehensive laws,
regulations, policies, or procedures on behalf of the State for awarding
and administering grants nor requiring agencies to utilize the EGMS.
Additional legislation or actions will be required to establish authority to
accomplish the audit recommendation.
Recommendation 3c Agree Estimated Completion Date:
DBM agrees with the intention of the recommendation that there should
be policies, procedures, and regulations to ensure the EGMS is used as
intended but does not have the legal authority to develop comprehensive
laws, regulations, policies, or procedures on behalf of the State for
awarding and administering grants nor requiring agencies to utilize the
EGMS.
Per GGO, a policy is under development for use of the EGMS. It will be
available on the GGO Website upon completion of the EGMS.
The Maryland Efficient Grant Application Council (“MEGAC”) has
been tasked with studying and making recommendations to GGO, the
DBM, and the General Assembly for a statewide centralized grants
management and accountability system, that may include
recommendations for policies and regulations related to use of the
EGMS. See Md. Code, State Finance and Procurement Article §§ 2-
210(b)(1), (c). The report and recommendations are due on or before
July 1, 2024. See id. at § 2-210(c). In conjunction with GGO, DBM will
work to implement the recommendations made by the MEGAC.
Additional legislation or actions will be required to establish authority to
fully accomplish the audit recommendation, especially with establishing
policies and regulations related to the use of EGMS.
Page 4 of 4

--- Page 61 ---
State Grants
Agency Response Form
Finding 4
Individual agencies awarded certain grants without competition and required
documentation was not always available to support the propriety of the award, including
one award which was not calculated correctly.
We recommend that DOC, MDL, and DHS implement comprehensive policies and
procedures over the grant award process to include a requirement for public competitive
solicitation, if applicable, and prepare and retain all documentation to support the award
process.
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide
additional comments as This was the 2018 DOC sponsorship for the event, Maryland Fleet
deemed necessary. Week, to Historic Ships - the event producer. The producer of the event
did supply a grant application; however, the grant agreement forwarded
to Historic Ships included $113,500 in administrative costs that should
have been eliminated from the grant agreement.
The $125,000 was for a grant to Visit Baltimore as a partner with the
American Bus Association (ABA) to host the annual ABA Marketplace
in 2020. Exhibit A that described the activities associated with the event
was provided to the auditors. The agreement between DOC and Visit
Baltimore was discussed between the parties to determine which
activities would be covered in the grant agreement.
Recommendation 4 Agree Estimated Completion Date: Done (9-21)
Please provide details of
corrective action or Office of Tourism Development has corrected this and developed an
explain disagreement. application that is standard across all platforms. OTD has developed a
policy, which requires grantees to submit an application that includes the
purpose of the event, background or history of the event, marketing plan,
amount of the request, total budget, and an explanation of how grant
funds will be used. This should ensure that grant agreements align with
grant applications and intent of the funds granted to the grantee.
Competitive awards of grants may not always be possible as many grants
are awarded to unique and/or event organizer owned events such as
Maryland Fleet Week and CIAA.
Page 1 of 3

--- Page 62 ---
State Grants
Agency Response Form
Finding 6
Certain State agencies did not maintain documentation to support grant payments totaling
approximately $22.3 million and made payments totaling $220,000 that were not in
accordance with the related grant agreement.
We recommend the aforementioned State agencies
a. ensure all required documentation is obtained to support all grant payments, including
those payments noted above;
b. ensure payments are made in accordance with the terms and conditions of the grant
agreements; and
c. take appropriate corrective action for any grant payments that cannot be supported.
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide The Ocean City grant is part of the Tourism Promotion Act of 2008 that
additional comments as requires that all official Destination Marketing Organizations be granted
deemed necessary. a portion of $2.5 million for promotional and marketing expenses. The
$373,200 invoice from Ocean City was for the total amount that the
county is eligible for through the grant agreement.
Advertising has expanded beyond print, radio, and television, which
have systems of supporting documentation including tear sheets and
broadcast affidavits. Digital advertising does not have a formal affidavit
process, and advertising proof of performance is verified through the
digital media outlets’ invoicing system.
Recommendation 6a Agree Estimated Completion Date: Done (9-21)
Please provide details of Office of Tourism Development staff has been instructed to ensure that
corrective action or all required documentation as outlined in the Grant Agreement and the
explain disagreement. Grant Guidelines must be obtained from Grantee prior to payment
processing. However, documentation will be limited, as digital
advertising does not have an affidavit process as radio and television
does, and print with its tear sheets, to demonstrate that the advertising
did appear on digital media outlets.
Recommendation 6b Agree Estimated Completion Date: Done (9-21)
Please provide details of OTD staff has been instructed to ensure that all payments are made in
corrective action or accordance with the terms and conditions as required as outlined in the
explain disagreement. Grant Agreement and the Grant Guidelines.
Page 2 of 3

--- Page 63 ---
State Grants
Agency Response Form
Recommendation 6c Agree Estimated Completion Date: (2-22)
Please provide details of OTD staff has been instructed to ensure that all payments are made in
corrective action or accordance with the terms and conditions of the grant agreements. In the
explain disagreement. instance of non-supported payments, OTD will work with the Attorney
General to determine how to best recapture the funds.
Page 3 of 3

--- Page 64 ---
November 2, 2021
Mr. Gregory A. Hook
Legislative Auditor
Office of Legislative Audits
301 West Preston Street, Room 1202
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Dear Mr. Hook:
Please find enclosed the Department of Human Services’ (DHS) response to the draft Legislative
Performance Audit Report on State Grants.
If there are questions regarding the response, please contact the Inspector General, Marva Sutherland of
my staff at 443-378-4060 or marva.sutherland@maryland.gov.
Sincerely,
Lourdes R. Padilla
Secretary
Enclosures:
cc:
Gregory James, Deputy Secretary, Operations
Netsanet Kibret, Deputy Secretary, Programs
Samantha Blizzard, Chief of Staff
Michelle L. Farr, Executive Director, SSA
Stafford Chipungu, Chief Financial Officer
Marva M. Sutherland, Inspector General, OIG
Keonna Wiley, Assistant Inspector General – Audits, OIG
311 W. Saratoga Street, Baltimore, MD 21201-3500 | Tel: 1-800-332-6347 | TTY: 1-800-735-2258 |www.dhs.maryland.gov

--- Page 65 ---
State Grants
Agency Response Form
Finding 4
Individual agencies awarded certain grants without competition and required
documentation was not always available to support the propriety of the award, including
one award which was not calculated correctly.
We recommend that DOC, MDL, and DHS implement comprehensive policies and
procedures over the grant award process to include a requirement for public competitive
solicitation, if applicable, and prepare and retain all documentation to support the award
process.
Agency Response
Analysis Not Factually Accurate
Please provide DHS respectfully disagrees with the analysis. DHS’s current Grant
additional comments as policies and procedures manual outlines the instructions and guidance
deemed necessary. for the development and processing of grants by Department staff.
Section .05(A) of the manual states that there is no requirement for
competition in the award of grants as well as procedures determining
whether there are restrictions or requirements associated with the grant
that may require, for example, a competitive process or award to specific
grantees based on the source of the grant funds. The grant in question
did not have a requirement that it be publicly solicited or competitively
bid.
In addition, the grant in question supports the ability for DHS to have
access to national child welfare experts and is a continuation of an
agreement that began three years prior. Changing the grantee at the end
of the original grant period would have been disruptive to DHS’s
ongoing child welfare transformation efforts including the
implementation of new child welfare legislation passed in 2018, which
dramatically altered the federal financing structure for child welfare
programming. While the review procedures undertaken may not be fully
documented, the $3 million grant identified in the analysis was included
in DHS’s approved budget, which outlined the services to be rendered
and identified the grantee.
Page 1 of 4

--- Page 66 ---
State Grants
Agency Response Form
Recommendation 4 Disagree Estimated Completion Date:
Please provide details of DHS has a comprehensive grant policy, and all grants are reviewed for
corrective action or legal sufficiency by the Office of the Attorney General. DHS notes that
explain disagreement. in many instances, a competitive grant award process would not be
consistent with the delivery of critical services. DHS will ensure that it
documents the basis for selecting a competitive or non-competitive
award process, as well as the basis for award.
Auditor’s Comment: DHS’ response disagreed with our analysis and recommendation.
DHS states that it has a comprehensive grant policy and that there is no requirement for
competition in the award of grants. We continue to believe that a policy requiring a
competitive award process is in the best interest of the State. Further, for the specific
grant tested, even though DHS presents several reasons in its response for not using a
competitive award process, we determined that DHS did not document its rationale for
the award. DHS did acknowledge that it will take steps to ensure proper documentation
is maintained for the basis of selection.
Page 2 of 4

--- Page 67 ---
State Grants
Agency Response Form
Finding 6
Certain State agencies did not maintain documentation to support grant payments totaling
approximately $22.3 million and made payments totaling $220,000 that were not in
accordance with the related grant agreement.
We recommend the aforementioned State agencies
a. ensure all required documentation is obtained to support all grant payments, including
those payments noted above;
b. ensure payments are made in accordance with the terms and conditions of the grant
agreements; and
c. take appropriate corrective action for any grant payments that cannot be supported.
Agency Response
Analysis Factually Inaccurate
Please provide DHS respectfully disagrees with the analysis. DHS received sufficient
additional comments as and appropriate documentation to ensure that DHS received the services
deemed necessary. identified in the grant and that payments were appropriate. The
documentation received included expenses for each staff person charged
to the grant, the number of hours worked on the grant, and
documentation to support other direct service costs. These documents
are available and were provided to the auditors when requested. The
background analysis also noted that of the four payments tested, DHS
paid $37,000 for 9 individuals who were not named in the grant
agreement, and DHS could not provide support that it approved these
individuals to work on the grant, as required by the agreement.
However, DHS explained that any changes to staffing were discussed
with the contract monitor in advance of staffing modifications during
regular contract monitoring meetings. In addition, only three of the staff
changes that occurred were key personnel on the grant and these changes
were documented in the minutes from the regular contract monitoring
meetings which were shared with the auditors.
Recommendation 6a Disagree Estimated Completion Date:
Please provide details of DHS respectfully disagrees with this recommendation as DHS already
corrective action or has procedures in place to ensure all required documentation is obtained
explain disagreement. to support all grant payments. DHS reviewed all the necessary
documentation to approve the payments noted in the analysis to ensure
all payments were made in accordance with the terms and conditions of
the grant agreements.
Nonetheless, the Department is always willing to explore opportunities
to strengthen our control environment, and therefore, we are determining
Page 3 of 4

--- Page 68 ---
State Grants
Agency Response Form
the cost benefit of incorporating in our review, on a test basis, the
additional documents referenced by the auditor.
Recommendation 6b Disagree Estimated Completion Date:
Please provide details of DHS respectfully disagrees with this recommendation. DHS’s current
corrective action or process to ensure payments are made in accordance with the terms and
explain disagreement. conditions of the grant agreements includes the review of the invoice
along with the supporting documentation, which includes expenses for
each staff person charged to the grant, the number of hours worked on
the grant, and the direct costs. DHS will continue to ensure that all
payments are made in accordance with the terms and conditions of the
grant agreements. DHS/SSA has reviewed the invoices refenced in the
finding and has determined that payments were made in accordance with
the terms and conditions of the grant.
Auditor’s Comment: DHS’ response disagreed with certain aspects of our analysis and
related recommendations. While DHS states that it received documentation from the
grantee such as the number of hours each employee worked on the grant, DHS did not
receive time records from the grantees and did not compare the billed charges to the
grantee’s payroll records as stated in our analysis. DHS did commit to determining if
such comparisons recommended in the audit report will be implemented in some fashion.
Recommendation 6c Agree Estimated Completion Date:
Please provide details DHS agrees with the recommendation and is performing a quality
of corrective action or assurance review of the related grant payments to further confirm that
explain disagreement. they are adequately supported accordingly.
Page 4 of 4

--- Page 69 ---
Maryland Department of Labor
Division of Workforce Development and Adult Learning
Statewide Review of State Grants
July 1, 2015 and ending June 30, 2020
Agency Response Form
Maryland Employment Advancement Right Now (EARN) Grants
Finding 4
Individual agencies awarded certain grants without competition and required documentation was
not always available to support the propriety of the award, including one award which was not
calculated correctly.
We recommend that DOC, MDL, and DHS implement comprehensive policies and procedures over
the grant award process to include a requirement for public competitive solicitation, if applicable,
and prepare and retain all documentation to support the award process.
Agency Response
Background / Analysis Factually accurate
Please explain any In 2019, Labor awarded nearly $4.5 million through the Letter of Intent
concerns with factual process. On May July 12, 2018, and May 20, 2019, all grantees were
accuracy. notified of the opportunity to apply for CY2019 funds via a Letter of Intent
opportunity (see Attachment A, Attachment B).
Recommendation Agree Estimated Completion Date: June 2021
Please provide details of Labor’s standard practice is to notify all existing grantees of the opportunity
corrective action or to apply for funds through the Letter of Intent process. Attachment C
explain disagreement. includes two examples of LOI announcements, in both 2020 and 2021, in
which all grantees were notified of the opportunity to apply for funds. The
Department has updated its policies and procedures over the grant award
process. For instance, the Department now has a set schedule for releasing
Letter of Intent opportunities (see Attachment D, Excerpt of EARN
Maryland Policies and Procedures). In addition, an independent reviewer
will review each award process to ensure grants are awarded with
competition, and supporting documents are prepared and retained to
support the grant award process.
Auditor's Note: The Maryland Department of Labor did not submit a cover letter to accompany the
above r e s p o n s e . MDL's formal response to the audit report included a number of additional documents
that in our opinion are not directly related to its position on the factual accuracy of the report finding and
its agreement or disagreement with the related recommendations. Consequently, we have declined to
include those documents as an appendix to this report.

--- Page 70 ---
November 8, 2021
Mr. Gregory A. Hook, CPA
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
301 W. Preston Street
Room 1202
Baltimore, MD 21201
Dear Mr. Hook:
In your letter dated October 18, 2021, the Office of Legislative Audits (OLA) requested that the
Department of General Services (DGS) specifically respond to Finding 5 and Finding 6 in the
draft audit report on State Grants.
In accordance with the OLA request, the responses have been electronically transmitted, via
email.
Should you have any additional questions or concerns, please feel free to contact me, at
410.767.4956, or at nelson.reichart@maryland.gov
Sincerely,
Nelson E. Reichart
Deputy Secretary
Cc: Ellington E. Churchill, Secretary

--- Page 71 ---
DGS CAPITAL GRANTS OFFICE AUDIT/PERFORMANCE REVIEW
RESPONSES TO FINDINGS 5 & 6
Finding 5
DGS did not ensure that grantees submitted required documents to explain or support
the basis used to select vendors to work on certain capital projects funded by State
capital grants. In addition, DGS did not perform documented routine site visits to ensure
capital projects funded with State grants were progressing in accordance with the terms
of the contract(s) funded by the grants.
We recommend that DGS
a. require grantees to submit support for their selection of vendors performing work
on capital projects, as required; and
b. establish a comprehensive site visit policy for all State capital grants, which
includes requirements for the frequency, content and timing of the visits,
documentation of the results, and steps for taking corrective action when issues are
identified.
Agency Response
Background / Factually Accurate
Analysis
Please explain any N/A
concerns with factual
accuracy.
Recommendation a Disagree Estimated Completion Date: N/A
Please provide details As noted in the response to Finding #2 above, the authority over the
of corrective action or Capital Grants Program is vested in the Board of Public Works (BPW).
explain disagreement. While the BPW did delegate the administration of the program to DGS
by executive fiat - not by statute or reg - DGS has no authority to enact
this recommendation.
The CGL Booklet that is provided to all new grantees, provides
guidance to the grantees suggesting they make an effort to get as
much competition as possible when hiring a contractor. It does not
require the grantees to follow any particular process, or to justify to
DGS why they did what they did when choosing a contractor. The
exact wording from the online CGL Booklet is “The State encourages

--- Page 72 ---
DGS CAPITAL GRANTS OFFICE AUDIT/PERFORMANCE REVIEW
RESPONSES TO FINDINGS 5 & 6
grant recipients to use competition to obtain the best value for the
dollar.”(emphasis added). Unless something is worded with must or
shall, we as administrators can only request it, and if the grantee does
not comply, there is no way for DGS to enforce the request or to
penalize the grantee for not complying.
Auditor’s Comment: DGS’ response indicated disagreement. However, the response
did not consider all the information included in the report or address each of the audit
recommendations. Specifically, the response stated that DGS has no authority to enact
the recommendation because authority over the Capital Grants Program is vested in the
BPW and administration of the Program has only been delegated to DGS by executive
fiat, not by statute or regulation. The audit report draft provided to DGS acknowledges
this condition and states that DGS would need authorization from BPW or a law change
to implement the related recommendation. Accordingly, we formally recommended that
DGS work in conjunction with BPW to obtain the necessary authority to require grantees
to conduct competitive solicitations for their selection of vendors performing work on
capital projects.
The DGS’ response makes no mention of OLA previously disclosing this condition and
does not address this recommendation, and thus is not an accurate reflection of the audit
report finding. Therefore, the reader is referred to Finding 5 in the body of the audit
report for the correct analysis and recommendations that OLA provided to DGS in draft
form for response. Nevertheless, as the recommendation disregarded by DGS in its
response does address the apparent basis for the aforementioned area of disagreement, we
will further pursue the matter in our audit report follow-up process.
Recommendation b Agree Estimated Completion Date: 3/31/22
Please provide details As the entity with authority over the Capital Grants Program, the Board
of corrective action or of Public Works would need to either draft and enact the policy, or at
explain disagreement. the very least direct DGS to draft the policy for their review and
approval before DGS could revise their operational procedures to
comply with this recommendation. However, DGS agrees that there
should be a policy put in place to govern the various aspects of site
visits/inspections of on-going grant funded projects, and specifying
what documentation is required for the project file.

--- Page 73 ---
DGS CAPITAL GRANTS OFFICE AUDIT/PERFORMANCE REVIEW
RESPONSES TO FINDINGS 5 & 6
Finding 6
Certain State agencies did not maintain documentation to support grant payments
totaling approximately $22.5 million and made payments that were not in accordance
with the related grant agreement.
We recommend the aforementioned State agencies
a. ensure all required documentation is obtained to support all grant payments,
including those payments noted above,
b. ensure payments are made in accordance with the terms and conditions of the
grant agreements, and
c. take appropriate corrective action for any grant payments that cannot be
supported.
Agency Response
Background / Factually Accurate
Analysis
Please explain any N/A
concerns with
factual accuracy.
Recommendation a Agree Estimated Completion March 31, 2022
Date:
Please provide As the authority over the Capital Grants Program is held by the Board of
details of corrective Public Works, where DGS is only providing administrative support, any
action or explain recommendations concerning policies and laws are more properly
disagreement. directed to them.
DGS concurs that grants must be correctly monitored, especially
concerning the funds and what the funds are used for after they are
received by the grantee, and adequate oversight provided during the
review of expenditures submitted to support a request for
reimbursement. As the review and approval for payment process in
connection with the Capital Grant Program involves the Comptroller’s
Office as well as DGS, a logical next step would be to do a review of the
Comptroller’s Office and how they process the matching grant requests
for funds. Any policy put into place would need to encompass the entire
Capital Grant process, not just the discreet piece handled by DGS.

--- Page 74 ---
DGS CAPITAL GRANTS OFFICE AUDIT/PERFORMANCE REVIEW
RESPONSES TO FINDINGS 5 & 6
Recommendation b Agree Estimated Completion March 31, 2022
Date:
Please provide Same as the answer above in Finding 6(a).
details of corrective
action or explain
disagreement.
Recommendation c Agree Estimated Completion March 31, 2022
Date:
Please provide DGS concurs that for payments made improperly or without proper
details of corrective documentation, appropriate corrective actions should be taken.
action or explain However, as the authority over the Capital Grants Program is held by the
disagreement. Board of Public Works (BPW), specifically SF&P §8–127 (the key points
are highlighted):
(a) Except as provided in § 8-129 of this subtitle, the proceeds of a
sale of State bonds may be used only in the manner and for a project or
program that is specified in an enabling act authorizing the issuance of
State bonds.
(b) (1) Except as provided in § 8-129 of this subtitle, the proceeds
of a sale of State bonds may be used only for a capital improvement
unless: (i) the enabling act specifically provides otherwise; or, (ii) in an
emergency, the Board unanimously grants a temporary exception.
(2) The Board shall determine whether the object of an
expenditure is a capital improvement. The standard for this
determination is whether the useful life of the object equals or exceeds
the life of the State bonds.
(c) The Board shall enforce the provisions of this section.
Any recommendations and/or decisions concerning appropriate
corrective actions are more properly directed to the BPW, and if they
choose to, they can request DGS to collaborate on what would be
appropriate and how to go about implementing the corrective action.

--- Page 76 ---
State Grants
Agency Response Form
Finding 6
Certain State agencies did not maintain documentation to support grant payments totaling
approximately $22.3 million and made payments totaling $220,000 that were not in
accordance with the related grant agreement.
We recommend the aforementioned State agencies
a. ensure all required documentation is obtained to support all grant payments, including
those payments noted above;
b. ensure payments are made in accordance with the terms and conditions of the grant
agreements; and
c. take appropriate corrective action for any grant payments that cannot be supported.
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 6a Agree Estimated Completion Date: Not
applicable
Please provide details of While the DEC agrees with the recommendation it wants to note that
corrective action or documentation was obtained from the grantee and was on file during the
explain disagreement. audit to support all reimbursed expenditures, including the two advance
payments, for the two reviewed grants. DEC has and will continue to
obtain documentation to support all grant payments.
Recommendation 6b Agree Estimated Completion Date: September 1,
2021
Please provide details of The DEC agrees that payments should be made in accordance with the
corrective action or terms and conditions of the grant agreement and will do so in the future.
explain disagreement. To address the advance payment issue, the following will be added to the
current terms and conditions of grants issued by the DEC:
“A 15% advancement of the grant award amount will be issued upon
request and all supporting receipts will be required.”
Recommendation 6c Agree Estimated Completion Date: Not
applicable
Page 1 of 2

--- Page 77 ---
State Grants
Agency Response Form
Please provide details of While the DEC agrees with the Recommendation it wants to note that it
corrective action or had obtained and reviewed documentation to support all reimbursed
explain disagreement. expenditures including the two advance payments for the two reviewed
grants. Consequently, no amount needs to be recovered.
Page 2 of 2

--- Page 78 ---
A T
UDIT EAM
Mark S. Hagenbuch, CPA
Audit Manager
James M. Fowler, CFE
Senior Auditor
Marina I. Bulatova
Sporthi J. Carnelio
Owen M. Long
Oluwafemi E. Ogundolie
Staff Auditors
Lisa M. Beers, CFE
Amanda M. Jones
Others Who Contributed
David R. Fahnestock, CPA
Charles H. Hinds IV, CPA
Ian T. Pontius
Data Analytics Unit Auditors