Title: Presentation to the Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee - Fraud Investigation Unit - Update and Results


The reports referenced in this presentation are listed below.

Department of Juvenile Services (Report Dated 9/2/2021)

Office of the Public Defender (Report Dated 8/10/2021)

Maryland Department of Agriculture (Report Dated 12/14/2020)

Video Presentation (Fraud Investigation Unit Update and Results starts at 2:22:29)
Date: 12/01/2021
Type: Presentations to the Legislature
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=61a7948da1ce58155062f010
Extracted: 2025-06-19T11:56:59.777130
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Fraud Investigation Unit
Update and Results
Presentation to Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Gregory A. Hook, CPA
Joshua S. Adler, CPA, CFE
Joseph E. McWilliams, CFE
December 1, 2021

--- Page 2 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Fraud Investigation Unit - History
 2002 – The Joint Audit Committee instructed OLA to implement a hotline and
web referral process for the reporting of allegations of fraud, waste, and
abuse in State government operations.
 2003 – OLA’s hotline and web referral process were launched with an
expected call volume of 200 calls per year but as noted on page 5, actual call
volume has consistently exceeded expectations.
 2016 – OLA dedicates a second employee to the hotline.
 2020 – OLA dedicates a third employee to the hotline and establishes the
Fraud Investigation Unit (FIU).
 2021 – OLA dedicates a fourth employee to the FIU.
Fraud Investigation Unit
Page 2
Update and Results

--- Page 3 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Fraud Investigation Unit (FIU) – Responsibilities
FIU operations include both administrative and investigative activities as
depicted in the following tables.
Administrative Operations Investigative Operations
Fraud Hotline Administration Audit Support
• Call Intake • Allegation Approach Development
• Initial Research, Assessment, & Recommended Actions • Procedural & Testing Guidance
• Allegation Referrals • Finding Development
• Vendor & Employee Research
• Transaction Analyses
Allegation Due Diligence
• Specialized Reports
• Research
• Validity & Risk Assessment
Special Investigations
• Recommended Actions
• Approach Development • Planning & Conducting Investigations
• Referrals to Prosecutorial Agencies
Outreach & Education
Fraud Brainstorming & Risk Assessment
• Agency Outreach
• Training & Development • Brainstorming
• Presentations • Allegation Risk Assessment
• FIU Newsletter • Assessment of High-Risk Areas
Fraud Investigation Unit
Page 3
Update and Results

--- Page 4 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
FIU Administrative Operations - Hotline Administration
 Allegations are received by phone, web, referral, mail, and from OLA
auditors in the field.
 Callers are informed that the information provided is considered
confidential, and are provided with information about the State’s
“whistleblower” laws if reassurance is needed.
 Investigative auditors (certified fraud examiners) handle calls during
business hours in accordance with established procedures.
 All allegations are assessed for credibility, and due diligence is performed
before field investigations are initiated.
 Allegations are 1) investigated by OLA – either as part of a regularly
scheduled audit or as a special audit 2) referred to applicable State
agencies, or 3) not pursued.
Fraud Investigation Unit
Page 4
Update and Results

--- Page 5 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
FIU Administrative Operations - Referrals to State Agencies
Callers who report allegations that would be more appropriately handled by
other agencies are referred to the applicable agencies for assistance. Example
of these referrals include:
 Unemployment Insurance – Maryland Department of Labor
 Welfare Benefits – Department of Human Services, Office of the Inspector
General
 Medicaid Benefits – Maryland Department of Health, Office of the Inspector
General
 Identify Theft – Office of the Attorney General, Identify Theft Unit
 Income Tax – Comptroller of Maryland, Compliance Division
Fraud Investigation Unit
Page 5
Update and Results

--- Page 6 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
FIU Administrative Operations - Hotline Statistics
Call Volume Allegation Disposition
(Calendar Year Basis) (February 2003 through October 2021)
1600
1482
1400
Investigations Completed by
1200 16%
OLA or in Process
1000
Referred to State Agencies
800
65%
(38% were related to Department
600 of Human Services benefits.)
455
419 423
385
400
Not Pursued 19%
200
0
Average 2018 2019 2020 2021
2003 to 2017 Actual Actual Actual Projected
The increase in 2021 was primarily due to the large number
of unemployment calls received (40% of all calls).
Fraud Investigation Unit
Page 6
Update and Results

--- Page 7 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
FIU Administrative Operations - Hotline Awareness
The FIU promotes OLA’s hotline by displaying
fraud posters in State offices, including
biannual messages on State employee
payroll notices, and requesting that agencies
send annual emails to their employees with
OLA’s hotline information.
Chapter 225 of the Acts of 2021 required
that each unit of State government:
• Display OLA’s fraud hotline posters in
their buildings,
• Post a link to OLA’s fraud hotline website
on their websites, and
• At the request of OLA, distribute
information regarding fraud to their
employees.
Fraud Investigation Unit
Page 7
Update and Results

--- Page 8 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
FIU Investigative Operations – Results of Investigations
The results of investigations may be included in OLA’s fiscal compliance audit
reports or in separate special review reports. Examples from the past 12
months include:
 Department of Juvenile Services (DJS) – Review of DJS’ procurement and
payment activity to follow-up on a prior audit finding that resulted in the
conviction of a former DJS management employee. (Report Dated
September 2, 2021)
 Office of the Public Defender (OPD) – Allegations related to concerns with
OPD’s procurement of IT services and questionable charges by a panel
attorney. (Report Dated August 10, 2021)
 Maryland Department of Agriculture (MDA) – Allegation related to MDA not
taking sufficient actions when grantees were noncompliant with grant terms.
(Report Dated December 14, 2020)
Fraud Investigation Unit
Page 8
Update and Results

--- Page 9 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
FIU Investigative Operations – Results of Investigations
Department of Juvenile Services (Findings 1 and 2)
Deficiencies were identified relating to DJS’ procurement and monitoring
processes.
 DJS did not consolidate procurements, resulting in the circumvention of certain
State procurement regulations. In addition, DJS could not support certain
contract modifications.
 DJS did not verify the propriety or reasonableness of certain services prior to
payment, resulting in overpayments to vendors.
 DJS management authorized payments on invoices that had been previously
denied by contract monitors. The invoices were initially rejected because they
included services that were not provided or specifically excluded by the
contract.
Fraud Investigation Unit
Page 9
Update and Results

--- Page 10 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
FIU Investigative Operations – Results of Investigations
Office of the Public Defender (Findings 1 and 2)
OPD did not comply with State procurement regulations when awarding two sole
source information technology (IT) contracts. In addition, OPD did not monitor two
IT contracts, including one of the sole source contracts, to ensure certain
deliverables were provided and tasks were performed.
 OPD did not justify the use of a sole source procurement method for two
contracts with expenditures totaling $960,000. For one of these contracts,
neither the initial contract nor any of the 19 contract modifications totaling
$850,000 were approved by the Department of General Services or Board of
Public Works.
 OPD did not adequately monitor one IT contract with payments totaling $1.8
million to ensure that certain deliverables were provided and tasks were
performed.
 OPD could not adequately document that contracted IT advisory services were
provided by one vendor that received payments totaling $939,000.
Fraud Investigation Unit
Page 10
Update and Results

--- Page 11 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
FIU Investigative Operations – Results of Investigations
Office of the Public Defender (Finding 4)
OPD lacked comprehensive procedures for monitoring panel attorney (PA)
invoices and did not expand its review and initiate collection actions when
questionable billings were identified.
 OPD did not always determine the reasonableness of hours charged per day by
each PA. As a result, OPD was unable to readily determine instances when it
was billed for excessive or duplicate hours.
 OPD management hired a forensic accountant to review questionable charges
OPD identified on invoices from one PA. OPD referred the matter to the proper
authorities, but it did not seek reimbursement for any questionable charges
and did not expand its review to other payments to this PA.
 Our extended review of this PA’s invoices disclosed that the PA billed and was
paid for more than 20 hours on 40 different days. We also noted 25 cases that
were billed and paid twice and 2 cases that were billed and paid three times.
Additional questionable charges we identified totaled approximately $47,000.
Fraud Investigation Unit
Page 11
Update and Results

--- Page 12 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
FIU Investigative Operations – Results of Investigations
Maryland Department of Agriculture (Finding 1)
MDA did not adequately monitor cover crop grant inspections by Soil
Conservation Districts (SCDs) and take corrective actions when inspections
identified noncompliance with grant requirements.
 MDA’s processes for monitoring SCD inspections were not sufficient to ensure
compliance with grant agreements.
 SCD inspections were not comprehensive; the methods used to conduct
inspections were not consistent between each SCD; and certain reported
inspections appeared questionable.
 Our review of six grants with instances of noncompliance disclosed that none
of the grants were cancelled as required by the cover crop grant agreements.
Instead, MDA took other actions which were not provided for in the grant
agreement, such as negotiating a lower payment rate.
Fraud Investigation Unit
Page 12
Update and Results

--- Page 13 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
FIU Investigative Operations – Audit Support
The FIU provided support on 39 other OLA special reviews/audits, such as the
Judiciary, Uninsured Employers’ Fund, and Review of Procurement of Certain
COVID Tests. This support included activities such as:
 The development of audit procedures to address allegations and related risks.
 Preparation of electronic data matches to identify high-risk transactions.
 Analyses of agency transactions and documents to identify indicators of fraud
and noncompliance with laws and regulations.
 Comprehensive research into individuals and companies referenced in
allegations.
 Participation in fraud brainstorming sessions to identify high-risk areas and
develop an approach to address the risks.
Fraud Investigation Unit
Page 13
Update and Results

--- Page 14 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Conclusion
The FIU’s efforts will continue to evolve and expand to help prevent and detect
fraud and abuse in State government.
 Significant efforts continue to be made to build awareness of the hotline.
 Hotline activity has continued to exceed initial expectations. Investigative
auditors provide a high level of customer service to the hundreds of hotline
callers.
 OLA continues to identify and report on significant findings, in both fiscal
compliance audit reports and special review reports, based on hotline
allegations.
 FIU future plans include:
 Dedicating additional employees to the FIU team
 Processes for the proactive detection of fraudulent transactions
 Expanded support for ongoing audit efforts
 Additional initiatives to promote fraud awareness in State government
Fraud Investigation Unit
Page 14
Update and Results