Title: Presentation to the Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee - Maryland Transportation Authority


Related Report Dated (9/13/2021)

Video Presentation (Maryland Transportation Authority starts at 3:02)
Date: 12/01/2021
Type: Presentations to the Legislature
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=61a7948da1ce58155062f00f
Extracted: 2025-06-19T11:56:39.747743
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Maryland Transportation Authority (MDTA)
Report Dated September 13, 2021
Presentation to Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Gregory A. Hook, CPA
Matthew L. Streett, CPA, CFE
Raymond G. Burton Jr., CPA, CFE
December 1, 2021

--- Page 2 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Report Overview
 MDTA is responsible for the supervision, financing, construction, operation,
maintenance, and repair of the State’s nine toll facilities. During fiscal year
2020, MDTA’s operating revenues and expenses totaled $733 million and
$475 million, respectively.
 The audit report contains two findings and covers activity during the period
from May 10, 2016 through March 4, 2020. MDTA’s response indicated
agreement with the factual accuracy of the report findings, and generally
agreed to implement the related recommendations.
Maryland Transportation Authority Page 2

--- Page 3 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Toll Collections - Background
 MDTA is responsible for the collection of toll revenue at the State’s nine toll
collection facilities. During the audit period, customers paid tolls via cash at toll
booths, electronically through E-ZPass, or through video tolling billing notices. On
August 6, 2020 the Governor announced that electronic tolling would be the
exclusive method for toll collection in the State.
 In February 2018, two separate contracts totaling $359.4 million were approved
to replace MDTA’s existing contractor that provided both the toll collection
system and the customer service call center. The transition to the new
contractor began in May 2019, which involved installing new tolling system
equipment and software.
 We received allegations on our fraud, waste, and abuse hotline alleging that
MDTA was not taking sufficient action to detect and address the overbilling of
customers for electronic tolling due to issues with its new tolling equipment. We
reviewed MDTA’s processes to monitor its electronic tolling system and the
actions taken to address any deficiencies it had identified from December 2019
to October 2020.
Maryland Transportation Authority Page 3

--- Page 4 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Toll Collections - Background
Fiscal Year 2020 Toll Collections by Facility (in Millions)
During Fiscal Year 2020,
MDTA collected $584.6
million at the State’s nine
toll collection facilities,
including $510.9 million in
electronic tolling (E-ZPass
and Video Tolling).
Note: Numbers may not sum to total due to rounding.
Maryland Transportation Authority Page 4

--- Page 5 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Toll Collections (Finding 1)
MDTA did not sufficiently determine the impact of certain issues with its
electronic toll collection system on its customers and identify and correct
related customer overbillings.
 MDTA documented certain incidents of tolling errors resulting from
problems with tolling equipment at four facilities (the Fort McHenry
Tunnel, Intercounty Connector, I-95 Express Toll Lanes, and Thomas J.
Hatem Memorial Bridge), but it did not identify an issue at the Francis
Scott Key Bridge.
 Although MDTA investigated and corrected tolling equipment errors
during the implementation of its new tolling system, it did not always
ensure all customers were refunded for any overbilling.
 We were unable to quantify the potential overbilling related to these
issues due to the lack of available data.
Maryland Transportation Authority Page 5

--- Page 6 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Toll Collections (Finding 1 continued)
 MDTA conducted limited investigations of tolling equipment malfunctions
(certain days and at certain facilities), but did not determine the total
extent of the problem or ensure all customers received a refund for
amounts overbilled. For example, at the Fort McHenry Tunnel, MDTA
documented that it had fixed the tolling equipment, but could not
document that it researched the impact of the problem on customers and
made any related refunds. In response to our inquiries, MDTA identified
approximately 7,700 customers overbilled $84,400.
 We identified customers at multiple facilities that were being billed twice
and/or incorrectly due to several reasons and MDTA was not aware of
these overbillings. For example, at the Francis Scott Key Bridge,
customers were correctly charged for a 2-axle vehicle ($3), and then
incorrectly charged again for a 5-axle vehicle ($24) one second later.
Maryland Transportation Authority Page 6

--- Page 7 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
System Access (Finding 2)
MDTA did not perform periodic documented reviews of system access
capabilities granted to State and contractor employees on the old
electronic tolling and customer service system used during our audit
period.
 According to available system records, as of July 2020, there were 296
active users that had access to the old system, and the new systems
had not yet been fully implemented.
 We could not readily determine the propriety of the system access,
because MDTA could not provide us with a detailed system report of
user capabilities. For example, MDTA provided us with a report that
identified 121 users that had the ability to dismiss a toll violation, but
MDTA could not confirm whether this capability was subject to
appropriate supervisory review and approval.
Maryland Transportation Authority Page 7

--- Page 8 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Conclusions
MDTA should:
• formally review and evaluate significant tolling issues (such as, an
increase in similar customer complaints or a pattern of tolling
abnormalities);
• review previously identified electronic toll issues to determine the
extent of customer overbillings and in consultation with legal
counsel, assess the practicality of related customer restitution; and
• perform periodic documented reviews of user access to its
electronic tolling and customer service system, including the new
systems once implemented, and take appropriate corrective action
for any improper or unnecessary user access.
Maryland Transportation Authority Page 8