Title: Baltimore Police Department - Asset Forfeiture and Property Control
Date: 11/30/2021
Type: Performance
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=61a77d29a1ce581550628405
Extracted: 2025-06-20T00:09:45.047573
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Performance Audit Report
Baltimore Police Department
Asset Forfeiture and Property Control
November 2021
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Senator Clarence K. Lam, M.D. (Senate Chair) Delegate Carol L. Krimm (House Chair)
Senator Malcolm L. Augustine Delegate Steven J. Arentz
Senator Adelaide C. Eckardt Delegate Mark S. Chang
Senator George C. Edwards Delegate Nicholas P. Charles II
Senator Katie Fry Hester Delegate Andrea Fletcher Harrison
Senator Cheryl C. Kagan Delegate Trent M. Kittleman
Senator Benjamin F. Kramer Delegate David Moon
Senator Cory V. McCray Delegate Julie Palakovich Carr
Senator Justin D. Ready Delegate Elizabeth G. Proctor
Senator Craig J. Zucker Delegate Geraldine Valentino-Smith
To Obtain Further Information
Office of Legislative Audits
301 West Preston Street, Room 1202
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Phone: 410-946-5900 ꞏ 301-970-5900 ꞏ 1-877-486-9964 (Toll Free in Maryland)
Maryland Relay: 711
TTY: 410-946-5401 ꞏ 301-970-5401
E-mail: OLAWebmaster@ola.state.md.us
Website: www.ola.state.md.us
To Report Fraud
The Office of Legislative Audits operates a Fraud Hotline to report fraud, waste, or abuse involving State
of Maryland government resources. Reports of fraud, waste, or abuse may be communicated anonymously
by a toll-free call to 1-877-FRAUD-11, by mail to the Fraud Hotline, c/o Office of Legislative Audits, or
through the Office’s website.
Nondiscrimination Statement
The Department of Legislative Services does not discriminate on the basis of age, ancestry, color, creed,
marital status, national origin, race, religion, gender, gender identity, sexual orientation, or disability in the
admission or access to its programs, services, or activities. The Department’s Information Officer has been
designated to coordinate compliance with the nondiscrimination requirements contained in Section 35.107
of the United States Department of Justice Regulations. Requests for assistance should be directed to the
Information Officer at 410-946-5400 or 410-970-5400.

--- Page 3 ---
November 30, 2021
Senator Clarence K. Lam, M.D., Senate Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Delegate Carol L. Krimm, House Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Members of Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Annapolis, Maryland
Ladies and Gentlemen:
We have conducted a performance audit to evaluate the effectiveness and
efficiency of certain management practices of the Baltimore Police Department
(BPD) as required by State Government Article, Section 2-1220 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland. This is the second of four planned audits during the first six-
year audit cycle of BPD. The scope of this audit focused on an evaluation of
BPD’s policies and procedures for safeguarding, accounting for, and disposing of
property it confiscates, including money, during the course of its police work.
Our audit focused on activity for the six-year period beginning July 1, 2014 and
ending June 30, 2020.
Generally, confiscated property is held until final disposition by BPD’s Evidence
Management Unit, deposited into a City bank account in the case of money, or in
the case of vehicles, maintained at a Baltimore City impound lot. Confiscated
property may include items held specifically as evidence of a crime, items seized
during an investigation but not necessarily considered evidence, as well as
property that has been found or otherwise recovered. According to BPD records,
between July 1, 2014 and June 30, 2020, approximately 272,000 property items
were confiscated, including, for example, approximately $11.5 million in cash,
14,000 weapons, and 76,000 items related to controlled dangerous substances.
Our audit disclosed that BPD’s written policies and procedures for maintaining
confiscated property did not address the performance of routine physical
inventories and audits, and complete physical inventories and audits had not been
conducted, contrary to published best practices. Furthermore, BPD’s policies and
procedures did not require regularly scheduled reviews of its property inventory
to identify items that could be removed, and sufficient action was not always

--- Page 4 ---
taken to identify and remove items no longer required to be held. In addition,
BPD did not have an effective procedure for ensuring that property transferred out
of its property room for temporary use elsewhere, such as in court proceedings,
was adequately accounted for and returned when no longer required.
Our audit also disclosed that critical data relating to seized firearms were often
not recorded or were inconsistently recorded in BPD’s property records.
Additionally, required documentation supporting the destruction of firearms was
not always on file, and based on available records, BPD was not reporting
destroyed firearms to the Maryland State Police as required by law.
We also noted that BPD did not have procedures to independently account for all
funds initially recorded in its property records, as well as funds being held in City
escrow accounts. Furthermore, BPD had not established a formal, comprehensive
training program for its property and evidence management operations, and
lacked formal policies and procedures for maintaining and tracking certain critical
documentation relating to the seizure and return of property. Lastly, BPD did not
maintain adequate documentation to support $1 million in overtime expenditures
charged against Federal Equitable Sharing Program funds.
Our audit recommendations were addressed to BPD; however, for certain fiscal-
related issues noted in Finding 7, the Baltimore City Department of Finance will
be a party to the recommended corrective actions. BPD’s response to this audit is
included as an appendix to this report. We reviewed the response and noted
general agreement to our findings and related recommendations. However,
BPD’s responses did not always include details on corrective actions discussed
and agreed to during our previous meetings with the BPD, which are necessary
for us to conclude that all agreed upon recommendations will be satisfactorily
addressed. As a result, certain aspects of the response will require further
clarification and follow-up. However, we do not anticipate that this follow-up
process will require the Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee’s attention to
resolve.
We wish to acknowledge the cooperation extended to us during the audit by BPD
and other Baltimore City government employees. We also wish to acknowledge
2

--- Page 5 ---
BPD’s willingness to address the audit issues and implement appropriate
corrective actions.
Respectfully submitted,
Gregory A. Hook, CPA
Legislative Auditor
3

--- Page 6 ---
4

--- Page 7 ---
Table of Contents
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology 7
Audit Scope 7
Objectives and Methodology 8
Fieldwork and Agency Response 9
Background Information 10
Agency Responsibilities 10
State Asset Forfeiture Law 11
Federal Equitable Sharing Program 12
Property and Evidence Management System 12
Support Services 13
Findings and Recommendations 14
Objective 1 – Property Room Procedures
Objective and Methodology 14
Background 14
Conclusion 15
Findings
Finding 1 – The Baltimore Police Department’s (BPD) written policies 16
and procedures did not require routine physical inventories and audits
to ensure all property is accounted for, and complete physical
inventories and audits were not being conducted.
Finding 2 – BPD’s policies and procedures did not require regularly 17
scheduled reviews of confiscated property to identify items that
could be disposed of or returned to owners, resulting in items held
unnecessarily for extended periods.
Finding 3 – BPD did not have an effective procedure to ensure all 18
property temporarily transferred out of its property room was
accounted for and returned.
Finding 4 – BPD did not enter all required data into the property records 19
for confiscated firearms, could not support the destruction of
numerous firearms, and did not report destroyed firearms to the
Maryland State Police as required.
5

--- Page 8 ---
Finding 5 – BPD did not have procedures to independently account for 22
all funds seized and recorded in its property records on a periodic
basis.
Finding 6 – BPD had not established a formal, comprehensive training 23
program in relation to its property and evidence management
operations.
Objective 2 – Asset Forfeiture and Return of Property
Objective and Methodology 25
Background 25
Conclusion 27
Findings
Finding 7 – BPD lacked formal policies and procedures for maintaining 28
and tracking certain critical documentation relating to the seizure and
return of property and did not adequately account for funds maintained
in escrow accounts.
Objective 3 – Federal Equitable Sharing Program Compliance
Objective and Methodology 30
Background 31
Conclusion 31
Findings
Finding 8 – BPD did not maintain adequate documentation to support 32
one of the seventeen program expenditures tested totaling $1.0 million.
Exhibit 1 – Property Seizure Receipt 33
Exhibit 2 – Property Receipt 34
Agency Response Appendix
6

--- Page 9 ---
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
Audit Scope
Chapter 535, Laws of Maryland, 2020, effective July 1, 2020, requires the Office
of Legislative Audits (OLA), at least once every six years, to conduct an audit or
audits of the Baltimore Police Department (BPD) to evaluate effectiveness and
efficiency of the financial management practices of BPD. The law also states the
scope and objectives of the audit or audits shall be determined by the Legislative
Auditor.
OLA identified four separate audits to be conducted during the first audit cycle of
BPD (in the following order).
1. Evaluation of Purchasing and Disbursement Controls and Transactions,
2. Asset Forfeiture and Property Control,
3. Surveillance Equipment, and
4. Human Resource Activities and Overtime.
The scope of this audit broadly focused on an evaluation of BPD’s policies and
procedures for the safeguarding, accountability, and disposition of confiscated
property (including money). Our audit focused on activity for the six-year period
beginning July 1, 2014 and ending June 30, 2020. The audit evaluated BPD’s
compliance with its standard operating procedures and policies for confiscated
property and the extent to which BPD had implemented certain property and
evidence management best practices recommended by the International
Association for Property and Evidence (IAPE)1. In addition, we reviewed BPD’s
practices for compliance with State laws that provide for the forfeiture of property
seized in relation to certain criminal violations. Finally, we evaluated BPD’s
compliance with Federal Equitable Sharing Program requirements established in
the U.S. Department of Justice and U.S. Department of the Treasury Guide to
Equitable Sharing for State, Local, and Tribal Law Enforcement Agencies.
Our audit was performed in accordance with generally accepted government
auditing standards. Those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to
obtain sufficient, appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our
findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives. We believe that the
evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions
based on our audit objectives.
1 IAPE is a non-profit organization that seeks to advance the scope of knowledge and enhance
professionalism within the field of property and evidence management.
7

--- Page 10 ---
Objectives and Methodology
Our audit included the following objectives:
1. Evaluate the adequacy of BPD policies and procedures for the submission,
handling, storage, and disposition of confiscated/seized property relative to
State law and established best practices, and to determine if BPD complied
with its policies and procedures.
2. Evaluate the adequacy of BPD’s policies and procedures for asset forfeiture
and the return of property relative to State law, and to determine if BPD
complied with its policies and procedures.
3. Evaluate the adequacy of BPD’s procedures for ensuring compliance with the
U.S Department of Justice and U.S. Department of Treasury – Guide to
Equitable Sharing for State, Local, and Tribal Law Enforcement Agencies
(Guide) and to determine if BPD addressed certain recommendations noted
during prior federal reviews of BPD’s participation in the Federal Equitable
Sharing Program.
To accomplish our objectives, we reviewed applicable State laws, and standard
operating procedures and policies established by BPD for the control of property,
asset forfeiture, and the return/disposition of property. Additionally, we reviewed
the aforementioned federal Guide on equitable sharing. We also compared BPD’s
policies and procedures against evidence control best practice standards provided
by the IAPE.
In addition, we conducted interviews of BPD, Baltimore City Department of
Finance (DOF), Baltimore City Department of Transportation, and Baltimore City
Law Department personnel; inspected documents and records; observed certain
procedures and operations; and performed tests of transactions. Furthermore, we
reached out to four other large law enforcement agencies in Maryland regarding
their asset forfeiture and property room procedures, and compared the procedures
from the three agencies that responded to our request for information to the
procedures used by BPD.
We obtained data files of BPD’s general ledger activity from the City’s financial
system for the period of July 1, 2014 to June 30, 2020. We also obtained various
data extracts from BPD’s property and evidence management system, such as
detailed records of property and evidence under BPD custody as of September 24,
2020, as well as extracts from BPD’s internal tracking databases for the Equitable
Sharing Program cases and vehicle forfeiture tracking. We performed various
tests of the relevant data and determined that these data files were sufficiently
8

--- Page 11 ---
reliable for the purposes used during the audit. Finally, we performed other
auditing procedures that we considered necessary to achieve our audit objectives.
Generally, transactions were selected for testing based on auditor judgment,
which primarily considers risk, the timing or dollar amount of the transaction, or
the significance of the transaction to the area of operation reviewed. As a matter
of course, we do not normally use sampling in our tests, so unless otherwise
specifically indicated, neither statistical nor non-statistical audit sampling was
used to select the transactions tested. Therefore, unless sampling is specifically
indicated in a finding, the results from any tests conducted or disclosed by us
cannot be used to project those results to the entire population from which the test
items were selected.
The reliability of data used in this report for background or informational
purposes was not assessed. In addition to the conditions included in this report,
other findings were communicated to BPD that were not deemed significant and,
consequently, did not warrant inclusion in this report.
More detailed descriptions of the specific objectives and related methodologies,
including the time period covered by our test work, are discussed in the Findings
and Recommendations section of this report.
Fieldwork and Agency Response
We conducted our fieldwork from August 28, 2020 to April 19, 2021. A copy of
the draft report was provided to BPD and DOF. The responses to our findings
and recommendations from BPD appear as an appendix to this audit report. As
prescribed in the State Government Article, Section 2-1224 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, we will advise BPD regarding the results of our review of its
response.
9

--- Page 12 ---
Background Information
Agency Responsibilities
The Baltimore Police Department (BPD) is an agency and instrumentality of the
State of Maryland (State) established under Article 4 – Section 16 of the Code of
Public Local Laws of Maryland. BPD safeguards the lives and properties of
persons within the areas under the control of Baltimore City, and assists in
securing protection under the law for all persons. Authority to appoint the Police
Commissioner was transferred from the Governor to the Mayor of Baltimore,
effective July 1, 1978. The Police Commissioner has the full authority and
responsibility for directing and supervising the operations and affairs of BPD.
BPD is responsible for safeguarding, storing, accounting for, and disposing of
confiscated or recovered property. Confiscated property may include items held
specifically as evidence of a crime or items seized during an investigation but not
necessarily considered evidence. BPD may also obtain other property that has
been found or otherwise recovered. Generally, confiscated money is deposited
into a City bank account and vehicles are maintained at a Baltimore City impound
lot, while other property and controlled dangerous substances are physically
safeguarded by BPD’s Evidence Management Unit until final disposition.
Confiscated or recovered property may be returned to the rightful owner, sold or
auctioned, disposed or destroyed, or retained for BPD use. See Figure 1 below
for the possible disposition outcomes.
10

--- Page 13 ---
Figure 1
Possible Dispositions
Possible Disposition Eligible Property Types
Money
Weapons
Return to Owner
Vehicles
Other Property
Vehicles
Sold/Auctioned
Other Property
Weapons
Destroyed/Disposed Controlled Dangerous Substance
Other Property with no value
Money
Retained for Local Government Vehicles
Use Weapons (if rare or for training)
Other Property
Note: Money or proceeds from sale of property are reverted to the City General Fund (except for
Federal Sharing Proceeds)
State Asset Forfeiture Law
Property that is subject to forfeiture proceedings are governed by the Annotated
Code of Maryland, specifically the Criminal Procedure Article, Title 12 –
Forfeiture – Controlled Dangerous Substance (CDS) Violations and Title 13 –
Other Forfeitures, which relates to non-CDS related crimes such as gambling or
gun violations. The majority of BPD forfeitures are made in association with
CDS violations.
Legislation enacted during the 2016 General Assembly session amended Title 12,
shifting the burden of proof in forfeiture proceedings by requiring that the State
prove that a violation of the CDS law was committed with the owner’s actual
knowledge, rather than the owner having to prove otherwise. The amendment
also included a requirement that law enforcement agencies send written
information to the owner within 15 days regarding steps to recover seized
property.
Maryland law requires proceeds from BPD forfeitures be deposited into the
Baltimore City General Fund. In accordance with this law, during fiscal year
11

--- Page 14 ---
2020, BPD transferred approximately $500,000 to the City’s General Fund
according to the City’s records.
Federal Equitable Sharing Program
The U.S. Department of Justice (DOJ) and the U.S. Department of the Treasury
(DOT) Federal Equitable Sharing Program allows for sharing of federal forfeiture
proceeds with cooperating state and local law enforcement agencies through an
equitable sharing process. BPD is eligible to receive a portion of forfeited
proceeds for its participation and assistance in an investigation or prosecution of a
DOJ or DOT case. The amount to be received is based on the discretion of DOJ
and DOT. Any proceeds received through the Program must be used by BPD for
law enforcement purposes only and cannot be reverted to the City’s General
Fund. According to the City’s records, during fiscal year 2020, BPD received
approximately $1.5 million in Program proceeds.
Property and Evidence Management System
BPD has used the same automated property and evidence management system
(PEMS) since 1993. At the time of our review, the PEMS software had not been
updated in numerous years, and BPD management advised us that, due to its age
and related limitations, it did not believe that the current PEMS adequately met
the complex needs of BPD or properly served the citizens of the City of
Baltimore.
Consequently, BPD awarded a non-competitive sole source procurement for a
new PEMS to a Kentucky based company which was approved by the City Board
of Estimates in June 2020. The contract provided for migration of data from the
old system, training, and software licenses at a cost of approximately $94,000 for
the period of May 13, 2020 to May 12, 2021, with two one-year renewal options.
This new system was not operational during our audit. We were advised that the
system went live on March 1, 2021, at which time our fieldwork had essentially
been completed. As a result, the conclusions reached during our audit and
included in this report are based on our review of procedures and related testing of
procedures in place and data available prior to activation of the new PEMS. We
did not examine the implementation or effectiveness of the new system.
Nevertheless, the recommendations contained in this report will apply to BPD’s
property management function regardless of what PEMS is in use, and will help
to ensure BPD’s complex needs are met and that the citizens of the City are
properly served.
12

--- Page 15 ---
Support Services
Our audit scope included certain support services provided to BPD. Specifically,
the Baltimore City’s Department of Finance (DOF), Law Department - Office of
Legal Affairs for the Baltimore Police Department, and Department of
Transportation provide various support services to BPD regarding confiscated
funds and asset forfeiture. These include administering forfeiture proceedings
with the court, record keeping for BPD’s participation in the Federal Equitable
Sharing Program, maintaining escrow accounts and processing certain
disbursements relating to seized funds, and certain other record keeping functions.
In addition, the Department of Transportation operates the impound lots used to
store vehicles towed or seized by BPD, notifies owners upon release by BPD, and
processes the return of the vehicle to the owner.
13

--- Page 16 ---
Findings and Recommendations
Objective 1 – Property Room Procedures
Objective and Methodology
The objective of our review of the Baltimore Police Department (BPD) property
room was to evaluate the adequacy of policies and procedures for the submission,
handling, storage, and disposition of confiscated property in relation to State law
and established best practices, and to determine whether BPD complied with its
policies and procedures.
To accomplish our objective, we reviewed applicable State laws and related
policies and standard operating procedures established by BPD. We also
reviewed best practices established by the International Association of Property
and Evidence (IAPE)2. Additionally, we interviewed BPD staff to determine
processes used to receive, secure, maintain, and dispose of property. We also
interviewed Baltimore City Department of Finance (DOF) staff to determine how
money deposited by BPD was recorded in the City’s financial system. In
addition, we surveyed four other large law enforcement agencies (LEA) in
Maryland regarding their asset forfeiture and property room procedures. Three of
the LEAs responded and we compared their limited responses to BPD procedures
and did not note any significant practices not present at BPD. Lastly, we
reviewed other audits and reviews related to property and evidence control,
including best practice reviews conducted by the audit departments in two other
States.
We also obtained data files of BPD’s general ledger activity from the City’s
financial system for the period of July 1, 2014 to June 30, 2020, and we obtained
data extracts of BPD’s property and evidence management system (PEMS), as of
September 24, 2020. We used the data to perform various tests of the existence,
recordation, transfer, and disposal of property and evidence. We performed
various tests of the relevant data and determined that these data files were
sufficiently reliable for the purposes used during the audit.
Background
In the course of performing their duties, BPD law enforcement personnel
routinely seize or take custody of property such as money, weapons, vehicles, and
controlled dangerous substances (CDS). Property may be taken for evidentiary
purposes, to ensure public safety, for safekeeping, or because the owner is
2 International Association for Property and Evidence, Inc. – Professional Standards, Version
3.0/Rev January 2019
14

--- Page 17 ---
unknown. BPD’s Evidence Management Unit (EMU) is responsible for the
receipt, maintenance, and disposal of property and evidence seized or found by
BPD officers.
According to BPD records, between July 1, 2014 and June 30, 2020,
approximately 272,000 property items were submitted to the EMU, including
approximately $11.4 million in cash, 14,000 weapons, 76,000 CDS/paraphernalia
items, and 159,000 other property items. See Figure 2 below for property
submitted by fiscal year.
Source: Baltimore Police Department PEMS
Conclusion
Based on our review, we determined that BPD personnel did not always comply
with established BPD procedures and controls. In addition, certain procedures
and controls were not in line with international best practices for receiving,
monitoring, and accounting for seized property. We also noted inconsistencies
and inefficiencies with firearms data recorded in PEMS, and found that firearm
destructions did not always have required approvals documented.
15

--- Page 18 ---
Findings
Finding 1
BPD’s written policies and procedures did not require routine physical
inventories and audits to ensure all property is accounted for, and complete
physical inventories and audits were not being conducted.
Analysis
BPD’s written policies and procedures did not require routine physical inventories
and audits to ensure all property was properly accounted for. According to BPD’s
automated PEMS, as of September 24, 2020, BPD had custody of 961,554
property items3. Professional Standards published by the IAPE provide for law
enforcement agencies to conduct inventories of property at least annually and
several times a year for high-risk items (such as firearms, drugs, and money). The
IAPE standards further provide for annual audits to verify employee compliance
with written policies and procedures and to ensure agency property and evidence
functions, such as staffing, training, security, and special handling are free from
significant errors or other deficiencies.
Our review of BPD procedures disclosed that they did not include provisions or
requirements for conducting routine inventories or audits. While audits of
employee compliance with policies and procedures were not performed, BPD did
conduct a limited number of physical inventories; however, BPD could not
document that all discrepancies found during the inventory process were
investigated and resolved. Specifically, according to BPD records, between
August 2018 and November 2020, inventories were only conducted of 143,105
property items, of which, 1,008 could not be located. We were advised that
discrepancies identified during the inventories, including the missing items, were
provided to EMU warehouse personnel to investigate and resolve. However, our
test of 12 of the aforementioned missing items disclosed that BPD could not
provide us with documentation of the investigation and resolution for 11 of the
items. In separate testing, we were able to account for all 65 items selected from
BPD property records, and our test of 15 items on hand disclosed that the items
were all properly recorded in BPD’s PEMS.
The lack of routine physical inventories and audits may result in missing property
going undetected, the inability to locate property when required, an inability to
return property to its rightful owner, or the improper disposal of property.
3 BPD also maintained manual inventory records that included approximately 867,000
property items, but BPD considers its automated system to be its official record of property and
there is uncertainty as to the accuracy of the manual records. We did not attempt to reconcile the
differences.
16

--- Page 19 ---
Recommendation 1
We recommend that BPD
a. establish and implement written policies and procedures for the routine
performance of physical inventories that address, for example, frequency,
methodology, documentation requirements, and resolution of
discrepancies and other problems noted, in accordance with industry best
practices;
b. establish and implement written policies and procedures for periodic
audits to ensure employee adherence to policies and procedures, and that
property and evidence functions, such as staffing, training, and security
are free from significant errors or other deficiencies;
c. periodically conduct complete physical inventories and audits in
accordance with newly established policies and procedures, and reconcile
the results of inventories to its inventory records; and
d. determine the disposition of missing items, including those noted above.
Finding 2
BPD’s policies and procedures did not require regularly scheduled reviews of
confiscated property to identify items that could be disposed of or returned
to owners, resulting in items held unnecessarily for extended periods.
Analysis
BPD’s policies and procedures did not require regularly scheduled reviews of its
property to identify items that could be disposed of (such as by sale) or returned
to their owners. IAPE best practices provide for law enforcement agencies to
conduct an annual review to evaluate whether property can be disposed of or
returned. Although BPD’s policies and procedures state that items that may be
eligible for disposal should be identified, there was no formal mechanism or
provision for regularly scheduled reviews of the inventory to identify such items.
Instead, we were advised by BPD management that reviews are only performed
when the evidence room becomes overpopulated.
When an item is identified for possible disposal or return, an Electronic
Disposition Order (EDO) is to be sent to the responsible officer requesting
authorization to return or dispose of the property. As provided for in BPD’s
standard operating procedures, an officer’s failure to respond to an EDO within
30 days shall be deemed authorization for release or disposal of the property.
Our review of 12 items in BPD custody for at least three years disclosed that BPD
either did not issue an EDO or did not take appropriate action when the officer
failed to respond timely to the EDO. Specifically, as of September 2020, 10 of
17

--- Page 20 ---
the 12 items had been held for between 41 and 72 months without evidence that
an EDO had been issued to the applicable officer. For the remaining 2 items, an
EDO was issued between January 2020 and May 2020, but as of September 2020
the responsible officer had failed to respond, which is deemed to be implicit
authorization, yet no action was taken to dispose of or return the items.
Recommendation 2
We recommend that BPD
a. establish and implement policies and procedures to require regularly
scheduled reviews of its property to identify items eligible for disposal or
return,
b. consider revising the EDO policy to require positive confirmation from
the applicable officer that property is approved for disposal or return,
and
c. issue timely EDOs and take action to dispose of or return property.
Finding 3
BPD did not have an effective procedure to ensure all property temporarily
transferred out of its property room was accounted for and returned.
Analysis
BPD did not have an effective procedure to ensure that property temporarily
transferred out of its property room (such as for court or for laboratory analysis)
was accounted for and returned. Specifically, BPD did not use available output
reports from its PEMS to periodically identify and determine the disposition of
transferred property that was outstanding (removed) for extended periods. For
example, as of September 2020, the system indicated that 28,433 transferred
property items had been outstanding since between December 1993 and
September 2019.
BPD could not document that sufficient follow-up action was taken to investigate
these outstanding items to determine the current disposition, including whether
the items should have been or had been returned to the property room. According
to the system, at least nine of these items were firearms that had been transferred
to other BPD units for further investigation between September 2008 and May
2015.
BPD written policies provide that evidence removed for court proceedings may
remain in the custody of the court for the duration of the trial except for firearms
and CDS, which are to be returned to the property room at the conclusion of each
day’s court proceedings. The policies further provide that EMU personnel shall
18

--- Page 21 ---
follow-up on all items released for further investigation that are not returned to
EMU within 30 days.
BPD advised us that it believes that there are legitimate reasons why transferred
property may remain outstanding for extended periods. For example, property
may be secured in crime labs for extended periods due to the volume of property
to be analyzed. In addition, property may be permanently transferred to another
entity such as a federal agency for prosecution purposes. Furthermore, certain
items recorded as outstanding may have been returned at some point, but not
properly updated in the property system. Nevertheless, BPD could not document
how these conditions may have impacted the specific aforementioned 28,433
items.
BPD had certain manual procedures for tracking property transferred out of the
evidence control room, such as maintaining folders of items removed; however,
these records were not reconciled to the evidence management system to ensure
all outstanding property was properly accounted for; and therefore could not be
relied upon.
Recommendation 3
We recommend that BPD
a. use available output reports to periodically identify outstanding
transferred property;
b. investigate transferred property outstanding for extended periods and
document the results of these reviews; and
c. determine the status of the aforementioned items that were outstanding
for extended periods, including the nine firearms, and take appropriate
corrective action.
Finding 4
BPD did not enter all required data into the property records for confiscated
firearms, could not support the destruction of numerous firearms, and did
not report all destroyed firearms to the Maryland State Police as required.
Analysis
BPD did not enter all required data into the property records for confiscated
firearms, could not support the destruction of numerous firearms, and did not
report all destroyed firearms to the Maryland State Police as required. Seized
firearms are submitted to the EMU, which then records the firearm information in
BPD’s PEMS and safeguards the firearm in a secured firearm vault. EMU retains
the firearms until they are released by the responsible officer (such as when it is
19

--- Page 22 ---
no longer needed for evidentiary purposes). Released firearms are generally
returned to the owner following a background investigation, or are scheduled for
destruction.
Firearms scheduled for destruction are added to a destruction list in PEMS and
identified by a sequential destruction or “burn” number. Prior to destruction, the
BPD Performance Standards Section (PSS) ensures the firearm matches the
information on the prepared destruction list and then written approval to destroy
the firearm is obtained from the Director of BPD’s Crime Scene Sciences and
Evidence Section. Multiple BPD personnel escort the firearms to the destruction
facility and witness the destruction, sign a Certification of Destruction, and PEMS
is updated to reflect the firearm was destroyed. According to PEMS, between
July 2014 and September 2020 there were 14,583 entries into the property records
with at least one item coded as a firearm.4 However, primarily because of the
coding discrepancies noted below, it was not possible to determine the exact
number of firearms taken in during the period; therefore, we believe the accuracy
of the 14,583 is questionable.
Firearm Information Recorded in PEMS was Not Accurate or Complete
Critical information, such as serial number and brand (manufacturer) was not
always recorded in PEMS for firearms seized. We judgmentally selected 15
firearms recorded in PEMS and noted 3 that had no serial number5 recorded and 1
with no brand recorded. When the serial number and brand were provided, they
were not always recorded in the proper designated fields. For example, 1 of the
12 aforementioned firearms with recorded serial numbers had the serial number
recorded in the item description field instead of the designated serial number
field. In addition, although PEMS had a designated brand field, this was not used
when recording firearms, rather the brand information was included in the item
description field. As a result of incorrectly recording firearm designations, BPD
could not readily identify or otherwise analyze all firearms held by serial number
or brand using its automated PEMS.
Furthermore, in addition to improperly recording firearms, BPD improperly used
the identification code reserved for firearms for other items such as ammunition
and holsters. BPD established a unique identification code for individual property
types, and designated “W” for firearms. Our review of 1,507 entries into the
property records between July 2014 and September 2020 disclosed 2,296 property
items with property code W, which were not firearms based on recorded
4 Each property entry may include multiple property items, each assigned its own identification
code and description.
5 A serial number may not always be available, but the reason for such should be recorded in
PEMS (for example, serial number had been filed off).
20

--- Page 23 ---
descriptions of the items. For example, for one entry with six property items
coded “W”, only one item was described as a firearm while the others included
ammunition and clothing. Consequently, BPD could not readily determine the
number of firearms on hand using the PEMS coding system.
Firearm Destruction Was Not Always Documented or Recorded Properly
Our test of five firearm destruction events between July 2016 and March 2020,
which according to destruction documentation destroyed 7,308 firearms, disclosed
a lack of documented inspections and approvals by witnesses, untimely updating
of PEMS, and other record keeping deficiencies.
 For two of the five events tested (for 3,965 firearms), BPD did not retain
documentation to support the required pre-inspection by the PSS or the
witnessing of the firearm destruction as required (in other words, no
Certificate of Destruction was prepared for these two events). For the
remaining three events, Certificates of Destruction were prepared, but not
signed by all witnesses.
 PEMS was not updated timely for any of the five events tested. Specifically,
PEMS was updated between 31 days to more than 3.5 years after the dates of
the firearms’ destruction. Although BPD Standard Operating Procedures and
Policies do not specify a timeframe for updating PEMS after destruction, we
believe that records should be updated timely to ensure the records are
accurate. We were advised by BPD management that delays were due to an
unfamiliarity on the part of BPD personnel with how to finalize the
destructions in PEMS.
 BPD did not reconcile the number of firearms to be destroyed according to the
Certifications of Destruction to the corresponding number of firearms
destroyed recorded in PEMS. As a result, discrepancies were not identified
and resolved. For example, documentation from one of the five destruction
events tested indicated that 2,465 firearms were destroyed, but PEMS
indicated that 5,828 firearms had been destroyed. BPD could not explain the
cause(s) of the discrepancy or the whereabouts of the unaccounted for 3,363
firearms (which were not documented as having been destroyed).
BPD Did Not Report the Destroyed Firearms to Maryland State Police
BPD did not report destroyed firearms to the Maryland State Police (MSP) as
required by State law and BPD operating procedures. MSP management
personnel advised us that they had not received any record of destroyed firearms
from BPD since 2012. The Criminal Procedure Article, Section 13-206, of the
Annotated Code of Maryland requires that forfeited firearms be reported to MSP
21

--- Page 24 ---
within 30 days of disposal. In addition, BPD’s Standard Operating Procedures
require that reports of destroyed firearms be sent to MSP. Although we were
advised by BPD officials that the reports were sent to MSP, there was no
documentation provided by BPD to support these assertions and, as previously
mentioned, this was contradicted by MSP.
Recommendation 4
We recommend that BPD
a. ensure that all firearms seized are properly recorded in PEMS, which
includes appropriately using the firearms code and correctly recording
all identifying information in designated system fields;
b. ensure that all required inspections and witness approvals are obtained
and documented for destruction events;
c. accurately and timely record the destruction of firearms in PEMS and
periodically reconcile destruction records to PEMS and investigate any
discrepancies, including those noted above; and
d. ensure that all destroyed firearms, including those noted in this Finding,
are reported to MSP as required.
Finding 5
BPD did not have procedures to independently account for all funds seized
and recorded in its property records on a periodic basis.
Analysis
BPD did not have procedures to independently account for all funds seized and
recorded in PEMS on a periodic basis. Funds seized by officers are submitted to
EMU, recorded in PEMS, and temporaily placed in an EMU vault until deposit in
a financial institution. We were advised that, for the vast majority of these funds,
a deposit is prepared by BPD on a weekly basis, which is then picked up and
deposited by a courrier into a City holding or escrow account maintained at a
financial institution, when DOF updates the City’s financial accounts accordingly.
In certain cases, funds may be returned to the owner without being deposited, or
remain in the vault, such as when the funds are evidence of a crime. During the
period July 1, 2014 to June 30, 2020, funds recorded in PEMS totaled
approximately $11.4 million, and funds deposited into escrow accounts totaled
approximately $11.2 million.
Our review disclosed that BPD lacked procedures to independently verify the
disposition of all recorded funds as deposited, returned to the owner, or on hand.
Although an employee in DOF agreed deposit documentation prepared by BPD to
deposit documentation from the financial institution, this procedure was not
22

--- Page 25 ---
sufficient since the intial record of the funds received by EMU (property records)
was not used for this process. In addition, this procedure did not account for
funds that were returned to the owner prior to deposit or retained in the vault.
Recommendation 5
We recommend that BPD establish procedures to independently account for
all funds recorded in PEMS. Specifically we recommend that an employee
independent of the related funds reconcile collections initially recorded in
PEMS to the validated deposit slip from the financial institution and
periodically account for all funds as to deposited, returned, or on hand.
Finding 6
BPD had not established a formal, comprehensive training program in
relation to its property and evidence management operations.
Analysis
BPD had not established a formal, comprehensive training program for its
property and evidence management operations to help ensure that employees
obtain and develop the necessary knowledge and skills to effectively perform
their duties. We reviewed best practices for training established by two other
states (Minnesota and Ohio) and noted that they provided examples of a
comprehensive training program relevant to property and evidence management.
Such training may address, for example, protocols in all areas of evidence
handling; safety precautions; specialized training in the handling of items such as
hazardous materials and firearms, and drug exposure; evidence management
software; and laws governing the disposition of property.
We also found that the IAPE (which appears to be a basis for the aforementioned
states’ programs) recommends that training should be provided to all property
officers, supervisors, and managers of the property unit and the training should be
timely, continual, and well documented. Familiarization with written evidence
policies and procedures should also be provided to all officers, especially new
hires and newly promoted detectives and investigators to provide, for example,
instruction on timely authorization to dispose or return unneeded items. This
training, if provided by BPD, could help address some of the deficiencies noted in
other findings in this report. For example, as noted in Finding 2, officers did not
always respond to disposition inquiries from property room personnel despite the
requirement in BPD’s written policies and procedures.
23

--- Page 26 ---
Recommendation 6
We recommend that BPD establish and implement a formal, comprehensive
training program that includes established best practices from the IAPE, and
other states or law enforcement agencies as appropriate.
24

--- Page 27 ---
Objective 2 –Asset Forfeiture and Return of Property
Objective and Methodology
Our objective related to asset forfeiture and the return of property was to evaluate
the adequacy of BPD’s policies and procedures for these functions in relation to
State law, and to determine if BPD complied with its policies and procedures. To
accomplish our objective, we reviewed applicable State law and BPD policies and
standard operating procedures pertaining to asset forfeiture and the return of
property. Additionally we interviewed BPD personnel and personnel at the City’s
Law Department – Office of Legal Affairs for Baltimore Police Department,
DOF, and Department of Transportation to determine the processes in place for
pursuit of asset forfeiture and the return of property to owners.
We obtained data files of BPD’s general ledger activity from the City’s financial
system for the period of July 1, 2014 to June 30, 2020. We also obtained various
data extracts from BPDs property records (PEMS), such as detailed records of
property and evidence under BPD custody as of September 24, 2020, as well as
extracts from BPD’s internal tracking database of vehicle forfeiture tracking. We
used these data files to perform various tests pertaining to asset forfeiture and the
return of property to ensure compliance with applicable State law and BPD
policies and procedures. We performed various tests of the relevant data and
determined that these data files were sufficiently reliable for the purposes used
during the audit.
Our objective pertaining to asset forfeiture was generally focused on seizures
governed by the Criminal Procedure Article, Title 12 – Forfeiture – Controlled
Dangerous Substance Violations of the Annotated Code of Maryland, as these
cases account for the majority of money and vehicles seized and we were advised
BPD focuses its forfeiture efforts on money and vehicles seized in relation to
CDS violations.
Background
If there is probable cause to believe that property (including money, weapons, and
vehicles) has been used or is intended to be used in a violation of the CDS law,
the property may be subject to seizure under Title 12 with or without a warrant.
State law and BPD’s Policy 1401 - Control of Property and Evidence, require a
Property Seizure Receipt form (Exhibit 1) witnessed by a supervisor to be
completed at the time property is seized.6 The form must be signed by both the
officer and the witnessing supervisor. Accordingly, the following three steps
6 The law regarding provision of a receipt does not specifically address property seizures unrelated
to CDS violations.
25

--- Page 28 ---
must occur when an officer is seizing property relating to a potential CDS
violation, all of which must be recorded on the officer’s body worn camera.
1. Notify – The officer must notify a supervisor to witness inventory and
completion of the receipt form.
2. Inventory – The officer must count any money with the suspect and
supervisor both as witnesses.
3. Document – The officer must document the inventory and provide a copy of
the receipt form to the suspect.
The Receipt form explains that the owner of the seized property has the right to
request the return of the property, and provides an email address to make such a
request. Within 60 days after receipt of such a request, BPD must make a
determination as to whether to seek forfeiture of the property, continue holding
the property as evidence, or release/return the property.
All property recovered or seized by BPD officers that is not immediately returned
to the lawful owner, is required to be submitted to the EMU for storage and
safekeeping before the completion of the officer’s tour of duty. The officer
submitting the property must complete a property receipt, documenting the
change of custody to EMU personnel (Exhibit 2).
If the property is to be held for an investigation or evidence of a crime, a hold is
entered into PEMS, and the property may not be disposed of or returned to the
owner until authorized by the responsible officer. If no owner can be identified,
and there is no record of the property as stolen, the property will be considered
found property, and may be disposed in accordance with BPD’s Policy.
Like other property seized related to CDS violations, to comply with State Law
and BPD policy, a Property Seizure Receipt form (Exhibit 1) is required to be
completed for vehicles seized by BPD. If the owner is not present at the time of
seizure, the owner must be notified in writing within 15 days.
BPD Forfeiture of Property Process
The City’s Office of Legal Affairs acts as the forfeiting authority on behalf of
BPD and makes determinations regarding whether a complaint seeking forfeiture
of property should be pursued and filed with the court. The law stipulates certain
time limits by which a complaint must be filed depending on the type of property.
In general, the law requires complaints be filed within the earlier of 90 days after
the seizure or 1 year after the final disposition of the criminal charge for the
violation giving rise to the forfeiture. If a complaint seeking forfeiture is filed
with the court, the owner must respond by the date indicated in the summons. If
26

--- Page 29 ---
the owner does not respond by that date, the court may order forfeiture of the
property.
BPD Escrow Accounts for Seized Money
Funds recovered or seized by BPD are generally deposited and recorded in one of
three separate City maintained escrow accounts based on the type of case to
which they relate, CDS, gambling, or other. These accounts serve to hold funds
pending final disposition, such as seeking forfeiture or return to owner. Deposit
activity by account (BPD escrow account by case) for fiscal years 2015 through
2020 and total activity combined for all accounts for the same period is shown in
Figure 3. As previously mentioned, Maryland law requires proceeds from BPD
forfeitures be deposited into the Baltimore City General Fund.
Source: BPD records
Note: Transfers to the City General Fund are also included in our deposit totals to the extent
deposits in the escrow accounts during the audit period were also transferred to the General Fund
Conclusion
Based on our review, we determined that BPD lacked formal policies and
procedures for maintaining and tracking certain critical documentation relating to
the seizure and return of property. In addition, BPD did not adequately account
for seized or recovered funds deposited into escrow accounts and asset forfeitures.
27

--- Page 30 ---
Findings
Finding 7
BPD lacked formal policies and procedures for maintaining and tracking
certain critical documentation relating to the seizure and return of property
and did not adequately account for funds maintained in escrow accounts.
Analysis
BPD lacked formal policies and procedures for maintaining and tracking critical
information documenting the receipt, request to return, and return of seized
property. Our procedural review and testing disclosed several instances in which
these documents were not on file, or were not adequately tracked and monitored
by BPD. In addition, BPD did not adequately account for seized or recovered
funds deposited into escrow accounts.
Property Seizure Receipt Forms
 BPD has no central file of property seizure forms, which must be provided to
the individual from whom the property is taken when the seizure relates to a
CDS violation. We were advised that the seizing police officer maintains a
copy of the property seizure receipt form in their case file. Using EMU
records as our source, we requested copies of receipt forms for 47 CDS-
related property seizures consisting of 20 vehicles and money totaling
$580,701 during the period from fiscal years 2015 to 2020; but BPD could
provide a receipt form for only one of the seizures, which consisted of money
totaling $6,480. According to BPD’s records, during fiscal years 2019 and
2020 seized funds related to CDS cases and deposited into escrow accounts
maintained by DOF totaled approximately $1.2 million and $738,000,
respectively.
Returned Property
 BPD did not formally track requests from owners for the return of property.
Specifically, there was no centralized record of requests received, the
substance and timing of BPD’s response, and the disposition of the request.
Consequently, we were unable to readily compile this data for any specific
period of time.
 A property release receipt signed by the owner/recipient was not on file for 6
of 8 cases we examined between May 2016 and January 2020 in which BPD’s
records indicated that the property, such as phones and bicycles, had been
returned to the owners.
28

--- Page 31 ---
Escrow Accounts
 BPD did not have a comprehensive centralized record of seized or recovered
funds deposited into the three escrow accounts. Although certain BPD and
City units kept independent records of escrow account activity, such as
deposits and transfers, there was no centralized record maintained to
summarize all activity for each account. In addition, there was no
reconciliation of BPD’s recorded account activity to the escrow account
balances maintained by DOF (completing such a reconciliation would be
complicated by the current lack of comprehensive centralized records).
Consequently, BPD could not readily identify and account for all funds in
each account, and there was a lack of assurance that only valid and authorized
account activity had been processed. According to DOF records, as of June
30, 2020, the three escrow account balances totaled approximately $8.9
million.
 Forfeited funds were not transferred to the City’s General Fund on a case-by-
case basis. Instead, DOF generally processed one year-end transfer for the
current year net proceeds (current year deposits less returns to owners). As a
result, there was a lack of assurance that transfers were made only when
permitted, and that all funds were transferred as required. State law requires
funds not pursued for forfeiture to be transferred to the City General Fund if
the owner does not request return of the funds within one year of the criminal
case disposition; such accountability was not provided by the current annual
bulk transfer.
Recommendation 7
We recommend that BPD maintain a centralized seized property record
retention system and
a. establish and enforce formal policies and procedures for maintaining
required property seizure receipt forms to and from owners, and for
tracking requests from owners for the return of seized property,
including the timing of BPD’s response and the dispostion of the request;
b. formally track and account for property seizure receipt forms, including
those noted above for which a receipt could not be provided;
c. establish a comprehensive centralized record of each escrow account and
periodically reconcile this record to the balance maintained by DOF and
investigate and resolve any differences; and
d. transfer funds to the City’s General Fund on a case-by-case basis to
ensure compliance with State law and perform an analysis of the current
escrow account balances to identify and ensure the proper disposition of
the funds.
29

--- Page 32 ---
Objective 3 – Federal Equitable Sharing Program Compliance
Objective and Methodology
Our objective for examining BPD’s participation in the Federal Equitable Sharing
Program (Program) was to evaluate BPD’s procedures for ensuring compliance
with Program requirements as stated in the U.S Department of Justice (DOJ) and
U.S. Department of Treasury (DOT) – Guide to Equitable Sharing for State,
Local, and Tribal Law Enforcement Agencies (Guide) and to determine if BPD
addressed certain recommendations noted during prior federal reviews of BPD’s
participation in the Program. While DOJ and DOT are two separate federal
agencies, the Guide applies to both.
To accomplish our objectives, we reviewed the Guide to determine requirements
placed on local law enforcement agencies for participation in the Program. We
interviewed BPD and DOF staff to determine the procedures in place to request
federal equitable sharing funds, account for the funds, and ensure that Program
funds received were used for authorized purposes as stipulated in the Guide. In
addition, we reviewed the results of one DOJ and one DOT review of BPD
compliance with Program requirements issued in September 2018 and July 2019,
respectively. The reports identified findings and recommendations regarding
BPD’s compliance with the Program. We examined BPD’s actions regarding a
selection of those findings and recommendations that we deemed to be the most
significant.
We obtained data files of BPD’s general ledger activity from the City’s financial
system and data files of case information from BPD’s internal tracking database
of cases potentially eligible for Program participation for the period of July 1,
2014 to June 30, 2020. We performed various tests of the relevant data and
determined that these data files were sufficiently reliable for the purposes used
during the audit. We then used these data files to perform various tests of BPD’s
participation in the Program.
We tested 15 cases for which Program proceeds had been requested by BPD and
determined whether BPD properly controlled and accounted for any amounts
received. We also tested 17 disbursements of Program funds to ensure they were
made in accordance with the Guide and were properly supported and approved.
Finally, we ensured that an Equitable Sharing Agreement and Certification
(ESAC) required by the Program was accurately prepared by BPD for fiscal year
2020 and submitted to the DOJ, as required.
30

--- Page 33 ---
Background
The Program allows for sharing of federal forfeiture proceeds with cooperating
state and local law enforcement agencies through an equitable sharing process.
State or local law enforcement agencies approved for participation in the Program
that directly participate in a DOJ or DOT investigation or prosecution resulting in
an asset forfeiture can request an equitable share of the proceeds. DOJ and DOT
have discretion in evaluating, approving and determining the amount of a request
and not all law enforcement efforts will result in equitable sharing.
Any amounts awarded are required to be retained by BPD and spent on authorized
police-related expenditures, and may not be used for other purposes, such as
reversion to the City’s General Fund. In order to remain compliant with the
Program, an annual ESAC must be submitted by BPD to DOJ. The ESAC is used
by BPD to certify compliance with the Guide and provides a summary of DOJ
and DOT equitable sharing fund balances, including the beginning balances,
funds received, interest income, total funds spent, and ending balance, as well as
additional details on funds spent by various expense categories such as for law
enforcement operations, training and education, and law enforcement equipment.
Figure 4 below specifies relevant Program data for fiscal years 2015 through
2020.
Conclusion
BPD has established adequate written procedures and controls required for
participation in the federal Equitable Sharing Program. The procedures address
requests for equitable share funds, accounting for funds received in the City’s
fiscal records, requests and recordation of expenditures from Program funds,
filing of the annual ESAC, and monitoring and reconciliation of Program funds.
These procedures also addressed the findings we examined in the aforementioned
DOJ and DOT compliance reviews. Furthermore, DOF, on behalf of BPD, has
established general ledger accounts to separately account for Program funds,
including related interest earned.
31

--- Page 34 ---
Our test of 15 BPD requests for Program funds disclosed that approximately $2
million relating to 7 requests were approved and paid by DOJ/DOT and had been
properly recorded by BPD. Five other requests were pending DOJ or DOT
approval, and 3 requests were denied by either DOJ or DOT. However, our test
of 17 expenditures by BPD totaling approximately $2.5 million charged against
Program funds did note one expenditure totaling $1.0 million that was not
adequately supported in accordance with Program requirements.
Findings
Finding 8
BPD did not maintain adequate documentation to support one of the
seventeen program expenditures tested totaling $1.0 million.
Analysis
BPD did not maintain adequate documentation to support $1.0 million in overtime
expenditures charged against Equitable Sharing Program funds. Our test of 17
expenditure transactions totaling approximately $2.5 million charged against
Program funds during our audit period, disclosed a $1.0 million transaction
processed at the end of fiscal year 2016 that was not adequately supported. The
expenditure related to overtime costs for which BPD could not provide the
specific employees and the hours worked to substantiate the proper use of
Program funds.
The Equitable Sharing Program Guide provides that Program funds may be used
to pay overtime costs of law enforcement personnel. DOJ and DOT further
provide that adequate records be maintained to support the overtime charges,
including applicable employees and the overtime hours worked.
Recommendation 8
We recommend that BPD maintain documentation required by the Guide to
support all expenditures using Program funds.
32

--- Page 35 ---
Exhibit 1 - Property Seizure Receipt
33

--- Page 36 ---
Exhibit 2 – Property Receipt
34

--- Page 37 ---
APPENDIX
BALTIMORE POLICE DEPARTMENT
Brandon M. Scott Michael S. Harrison
Mayor Police Commissioner
November 16, 2021
Gregory A. Hook, CPA
Legislative Auditor
Department of Legislative Services
301 West Preston Street, Room 1202
Baltimore, MD 21201
Dear Mr. Hook:
Enclosed please find responses from the Baltimore Police Department (BPD) to the performance
audit report for asset forfeiture and property control from the Office of Legislative Audits for the
period beginning July 1, 2014 and ending June 30, 2020.
If you have any additional questions or concerns, please contact Ms. Shallah L. Graham, BPD
Chief Financial Officer, at 443-602-4280 or shallah.graham@baltimorepolice.org. Ms. Graham
will be happy to assist you. Of course, you may always contact me directly.
Respectfully,
Michael S. Harrison
Police Commissioner
Enclosure
Cc: Henry J. Raymond, Director and Chief Financial Officer, Baltimore City Department of
Finance
Eric Melancon, Chief of Staff, BPD
Shallah Graham, Chief Financial Officer, BPD
Yoanna Moisides, Chief of Staff, Baltimore City Department of Finance
c/o 242 West 29th Street  Baltimore, Maryland 21211-2908

--- Page 38 ---
Baltimore Police Department
Asset Forfeiture and Property Control
Agency Response Form
Finding 1
BPD’s written policies and procedures did not require routine physical inventories and
audits to ensure all property is accounted for, and complete physical inventories and audits
were not being conducted.
We recommend that BPD
a. establish and implement written policies and procedures for the routine performance of
physical inventories that address, for example, frequency, methodology, documentation
requirements, and resolution of discrepancies and other problems noted, in accordance
with industry best practices;
b. establish and implement written policies and procedures for periodic audits to ensure
employee adherence to policies and procedures, and that property and evidence
functions, such as staffing, training, and security are free from significant errors or
other deficiencies;
c. periodically conduct complete physical inventories and audits in accordance with newly
established policies and procedures, and reconcile the results of inventories to its
inventory records; and
d. determine the disposition of missing items, including those noted above.
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 1a Agree Estimated Completion Date: 12/31/21
Please provide details of We will update the current Policy 1401 Section V Property
corrective action or Retention/Disposal to include a provision which requires EMU
explain disagreement. personnel to conduct routine sample set physical inventories. We will
update the EMU Standard Operating Procedures to include a section that
outlines the frequency, methodology, documentation requirements, and
resolution of discrepancies, in accordance with industry best practices.
Periodic audits of employee compliance with written policies and
procedures are being conducted by shift supervisors and communicated
by operation managers through regularly scheduled staff meetings.
Recommendation 1b Agree Estimated Completion Date:
Page 1 of 11

--- Page 39 ---
Baltimore Police Department
Asset Forfeiture and Property Control
Agency Response Form
Please provide details of See above.
corrective action or
explain disagreement.
Recommendation 1c Choose an item Estimated Completion Date:
Please provide details of Because of the resource intensive nature of the recommendation,
corrective action or supplemental funding would be required for EMU to complete a
explain disagreement. comprehensive physical inventory. BPD agrees that such an audit would
be useful and will work to identify funding for this purpose.
Recommendation 1d Choose an item Estimated Completion Date:
Please provide details of See above.
corrective action or
explain disagreement.
Page 2 of 11

--- Page 40 ---
Baltimore Police Department
Asset Forfeiture and Property Control
Agency Response Form
Finding 2
BPD’s policies and procedures did not require regularly scheduled reviews of confiscated
property to identify items that could be disposed of or returned to owners, resulting in
items held unnecessarily for extended periods.
We recommend that BPD
a. establish and implement policies and procedures to require regularly scheduled reviews
of its property to identify items eligible for disposal or return,
b. consider revising the EDO policy to require positive confirmation from the applicable
officer that property is approved for disposal or return, and
c. issue timely EDOs and take action to dispose of or return property.
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide We agree with the auditors’ finding that during the period of the audit –
additional comments as 7/1/2014 to 6/30/2020 – there were no examples of a clear established
deemed necessary. methodology for the timely disposition of property. This deficiency was
due to the use of an antiquated evidence management system and a lack
of necessary personnel to manually track the disposition process.
Recommendation 2a Agree Estimated Completion Date: 10/31/21
Please provide details of The BPD EMU has since implemented a new evidence management
corrective action or system in the third quarter of FY21 that allows of the automation of the
explain disagreement. disposition process employing a trackable EDO function which will
significantly improve the efficiencies of the process. We also began
hiring additional personnel to staff the property and evidence storage and
disposition section.
As of date, this recommendation has been completed.
Recommendation 2b Agree Estimated Completion Date: 12/31/21
Please provide details of Formal consideration of revision to EDO policy will take place before
corrective action or year end.
explain disagreement.
Recommendation 2c Agree Estimated Completion Date: 10/31/21
Please provide details of See above.
corrective action or
explain disagreement.
Page 3 of 11

--- Page 41 ---
Baltimore Police Department
Asset Forfeiture and Property Control
Agency Response Form
Finding 3
BPD did not have an effective procedure to ensure all property temporarily transferred out
of its property room was accounted for and returned.
We recommend that BPD
a. use available output reports to periodically identify outstanding transferred property;
b. investigate transferred property outstanding for extended periods and document the
results of these reviews; and
c. determine the status of the aforementioned items that were outstanding for extended
periods, including the nine firearms, and take appropriate corrective action.
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 3a Agree Estimated Completion Date: 10/31/21
Please provide details of We agree with the auditors’ recommendation to utilize available reports
corrective action or to identify and investigate outstanding transferred property. Since the
explain disagreement. implementation of the new EMS, EMU has implemented a daily check
process in which officers are contacted each evening to provide an
update on outstanding items taken out for court or further investigation.
This information is then updated in the EMS notes for the individual
items. EMU will continue to investigate the items mentioned between
the period of December 1993 and September 2019 and take appropriate
corrective action where applicable.
As of date, this recommendation has been completed.
Recommendation 3b Agree Estimated Completion Date: 12/31/21
Please provide details of See above.
corrective action or
explain disagreement.
Recommendation 3c Agree Estimated Completion Date: 12/31/21
Please provide details of See above.
corrective action or
explain disagreement.
Page 4 of 11

--- Page 42 ---
Baltimore Police Department
Asset Forfeiture and Property Control
Agency Response Form
Finding 4
BPD did not enter all required data into the property records for confiscated firearms,
could not support the destruction of numerous firearms, and did not report all destroyed
firearms to the Maryland State Police as required.
We recommend that BPD
a. ensure that all firearms seized are properly recorded in PEMS, which includes
appropriately using the firearms code and correctly recording all identifying
information in designated system fields;
b. ensure that all required inspections and witness approvals are obtained and
documented for destruction events;
c. accurately and timely record the destruction of firearms in PEMS and periodically
reconcile destruction records to PEMS and investigate any discrepancies, including
those noted above; and
d. ensure that all destroyed firearms, including those noted in this Finding, are reported to
MSP as required.
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 4a Agree Estimated Completion Date: 10/31/21
Please provide details of We agree with the auditors’ recommendations as during the audit scope
corrective action or period the agency was using an antiquated evidence management
explain disagreement. system. With the implementation of the new PEMS and updated training
of the property intake personnel, we are correctly capturing all pertinent
information related to firearm submissions. In addition, checks and
balances have been implemented and agreed upon with the EMU and
BPD Inspections Unit to ensure proper documentation of each
destruction event. These documents are then scanned and stored digitally
for future reference. We recognize there was a discrepancy in timely
reporting of destroyed firearms to the MSP. This task will now be
handled by the EMU Legislative Compliance team.
As of date, this recommendation has been completed.
Recommendation 4b Agree Estimated Completion Date: 10/31/21
Page 5 of 11

--- Page 43 ---
Baltimore Police Department
Asset Forfeiture and Property Control
Agency Response Form
Please provide details of See above.
corrective action or
explain disagreement.
Recommendation 4c Agree Estimated Completion Date: 10/31/21
Please provide details of See above.
corrective action or
explain disagreement.
Recommendation 4d Agree Estimated Completion Date: 10/31/21
Please provide details of See above.
corrective action or
explain disagreement.
Page 6 of 11

--- Page 44 ---
Baltimore Police Department
Asset Forfeiture and Property Control
Agency Response Form
Finding 5
BPD did not have procedures to independently account for all funds seized and recorded in
its property records on a periodic basis.
We recommend that BPD establish procedures to independently account for all funds
recorded in PEMS. Specifically we recommend that an employee independent of the
related funds reconcile collections initially recorded in PEMS to the validated deposit slip
from the financial institution and periodically account for all funds as to deposited,
returned, or on hand.
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide Management acknowledges that a discrepancy exists. We are actively
additional comments as investigating the source and time of that discrepancy.
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 5 Agree Estimated Completion Date: Dec 2021
Please provide details of We agree with the auditors’ recommendation and the EMU is working
corrective action or with BPD Fiscal to implement a Quality control process within the next
explain disagreement. forty-five (45) days whereas BPD Fiscal will reconcile collections and
deposits made on behalf of the BPD.
Page 7 of 11

--- Page 45 ---
Baltimore Police Department
Asset Forfeiture and Property Control
Agency Response Form
Finding 6
BPD had not established a formal, comprehensive training program in relation to its
property and evidence management operations.
We recommend that BPD establish and implement a formal, comprehensive training
program that includes established best practices from the IAPE, and other states or law
enforcement agencies as appropriate.
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 6 Agree Estimated Completion Date: 12/31/21
Please provide details of We agree with the auditors’ recommendation for a formal
corrective action or comprehensive training program which includes industry best practices.
explain disagreement. Review of best practices as outlined by such respected entities as the
International Association of Property & Evidence and the Evidence
Management Institute has been incorporated in the onboarding and
continuing education training of all EMU personnel. We are also
allocating funding to obtain virtual learning modules from these groups
to facilitate ongoing training and refresher resources. The virtual training
modules resources will be procured and applied in the 2nd quarter of
FY22.
Page 8 of 11

--- Page 46 ---
Baltimore Police Department
Asset Forfeiture and Property Control
Agency Response Form
Finding 7
BPD lacked formal policies and procedures for maintaining and tracking certain critical
documentation relating to the seizure and return of property and did not adequately
account for funds maintained in escrow accounts.
We recommend that BPD maintain a centralized seized property record retention system
and
a. establish and enforce formal policies and procedures for maintaining required property
seizure receipt forms to and from owners, and for tracking requests from owners for
the return of seized property, including the timing of BPD’s response and the dispostion
of the request;
b. formally track and account for property seizure receipt forms, including those noted
above for which a receipt could not be provided;
c. establish a comprehensive centralized record of each escrow account and periodically
reconcile this record to the balance maintained by DOF and investigate and resolve any
differences; and
d. transfer funds to the City’s General Fund on a case-by-case basis to ensure compliance
with State law and perform an analysis of the current escrow account balances to
identify and ensure the proper disposition of the funds.
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 7a Agree Estimated Completion Date:
Please provide details of BPD currently maintains copies of Form 56 (Property Receipt) in EMU
corrective action or and Form 57 (Property Seizure Receipt) is maintained by the seizing
explain disagreement. officer. We agree that the maintenance of these forms should be
controlled by a formal policy, which also could provide for a transition
to digital recordkeeping, and will commence work on developing such a
policy.
Recommendation 7b Agree Estimated Completion Date:
Please provide details of EMU maintains 56 forms which we ultimately would like to digitize in
corrective action or order to attach to the case (a work in progress).
explain disagreement. There are also 57 forms which are maintained by the seizing officer. A
policy should be established to maintain these forms as well in the case
files (policy suggestion).
Page 9 of 11

--- Page 47 ---
Baltimore Police Department
Asset Forfeiture and Property Control
Agency Response Form
Recommendation 7c Agree Estimated Completion Date: Spring 2022
Please provide details of The BPD Fiscal Department will work with EMU and the Department of
corrective action or Finance to implement a reconciliation procedure for these accounts.
explain disagreement.
Recommendation 7d Agree Estimated Completion Date:
Please provide details of BPD recognizes that this is an ongoing and complex issue which BPD
corrective action or hopes to resolve through the implementation of an IT solution and
explain disagreement. identification of a reliable and efficient data intake strategy. We have
been in strategizing and planning meetings, both internally and with
other agency partners, for several months and will continue to pursue an
appropriate solution that provides the granularity of tracking we require.
With regard to historical balances, BPD has preliminarily developed a
disposition plan and is in consultation with the Law Department to
ensure legal compliance.
Page 10 of 11

--- Page 48 ---
Baltimore Police Department
Asset Forfeiture and Property Control
Agency Response Form
Finding 8
BPD did not maintain adequate documentation to support one of the seventeen program
expenditures tested totaling $1.0 million.
We recommend that BPD maintain documentation required by the Guide to support all
expenditures using Program funds.
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 8 Agree Estimated Completion Date: 12/31/21
Please provide details of A thorough review of compliance with our SOP and the Guide has
corrective action or begun. Retraining of staff administering this program will be done as
explain disagreement. needed.
Page 11 of 11

--- Page 49 ---
A T
UDIT EAM
Robert A. Wells, Jr., CPA
Audit Manager
James J. Podhorniak, CPA, CFE
Senior Auditor
Matusala Y. Abishe
Matthew P. Henry
Staff Auditors
David R. Fahnestock, CPA
Charles H. Hinds IV, CPA
Ian T. Pontius
Data Analytics Auditors