Title: Presentation to the Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee - State Grants


Related Report Dated (11/10/2021)

Video Presentation (State Grants starts at 1:42:22)
Date: 12/01/2021
Type: Presentations to the Legislature
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=61a7948da1ce58155062f013
Extracted: 2025-06-19T11:56:49.944135
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
State Grants
Performance Audit
Report Dated November 10, 2021
Presentation to Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Gregory A. Hook, CPA
Mark S. Hagenbuch, CPA
James M. Fowler, CFE
December 1, 2021

--- Page 2 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Report Overview - Audit Scope and Objectives
We conducted a performance audit to assess if comprehensive guidance and/or
policies were in place over State grants and whether agencies were properly
creating, awarding, and administering the grants. This audit was initiated due to
issues identified with State grants during our routine fiscal compliance audits.
Between July 1, 2015 and December 31, 2020 our audit reports disclosed 26
findings primarily related to grant awards and monitoring at 14 State agencies.
Our audit had the following objectives:
1. To determine if the State has comprehensive policies and procedures
governing the awarding and administration of State grants, and to assess
the adequacy of those policies and procedures.
2. To determine if State agencies had appropriate mechanisms in place when
creating, awarding, and administering State grants to ensure adequate
accountability.
Performance Audit - State Grants Page 2

--- Page 3 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Report Overview – Background Information
Definition of State Grants
 State regulations define a grant as the bestowing of a power, money,
privilege, property, or other item of value that may be conditional, although
without other consideration, by the State upon another party. State
regulations further specify that a grant is not a contract.
 Grants are intended to help State agencies fulfill their objectives and
missions. Grants are typically originated by formula, a specific allocation in
law, or in the annual operating budget act, bond authorizations, or other acts
of the legislature.
Audit Scope
Our review focused on grants by Executive Department agencies. Based on our
analysis of statewide expenditures, grants subject to this audit totaled
approximately $5 billion during fiscal years 2015 through 2020.
We excluded grants that were federally funded, grants to local municipalities,
and grants by State Universities.
Performance Audit - State Grants Page 3

--- Page 4 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Key Findings
Objective 1 – Statewide Policies and Procedures
 The State did not have comprehensive policies and procedures, and
standardized grant applications/agreements to ensure grants were properly
created, awarded, and administered. We noted inconsistencies in the way
State agencies created, awarded, and administered their grants, and critical
provisions that were not included in certain grant agreements.
 The State did not have a statewide grants management system to assist in
administering and tracking grant awards and related expenditures.
Objective 2 – Grant Practices at Selected Agencies
 State grants tested were not always adequately advertised, awarded, and
administered.
 Certain State agencies tested did not always use competition to solicit grants
when appropriate; document the award process; conduct site visits to better
monitor grantee compliance with the grant provisions; and maintain
documentation to support grant payments.
Performance Audit - State Grants Page 4

--- Page 5 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Statewide Policies and Procedures (Finding 1)
The State did not have statewide comprehensive laws, regulations, policies or
procedures governing the creation, award, and administration of State grants.
 The state had no single agency designated or responsible for providing
centralized comprehensive oversight and guidance. Generally, individual
State agencies (for example, departments or units and programs within a
larger department) were responsible for establishing appropriate records
and processes.
 We identified certain elements from our past grant-related findings, best
practices, and contract criteria from State laws/regulations that would be
useful in establishing accountability over State grants. For example,
requirements for public solicitation and award of grants as appropriate,
conflict of interest prohibitions, performance measures, and formal
monitoring requirements.
Performance Audit - State Grants Page 5

--- Page 6 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Statewide Policies and Procedures (Finding 2)
The State did not have standardized grant applications and grant agreements.
As a result, we noted critical provisions that were not included in certain State
agencies’ grant agreements.
Critical Provisions Missing from Grant Agreements
(indicated by “”)
 We reviewed certain grant
agreements at 5 agencies to
determine if they included 9
provisions we deemed
necessary to protect the State.
 The grant agreements at each
of the agencies reviewed
lacked one or more provision.
Performance Audit - State Grants Page 6

--- Page 7 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Statewide Policies and Procedures (Finding 3)
The State did not have a statewide grants management system (GMS) to help
administer and track grant awards and related expenditures.
 A statewide GMS would provide a centralized record of all State grants and
could improve statewide grant management by enabling State agencies to
record grant awards, various approvals, and grantee monitoring
documentation accurately and in a comprehensive manner.
 Absent a GMS, State agencies individually used a variety of methods to
award and monitor grants (such as manual records, spreadsheets).
 The Statewide procurement process for a GMS began in October 2020 and a
contract is estimated to be awarded in December 2021. However, there is
currently no legal requirements for State agencies to use the GMS when it
becomes operational.
Performance Audit - State Grants Page 7

--- Page 8 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Grant Practices at Selected Agencies (Finding 4)
Individual agencies awarded certain grants without competition and required
documentation was not always available to support the propriety of the
award, including one award which was not calculated correctly.
 Department of Commerce (DOC) did not use a competitive method to
award certain tourism grants, included ineligible costs in one award, and
could not document the propriety of another grant award.
 Maryland Department of Labor (MDL) did not notify all existing grantees of
the opportunity to receive supplemental grant funds for the Employment
Advancement Right Now grant awards.
 Department of Human Services (DHS) did not publicly solicit applications
(or document its rationale for not soliciting applications) for a grant to
provide technical assistance for child welfare strategies.
Performance Audit - State Grants Page 8

--- Page 9 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Grant Practices at Selected Agencies (Finding 5)
The Department of General Services (DGS) did not ensure that grantees
submitted required documents to explain or support the basis used to select
vendors to work on State-funded capital grant projects. DGS also did not
perform documented site visits to ensure capital projects were progressing
as intended.
 Although its policy encourages grantees to use competition and requires
grantees to provide the basis for the selection of each vendor, DGS
advised us they do not have authority to require grantees to procure
services through competition.
 DGS could not document that it conducted site visits to ensure capital
projects were progressing in accordance with the related grants. DGS
management advised us that it did not have a formal policy or process
requiring site visits because it does not have the necessary personnel
resources to conduct the visits.
Performance Audit - State Grants Page 9

--- Page 10 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Grant Practices at Selected Agencies (Finding 6)
Certain State agencies did not maintain documentation to support grant
payments totaling approximately $22.3 million and made payments totaling
$220,000 that were not in accordance with the related grant agreement.
Lack of Documentation to Support Grant Payments
 DGS could not provide us documentation to support two payments totaling
approximately $21.3 million for a community college capital project.
 DHS did not obtain sufficient documentation to support four payments
totaling $661,600 made to two grantees.
 DOC did not obtain documentation for a $373,200 payment to a local
government for tourism marketing.
Payments Not in Accordance with Grant Agreements
 Maryland State Department of Education (MSDE) advanced $182,000 to a
grantee in violation of the grant agreement.
 DHS paid $37,000 for individuals to work on a grant who were not
authorized in the related agreement.
Performance Audit - State Grants Page 10

--- Page 11 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Conclusions
The Governor’s Grants Office and the Department of Budget and Management
should
• develop a statewide framework which encompasses comprehensive laws,
regulations, and formal policies and procedures for awarding and
administering grants;
• develop a uniform grant application and agreement; and
• implement a comprehensive GMS that agencies are required to use.
State agencies should
• include requirements for public competitive solicitation and maintain
documentation to support the award process;
• require capital funded grantees to competitively solicit and submit support for
their vender selection, and establish policies for conducting site visits; and
• ensure required documentation is obtained to support payments to grantees
and ensure payments are in accordance with grant agreements.
Performance Audit - State Grants Page 11