Title: Review of Certain Emergency Procurements Related to the State of Maryland's COVID-19 Response
Date: 12/13/2021
Type: Special Reports and Letters
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=61bb7f05a1ce58056ca2e7ef
Extracted: 2025-06-20T00:10:19.489228
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Special Review
Review of Certain Emergency Procurements Related to
the State of Maryland’s COVID-19 Response
December 2021
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Senator Clarence K. Lam, M.D. (Senate Chair) Delegate Carol L. Krimm (House Chair)
Senator Malcolm L. Augustine Delegate Steven J. Arentz
Senator Adelaide C. Eckardt Delegate Mark S. Chang
Senator George C. Edwards Delegate Nicholas P. Charles II
Senator Katie Fry Hester Delegate Andrea Fletcher Harrison
Senator Cheryl C. Kagan Delegate Trent M. Kittleman
Senator Benjamin F. Kramer Delegate David Moon
Senator Cory V. McCray Delegate Julie Palakovich Carr
Senator Justin D. Ready Delegate Elizabeth G. Proctor
Senator Craig J. Zucker Delegate Geraldine Valentino-Smith
To Obtain Further Information
Office of Legislative Audits
The Warehouse at Camden Yards
351 West Camden Street, Suite 400
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Phone: 410-946-5900
Maryland Relay: 711
TTY: 410-946-5401 ꞏ 301-970-5401
E-mail: OLAWebmaster@ola.state.md.us
Website: www.ola.state.md.us
To Report Fraud
The Office of Legislative Audits operates a Fraud Hotline to report fraud, waste, or abuse involving State
of Maryland government resources. Reports of fraud, waste, or abuse may be communicated anonymously
by a toll-free call to 1-877-FRAUD-11, by mail to the Fraud Hotline, c/o Office of Legislative Audits, or
through the Office’s website.
Nondiscrimination Statement
The Department of Legislative Services does not discriminate on the basis of age, ancestry, color, creed,
marital status, national origin, race, religion, gender, gender identity, sexual orientation, or disability in the
admission or access to its programs, services, or activities. The Department’s Information Officer has been
designated to coordinate compliance with the nondiscrimination requirements contained in Section 35.107
of the United States Department of Justice Regulations. Requests for assistance should be directed to the
Information Officer at 410-946-5400 or 410-970-5400.

--- Page 3 ---
December 13, 2021
Senator Clarence K. Lam, M.D., Senate Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Delegate Carol L. Krimm, House Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Members of Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Annapolis, Maryland
Ladies and Gentlemen:
We have conducted a special review of certain emergency procurements related to
the State of Maryland’s response to the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic. This
review was initiated by the Office of Legislative Audits, and it represents an
expansion of an earlier limited review that was undertaken based on a joint
request from the chairs of the Senate Education, Health, and Environmental
Affairs and the House Health and Government Operations Committees for a
review of two COVID-related emergency procurements.
The results of our review of the procurement and related use of COVID tests from
LabGenomics were included in a special report dated March 31, 2021. This
current report includes the results of our review of the emergency procurement
and accountability of medical supplies from Blue Flame Medical. In addition,
during the course of our review, we identified 848 emergency procurements
conducted during the period between March 2020 and May 2021 totaling
approximately $1.7 billion. Consequently, we expanded the scope of this review
to include 14 additional emergency procurements (in addition to Blue Flame
Medical) conducted by the following six agencies:
 Department of General Services
 Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services
 Department of State Police
 Maryland Department of Environment
 Maryland Department of Health
 Maryland Emergency Management Agency

--- Page 4 ---
The purpose of this current expanded review was to determine whether (1) the
goods or services were obtained in accordance with State regulations for
emergency procurements; (2) the related contracts or payments were effectively
monitored to ensure the goods or services were received; (3) purchases of goods,
such as personal protective equipment (PPE) and other medical equipment, had
been inspected to ensure compliance with applicable criteria; and (4) inventory
records were maintained for the goods purchased that properly account for and
reflect the disposition of the goods (still on hand or distributed to other entities).
While we recognize the urgent and unique circumstances under which these
procurements were made, such conditions would not mitigate the need to properly
document and comply with State regulations specifically tailored to or required of
emergency procurements. These conditions also would not mitigate the need to
ensure the purchased goods or services were received and met applicable
requirements and to document the disposition of items purchased. We conducted
our review during the period from April 9, 2021 through August 31, 2021 and the
results herein are based on information obtained from the applicable State
agencies during this period.
In general, our review noted a lack of compliance with State regulations for
emergency procurements and ineffective monitoring of the related payments. In
addition, we frequently found that documentation was not available evidencing
items purchased were inspected and inventory records were not maintained to
determine the ultimate disposition of the items.
Specifically, our review disclosed that 11 of the 15 emergency procurements
totaling $189.4 million were not in compliance with all State regulations for
emergency procurements. For example, there was no formal written contract for
three of the procurements and the contracts for the other eight procurements did
not include all of the critical provisions required by State procurement
regulations. In addition, the agencies responsible for these procurements
frequently could not provide critical documentation to support the basis for the
purchases, including written explanations for how the vendors were identified and
selected.
We also concluded that 7 emergency procurements with payments at the time of
our review totaling $133.7 million were not effectively monitored. For example,
for four emergency procurements, we noted payments totaling $25.5 million made
for which the responsible agencies could not document that the services had been
received and that the payments were in accordance with the contract.
2

--- Page 5 ---
Furthermore, our review disclosed a general lack of documentation to support that
PPE items obtained through these procurements were inspected and the
disposition of items. While we were advised that PPE items were visually
inspected to ensure the items were undamaged, the agencies that received these
items could not document any additional steps taken to verify their legitimacy
(that is, the items received matched the technical specifications of the items
ordered and paid for by the State). In our opinion, such inspections were
warranted given the intended use of the items (ultimately to protect Marylanders
from the COVID-19 virus), as well as the fact that several of the purchases were
made from vendors whose prior primary business did not appear to involve the
manufacturing or sales of medical equipment and supplies, and were not
registered to conduct business in the State, both prior to the sale and at the time of
payment by the State. In addition, we could not determine the disposition of
certain items valued at approximately $7.6 million that were purchased under five
emergency procurements.
Finally, this report also includes our review of test results from the laboratories
that used the LabGenomics tests, which we were unable to obtain access in time
for inclusion in our March 31, 2021 report. We reviewed the test results from the
laboratories that used the LabGenomics tests to account for the number of tests
used and to assess concerns raised about the accuracy of test results reported by
the University of Maryland Pathology Associates (UMPA) laboratory when using
the tests obtained from LabGenomics. Our assessment disclosed that the majority
of the LabGenomics tests were used to analyze patient samples and that certain
individuals who received positive test results from UMPA received negative
results on subsequent tests. However, we could not determine, from available
sources, if the inconsistent results occurred due to deficiencies with the
LabGenomics tests or other factors.
We shared our preliminary findings with all appropriate agencies in October
2021, and these agencies were given an opportunity to provide written responses.
We considered those responses in finalizing this report. Although this report
contains no recommendations, we provided a draft copy of the report to each State
agency mentioned in the report for review and comment. The agency responses
have been included as an Appendix to this report. Specifically, the Maryland
Department of Health provided a combined response with the response from the
Department of General Services, which did not differ from the responses to the
preliminary findings. Additionally, certain other agencies (Maryland Department
of Emergency Management, Maryland Department of the Environment,
Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services, and Department of State
Police) provided updated responses related to their specific circumstances.
3

--- Page 6 ---
In accordance with State law, we have reviewed the responses and noted general
agreement to our findings and related recommendations. However, we identified
certain instances in which the Department of General Services’, Maryland
Department of Health’s, and the Department of State Police’s responses indicated
disagreements with certain report findings. In these instances, we reviewed and
reassessed our audit documentation and reaffirmed the validity of the findings. In
accordance with generally accepted auditing standards, we have included an
“auditor comment” within the responses to explain our position.
We wish to acknowledge the cooperation extended to us during the review by the
aforementioned entities.
Respectfully submitted,
Gregory A. Hook, CPA
Legislative Auditor
4

--- Page 7 ---
Table of Contents
Background Information 6
COVID-19 Pandemic 6
Emergency Procurements 6
Scope, Objectives, and Methodology 8
Legislative Request and Scope 8
Objectives and Methodology 11
Findings 12
Objective 1 – Assess the Procurement and Accountability of
Certain Emergency Procurements Associated with the State’s
COVID-19 Response
Objective and Methodology 12
Conclusion 15
Detailed Test Results 18
Objective 2 – Disposition and Reliability of LabGenomics Tests
Objective and Methodology 43
Conclusion 43
Agencies Responses Appendix
Maryland Department of Health – combined with Department of General Services
Maryland Department of Emergency Management
Maryland Department of the Environment
Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services
Department of State Police
5

--- Page 8 ---
Background Information
COVID-19 Pandemic
The disease referred to as COVID-19 (Coronavirus disease 2019) was first
identified in China in December 2019. It quickly spread worldwide and was
characterized as a pandemic on March 11, 2020 by the World Health
Organization. On March 5, 2020, the Governor of Maryland announced the
State’s first positive cases of COVID-19 and declared a state of emergency to
mobilize all of the State’s available resources. The COVID-19 pandemic created
an increased demand for medical equipment and supplies (for example, personal
protective equipment) and various services (for example, laboratory analysis of
COVID-19 tests).
Emergency Procurements
According to State procurement regulations, agencies are authorized to procure
goods and services using the emergency procurement method when faced with an
emergency, which is defined as:
A sudden and unexpected occurrence or condition which agency
management reasonably could not foresee that requires an action to avoid
or to mitigate serious damage to public health, safety, or welfare.
The use of the emergency procurement method does not require a formal State of
Emergency to have been declared by the Governor1, nor are agencies limited to
the emergency procurement method during a State of Emergency. Rather,
agencies are responsible for determining when the use of the emergency
procurement method is justified.
State procurement regulations include several requirements for emergency
procurements including (a) a formal written contract; (b) obtaining as much
competition as practicable; (c) notifying the Board of Public Works (BPW) of the
procurement; (d) publicizing the award on eMaryland Marketplace Advantage
(eMMA); and (e) documenting the details of the procurement, including
justification for the use of the emergency procurement and the basis for selecting
the vendor.
The regulations require certain critical provisions be included in the written
contract, such as conformance of specifications, delivery and acceptance, dispute
1 According to the Department of Legislative Services’ Office of Program Evaluation and
Government Accountability’s January 15, 2021 report on Evaluation of Emergency Procurement,
most emergency procurements conducted between fiscal year 2013 through 2020 were unrelated
to a Statewide emergency.
6

--- Page 9 ---
resolution, indemnification, liquidated damages, compliance with laws, cost and
price certifications, political contribution disclosures, anti-bribery statements, and
requirements for registration of the business with the State Department of
Assessments and Taxation. The regulations also require agencies to report
emergency procurements (including modifications) in excess of $50,000 to BPW
within 45 days of award and publicize the award on eMMA within 30 days.
Emergency procurement regulations waive a key independent oversight control
found in certain other State procurement processes – the submission of related
contracts to BPW for formal approval prior to contract execution.
7

--- Page 10 ---
Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
Legislative Request and Scope
We conducted an initial review of certain emergency procurements related to the
State of Maryland’s response to the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic. This first
review was initiated based on a June 2020 request from the chairs of the Senate
Education, Health, and Environmental Affairs and the House Health and
Government Operations Committees. Specifically, the Committees’ chairs
requested that the Office of Legislative Audits (OLA) conduct a review of the
emergency procurements awarded to:
 LabGenomics for COVID tests used by laboratories to analyze samples
collected from patients at testing sites, and
 Blue Flame Medical for medical supplies.
On March 31, 2021, we issued a first report on the results of our review of the
procurement and accountability of the LabGenomics tests and the termination of
two employees associated with the LabGenomics tests. The review disclosed that
the test kits were not procured in accordance with State procurement regulations,
including the lack of a formal contract, and the absence of documentation to
support critical decisions regarding the procurement, cost and validity of the test
kits.
During the course of our current review, we identified 848 emergency
procurements totaling approximately $1.7 billion conducted by the following 19
State agencies during the period between March 2020 and May 2021 (see Figure
1).
8

--- Page 11 ---
1. Department of Agriculture (DOA) 11. Maryland Department of Health (MDH)
2. Department of Commerce (DOC) 12. Maryland Department of Labor (MDL)
3. Department of General Services (DGS) 13. Maryland Department of Transportation
4. Department of Human Services (DHS) Agencies (MDOT)
5. Department of Information Technology 14. Maryland Department of Veterans
(DoIT) Affairs (MDVA)
6. Department of Juvenile Services (DJS) 15. Maryland Emergency Management
7. Department of Natural Resources Agency (MEMA)2
(DNR) 16. Maryland Institute of Emergency
8. Department of Public Safety and Medical Services Systems (MIEMSS)
Correctional Services (DPSCS) 17. Morgan State University (MSU)
9. Department of State Police (DSP) 18. State Board of Elections (SBE)
10. Maryland Department of Environment 19. University of Maryland Baltimore
(MDE) (UMB)
Consequently, OLA advised the chairs of the Senate Education, Health, and
Environmental Affairs and the House Health and Government Operations
Committees that the scope of OLA’s review would be expanded and that two
reports would be issued. The first report was issued on March 31, 2021 and was
limited to the LabGenomics procurement, while the second report would include
the procurement and accountability of the Blue Flame Medical purchases and
additional emergency procurements, as explained in more detail below. In
addition, this second report resolves an open issue remaining from our earlier
March 31, 2020 report, wherein we commented that we were unable to obtain
access to certain data associated with the use of the test kits in time for inclusion
in that report. Accordingly, our current report includes the results of our review
of test results from the laboratories that used the LabGenomics tests.
2 The Maryland Emergency Management Agency became the Maryland Department of
Emergency Management effective October 1, 2021.
9

--- Page 12 ---
Figure 1
Emergency Procurements Conducted by 19 State Agencies
(figuresin millions)
MDOT Agencies Others
$61.8 $65.1
DPSCS 4% 4%
$74.4
4%
MDL
$179.5
10%
DGS
$952.9
MDH
56%
$371.4
22%
Source: Complied and calculated by OLA using State procurement data, BPW agendas, and other supporting documents.
Our current review was conducted during the period from April 9, 2021 through
August 31, 2021 and the results herein reflect information we were able to obtain
from the applicable State agencies during this period. We conducted our review
under the authority of State Government Article, Section 2-1220 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland. Our review did not constitute an audit conducted in
accordance with generally accepted government audit standards.
10

--- Page 13 ---
Objectives and Methodology
The objectives of our current review were to:
1. assess the procurement and accountability of certain emergency
procurements associated with the State’s COVID-19 response; and
2. account for the number of LabGenomics tests used and to corroborate an
allegation we received on our fraud, waste, and abuse hotline in
September 2020 regarding concerns with the accuracy of test results
received for samples collected at Towson University.
Our review included the identification of emergency procurements associated
with the State’s COVID-19 response, and related tests, analyses, observations,
and discussions with State personnel and individuals at the aforementioned
laboratories, as we deemed necessary to accomplish our objectives. We also
interviewed the employees who were identified by the State agencies as being
responsible for the procurement and monitoring of the related payments. In
addition, we reviewed numerous documents (such as, procurement records and
invoices) and conducted physical inspections of certain personal protective
equipment and medical equipment items located at State and private facilities.
11

--- Page 14 ---
Findings
Objective 1
Assess the Procurement and Accountability of Certain Emergency
Procurements Associated with the State’s COVID-19 Response
Objective and Methodology
Our objective was to assess the procurement and accountability of certain
emergency procurements associated with the State’s COVID-19 response.
For the purpose of completing this objective, we reviewed procurements recorded
in the State’s accounting records during the period from March 2020 through May
2021 to identify emergency procurements. We believed that with the advent of
the COVID-19 crisis in March 2020, it is likely that emergency procurements
during that period were associated with the State’s COVID-19 response3. This
review identified 848 emergency procurements totaling approximately $1.7
billion conducted by 19 State agencies during the period between March 2020 and
May 2021. To corroborate that the emergency procurements we identified were
associated with the State’s COVID-19 response, we obtained certain additional
information about each of those 848 procurements from a variety of other sources,
such as Board of Public Works (BPW) meeting documents and information
recorded on eMaryland Marketplace Advantage (eMMA).
We judgmentally selected 15 emergency procurements that we concluded were
related to the State’s COVID-19 response (including the Blue Flame procurement
requested by the aforementioned Maryland General Assembly Committees)
totaling approximately $232.8 million for review. To select these procurements,
we considered certain factors that may be indicative of significant violations of
State procurement laws or regulations. For example, vendor names that were not
consistent with the goods or services purchased or vendors that were not
registered with the State Department of Assessments and Taxation (SDAT) prior
to the onset of the pandemic. As detailed in Figure 2, the 15 emergency
procurements we tested were procured or used by the Department of General
Services (DGS), Maryland Department of Health (MDH), Maryland Emergency
Management Agency (MEMA), Maryland Department of Environment (MDE),
3 While we believe the emergency procurements identified by us reflect the significant majority of
emergency procurement activity during the period based on transaction coding included in the
State’s accounting records, additional activity may have occurred and not have been subject to
our review. For example, our review did not consider transactions processed using corporate
purchasing cards (CPC) since we could not readily determine which of these transactions, if any,
related to an emergency procurement since there was no unique coding for this type of
procurement in the CPC records.
12

--- Page 15 ---
Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services (DPSCS), or Department
of State Police (DSP).
Figure 2
Emergency Procurements Selected for Review
Procuring Using Purchase
Agency Agency Vendor Description of Good or Service Price
MDH MDH CIAN Diagnostics Inc. Laboratory testing services $54,795,961
DGS MDH Vanguard LED Display, Inc. Purchase of 1,107 ventilators 42,066,000
DGS MDH Two Canoes, LLC Purchase of 5.0 million isolation gowns 41,250,000
Provide medical supply chain and materials handling
DGS MDH Vizient, Inc.
services at State supported field hospital locations 40,000,000
Consulting services related to the COVID-19 Vaccine
MDH MDH Ernst & Young, LLP
Program 25,046,140
DGS MDH Coast to Coast Strategies, LLC. Purchase of 5.0 million KN95 masks 14,000,000
DGS MDH Blue Flame Medical, LLC Purchase of 1,550,000 N95 masks and 37 ventilators 6,271,000
DGS MDH Design Co., Ltd Purchase of 2.0 million KN95 masks 3,280,000
Purchase of 1.0 million KN95 masks and 1.0 million
DGS MDH Economy Kanghwa Co., Ltd
surgical masks 2,350,000
Disaster response consulting services and additional
DGS MEMA Hagerty Consulting
staffing 1,500,000
MDE MDE Inspection Experts, Inc. Sampling of wastewater for COVID-19 1,053,000
MDE MDE CosmosID Inc. Analysis of wastewater for COVID-19 826,680
Electrical work at a temporary hospital site located at
DPSCS DPSCS Ellsworth Electric, Inc.
the Maryland Correctional Institution – Hagerstown 181,736
Purchase of various personal protective equipment
DSP DSP White Star Sales and Promotions
items 117,950
Consulting and logistical services for DGS
DGS DGS John S. Connor, Inc.
procurements from overseas suppliers 50,000
Total $232,788,467
For each emergency procurement selected, we performed a test to determine
whether the goods or services were obtained in accordance with State regulations
for emergency procurements, and whether the related contracts or payments were
effectively monitored to ensure that all goods or services paid for were received.
Specifically, we tested 50 payments totaling approximately $127.6 million of the
$198.9 million we identified as having been disbursed to the aforementioned 15
vendors at the time of our review. When applicable, our test also included a
determination of whether the goods were inspected to ensure compliance with
applicable requirements (such as U.S. Food and Drug Administration criteria),
which we considered to be of critical importance given the intended use of the
goods (that is, to protect Marylanders from the COVID-19 virus)4. We also
4 Our intent was to determine what steps were taken beyond a possible review of packaging or
product labeling to ensure that items received were legitimate, and not fraudulent or imposter
items. For example, we inquired with MDH as to how it determined that the masks it purchased
met the technical specifications of an N95 or KN95 mask.
13

--- Page 16 ---
attempted to determine the disposition of the goods paid for by the State under
these procurements (specifically, whether the goods were still on-hand or
distributed to other parties).
Our review included tests, analyses, observations, and discussions with State
personnel, as we deemed necessary to accomplish our objectives. We reviewed
numerous documents when available, such as procurement records and invoices.
We also interviewed the employees who were identified by the agencies as being
responsible for the procurement and monitoring of the related payments.
In addition, we conducted certain physical inspections of personal protective
equipment (PPE) and medical equipment items located at State and private
facilities. The primary purpose of these inspections was to verify the
reasonableness of the quantities distributed and on hand reflected in MDH’s
inventory records for the purpose of determining the disposition of these items.
As explained in greater detail below, our review disclosed a lack of
documentation to support that certain items were received; in these instances, we
attempted to verify whether the goods had been received during our physical
inspections.
The conclusions contained in this report are based on the documentation we
obtained from, and interviews with, applicable staff at the State agencies
responsible for procuring and monitoring (including approval of the related
payments) the emergency procurements we reviewed. Specifically, the focus of
our review was to determine whether the procurement reviewed was in
accordance with applicable State regulations for emergency procurements and the
related payment(s) was proper. Consequently, we did not attempt to contact the
vendors that provided the goods or services to obtain additional explanation or
documentation for the transactions.
We also did not attempt to obtain current pricing for these purchases because we
did not believe it to be a valid indicator of the reasonableness of the pricing at the
time of the purchase given that our review occurred more than a year after the
these purchases were made (at the onset of the COVID-19 pandemic).
Generally, the procurements tested were judgmentally selected based on our
consideration of certain factors that may be indicative of significant violations of
State procurement laws or regulations. As a matter of course, we do not normally
use statistical nor non-statistical sampling in our tests, so unless otherwise
specifically indicated, neither statistical nor non-statistical sampling was used to
select the transactions tested. Therefore, unless sampling is specifically indicated
in a finding, the results from any tests conducted or disclosed by us cannot be
14

--- Page 17 ---
used to project those results to the entire population from which the test items
were selected.
Conclusion
Generally, from our review, we identified a lack of compliance with State
regulations for emergency procurements and effective monitoring of the related
payments for the procurements selected for review. In addition, for emergency
procurements of goods (such as PPE and medical supplies) reviewed, we found
that documentation generally was not available to support that items purchased
were inspected upon receipt to ensure that they met applicable requirements; and
documentation that supported the disposition of the items was also not available
(see Figure 3). A summary of the deficiencies we identified is presented below,
followed by a detailed description of our test results for each emergency
procurement selected for review.
Figure 3
Results of our Test of 15 Emergency Procurements
Available Agency Documentation Supports:
Payments to Procurement Contract or
Vendor at Compliance Payment All Items
Test Purchase Time of OLA with State Effectively Items Accounted
Item Type Review Regulations? Monitored? Inspected? For?
1 Services $46,346,956 No No N/A N/A
2 Goods 42,066,000 No No No No
3 Goods 41,249,999 No Yes No UTD*
4 Services 38,145,934 Yes No N/A N/A
5 Services 3,681,468 No No N/A N/A
6 Goods 14,000,000 No Yes No No
7 Goods 6,271,000 No Yes No No
8 Goods 3,280,000 No No No No
9 Goods 2,350,000 No Yes No Yes
10 Services 858,730 Yes Yes N/A N/A
11 Services 275,660 Yes Yes N/A N/A
12 Services 199,200 Yes Yes N/A N/A
13 Services 82,301 No Yes N/A N/A
14 Goods 117,950 No No No No
15 Services 29,704 No No N/A N/A
Totals $198,954,902 11 7 7 5
* Unable to Determine (UTD) - As explained further under Test Item 3, MDH advised that the items
(isolation gowns) purchased from this vendor were commingled with similar items purchased from other
vendors. As a result, we could not determine whether that the gowns on hand in MDH’s warehouse were
related to this procurement.
N/A – Attribute not applicable to the procurement tested.
15

--- Page 18 ---
Emergency Procurements Did Not Comply With State Procurement Regulations
We concluded that 11 emergency procurements, valued at $189.4 million, of the
15 emergency procurements reviewed, valued at $232.8 million, were not
procured in accordance with certain State regulations. Specifically, the agencies
responsible for these procurements generally could not provide documentation of
the basis for the purchases, including justification for the use of the emergency
procurement method or to explain how the vendors selected were identified. Our
review also disclosed that there was no formal written contract for three of the
procurements and the contracts for the other eight procurements did not include
all of the critical provisions required by State procurement regulations. In
addition, seven procurements were made from vendors that were not registered
with the State at the time of the respective procurements5, including six vendors
that were still unregistered as of July 21, 2021. Finally, we noted that certain
procurements were not reported to the Board of Public Works or publicized
within the timeframes specified in State procurement regulations.
Lack of Effective Monitoring and Documentation to Support Payments
We concluded that 7 of the 15 emergency procurements reviewed, with payments
at the time of our review totaling $133.7 million, were not effectively monitored.
Specifically, we identified payments totaling $3.3 million on two emergency
procurements for which documentation could not be provided to support that all
of the items paid for were received, and $1.7 million related to another
procurement for ventilators that were not yet operational at the time of our review.
In addition, we identified payments totaling $25.5 million made under four
emergency procurements for which the agencies responsible for monitoring the
contracts could not document that the invoiced services were received and that the
payments were in accordance with the contracts.
Lack of Documentation that Items Purchased Were Inspected
For most of the goods procured that we reviewed, we were not provided with
documentation to support that PPE items purchased under the emergency
procurements we reviewed were inspected to ensure the items provided met the
applicable requirements. Specifically, staff at the agencies that received these
items advised us that the items were visually inspected upon receipt to ensure the
items were undamaged; however these agencies could not document any
additional steps taken to verify that the items received were legitimate (for
example, that face masks met the technical specifications of an N95 or KN95
mask). In addition, we noted that 12 ventilators valued at $456,000 had not been
inspected at the time of our review. As explained further under Test Item 2, we
5 Registration with the State helps to ensure that vendors meet all State obligations (such as paying
applicable taxes) and that the owners and officers of the business are appropriately disclosed.
16

--- Page 19 ---
noted that MDH inspections of other ventilators provided by that vendor
determined that 46 ventilators were not operational.
Unable to Determine Disposition of Items Purchased
We could not determine the disposition of certain items valued at approximately
$7.6 million that were purchased under five emergency procurements (see Figure
4). Specifically, the inventory records we were provided did not indicate whether
the items were on hand or had been distributed to other entities, and MDH and
DSP could not readily locate the items at the time of our review.
Figure 4
Summary of Items That Could Not Be Accounted For
(Based on OLA testing)
Description of Value of
Test Using Unaccounted For Unaccounted For
Item Agency Item Item
2 MDH 27 ventilators $1,026,000
6 MDH 370,436 KN95 masks 1,037,221
7 MDH 475,400 N95 masks 2,149,712
8 MDH 2 million KN95 masks 3,280,000
14 DSP 11,000 N95 masks 64,223
Total $7,557,156
Inventory Records Were Not Sufficiently Comprehensive
While not the focus of our review, we also identified certain conditions that raised
questions regarding the accuracy and reliability of MDH inventory records for the
goods purchased that we selected for review. For example, as of July 2021, MDH
had not completed a physical inventory of the COVID-19 related items purchased
to determine the amount on hand, and to investigate missing items and update the
detailed records, as required by the DGS Inventory Control Manual. In addition,
MDH warehouse personnel advised us that due to the urgent manner in which the
items were received and disbursed, the inventory records may not always have
been updated to reflect goods received and distributed, and consequently, the
quantities reflected in the inventory records may not be accurate.
17

--- Page 20 ---
Detailed Test Results
Test Item 1
CIAN Diagnostics, Inc.
Procuring Using Purchase
Agency Agency Description Price
MDH MDH Laboratory testing services $54,795,961
OLA Conclusions as of August 31, 2021
MDH did not procure the CIAN Diagnostics, Inc. contract in accordance with
certain State procurement regulations. MDH did not adequately monitor the
contract, and our testing disclosed unsupported payments totaling $1,591,832.
Background
In April 2020, the Maryland Department of Health (MDH) awarded a $3.9 million
contract to CIAN Diagnostics, Inc. to perform laboratory diagnostic testing
services related to COVID-19 testing. The contract covered the period from April
29, 2020 to July 29, 2020 and was subsequently modified three times, extending
the services through June 30, 2021, for a final total contract cost of $54.8 million.
According to the vendor’s website, CIAN Diagnostics, Inc. offers a variety of
laboratory testing services, including COVID-19 testing.
Procurement
Our review disclosed that the laboratory testing services contract was not
procured in accordance with State procurement regulations. Specifically, MDH’s
contract did not include certain critical provisions required by State procurement
regulations, such as dispute resolution, modifications, and cost and price
certification. MDH was able to provide documentation to support that it solicited
bids from multiple vendors and documented its basis for selecting CIAN
Diagnostics, Inc., as required. In addition, we noted that CIAN Diagnostics, Inc.
was registered with the State Department of Assessments and Taxation (SDAT) to
do business in the State, as required.
MDH did not publish the contract award in eMaryland Marketplace Advantage
(eMMA) until 11 months after the deadline provided for in State procurement
regulations for emergency procurements. We also noted that the original contract
and two of the subsequent modifications were reported to the Board of Public
Works (BPW) between 2 and 34 days after the deadline provided for in State
regulations.
18

--- Page 21 ---
Monitoring and Payment
Based on our testing, MDH did not adequately verify the propriety of the amounts
invoiced. CIAN Diagnostics periodically invoiced MDH at a fixed rate for each
COVID-19 test it completed, and was to record the results of these tests in the
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention’s National Electronic Disease
Surveillance System (NEDSS).
Our test of five payments totaling $13,203,541 made to CIAN Diagnostics, Inc.
between May and December 2020 disclosed discrepancies between the number of
tests invoiced and the total test results recorded in NEDSS for four payments
totaling $12,257,645. Specifically, the vendor billed MDH for 127,950 tests, but
only recorded 111,706 test results in NEDSS for the related period. Although
MDH advised us that it had identified and investigated these discrepancies, it
could not provide written documentation to support that the remaining 16,244
tests (with associated billings totaling $1,591,832) were actually conducted.
MDH ultimately paid CIAN Diagnostics, Inc. the full amounts invoiced. As of
June 30, 2021 (the end of the contract term), payments to CIAN Diagnostics, Inc.
under this contract totaled approximately $46.3 million.
Test Item 2
Vanguard LED Display, Inc.
Procuring Using Purchase
Agency Agency Description Price
DGS MDH Purchase of 1,107 ventilators $42,066,000
OLA Conclusions as of August 31, 2021
DGS did not procure the ventilators in accordance with State procurement
regulations. In addition, although all 1,107 ventilators purchased were received,
73 ventilators valued at $2,774,000 either could not be accounted for or were not
operational at the time of our review. Finally, MDH had not inspected 12
ventilators valued at $456,000 and therefore there was no assurance that the
ventilators worked.
Background
According to State records, the Department of General Services (DGS) procured
1,107 ventilators from Vanguard LED Display, Inc. on behalf of MDH, for a total
cost of $42,066,000. Our review of the vendor’s website on July 28, 2021
disclosed that the vendor primarily sells LED and LCD video displays and did not
include any ventilators listed for sale.
19

--- Page 22 ---
DGS issued two Letters of Intent (LOI) to the vendor, dated March 28, 2020 and
April 4, 2020, respectively. According to the LOIs, DGS was to purchase 1,150
ventilators for $43,700,000 ($38,000 per ventilator), but ultimately only
purchased 1,107 ventilators for $42,066,000. According to MDH records, the
ventilators were delivered to MDH warehouses, and consequently, MDH assumed
responsibility for the inspection, storage, and distribution of the ventilators and
for the related recordkeeping.
Procurement
Our review disclosed that the ventilators were not procured in accordance with
State procurement regulations. Specifically, DGS did not have a formal written
contract with Vanguard LED Display, Inc. While the aforementioned LOIs
included the quantity to be purchased and the related payment terms, the LOIs did
not contain any of the critical provisions required by State procurement
regulations for emergency procurements, or any specifications or requirements for
the ventilators to ensure they would work as intended.
DGS provided us with an email sent by an MDH official to DGS procurement
officials on March 27, 2020 that indicated that a vendor located in Virginia had
ventilators available for sale. The email also indicated that the vendor had
previously contacted the Maryland Emergency Management Agency (MEMA)
offering to provide the ventilators but had not received a response. We were
advised by MDH and DGS personnel that competition was not obtained for
purchases of PPE and medical equipment. Rather, DGS advised us that it
solicited or received offers from numerous vendors to provide these items and that
DGS generally sought to purchase all of the items these vendors had available
provided that the vendor’s price was reasonable. However, DGS did not maintain
a comprehensive record of these vendors. DGS also could not provide written
documentation to support that it had determined the vendor’s prices were
reasonable; although not specifically required by State regulations for emergency
procurements, we believe such a determination would be prudent given that the
ventilators were effectively procured as sole source.
In addition, at the time of the procurement, Vanguard LED Display Inc. was not
registered with SDAT to do business in the State as required, and as of July 21,
2021, was still unregistered. DGS did publish the award in eMMA as required;
and, while the procurement was reported to the Board of Public Works BPW, the
report was nine days after the deadline provided for in State procurement
regulations.
20

--- Page 23 ---
Monitoring and Payment
Based on our review of packing slips accompanying the equipment delivered to
MDH, and approved by MDH personnel, we determined that MDH received a
total of 1,107 ventilators from Vanguard LED Display, Inc. However, 85 of these
ventilators valued at $3.2 million were either unaccounted for, not operational, or
had not been inspected (as to condition or functionality). Specifically, we
conducted a physical inventory of these ventilators on July 8, 2021 and
determined that 1,074 ventilators were on hand and, according to MDH, 6
ventilators had been distributed to Allegany College of Maryland. MDH did not
maintain inventory records (as would be required by DGS policies) and could not
account for the remaining 27 ventilators with an associated purchase price of $1.0
million.
Furthermore, MDH records indicated that 46 ventilators received (and included in
the 1,074 on-hand count) had failed inspection and had not been repaired, as of
June 15, 2021. The associated purchase price of the 46 non-operational
ventilators was approximately $1.7 million. Although MDH advised us that it had
addressed the non-operational ventilators with the vendor and that it was waiting
to receive the replacement parts needed to repair them, no written documentation
was provided to support this assertion. We further noted that 12 other ventilators
with an associated purchase price of $456,000 were not inspected and therefore
there was no assurance that they worked.
Test Item 3
Two Canoes LLC
Procuring Using Purchase
Agency Agency Description Price
DGS MDH Purchase of 5 million isolation gowns $41,250,000
OLA Conclusions as of August 31, 2021
DGS did not procure the isolation gowns in accordance with State procurement
regulations. Based on our testing, MDH appeared to have received the isolation
gowns associated with the purchases selected for review; however, MDH could
not provide documentation that it had inspected the gowns to ensure they met
applicable requirements, and we could not verify the disposition of these gowns
due to certain deficiencies with MDH inventory records.
Background
According to State records, on May 11, 2020, DGS issued a purchase order to
Two Canoes LLC to procure 2.5 million level-1 and 2.5 million level-2 isolation
21

--- Page 24 ---
gowns6 on behalf of MDH for a total cost of $41,250,000. The cost of each level-
1 and level-2 gown was $6.75 and $9.75, respectively. Our review of the
vendor’s website on July 29, 2021 disclosed that Two Canoes LLC is a “venture
development” company and the website did not list any level-1 or level-2
isolation gowns, or any other PPE for sale. According to MDH records, the
isolation gowns were delivered to MDH warehouses in multiple shipments, and
consequently, MDH assumed responsibility for the inspection, storage, and
distribution of the gowns and for the related recordkeeping.
Procurement
Our review disclosed that the isolation gowns were not procured in accordance
with State procurement regulations. Specifically, DGS advised us that isolation
gowns were purchased from numerous vendors, but could not provide written
documentation to explain its basis for selecting the vendor, including how it
identified Two Canoes LLC to provide isolation gowns. As previously noted in
this report, DGS did not obtain competition for PPE purchases made on behalf of
MDH. DGS also could not provide written documentation to support that the
vendor’s prices were reasonable; although not required by State regulations for
emergency procurements, we believe such a determination would be prudent
given that the isolation gowns were effectively procured as sole source. We also
noted that the aforementioned purchase order did not contain certain critical
provisions required by State procurement regulations for emergency
procurements, such as conformance of specifications and delivery and acceptance.
Our review also disclosed that Two Canoes LLC was not registered with SDAT to
do business in the State, as required. The vendor subsequently registered with
SDAT on September 8, 2020. The procurement was reported to BPW and
published on eMMA 33 days and 34 days, respectively, after the individual
deadlines provided for in State procurement regulations.
Monitoring and Payment
We reviewed five payments totaling $21.3 million made to the vendor between
May and July 2020 for 2.8 million isolation gowns. We were able to sight
packing slips (that accompanied the delivered goods) approved by MDH
personnel to support that MDH received all 2.8 million gowns associated with the
five payments we tested. However, beyond product labeling, MDH could not
provide documentation to support that the gowns were inspected to ensure they
6 The U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) recognizes four levels of isolation gowns, which
are categorized based on the level of risk associated with the gown’s intended use. For example,
level-1 gowns are intended for situations that present minimal risk (such as, basic care in a
standard medical unit) and level-2 gowns are for situations that present low risk (such as,
drawing blood from patients).
22

--- Page 25 ---
met the applicable requirements (that is, that the gowns provided were in fact
level-1 or level-2 gowns as defined by the FDA).
MDH inventory records indicated that none of these gowns had been distributed
as of June 2, 2021. While we did sight certain isolation gowns during our
physical inventory, we could not confirm that the gowns procured from the
vendor tested were on hand during our physical inventory because MDH advised
us that it comingled these gowns with similar items purchased from other
vendors. As commented upon elsewhere in this report, our review disclosed
certain deficiencies which raise questions regarding the accuracy and reliability of
MDH’s inventory records.
Test Item 4
Vizient, Inc.
Procuring Using Purchase
Agency Agency Description Price
Provide medical supply chain and
DGS MDH materials handling services at the State $40,000,000
supported field hospital locations
OLA Conclusions as of August 31, 2021
DGS procured the contract in accordance with State procurement regulations.
MDH did not effectively monitor the contract, and we could not verify that MDH
received all of the services and the propriety of the related billings.
Background
In April 2020, DGS, on behalf of MDH, awarded a $30.0 million contract to
Vizient, Inc. to provide medical supply chain and materials handling services at
State supported field hospitals throughout the State (such as, the Baltimore
Convention Center). The initial contract covered the period from April 10, 2020
to April 9, 2021 and was modified in November 2020 to increase the total
contract cost to $40.0 million. According to the vendor’s website, Vizient, Inc.
serves more than half of the health care organizations across the United States
providing clinical, operational, and supply chain services. MDH was responsible
for the oversight of this contract.
Procurement
Our review disclosed that the Vizient, Inc. contract was procured in accordance
with State regulations for emergency procurements. Specifically, DGS executed a
formal contract with Vizient, Inc. which included all critical provisions required
by State procurement regulations, and documented its basis for selecting the
23

--- Page 26 ---
vendor for award. In addition, we noted that Vizient, Inc. was registered with
SDAT to do business in the State, as required. Furthermore, DGS published the
contract award in eMMA and notified BPW within the required deadlines
provided for in State regulations.
Monitoring and Payment
Based on our testing, MDH did not effectively monitor the contract. The contract
provided for Vizient, Inc. to manage the medical supply inventory, disposable
medical supply distribution, and medical supply procurement processes at each of
the field hospital locations, and to invoice MDH monthly for these services. Our
test of six payments totaling $20,247,661 made to Vizient between September
2020 and February 2021 disclosed that the rates billed were in accordance with
the contract terms; however, the contract did not require, nor could MDH provide,
documentation of the specific services received (such as, the specific medical
supplies procured for each field hospital). Therefore, we could not verify that
MDH received all of the required services and the propriety of the related billings.
As of July 31, 2021, payments to Vizient, Inc. under this contract totaled
approximately $38.1 million.
24

--- Page 27 ---
Test Item 5
Ernst & Young, LLP
Procuring Using Purchase
Agency Agency Description Price
Consulting services related to the
MDH MDH $25,046,1407
COVID-19 Vaccine Program
OLA Conclusions as of August 31, 2021
MDH did not procure the Ernst & Young, LLP (EY) contract in accordance with
State procurement regulations. For example, as part of this contract, MDH
processed a contract modification totaling $21.3 million, but the contract
modification only increased the cost and did not include a description of what
additional staff or services were to be provided to justify the increase.
MDH also did not adequately monitor the contract; we found a lack of task
orders identifying the specific work to be performed. This condition was
significant because MDH was unaware of the extent of the services to be provided
at the time the contract was awarded. Rather, MDH relied on EY to
subsequently determine the services it would provide which, based on the records
provided us by MDH, was not done with any specificity, and the billings for these
undefined services accounted for virtually all of the contract cost. We also could
not determine the propriety of two invoices totaling $3.7 million selected for
review, and identified overpayments totaling $53,415.
Background
On January 21, 2021, MDH awarded a contract to EY valued at $3,794,600 that
covered the period from January 21, 2021 to April 21, 2021, with two 90-day
options totaling $8,131,200 to extend the contract through October 18, 2021.
Under the contract’s terms, EY was to assess the State’s COVID-19 Vaccination
Program and identify any additional support, processes, and actions necessary for
MDH to effectively administer the Program. EY was also to provide seven staff
to support the Program, with the provision that additional staff would be provided
on an as needed basis.
As further described below, MDH subsequently modified the contract in April
2021, increasing the total cost to $25,046,140. Specifically, the modification
added $21,251,540 to the original contract amount and voided the two contract
options. Our review of EY’s website on August 19, 2021 noted that it provides an
array of consulting services related to COVID-19.
7 Subsequent to our field work, MDH processed a $22.0 million modification to the contract,
increasing the total cost to $47,046,000 and extending the term through June 30, 2022. The
modification was approved by the Board of Public Works on September 15, 2021.
25

--- Page 28 ---
Procurement
Our review disclosed that the consulting services were not procured in accordance
with State regulations for emergency procurements and, in our opinion, the
contract was awarded in a manner that reduced competition and precluded
effective evaluation of the vendors.
 The use of the emergency procurement method for this contract did not appear
to be justified because the procurement was not a “sudden or unexpected
occurrence or condition which agency management could not foresee”, as
required under State regulations. MDH directly solicited proposals from four
vendors, allowing 36 hours for the submission of a proposal. MDH could not
document a formal process used to identify the four vendors it selected,
although we noted that one of the four had previously provided consulting
services to a MDH administration for a number of years. Ultimately, MDH
received proposals from EY and a second potential vendor. However, we
were advised by the Director of the MDH Healthcare System that MDH first
became aware it needed the services that were the subject of this procurement
in October 2020, three months before MDH procured the services using the
emergency procurement method. MDH could not explain why it did not
initiate a competitive procurement under non-emergency procurement
regulations at that time, but waited until January 18, 2021 (the date indicated
on MDH’s written justification for using the emergency procurement method).
This several month delay is significant because it resulted in MDH awarding
the contract following a 36 hour response time from certain potential vendors
rather than through a competitive procurement process (for which the standard
minimum response period is 20 days). Although MDH generally documented
its basis for awarding the contract to EY (specifically, that it awarded the
contract to EY after considering the technical and price proposals), in light of
the abridged procurement and the emergency procurement process used, we
could not conclude that the vendor selected provided the best value to the
State.
 The contract did not include a maximum contract value, as required under
State procurement regulations. Specifically, the contract included the hourly
rates to be billed for each EY employee, but did not specify the total hours to
be worked by these individuals. Rather, MDH provided us with an internal
estimate it prepared, which indicated that billings from EY under the original
contract could total $11,925,800. While MDH reported this amount to the
BPW, no maximum value was incorporated into the contract terms.
 MDH could not justify the $21.3 million contract modification processed in
April 2021. The written contract modification only increased the cost and did
26

--- Page 29 ---
not include or otherwise specifically identify the additional staff or services to
be provided to justify the increase beyond a broad statement that additional
personnel were needed to effectively and efficiently implement the
Vaccination Program. MDH could not explain the basis for the dollar amount
of the modification. Although we noted the number of staff provided by EY
under the contract increased from 7 to 93 between January and April 2021 (an
increase of 1,200 percent), MDH could not document the need for these
individuals nor the specific tasks they were to perform.8
 Although the original contract award was published on eMMA four days after
the deadline provided for in State procurement regulations, as of August 19,
2021, MDH had not published the contract modification on eMMA. MDH did
report both the original contract and the modification to BPW within the
required timeframes, and EY was registered with SDAT to do business in the
State, as required.
Monitoring and Payment
MDH did not adequately monitor the contract resulting in the failure to receive
certain deliverables and certain payments that were not in accordance with the
contract terms. The contract language described the service to be provided by EY
in general terms. Specifically, EY was to conduct a comprehensive assessment of
MDH’s Vaccination Program to identify any additional support, processes, and
actions necessary for MDH to effectively administer the COVID-19 Vaccine
Program. The contract also required EY to provide seven staff to support the
Program, with the provision that additional staff would be provided on an as
needed basis (as determined by MDH) to implement the recommendations
contained in the comprehensive assessment. We reviewed the comprehensive
assessment provided by EY and tested the two invoices that had been paid by
MDH at the time of our review for services provided by 81 billed EY staff
totaling $3.7 million.
 The completed comprehensive assessment given to us by MDH did not
provide specific actions or identify the staff needed to conduct the work, as
required by the contract. The EY assessment contained a total of 22
recommendations to address various issues identified with the MDH
Vaccination Program. However, the assessment did not identify the specific
actions from EY necessary to implement these recommendations. The
assessment also did not identify the additional EY staff that were needed to
conduct the work. Although the invoices we reviewed did not include specific
8 The findings under “Monitoring and Payment” will highlight the critical nature of this particular
contract language issue.
27

--- Page 30 ---
charges for this assessment, we noted that the contract provided that MDH
was to pay the vendor $85,000 for this deliverable.
 MDH did not use a task order system9 to review and direct or otherwise
approve of the number of EY staff to be provided and the specific work to be
performed. Although a task order system was not required by the contract
terms, given the broad and general scope of the contract, such a system could
have established accountability and provided MDH with a formal process to
supervise the work to be performed. As a result, we could not readily
determine the extent to which MDH defined the scope of the work EY was to
perform, and the related staffing levels. In addition, MDH had no formal
method to challenge or otherwise question the resultant billings.10
Specifically, MDH did not know the extent of the services to be provided at
the time the contract was awarded (instead, it was relying on the
aforementioned EY assessment), and billings for these services accounted for
virtually all of the contract cost. Consequently, we believe that without a task
order system, or some similar process, to establish accountability, MDH had
no assurance that the services billed for were reasonable in relation to the
product provided.
 Our test of the two invoices disclosed that MDH could not document that it
formally approved the 74 additional employees billed on these invoices, and
did not obtain documentation of the work completed by each employee, as
required by the contract. Accordingly, we could not verify the propriety of
these billings. Furthermore, the hourly rates billed for three employees
exceeded the rates specified in the contract by $30 to $90. As a result, MDH
overpaid $53,415 for these three individuals’ services for the two invoices we
tested. MDH was not aware of the overpayment until we brought the matter
to its attention.
9 Under a task order system, MDH would have issued formal orders to the vendor that identified
the specific work to be performed and the related costs.
10 Although the contract provided that EY would seek MDH approval for individual staff assigned
to the contract, without a link to the task(s) to be performed by those staff there appears no
documented basis supporting any such approval process.
28

--- Page 31 ---
Test Item 6
Coast to Coast Strategies, LLC
Procuring Using Purchase
Agency Agency Description Price
DGS MDH Purchase of 5 million KN95 masks $14,000,000
OLA Conclusions as of August 31, 2021
DGS did not procure the KN95 masks in accordance with State procurement
regulations. Based on our testing, MDH appeared to have received the KN95
masks it purchased from the vendor; however, MDH could not provide
documentation that it had inspected the masks to ensure they met applicable
requirements. Further, MDH could not account for the disposition of 370,436 of
these masks valued at $1,037,221.
Background
According to State records, in April 2020, DGS procured 5 million KN9511 masks
from Coast to Coast Strategies, LLC, on behalf of MDH, for a total cost of $14
million ($2.80 per mask). Our review of the vendor’s website on July 28, 2021
disclosed that it provides various consulting services including political analysis
and access, strategic planning, business development, and public relations and did
not list any KN95 masks or other PPE for sale.
Our review of the documentation provided by DGS disclosed that Coast to Coast
Strategies, LLC obtained these masks from a biotechnological and pharmaceutical
marketing company based in Florida. According to MDH records, the KN95
masks were delivered to MDH warehouses, and consequently, MDH assumed
responsibility for the inspection, storage, and distribution of the masks and for the
related recordkeeping.
Procurement
Our review disclosed that the KN95 masks were not procured in accordance with
State procurement regulations for emergency procurements. Specifically, DGS
could not provide documentation to explain its basis for selecting the vendor,
including how it identified Coast to Coast Strategies, LLC to provide KN95
masks. In this regard, we noted that the Governor of Maryland’s
Communications Director stated to local news media that a former Lieutenant
Governor of Maryland, had reached out to the State about this purchase. This
individual was listed as a principal of Coast to Coast Strategies, LLC on its
11 KN95 masks are respiratory protective devices (similar to N95 masks) that are regulated by the
Chinese government. During the COVID-19 pandemic, the FDA issued an Emergency Use
Authorization (EUA) authorizing the use of certain KN95 masks as an alternative to N95 masks.
29

--- Page 32 ---
website. DGS did not provide us with any record of this correspondence (such as,
emails). As previously noted in this report, DGS did not obtain competition for
PPE purchases made on behalf of MDH. DGS also could not provide written
documentation to support that the vendor’s prices were reasonable; although not
specifically required by State regulations for emergency procurements, we believe
such a determination would be prudent given that the masks were effectively
procured as sole source.
DGS did not have a formal written contract with Coast to Coast Strategies, LLC,
as required. Rather, the only written documentation DGS provided us related to
this purchase were the invoices from the Florida company that sourced the masks
to Coast to Coast Strategies, LLC. Our review also disclosed that at the time of
the procurement, Coast to Coast Strategies, LLC was not registered with SDAT to
do business in the State, as required and as of July 21, 2021, was still
unregistered. The procurement was reported to the BPW and published on eMMA
3 days and 23 days after the respective individual deadlines provided for in State
procurement regulations.
Monitoring and Payment
Based on our review of packing slips, accompanying the delivery of the masks
and approved by MDH personnel, we determined that MDH received a total of 5
million KN95 labeled masks. However, beyond product labeling, MDH could not
provide documentation to support that these masks were inspected to ensure they
met the applicable requirements (that is, they were indeed KN95 masks or N9512
equivalents), and could not readily explain the disposition of certain of these
masks. Specifically, MDH inventory records indicated that as of June 6, 2021,
4,224,984 of the masks were on hand and 404,580 had been distributed. Based on
our physical inventory of these masks conducted in July 2021, we determined that
the amount reflected as on hand in MDH inventory records (4,224,984) was
reasonably accurate; but, MDH could not readily explain the disposition of the
remaining 370,436 masks with an associated price of $1,037,221. As commented
upon elsewhere in this report, our review also disclosed certain deficiencies which
raise questions regarding the accuracy and reliability of MDH’s inventory
records.
12 The FDA defines N95 masks as a respiratory protective device designed to achieve a very close
facial fit and very efficient filtration of airborne particles. The National Institute for
Occupational Safety and Health (NIOSH) is responsible for regulating N95 masks.
30

--- Page 33 ---
Test Item 7
Blue Flame Medical, LLC
Procuring Using Purchase
Agency Agency Description Price
Purchase of 1,550,000 N95 masks and 37
DGS MDH $6,271,000
ventilators
OLA Conclusions as of August 31, 2021
DGS did not procure the masks and ventilators in accordance with all
requirements of State procurement regulations. Based on our testing, MDH
appeared to have received all of the masks and ventilators it purchased from the
vendor; however, MDH could not document that the masks were inspected or
account for the disposition of at least 475,400 N95 masks purchased from Blue
Flame Medical, LLC with an associated purchase price of $2,149,712.
Background
In June 2020, the chairs of the Senate Education, Health, and Environmental
Affairs and the House Health and Government Operations Committees requested
that we conduct a review of this procurement, which was the subject of extensive
media coverage. According to State records, on April 1, 2020, DGS issued a
purchase order to Blue Flame Medical, LLC to purchase 1,550,000 N95 masks
and 110 ventilators on behalf of MDH. The total cost was $12,542,000, of which
$6,271,000 was required as an initial deposit. The cost of each N95 mask was
$4.52 and the cost of each ventilator was $41,000. Our review of the vendor’s
website on August 9, 2021 disclosed that Blue Flame Medical, LLC sells medical
supplies to help limit the spread of COVID-19. As of August 2, 2021, although
the vendor’s website listed N95 masks and other medical equipment there were no
ventilators advertised for sale.
On May 4, 2020, DGS canceled the purchase and attempted to recover its deposit
from Blue Flame Medical, LLC due to the vendor’s failure to deliver any items
within the expected time frame. In October 2020, DGS entered into a settlement
agreement with the vendor which allowed Blue Flame Medical, LLC to keep the
initial deposit of $6,271,000 as payment for the 1,550,000 N95 masks and 37
ventilators, which were ultimately provided. According to MDH records, the
masks and ventilators were delivered to MDH warehouses, and consequently,
MDH was responsible for the inspection, storage, and distribution of the masks
and ventilators and for the related recordkeeping.
Procurement
Our review disclosed that the masks and ventilators were not procured in
accordance with State procurement regulations for emergency procurements.
31

--- Page 34 ---
While the aforementioned purchase order included the quantity to be purchased
and the related payment terms, it did not contain certain critical provisions
required by State procurement regulations, such as dispute resolution, delays and
extensions, conformance of specifications, and delivery and acceptance.
DGS provided us with an email sent by the Secretary of DGS to senior DGS
procurement officials on March 29, 2020 which indicated that Blue Flame
Medical, LLC had been identified as a potential vendor by the Director of Federal
Regulations for the Governor’s Office. According to this email, Blue Flame
Medical, LLC had a direct link to a manufacturer in China that could provide
various medical supplies within 8 to 10 days. As previously noted in this report,
DGS did not obtain competition for purchases of PPE and medical equipment
made on behalf of MDH. DGS also could not provide written documentation to
support that it had determined the vendor’s prices were reasonable; although not
specifically required by State regulations for emergency procurements, we believe
such a determination would be prudent given that the masks and ventilators were
effectively procured as sole source.
At the time of the procurement, Blue Flame Medical, LLC was not registered with
SDAT to do business in the State, as required, and as of July 21, 2021 was still
unregistered. The procurement was reported to the BPW and published on eMMA
5 days and 25 days after the respective deadlines provided for in State
procurement regulations.
Monitoring and Payment
During the aforementioned Review of Procurement of Certain COVID Tests, we
conducted a physical inventory on November 17, 2020 and determined that MDH
received 1,550,000 N95 labeled masks and 37 ventilators from Blue Flame
Medical, LLC in accordance with the terms of the settlement agreement. MDH
provided evidence that the ventilators had been inspected, were operational, and
met all applicable requirements. However, beyond product labeling, MDH could
not provide documentation to support that the masks purchased from the vendor
were inspected to ensure they met the applicable requirements (that is, they were
indeed N95 masks).
MDH also could not explain the disposition of at least 475,400 of the N95 masks
with an associated purchase price of $2,149,712. Specifically, during our current
review, we conducted a second physical inventory on July 8, 2021 and determined
that only 928,000 of the masks were still on hand. While MDH inventory records
indicated that 146,600 had been distributed, there was no record of the disposition
of the other 475,400. MDH warehouse personnel advised us that the unaccounted
for masks had been distributed, but that MDH’s inventory records had not been
32

--- Page 35 ---
updated to reflect these distributions. As commented upon elsewhere in this
report, our review disclosed certain deficiencies which raise questions regarding
the accuracy and reliability of MDH’s inventory records.
Test Item 8
Design Co., Ltd.
Procuring Using Purchase
Agency Agency Description Price
DGS MDH Purchase of 2 million KN95 face masks $3,280,000
OLA Conclusions as of August 31, 2021
DGS did not procure the KN95 masks in accordance with State procurement
regulations. Based on our testing, we could not verify that MDH received any of
the 2 million masks purchased from the vendor.
Background
According to State records, on May 5, 2020, DGS issued a purchase order to
Design Co., LTD, a South Korean company, to purchase 2 million KN95 face
masks on behalf of MDH for a total cost of $3,280,000 million ($1.64 per mask).
Per our review of the vendor’s website on July 27, 2021, Design CO., LTD
primarily specializes in research and development of rechargeable batteries.
Although the vendor’s website indicated that it began exporting KN95 masks to
the United States in 2020, no KN95 masks were listed for sale at the time of our
review.
Procurement
Our review disclosed that the KN95 masks were not procured in accordance with
State procurement regulations. Specifically, DGS could not document its basis
for selecting the vendor as required by State procurement regulations, including
how it identified Design Co., LTD to provide KN95 masks. As previously noted
in this report, DGS did not obtain competition for PPE purchases made on behalf
of MDH. DGS also could not provide documentation to support that the vendor’s
prices were reasonable; although not specifically required by State procurement
regulations for emergency procurements, we believe such a determination would
be prudent given that the masks were effectively procured as sole source. In
addition, the aforementioned purchase order did not contain certain critical
provisions required by State procurement regulations, such as dispute resolution,
delays and extensions, conformance of specifications, and delivery and
acceptance.
33

--- Page 36 ---
Our review also disclosed that at the time of the procurement Design Co., LTD
was not registered with SDAT to do business in the State, as required and as of
July 21, 2021, was still unregistered. DGS did publish the award in eMMA as
required; and, the procurement was reported to the BPW, although it was done 39
days after the deadline provided for in State procurement regulations.
Monitoring and Payment
Based on our review of available documentation, we could not verify that MDH
had actually received the KN95 face masks purchased from the vendor. MDH
advised us that all of the masks were delivered to its warehouse on May 27, 2020
and provided us with four freight slips from a vendor (that MDH asserted had
delivered the masks), which did not appear related to Design Co., LTD.
However, we could not verify that this delivery was associated with the masks
purchased from Design Co., LTD because these documents only identified the
weight of the items delivered (which did not agree to the weight of the masks
shipped by Design Co., LTD according to the bill of lading MDH provided us),
and did not contain any specific identifying information such as a description of
the goods delivered (that is KN95 masks) or a bill of lading number.
Further, the shipping documents provided by MDH indicated that the masks were
placed aboard a container ship in a Korean port on May 24, 2020; accordingly, it
did not appear reasonable that the masks could have arrived at MDH’s warehouse
three days later. In addition, the MDH inventory records provided to us were only
a summary of the quantity of masks on hand and did not indicate whether any
masks were received on or around the May 27, 2020 date. MDH also could not
provide documentation to support that the masks were inspected to ensure they
met the applicable requirements; this documentation could have been used as
evidence that the masks were received.
While MDH inventory records indicated that certain KN95 masks were on hand,
we were unable to verify that any of the 2 million KN95 masks identified by
MDH as having been provided by Design Co. LTD were indeed the masks
purchased from the vendor. Specifically, we conducted a physical inventory on
July 1, 2021, during which MDH personnel identified certain unopened boxes
containing KN95 masks as having been provided by Design Co. LTD. However,
there was no evidence to support that these masks were associated with the
purchase from Design Co. LTD. For example, the purchasing documentation
provided did not indicate a specific manufacturer for the masks, and we noted that
the purchase order numbers on the masks located in the warehouse did not agree
to the purchase order number for Design Co. LTD or the vendor that MDH
advised had delivered the masks. As commented upon elsewhere in this report,
34

--- Page 37 ---
our review disclosed certain deficiencies which raise questions regarding the
accuracy and reliability of MDH’s inventory records.
Test Item 9
Economy Kanghwa Co. Ltd.
Procuring Using Purchase
Agency Agency Description Price
Purchase of 1 million KN95 masks and 1
DGS MDH $2,350,000
million surgical masks
OLA Conclusions as of August 31, 2021
DGS did not procure the KN95 and surgical masks in accordance with State
procurement regulations. Based on our testing, MDH appeared to have received
all of the masks it purchased from the vendor and these masks were still on hand
at the time of our review. However, MDH had not inspected the masks to ensure
they met applicable requirements.
Background
According to State records, on April 17, 2020, DGS issued an LOI to Economy
Kanghwa Co. Ltd., a South Korean company, to purchase 1.0 million KN95
masks and 1.0 million surgical masks on behalf of MDH, for a total cost of
$2,350,000. The cost of each KN95 was $2.00 and the cost of each surgical mask
was $0.35. We were unable to identify a current public website for this vendor;
however, we found an online business-to-business website that indicated that
Economy Kanghwa Co. Ltd offered various face masks as of August 19, 2021.
We could not readily obtain current pricing information for the vendor’s
offerings. According to MDH records, the masks were delivered to MDH
warehouses, and consequently, MDH was responsible for the inspection, storage,
and distribution of the masks and for the related recordkeeping.
Procurement
Our review disclosed that the KN95 masks were not procured in accordance with
State procurement regulations. Specifically, DGS could not provide
documentation to explain its basis for selecting the vendor, including how it
identified Economy Kanghwa Co. LTD to provide KN95 masks. As previously
noted in this report, DGS did not obtain competition for PPE purchases made on
behalf of MDH. DGS also could not provide written documentation to support
that the vendor’s prices were reasonable; although not specifically required by
State regulations for emergency procurements, we believe such a determination
would be prudent given that the masks were effectively procured as sole source.
35

--- Page 38 ---
In addition, DGS did not have a formal written contract with Economy Kanghwa
Co. Ltd, as required. While the aforementioned LOI included the quantity to be
purchased and the related payment terms, the LOI did not contain any of the
critical provisions required by State procurement regulations, or any
specifications or requirements for the masks to ensure they would function as
intended. At the time of the procurement, Economy Kanghwa Co. Ltd. was not
registered with SDAT to do business in the State as required, and as of July 21,
2021, the vendor was still unregistered. The procurement was reported to the
BPW and published on eMMA 57 days and 58 days after the respective deadlines
provided for in State procurement regulations.
Monitoring and Payment
Although there was a lack of documentation (such as, receiving reports) available
to support that the masks were received, during our physical inventory conducted
on July 1, 2021, we determined that MDH appeared to have received all 2.0
million masks from Economy Kanghwa and that these masks appeared to still be
on hand. However, beyond product labeling, MDH could not provide
documentation to support that these masks were inspected to ensure they met the
applicable requirements (for example, that the masks provided were in fact KN95
masks or N95 equivalents).
Test Item 10
Hagerty Consulting
Procuring Using Purchase
Agency Agency Description Price
Disaster response consulting services and
DGS MEMA $1,500,000
additional staffing
OLA Conclusions as of August 31, 2021
DGS procured the contract in accordance with State procurement regulations.
Based on our testing, MEMA appeared to have been effectively monitoring the
contract and the invoice payments tested were properly supported and in
accordance with the contract terms.
Background
In March 2020, DGS awarded a contract valued at $1.5 million to Hagerty
Consulting on behalf of the Maryland Emergency Management Agency (MEMA).
The contract provided for the vendor to provide staffing to assist in the State
Emergency Operations Center and to assist with the Federal Emergency
Management Agency reimbursement process. As of July 27, 2021, payments to
Hagerty Consulting under this contract totaled $858,730.
36

--- Page 39 ---
Test Item 11
Inspection Experts, Inc.
Procuring Using Purchase
Agency Agency Description Price
MDE MDE Sampling of wastewater for COVID-19 $1,053,000
OLA Conclusions as of August 31, 2021
MDE procured the contract in accordance with State procurement regulations.
Our review of one payment totaling $54,000 made to the vendor in April 2021
disclosed that the payment was properly supported and in accordance with the
contract terms.
Background
In December 2020, the Maryland Department of Environment (MDE) awarded a
contract valued at $1,053,000 (including options) to Inspection Experts, Inc. The
contract provided that the vendor was to take composite samples of wastewater at
various locations throughout Maryland to be tested for the presence of the
COVID-19 virus and to bill MDE periodically. As of April 13, 2021, payments to
Inspection Experts, Inc. under this contract totaled $275,660.
Test Item 12
CosmosID, Inc.
Procuring Using Purchase
Agency Agency Description Price
MDE MDE Analysis of wastewater for COVID-19 $826,680
OLA Conclusions as of August 31, 2021
MDE procured the original contract and the subsequent modification in
accordance with State procurement regulations. Our test of two payments
totaling $66,671 made to the vendor in April 2021 disclosed that the payments
were properly supported and in accordance with the contract terms.
Background
In December 2020, MDE awarded a contract valued at $647,400 (including
options) to CosmosID, Inc. The contract provided that the vendor was to analyze
the wastewater samples (obtained by Inspection Experts, Inc., see Test Item 11) to
estimate the amount of COVID-19 virus present. In February 2021, MDE
executed an emergency modification valued at $179,280 to include testing for
emerging variants of the COVID-19 virus. As of April 19, 2021, payments to
CosmosID, Inc. under this contract totaled $199,200.
37

--- Page 40 ---
Test Item 13
Ellsworth Electric, Inc.
Procuring Using Purchase
Agency Agency Description Price
Electrical work at a temporary hospital
DPSCS DPSCS site located at the Maryland Correctional $181,736
Institution - Hagerstown
OLA Conclusions as of August 31, 2021
DPSCS did not procure the electrical work in accordance with State
procurement regulations. Based on our testing, DPSCS appeared to have been
effectively monitoring the contract and the invoice payment tested was generally
supported and accurate.
Background
According to State records, between April and June 2020, the Department of
Public Safety and Correctional Services (DPSCS) issued four purchase orders
totaling $181,736 to Ellsworth Electric, Inc. to perform electrical work at a
temporary hospital site located at the Maryland Correctional Institution -
Hagerstown. Specifically, DPSCS awarded one purchase order valued at $98,869
in April 2020, one purchase order valued at $8,996 in May 2020, and two
purchase orders in June 2020 valued at $69,279 and $4,592, respectively. Our
review of the vendor’s website on August 17, 2021 disclosed that Ellsworth
Electric, Inc. provides a complete range of electrical contracting and insulation
services, including those provided to DPSCS.
Procurement
Our review of two purchase orders issued to Ellsworth Electric, Inc. (valued at
$98,869 and $69,279, respectively) disclosed that the electrical services generally
were not procured in accordance with State procurement regulations.
Specifically, the purchase orders did not contain certain critical provisions
required by State procurement regulations, such as modifications, delays and
extensions, and conformance of specifications.
While DPSCS documented its basis for selecting Ellsworth Electric, Inc. for the
initial purchase, DPSCS could not provide written documentation to explain its
basis for the second purchase. Specifically, DPSCS procured the second purchase
as an emergency modification to the first purchase, but did not document its
determination that the additional services were within the scope of the original
agreement, as required by State procurement regulations. In addition, DPSCS
could not provide written documentation for either purchase to support that the
vendor’s prices were reasonable; although not specifically required by State
38

--- Page 41 ---
regulations for emergency procurements, we believe such a determination would
be prudent given that the services were effectively procured as sole source.
DPSCS also had not reported the second purchase we reviewed (made in June
2020) to BPW as of May 3, 2021, and the initial purchase was reported to BPW
three days after the deadline provided for in State regulations. In addition, as of
August 17, 2021, DPSCS had not published either award on eMMA, as required.
We noted that Ellsworth Electric, Inc. was registered with SDAT to do business in
the State, as required.
Monitoring and Payment
Based on our review of the one invoice received for the two purchase orders at the
time of our work, totaling $68,713 paid in June 2020, it appeared that DPSCS
received the required services from Ellsworth Electric, Inc. However, we noted
that this invoice included $2,868 in State sales taxes even though State agencies
are exempt from these taxes. As of May 4, 2021, payments to Ellsworth Electric,
Inc. related to the two purchase orders we reviewed (which were valued at
$168,148) totaled $68,713.
Test Item 14
White Star Sales and Promotions
Procuring Using Purchase
Agency Agency Description Price
DSP DSP Various PPE Items $117,950
OLA Conclusions as of August 31, 2021
DSP did not procure the PPE items in accordance with State procurement
regulations. DSP could not provide documentation to support that certain items
valued at $53,727 had been received. In addition, DSP could not provide
documentation that it had inspected 11,000 N95 masks purchased from the
vendor valued at $64,223 to ensure they met applicable requirements, and we
could not verify the disposition of these masks due to certain deficiencies with
DSP inventory records.
Background
According to State records, between March and June 2020, the Department of
State Police (DSP) issued four purchase orders to White Star Sales and
Promotions to obtain various PPE items (such as, N95 masks and protective
coveralls) for a total cost of $117,950. Specifically, DSP awarded one purchase
order valued at $11,807 in March 2020, two purchase orders valued at $26,532
and $41,920 in April 2020, and one purchase order valued at $37,691 in June
39

--- Page 42 ---
2020. Our review of the vendor’s website on August 6, 2021 disclosed that White
Star Sales and Promotions sells promotional products for events, meetings, trade
shows, and product branding. The various PPE items DSP purchased from White
Star Sales and Promotions were listed for sale on the vendor’s website at the time
of our review.
Procurement
Our review disclosed that the PPE items purchased from the vendor generally
were not procured in accordance with State procurement regulations.
Specifically, the purchase orders did not contain certain of the critical provisions
required by State procurement regulations, such as modifications and delays and
extensions.
At the time of the procurements, White Star Sales and Promotions was not
registered with SDAT to do business in the State, as required and as of July 21,
2021, was still unregistered.13 Since the individual four procurements did not
exceed $50,000, DSP was not required to report the purchases to the BPW or
publish the awards on eMMA.
Monitoring and Payment
Based on our review of available documentation, we could not determine if DSP
had received certain PPE items purchased from the vendor. Specifically, DSP
could not provide documentation to support that it received the 9,985 hand
sanitizer packets or 5,000 hooded coveralls associated with two purchase orders
for which DSP paid $53,727. DSP also could not provide documentation to
support that the PPE items purchased from the vendor were inspected to ensure
they met the applicable requirements (for example, that the masks provided were
in fact N95 masks as defined by the FDA).
We could not verify DSP’s assertion that the 11,000 N95 masks DSP received
from the vendor with an associated purchase price of $64,223 were distributed to
DSP barracks or other State agencies, because DSP’s inventory records for
COVID-19 purchases were not designed to track the disposition of items
purchased from individual vendors. Because DSP advised us that they comingled
these masks with similar items purchased from other vendors, we did not conduct
a physical inventory to attempt to locate the masks.
13 Although the company itself as a legal entity was not registered as required by State
procurement regulations, DSP advised that it verified the individual who owned the company
was registered with SDAT prior to the purchase.
40

--- Page 43 ---
Test Item 15
John S. Connor, Inc.
Procuring Using Purchase
Agency Agency Description Price
Consulting and logistical services for
DGS DGS DGS procurements from overseas $50,000
suppliers
OLA Conclusions as of August 31, 2021
DGS did not procure the consulting and logistical services in accordance with all
State procurement regulations. DGS did not adequately monitor the contract,
and we could not determine the propriety of two invoices for consulting services
totaling $8,790 selected for review.
Background
According to State records, on April 14, 2020, DGS issued a purchase order to
John S. Connor, Inc. to provide assistance, support, and consulting services
related to the procurement and delivery of medical supplies and equipment, test
kits14, and PPE from overseas suppliers for a total cost of $50,000. Our review of
the vendor’s website on August 2, 2021, disclosed that John S. Connor Inc.
provides various shipping and logistical services.
Procurement
Our review disclosed that the vendor’s services were not procured in accordance
with State procurement regulations. Specifically, DGS could not document its
basis for selecting the vendor, including how it identified John S. Connor, Inc.
and why other vendors were not considered to provide the services. In addition,
the aforementioned purchase order did not contain certain critical provisions
required by State procurement regulations, such as disputes and delays and
extensions. DGS also could not provide documentation to support its
determination that the prices offered were reasonable; although not specifically
required by State procurement regulations for emergency procurements, we
believe such a determination would be prudent given that the services were
effectively procured as sole source.
Since the procurement did not exceed $50,000, DGS was not required to report
the procurement to the BPW or publish the award on eMMA. We noted that John
S. Connor, Inc. was registered with SDAT to do business in the State, as required.
14 For example, John S. Connor acted as the customs broker for the COVID-19 test kits purchased
from LabGenomics which was the subject of our Review of Procurement of Certain COVID
Tests, for which the related report was issued on March 31, 2021.
41

--- Page 44 ---
Monitoring and Payment
Based on our testing, DGS did not effectively monitor the contract. Specifically,
the purchase order provided that the vendor would invoice DGS for consulting
services provided at an hourly rate of $100, and for freight forwarding and
customs clearance based on actual costs. Our test of four invoices totaling
$13,971 paid between April and July 2020 disclosed that two invoices for
consulting services totaling $8,790 did not include any description of the specific
services performed. Therefore, we could not verify the propriety of these billings.
As of July 31, 2021, payments to John S. Connor, Inc. under this purchase order
totaled $29,704.
42

--- Page 45 ---
Objective 2
Disposition and Reliability of LabGenomics Tests
Objective and Methodology
Our objective was to account for the number of LabGenomics tests used, and to
corroborate an allegation we received on our fraud, waste, and abuse hotline in
September 2020 regarding concerns with the accuracy of test results received for
samples collected at Towson University (TU).
For the purpose of completing this objective, we obtained documentation of test
results from the laboratories (specifically from the University of Maryland,
Baltimore’s Institute of Genome Sciences and University of Maryland Pathology
Associates (UMPA), the Maryland Department of Health’s Maryland Public
Health Laboratory, and CIAN Diagnostics) that used the second set of 500,000
COVID-19 tests purchased from LabGenomics that were the subject of our
Review of Procurement of Certain COVID Tests report, for which OLA issued
the report on March 31, 2021. As previously noted, we were unable to obtain
access to these results in time for inclusion in that report. We performed various
tests of the data obtained from these laboratories and determined that the data
were reliable for the purposes for which the data were used by us.
Conclusion
Our analysis of the documentation provided disclosed that 460,596 (92 percent) of
the 500,000 LabGenomics tests were used to analyze patient samples. The
laboratories advised us that the remaining 39,404 tests were likely used for other
purposes, such as for validation studies and test controls.
Our analysis also generally corroborated the concerns raised in the
aforementioned allegation to our fraud, waste, and abuse hotline. Specifically, the
individual who submitted the allegation advised us that the test results for samples
collected by TU in August 2020 and sent to UMPA for analysis were positive for
66 individuals, but that certain of these individuals challenged the validity of their
test results for a variety of reasons and immediately retested and received negative
test results. In this regard, we determined that 42 of the 66 individuals were
retested from 2 to 6 days after the initial tests were completed and that 26 of these
individuals received a negative result for their subsequent test. However, we
could not determine from available sources if the inconsistent results were due to
inherent performance issues with the LabGenomics tests or other factors that
could impact the validity of the test results.
43

--- Page 46 ---
APPENDIX
December 3, 2021
Mr. Gregory A. Hook, CPA
Legislative Auditor
Office of Legislative Audits
State Office Building, Room 1202
301 West Preston Street
Baltimore, MD 21201
Dear Mr. Hook:
Thank you for the opportunity to review the revised Review of Certain Emergency Procurements
Related to the State of Maryland’s COVID-19 Response; the Maryland Department of Health
has no additional comment to the October 22nd joint agency response (attached).
If you have any questions, please contact Frederick D. Doggett at 410-767-0885 or email at
frederick.doggett@maryland.gov.
Sincerely,
Dennis R. Schrader
Secretary
Enclosure

--- Page 47 ---
Auditor’s Comments on Agencies’ Responses
Although the written responses provided by the agencies subject to this review indicated
general agreement with our findings, the responses included certain disagreements with
the content of our report. After reviewing the areas of disagreement, we re-examined our
work and reaffirmed that our published findings are appropriate, clearly presented, and
properly supported by the results of interviews and our examination of the documentation
provided to us by the respective agencies.
Thus, we continue to believe that OLA’s statements and conclusions in the report are
valid and were not disproved by any of the unsupported assertions included in the
responses. Although we reviewed each response in its entirety, we did not deem it
necessary to provide a point-by-point rebuttal, but rather provided the Auditor’s
Comments below to certain significant disagreements in the agencies’ responses.
October 22, 2021
Gregory A. Hook, CPA
Legislative Auditor
Office of Legislative Audits
Department of Legislative Services
301 West Preston Street, Room 1202
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Submitted electronically to response@ola.state.md.us
Dear Mr. Hook:
The Maryland Departments of General Services (DGS) and Health (MDH), along with
our partner state agencies below, appreciate the opportunity to respond to the Office of
Legislative Audits’ (OLA) Special Review of Emergency Procurements (October 2021),
as conducted from April 9, 2021 through August 31, 2021.
We are deeply appreciative of the work from our OLA colleagues. While there was less
of a collaborative business process discussion than traditionally occurs in a regularly
scheduled audit cycle, we thank the Special Review for identifying issues that we

--- Page 48 ---
continue to work on remedying or that we have already instituted new business
processes to remedy.
The State of Maryland’s COVID-19 response has been organized around one core
mission: to prevent as many deaths and hospitalizations as possible while ensuring that
Marylanders can go about their normal business in a reopened economy safely.
Maryland has been nationally recognized as having one of the best COVID-19
responses in the nation. (A report by SYKES ranked Maryland as having the 2nd most
effective response to the COVID-19 pandemic. According to a report issued by UC
Berkeley, Maryland has the 9th best response to the COVID-19 pandemic.) Under the
leadership of Governor Larry Hogan, Maryland moved aggressively early in the
pandemic to undertake steps to ensure a robust response addressing the five pillars of
our COVID-19 response:
(A) Ensure sufficient hospital capacity throughout the state
(B) Acquire adequate personal protective equipment (PPE) and other medical
equipment
(C) Set up the framework for access to COVID-19 tests
(D) Building a robust contact tracing infrastructure
(E) Creating a wide set of COVID-19 vaccine distribution channels to sustain
one of the most successful vaccination initiatives in the nation.
Generally speaking, all involved state agencies conducted procurement(s) and their
contract management processes as part of the statewide COVID-19 pandemic
response based on the following guiding principles:
1. Adherence to existing procurement law, regulations, and policies to the maximum
extent possible - as demonstrated by review for legal sufficiency, competitive
bids, and reporting to the Board of Public Works (BPW);
2. Contract management to ensure that services contracts were overseen on a
weekly basis with defined objectives; and
3. A focus on improving our business processes as shortcomings were identified.
Regarding principle three above, as opposed to regular or traditional business
processes of state government, the COVID-19 pandemic required actions that have not
been undertaken in over a century, or never in state history.
Below, please see agency specific remarks about the Special Review:
DGS Response:
DGS and its Office of State Procurement (DGS OSP) appreciates the opportunity to
offer this response to the OLA Special Review of Emergency Procurements (October
2021), as conducted from April 9, 2021 through August 31, 2021.
2

--- Page 49 ---
The nine contracts procured by DGS OSP that were reviewed resulted in several
common themes regarding the conclusions drawn. DGS’ responses are as follows:
1. DGS did not have a formal written contract.
Agency Response: One of the Office of the Attorney General’s Assistant
Attorneys General assigned to DGS reviewed and approved the chosen contract
vehicle, in this instance a Letter of Intent, for legal form and sufficiency and DGS
asserts this constitutes a valid contract.
Auditor’s Comment: It is troubling to us that DGS continues to consider letters of
intent sufficient to document multi-million dollar emergency procurements from vendors
that had not previously conducted business with the State. Our report acknowledged that
there were letters of intent for two of the emergency procurements tested (test items 2 and
9), but indicated that they did not include all of the required contract provisions,
including language to address key elements intended to protect the State, including
conformance of specifications, indemnification, cost and price certifications, and
requirements for registration of the business in the State. As indicated in response 2.
directly below, DGS concedes that the letters of intent did not contain all of the required
contract provisions. Furthermore, we were advised by the Board of Public Works staff
that, while a letter of intent may be evidence of an agreement between the State and a
vendor, without further documentation incorporating the State’s required contract
provisions, these agreements may be “void” under State law. Finally, we noted that there
was no letter of intent for test item 6, and the only documentation of the procurement
provided to us by DGS was the vendor’s invoice.
2. The Letter of Intent (LOI) did not contain critical provisions required by
regulations for emergency procurement contracts.
Agency Response: DGS concedes that the LOI did not contain all of the
mandatory clauses required under COMAR 21.07.01; however, it should be noted that
under COMAR 21.05.06.02(D)(2) the guidance provided in regulation is “[a] record of
each emergency procurement shall be made as soon as practicable and shall set
forth...”. The entirety of the Maryland State government was being asked to rise to meet
the challenges posed by a world-wide health crisis, the likes of which had not been
witnessed in over a hundred years. With supply chains completely gridlocked or
collapsed, demand far exceeding the supply, and no contingency planning for these
types of global events, the “as soon as practicable” part of the regulation certainly
provided the reasoning behind the strategies employed to acquire these critical supplies
and services. The LOIs represented a streamlined and expedited way for Maryland to
order and receive critical supplies that otherwise we would not have been able to obtain,
and were deemed legally sufficient by the Office of the Attorney General.
3

--- Page 50 ---
3. Competition was not obtained.
Agency Response: COMAR 21.05.06.02(C), which reads “[t]he procedure used
shall assure that the required items are procured in time to meet the emergency. Given
this constraint, such competition as is possible and practicable shall be obtained.” As it
relates to the procurements being made in response to the global pandemic, where
quite literally every country, and every state/province/county/city government in the
world was competing for the same limited supply of critically needed items (PPE and
ventilators), if a company approached the State of Maryland with a sales proposal, was
found to be legitimate and the items proved to be genuine, of course we were going to
do our best to acquire those items for the citizens of Maryland. When PPE and
ventilators were found, it was a race to put them under contract. Essentially, the choice
made in that moment - given the facts and circumstances at that point in time - was that
due to the overwhelming demand for the limited supply of these critical supplies, the
normal concept of competition was not of paramount importance. Keeping our first
responders, our doctors and nurses, our senior citizens, and each and every person
living and working in Maryland at the time safe and having the equipment necessary to
help sustain their lives if they became infected was what was foremost on the list of
priorities.
4. The report of emergency to the BPW was late.
Agency Response: Never before had commodity contracts been reported to the
BPW. There was much discussion about this change in policy and procedure during a
pandemic. DGS OSP conceded to reporting the commodities contracts in the spirit of
transparency. Due to the volume of commodities procurements to be reported, DGS
OSP worked with the BPW staff to create a format for presenting the procurements.
This effort to create a new process to accommodate this new reporting component was
lengthy and time consuming, and meanwhile DGS OSP was still expected to continue to
acquire critically needed supplies and services. Sourcing and acquiring were higher
priorities than reporting commodities purchases to the BPW, when prior to the
pandemic, that was never a requirement. The important aspect that should be noted is
that they were reported.
5. Could not provide documentation for the selection of the vendor.
Agency Response: In many cases DGS was buying from any and all qualified
vendors for PPE and ventilators as the supply chain basically did not exist. If a qualified
vendor was found, and the products deemed genuine and appropriate for the needs of
MDH or whoever the requesting agency was, DGS OSP purchased as much of the
products as the vendor could reasonably supply. There was a critical shortage of PPE
and ventilators and therefore the rationale for purchasing was because we could get the
products needed at a reasonable price from a qualified vendor.
4

--- Page 51 ---
6. Could not provide documentation to support that the vendors prices were
reasonable.
Agency Response: This is not required for emergency procurements. Further,
price reasonableness in a time of a pandemic for critical items is very subjective.
Demand far exceeded supply. Prices were indeed escalated when compared to pricing
for the same supplies prior to the pandemic. However, comparing the prices for specific
PPE, i.e. face masks, between Vendor “A” and Vendor “B” both of whom approached us
with offers to sell, but neither with sufficient quantities to meet our demand, if the
difference in prices between the vendors was not substantial, the price would be
deemed reasonable for both, and both would be contracted with to acquire those
masks.
Auditor’s Comment: Our report specifically acknowledges that determining the
reasonableness of vendor pricing is not a requirement under State regulations for
emergency procurements. Nevertheless, we believe that such determinations would be
prudent given the conditions under which these procurements occurred, as described in
DGS’ response.
7. Vendors were not registered with SDAT.
Agency Response: Not being registered with SDAT and not being in good
standing does not necessarily foreclose the State from doing business with a vendor. A
company could submit the paperwork to SDAT for becoming registered to do business
in Maryland, but that process might not be completed in time to meet the needs
precipitated by the current emergency.
Additionally, contractors commonly fall out of good standing during the life of a contract
for various reasons, such as not filing their taxes on a timely basis. The State doesn’t
cancel the contract; rather payments to the contractor are withheld or garnished until
their good standing status is re-established.
Auditor’s Comment: Contrary to the response, State procurement regulations mandate
that purchase orders in excess of $50,000 include a requirement for the vendor to register
with SDAT (no exception of this requirement for Emergency Procurements exists).
Moreover, as we noted in our report, only one vendor had subsequently registered with
the State as of July 2021.
8. Purchase Orders did not contain certain critical conditions.
Agency Response: Purchase orders generally have required terms and
conditions attached/ included. DGS and our Assistant Attorneys General would need to
see which purchase orders were reviewed and then compare them with purchase
orders completed prior to the pandemic, as well go through COMAR to determine which
critical conditions were required, if any, that were not included.
5

--- Page 52 ---
Auditor’s Comment: Our report includes examples of the omitted terms and conditions
under each applicable test item. Furthermore, DGS was provided an opportunity to
review the tested purchase orders during and subsequent to our review.
9. Vendor’s website provides goods or services other than what was
contracted for, or does not provide information on what was contracted for.
Agency Response: This conclusion is not a violation of statute or regulation, nor
is it relevant as to whether DGS acted within its legal authority by contracting with a
vendor for goods or services that were not listed on their website. Purchases were
made from companies who essentially acted as brokers or middlemen, and from
businesses that previously had not provided certain goods, but were able to quickly
adjust their business model to help fulfill the demand in the marketplace for certain
goods or services, and help maintain their company’s viability in the face of unknown
consequences resulting from a worldwide pandemic.
Auditor’s Comment: Our report does not conclude nor state that this is a violation of
statute or regulation, or an instance of DGS acting beyond its legal authority to procure
goods or services from vendors. However, we believe this information provides critical
context for other conclusions in our report, including that DGS could not document how
certain vendors were identified and the reasonableness of the related pricing.
10. Finally, regarding the procurement for John S. Conner, this procurement
was conducted as a small procurement (COMAR 21.05.07) not as an emergency
procurement. Emergency procurement regulations would not apply.
Agency Response: Many lessons were learned as a result of the procurement
activity resulting from the pandemic as well as through this exercise of responding to the
auditor’s reviews of those procurements. DGS OSP has already begun to make
process improvements in areas related to vetting vendors, the creation of checklists to
ensure regulatory requirements are met in the future, and discussions have begun
around creating a contract template for emergency procurements that includes the
applicable mandatory clauses. In addition, DGS OSP has been working on proactively
establishing contracts that can be accessed in emergency situations that would allow
agencies to respond immediately to needs arising from an emergency without needing
to conduct a standalone procurement.
Auditor’s Comment: Contrary to DGS’ assertion, this purchase order included plain
language that indicated that the procurement was awarded as an emergency contract
pursuant to State regulations for emergency procurements. Thus, we deemed it
appropriate to include the results of our review of this emergency procurement in this
report. Our report acknowledges that certain provisions (specifically, reporting to BPW
and publishing on eMMA) were not applicable due to the dollar amount of the
transaction.
6

--- Page 53 ---
MDH Response:
Looking forward, MDH has taken the lessons learned from our ongoing communications
with OLA, including the March 2021 Special Review, and conversations with DGS,
BPW, and Maryland General Assembly members and staff to make business processes
improvements regarding contract management and procurement within the Department.
We thank all of our colleagues from these state entities for their advice and
recommendations on improvements.
One key process improvement that began in early 2021 has been the formation of the
MDH Office of Contract Management and Procurement (OCMP) to build on the
procurement lessons that emerged in 2020. OCMP’s mission is to implement lifecycle
contract management and procurement initiatives into all aspects of MDH operations.
An important collaborative effort that occurred during the period of this Special Review,
which was completed in late June 2021, was an Agency Procurement Review of MDH
by OSP. This Agency Procurement Review focused on providing sound, practical
opportunities to improve the purchasing process to correct the deficiencies found during
their oversight of MDH’s delegated procurement activity. MDH has been focused on
building the staffing foundation to implement the various findings over the past 90 days.
A summary copy of the APR exit conference is available upon request.
A secondary aspect put into place based on the APR and the Special Review is that
MDH conducts regular (at the time of writing, three days a week) COVID-19 contract
management meetings. The scope of these meetings focuses on the operational and
fiscal aspects of our over 40 COVID-19 contracts to ensure that operational objectives,
fiscal expenditures, and other oversight measures are in effect. This mechanism, along
with a close partnership and coordination with staff at BPW, has ensured a regular
procurement cadence for COVID-19 contracts.
We note the following with respect to the Test Items raised in the Special Review:
 All contracts are reviewed and approved for legal sufficiency by the Office of the
Attorney General. This ensures that all of our contracts include OSP’s mandatory
terms and conditions as mandated by the standard state agency contract
documents, which all Contractors were required to accept. Should OLA have
questions about this standard contract document, we welcome, and encourage,
further conversations with the relevant procurement oversight authorities.
 Whenever possible, we made every attempt to conduct competitive bid
solicitations for our emergency procurements, especially in the area of services
contracts, within the operational windows permitted and required by the urgency
of the COVID-19 response. Proposals are reviewed to ensure they meet solicited
requirements and the vendor(s) most advantageous to the state are selected
based on technical response and price, as required under state procurement
regulations.
7

--- Page 54 ---
 MDH made emergency procurement reporting processes improvements which
included seeking clarification from BPW staff about when, and in what manner,
emergency procurements are required to be reported to BPW.
 We have conducted an in-depth investigation about the test item comments
regarding ventilators. All 1,107 ventilators are accounted for and located either at
our warehouse or with our bioengineering firm. MDH can provide updated
documentation upon request.
 Regarding personal protective equipment (PPE) receipt and inspection - upon
arrival, MDH conducted a physical inspection of items received to count and
verify the items against any included delivery paperwork (packing slips, bills of
lading, etc.), and inspected that the packing and products were in good
condition. Information collected was then sent back to DGS, which verified that
the products received were the products ordered. The MDH warehouses utilized
clinicians to spot check any items that did not appear to be in good condition, had
suspicious labeling, or where the product did not match the given product
description. Our inspection process evolved throughout the COVID-19 pandemic
as lessons were learned, especially in ensuring that delivery paperwork included
more detailed information about delivered goods.
Due to the volume of PPE items purchased, MDH was not able to inspect every
item. Once items were inspected upon arrival and put into inventory, they were
sorted into like items (e.g. gowns with gowns, gloves with gloves). MDH’s focus
was on efficient receipt, storage, and transportation of PPE to ensure that life-
saving personal protective equipment was distributed to healthcare providers,
first responders, and other front-line workers in a timely manner.
 For KN95 and N95 masks, MDH cross-checked these items against list of
respirators covered under the Umbrella EUA for Non-NIOSH-Approved
Disposable Filtering Facepiece Respirators maintained by the US Food and Drug
Administration as well as the NIOSH-approved N95 Particulate Filtering
Facepiece Respirators list maintained by the US Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention. MDH continues to check both websites to ensure we are tracking
updates made to both lists as the response continues.
Auditor’s Comment: While MDH’s response indicates that PPE items (including
N95 and KN95 masks) were inspected to ensure compliance with applicable
requirements, as noted in our report, MDH did not provide documentation that
these inspections were performed for any of the PPE purchases we tested.
We thank OLA for their work in conducting this Special Review and look forward to
having further conversations about process improvements here and in other audits.
8

--- Page 55 ---
MDEM Response:
An updated response was provided by MDEM which is included elsewhere in the
Appendix.
MDE Response: No agency response needed.
An updated response was provided by MDE which is included elsewhere in the
Appendix.
DPSCS Response:
An updated response was provided by DPSCS which is included elsewhere in the
Appendix.
MSP Response:
An updated response was provided by DSP which is included elsewhere in the
Appendix.
Sincerely,
Eric T. Lomboy Webster Ye
Chief of Staff Assistant Secretary, Health Policy
Department of General Services Maryland Department of Health
Cc: Ellington E. Churchill, Jr., Secretary, Department of General Services
Dennis R. Schrader, Secretary, Maryland Department of Health
Robert L. Green, Secretary, Department of Public Safety & Correctional Services
Ben H. Grumbles, Secretary, Department of the Environment
Col. Woodrow W. Jones, III, Secretary, Department of State Police
Russell J. Strickland, Acting Secretary, Department of Emergency Management
9

--- Page 57 ---
December 3, 2021
Gregory A. Hook, CPA
Legislative Auditor
Office of Legislative Audits
State Office Building, Room 1202
301 West Preston Street
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Dear Mr. Hook:
TheMaryland Department of the Environment (MDE)has reviewed your office’s special audit of
Certain Emergency Procurements Related to the State of Maryland’s COVID-19. We would like to
thank the Office of Legislative Audits for their diligence in this most favorable review. We have no
additional response to your assessment. MDE confirms that the disclosures are complete and that
they address activities that occurred from March 2020 through May 2021.
Sincerely,
Ben Grumbles
Secretary
cc: Horacio Tablada, Deputy Secretary
Cierra Neville, Internal Auditor
June Dwyer, Deputy Director, Office of Operational Services

--- Page 58 ---
Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services
Office of the Secretary
6852 4TH Street, Sykes ville, Maryland 21784
(410) 339-5000 • TOLL FREE (877) 379-8636 • www.dpscs.maryland.gov
STATE OF MARYLAND
December 7, 2021
LARRY HOGAN
GOVERNOR
Gregory A. Hook, CPA
BOYD K. RUTHERFORD
LT. GOVERNOR
Legislative Auditor
Office of Legislative Audits
ROBERT L. GREEN
SECRETARY
301 West Preston Street, Room 1202
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
RACHEL SESSA
CHIEF OF STAFF
Dear Mr. Hook,
SASHA VAZQUEZ-GONZALEZ
ACTING
DEPUTY SECRETARY
ADMINISTRATION
The Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services (DPSCS)
acknowledges and appreciates the Office of Legislative Audits’ (OLA)
WAYNE HILL
DEPUTY SECRETARY
November 2021 Special Review of Emergency Procurements related to
OPERATIONS
Maryland’s COVID-19 response. The Department has attempted to do
CAROLYN J. SCRUGGS
everything in full compliance with State procurement regulations, but we also
ASSISTANT SECRETARY
note that these emergency procurements were completed during the worst
GARY W. McLHINNEY
pandemic in the last 100 years, and the public safety of our offenders and staff
ASSISTANT SECRETARY
had to be, and was, our Department's highest and first priority.
Nevertheless, going forward, the Department will ensure, to the extent
possible, that all emergency procurements are completed in accordance with
all State procurement regulations, including the issues cited in the Special
Review. Please find attached the Department’s response to the one DPSCS
finding identified in the Special Review.
If you have any questions regarding this response, please contact me.
Sincerely,
Robert L. Green
Secretary
Attachment
Cc: Walter P. Landon, Deputy Chief of Staff

--- Page 59 ---
Office of Legislative Audits’ Special Review
of Emergency Procurements
Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services
Test Item 13
Ellsworth Electric, Inc.
Procuring Using Purchase
Agency Agency Description Price
Electrical work at a temporary hospital
DPSCS DPSCS site located at the Maryland Correctional $181,736
Institution - Hagerstown
OLA Conclusions as of August 31, 2021
DPSCS did not procure the electrical work in accordance with State
procurement regulations. Based on our testing, DPSCS appeared to have been
effectively monitoring the contract and the invoice payment tested was generally
supported and accurate.
Department Response:
In order to address the finding identified above in the OLA’s Special Review, the Department will
ensure that:
 purchase orders contain certain critical provisions required by State procurement regulations,
such as modifications, delays and extensions, and conformance of specifications;
 the basis for selecting vendors is clear and documented;
 purchases are reported to the BPW in a timely manner; and
 all awards are published on eMMA.

--- Page 61 ---
Mr. Gregory A. Hook, CPA
December 7, 2021
Page Two
Maryland Department of State Police
Response to OLA Test Item 14
Conclusion #1: At the time of the procurements, White Star Sales and Promotions was not
registered with SDAT to do business in the State, as required and as of July 21,2021 was still
unregistered.
Agency Response: The MDSP does note that White Star Sales and Promotions does not have a
certificate on file as required under COMAR. However, as stated in the footnote, the MDSP
verified the owner of the company was registered with SDAT. The owner shares a common
Federal Tax ID with White Star Sales and Promotions. As of April 27, 2020, White Star Sales &
Promotions was registered as Burch III, Louis Claude, Department ID: L204460705. The
Company is in FMIS as White Star and Louis C Burch.
Conclusion #2: The MDSP could not provide documentation to support that it received the
9,985 hand sanitizer packets or 5,000 hooded coveralls associated with two purchase orders, for
which the MDSP paid $53,727.
Agency Response: The MDSP does not object to the conclusion relating to the hand sanitizer
packets. As to the hooded coveralls, the MDSP did provide dissemination documentation to
support that 5,000 hooded coveralls were received and either disseminated across the MDSP or
stored in the MDSP Warehouse, where they remain as of the last inventory count dated 10/29/21.
Auditor’s Comment: The documentation provided by DSP at the time of our review
indicated that DSP distributed 1,656 hooded coveralls on June 25, 2020 and that 809
remained on hand at that date. However, DSP did not provide documentation to support
that these items were associated with the purchase from White Star Sales and
Promotions, or to account for the remaining 2,535 hooded coveralls that were to be
provided by the vendor.
Conclusion #3: The MDSP also could not provide documentation to support that the PPE items
purchased from the vendor were inspected to ensure they met the applicable requirements.
Agency Response: Prior to procurement, the MDSP Quartermaster consulted with the Agency
Risk Manager and the Agency Physician and obtained required PPE specifications for all
purchases to ensure consistency with CDC guidelines. The MDSP does not provide medical or
lab related training to warehouse staff, nor does it maintain specialized equipment necessary to
test PPE materials upon receipt. The MDSP warehouse receiving staff inspect every item
received by the MDSP warehouse to affirm order accuracy. This inspection was noted in the
Department records and was described during this inquiry.

--- Page 62 ---
Mr. Gregory A. Hook, CPA
December 7, 2021
Page Three
Conclusion #4: We could not verify the MDSP’s assertion that the 11,000 N95 masks the MDSP
received from the vendor, with an associated purchase price of $64,223, were distributed to the
MDSP barracks or other State agencies because the MDSP’s inventory records for COVID-19
purchases were not designed to track the disposition of items purchased from individual vendors.
Agency Response: The MDSP utilized a combination of tracking tools through a shared, cloud-
based solution that included COVID Supply Warehouse Inventory counts, COVID Supply
Distribution schedules, and COVID Supply Burn Rate sheets. The MDSP did not design
inventory tracking to isolate COVID-19 purchases by a vendor. Instead, the MDSP inventory
tracking was designed to monitor the acquisition, usage, and replenishment by item type. All
entries and/or revisions to COVID-19 inventory were time and date stamped with the unique
user’s email address associated with each entry. Twenty three (23) MDSP commanders were
involved in the receiving of N95 masks through this established and documented process.