Title: Maryland Department of Labor - Office of the Secretary - Division of Administration - Division of Workforce Development and Adult Learning


NOTE: Effective July 1, 2019, the Department of Labor, Licensing and Regulation is now named Maryland Department of Labor.
Date: 01/07/2022
Type: Fiscal Compliance
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=61dee270a1ce580648990075
Extracted: 2025-06-20T00:10:35.528252
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Audit Report
Maryland Department of Labor
Office of the Secretary
Division of Administration
Division of Workforce Development and Adult Learning
January 2022
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Senator Clarence K. Lam, M.D. (Senate Chair) Delegate Carol L. Krimm (House Chair)
Senator Malcolm L. Augustine Delegate Steven J. Arentz
Senator Adelaide C. Eckardt Delegate Mark S. Chang
Senator George C. Edwards Delegate Nicholas P. Charles II
Senator Katie Fry Hester Delegate Andrea Fletcher Harrison
Senator Cheryl C. Kagan Delegate Trent M. Kittleman
Senator Benjamin F. Kramer Delegate David Moon
Senator Cory V. McCray Delegate Julie Palakovich Carr
Senator Justin D. Ready Delegate Elizabeth G. Proctor
Senator Craig J. Zucker Delegate Geraldine Valentino-Smith
To Obtain Further Information
Office of Legislative Audits
The Warehouse at Camden Yards
351 West Camden Street, Suite 400
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Phone: 410-946-5900
Maryland Relay: 711
TTY: 410-946-5401 ꞏ 301-970-5401
E-mail: OLAWebmaster@ola.state.md.us
Website: www.ola.state.md.us
To Report Fraud
The Office of Legislative Audits operates a Fraud Hotline to report fraud, waste, or abuse involving State
of Maryland government resources. Reports of fraud, waste, or abuse may be communicated anonymously
by a toll-free call to 1-877-FRAUD-11, by mail to the Fraud Hotline, c/o Office of Legislative Audits, or
through the Office’s website.
Nondiscrimination Statement
The Department of Legislative Services does not discriminate on the basis of age, ancestry, color, creed,
marital status, national origin, race, religion, gender, gender identity, sexual orientation, or disability in the
admission or access to its programs, services, or activities. The Department’s Information Officer has been
designated to coordinate compliance with the nondiscrimination requirements contained in Section 35.107
of the United States Department of Justice Regulations. Requests for assistance should be directed to the
Information Officer at 410-946-5400 or 410-970-5400.

--- Page 3 ---
January 7, 2022
Senator Clarence K. Lam, M.D., Senate Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Delegate Carol L. Krimm, House Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Members of Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Annapolis, Maryland
Ladies and Gentlemen:
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the Maryland Department of
Labor (MDL) – Office of the Secretary, Division of Administration, and Division
of Workforce Development and Adult Learning for the period beginning August
17, 2016 and ending October 15, 2020. The Office of the Secretary and the
Division of Administration provide executive oversight, general administration,
public information, fiscal services, information technology support, and
comprehensive planning for the other MDL divisions. The Division of Workforce
Development and Adult Learning administers various employment and training
activities, including certain workforce programs that are funded primarily by the
federal government.
Our audit disclosed that MDL did not obtain documentation to support vendor
billings it paid for additional staffing at its Division of Unemployment Insurance
(DUI) and for modernizing DUI’s unemployment insurance system, and our
review of selected billings from one vendor disclosed potential overpayments of
at least $2.2 million. In addition, MDL did not ensure that it received all
technology enterprise services due from the Department of Information
Technology valued at $3.8 million for fiscal year 2020.
Furthermore, MDL did not obtain Board of Public Works approval for certain
significant contract modifications prior to execution and did not always publish
contract awards on eMaryland Marketplace as required. For example, BPW
approval was not requested and obtained for two contract modifications totaling
$591,000 until four years after implementation.
MDL also did not always request reimbursement of federal fund expenditures in a
timely manner, resulting in lost interest income totaling approximately $233,400.

--- Page 4 ---
In addition, adequate controls had not been established over payroll payments and
employee leave balances, and certain grant funds distributed by MDL were not
made available to all eligible entities.
Our audit also disclosed that MDL’s information systems security and related
controls could be improved. For example, we noted that MDL lacked assurance
that adequate security and operational controls existed over its Workforce
Exchange system which was hosted, operated, and maintained by external service
providers. We also noted that MDL lacked assurance that the underlying code for
its E-Licensing System web application was properly secured.
Finally, our audit included a review to determine the status of the six findings
contained in our preceding audit report of MDL (formerly named the Department
of Labor Licensing, and Regulation). We determined that MDL satisfactorily
addressed three of these findings. The remaining three findings are repeated in
the report.
MDL’s response to this audit is included as an appendix to this report. We
reviewed the response and noted agreement to our findings and related
recommendations, and while there are other aspects of MDL’s response which
will require further clarification, we do not anticipate that these will require the
Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee’s attention to resolve. We have also edited
MDL’s response to remove the name of a certain contractor, as allowed by our
policy.
We wish to acknowledge the cooperation extended to us during the audit by MDL
and its willingness to address the audit issues and implement appropriate
corrective actions.
Respectfully submitted,
Gregory A. Hook, CPA
Legislative Auditor
2

--- Page 5 ---
Table of Contents
Background Information 5
Name Change and Agency Responsibilities 5
Statewide Review of State Grants at Selected Agencies 5
Unrecovered Federal Fund Revenue 6
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report 6
Findings and Recommendations 8
Procurement and Disbursements
Finding 1 – The Maryland Department of Labor (MDL) did not obtain 8
documentation to support vendor billings it paid for additional
staffing at its Division of Unemployment Insurance (DUI) and for
modernizing DUI’s unemployment insurance system.
Finding 2 – MDL did not ensure it received technology enterprise 9
services valued at $3.8 million from the Department of Information
Technology.
* Finding 3 – MDL did not always obtain required Board of Public Works 10
approval for contract modifications prior to execution and did not
publish certain contract awards on eMaryland Marketplace, as
required.
Federal Funds
Finding 4 – MDL did not submit requests for reimbursement of federal 11
fund expenditures in a timely manner, resulting in lost interest income
totaling approximately $233,400.
Payroll
Finding 5 – MDL had not established adequate controls to ensure the 12
propriety of biweekly payroll payments and leave balances.
Maryland Employment Advancement Right Now Grants
Finding 6 – MDL did not notify all grantees that received Maryland 14
Employment Advancement Right Now grant awards of the
opportunity to receive supplemental grant funds.
* Denotes item repeated in full or part from preceding audit report.
3

--- Page 6 ---
Information Systems Security and Control
Finding 7 – MDL lacked assurance that adequate information technology 15
security and operational controls existed over its Workforce Exchange
system that was hosted, operated, and maintained by a primary
service provider and two subservice providers.
Finding 8 – MDL lacked assurance that the underlying code for its 16
E-Licensing System web application was properly secured.
* Finding 9 – MDL did not have an information technology disaster 17
recovery plan for recovering computer operations.
* Finding 10 – MDL’s computer network had significant security 18
weaknesses involving the lack of periodic assessments of its firewall
rules, assignment of local administrative rights, and security settings
for password and account controls for user network authentication.
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology 21
Agency Response Appendix
* Denotes item repeated in full or part from preceding audit report
4

--- Page 7 ---
Background Information
Name Change and Agency Responsibilities
Chapter 91, Laws of Maryland 2019, effective July 1, 2019 renamed the
Department of Labor, Licensing, and Regulation to be the Maryland Department
of Labor. The Maryland Department of Labor (MDL) consists of the Office of
the Secretary and seven operating divisions. This audit report includes the
operations of the following units:
 Office of the Secretary
 Division of Administration
 Division of Workforce Development and Adult Learning
The Office of the Secretary and its Division of Administration provide executive
oversight, general administration, public information, fiscal services, information
technology support, and comprehensive planning for the other MDL divisions.
The Division of Workforce Development and Adult Learning administers various
employment and training activities, including certain workforce programs that are
funded primarily by the federal government. Although the remaining divisions of
MDL (Unemployment Insurance, Financial Regulation, Labor and Industry,
Occupational and Professional Licensing, and Racing) are included within the
scope of, and reported upon, in separate audits, the support services they receive
from the Office of the Secretary and Division of Administration are subject to
review and testing during this audit.
According to the State’s records, during fiscal year 2020, total MDL expenditures
were approximately $372.7 million, of which $154.4 million related to the three
units audited.
Statewide Review of State Grants at Selected Agencies
On November 10, 2021, we issued a performance audit report titled State Grants
which contained findings related to MDL. This audit report included a number of
findings related to selected agencies, but emphasized the need for all agencies to
improve advertisement, award, and monitoring of grants in general. The
performance audit included the following findings related to MDL.
 MDL did not notify all grantees that received Maryland Employment
Advancement Right Now grant awards of the opportunity to receive
supplemental grant funds (Finding 6 in this report).
5

--- Page 8 ---
 Lack of State standardized grant applications and agreements resulting in
critical provisions being excluded. Specifically, we found two provisions
missing from certain MDL grants.
MDL agreed to the findings and recommendations in the November 2021 report.
Unrecovered Federal Fund Revenue
Our preceding fiscal compliance audit report on MDL’s Office of the Secretary
dated August 7, 2017 included a finding related to unsubstantiated federal fund
revenues of $9.9 million being recorded at year end. The recording of
unsubstantiated federal fund revenues has also been disclosed in our Statewide
Review of Budget Closeout Transactions for Fiscal Years 2016, 2017, 2018, and
2019. Our Statewide Review of Budget Closeout Transactions for Fiscal Year
2020 noted that MDL had determined that $5,875,000 in previously recorded
federal fund revenues were no longer recoverable from the federal granting
agency. These accrued revenues related to past indirect costs incurred to
administer certain federal programs that had not been recovered.
The April 2020 Joint Chairmen’s Report required MDL to provide a report
indicating where in the State’s records the unrecoverable revenues were recorded
and a for MDL to prepare a detailed plan to cover these costs.
In a letter dated September 30, 2020 to the Chairs of the Senate Budget and
Taxation and the House Appropriations Committees, MDL indicated that it will
offset the unrecovered costs over several years by adding an indirect cost
surcharge to most MDL programs of up to $500,000 per year. The funding source
was anticipated to be split between general funds and special funds from MDL’s
Special Administrative Expense Fund. As of March 2021, MDL created a new
indirect cost account which is now being used to track progress payments towards
the unrecoverable revenues.
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report
Our audit included a review to determine the status of the six findings contained
in our preceding audit report dated August 7, 2017. As disclosed in Figure 1
below, we determined that MDL satisfactorily addressed three of these findings.
The remaining three findings are repeated in this report.
6

--- Page 9 ---
Figure 1
Status of Preceding Findings
Preceding Implementation
Finding Description
Finding Status
Licensees’ sensitive personally identifiable
Finding 1 Not repeated
information was stored without adequate safeguards.
MDL did not have an information technology disaster
Repeated
Finding 2 recovery plan for the recovery of its information
(Current Finding 9)
systems operations.
Password, account, and malware protection controls Repeated
Finding 3 were not sufficient to properly protect MDL’s (Current Finding
network. 10)
MDL could not substantiate $9.9 million in federal
Finding 4 Not repeated
fund revenues recorded at the end of fiscal year 2016.
MDL did not publish contract awards totaling $12 Repeated
Finding 5
million on eMaryland Marketplace as required. (Current Finding 3)
Electronic licensing collections for the Division of
Finding 6 Financial Regulation were not reconciled with bank Not repeated
statements and the State’s accounting records.
7

--- Page 10 ---
Findings and Recommendations
Procurement and Disbursements
Finding 1
The Maryland Department of Labor (MDL) did not obtain documentation to
support vendor billings it paid for additional staffing at its Division of
Unemployment Insurance (DUI) and for modernizing DUI’s unemployment
insurance system.
Analysis
MDL did not obtain documentation to support vendor billings it paid for
additional staffing at DUI and for modernizing the DUI’s unemployment
insurance system, and our review of selected billings from one vendor disclosed
potential overpayments of approximately $2.2 million.
Additional Staffing
We reviewed nine invoices totaling $22.9 million from one vendor for additional
staffing required by DUI during the period April 2020 to December 2020,
primarily because of a significant increase in claim activity. The invoices
provided total hours and the total dollar amount billed for certain specified time
categories, such as regular hours and training hours. However, although available
from the vendor, detailed documentation regarding individual staff provided and
the hours they worked was not obtained from the vendor to aid MDL in verifying
the billings received.
We obtained this detailed data from the vendor for six of the nine invoices
totaling $17.6 million. The detailed data indicated that MDL received 262,932
service hours during the period July 2020 to December 2020. However, the six
invoices, which were previously paid by MDL, indicated that the vendor had
billed for 304,575 hours of staff service during the period. Using rates in place at
the time, this difference in hours received versus billed would represent an
overpayment of approximately $2 million. MDL was unable to explain this
variance. In addition, we determined that MDL was overbilled by the same
vendor for $200,000 in training costs. As of December 2020, the value of the
contract with this vendor totaled $102.2 million with a contract term of April 15,
2020 through August 31, 2021.
System Modernization
Seven days before the deadline (September 30, 2020) established by the federal
government for incurring reimbursable costs for modernizing MDL’s
unemployment insurance system, MDL approved $11.7 million in costs included
8

--- Page 11 ---
in an invoice for payment. This invoice was essentially for the remainder of the
modernization contract costs, described on the invoice as development and
implementation, required software tools, required staff, enhancements, and mobile
subscription. MDL claimed that because the system had gone live by the federal
deadline, payment was justified, but could not provide us with further
documentation that it had verified the propriety of the specific invoiced costs.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that MDL
a. obtain and review available detailed data and documentation to support
the propriety of all vendor invoices, and document steps taken to verify
invoiced costs; and
b. identify, investigate, and resolve any invoice discrepancies, including
those noted above, and recover any amounts that are determined to have
been improperly paid.
Finding 2
MDL did not ensure it received technology enterprise services valued at $3.8
million from the Department of Information Technology (DoIT).
Analysis
MDL did not ensure it received technology enterprise services from DoIT during
fiscal year 2020 valued at $3.8 million. At the beginning of fiscal year 2020,
DoIT submitted an invoice covering the services it planned to provide to MDL,
which MDL was to pay in four equal quarterly payments. The invoice specified
the general categories of work to be performed. For example, the annual invoice
included end user support services totaling $1.5 million for 1,726 devices and
cyber defense services totaling $462,000 for 1,492 users. MDL did not verify the
accuracy of the number of devices billed or the extent to which services were
provided.
The aforementioned conditions were caused, in part, because MDL and DoIT did
not execute a memorandum of understanding (MOU) as of March 2021. An
MOU would clarify DoIT’s responsibilities over information technology support
services performed, remaining technology responsibilities at MDL, and how the
cost for these services should be calculated, supported, and invoiced. In our most
recent DoIT audit report, dated May 1, 2020, we recommended that DoIT enter
into MOU’s with State agencies that receive technology enterprise services. DoIT
agreed with the recommendation and stated that its staff would work with
agencies to execute MOUs.
9

--- Page 12 ---
Recommendation 2
We recommend that MDL
a. pursue with DoIT the establishment of an MOU that provides for the
receipt of required detailed invoice information to support amounts
invoiced;
b. in the future, ensure that all technology enterprise services invoiced have
been received; and
c. verify receipt of the services noted above as invoiced for fiscal year 2020.
Finding 3
MDL did not always obtain required Board of Public Works approval for
contract modifications prior to execution and did not publish certain
contract awards on eMaryland Marketplace, as required.
Analysis
MDL did not obtain Board of Public Works approval for certain contract
modifications prior to execution and did not publish certain contract awards on
eMaryland Marketplace (eMM)1, as required.
 MDL did not obtain Board of Public Works (BPW) approval for certain
contract modifications prior to execution of the modification, as required.
During the period from August 2016 to December 2020, MDL processed 51
contract modifications, each exceeding $50,000, and totaling $153.0 million.
Our test of 14 of the modifications totaling $92 million, disclosed that BPW
approval was not always received prior to execution as required for
modifications exceeding $50,000. Specifically, BPW approval for two
modifications totaling $590,631 relating to modernization of DUI’s new
unemployment insurance system was obtained more than four years after the
modifications were implemented. In addition, BPW approval of 4 other
modifications totaling approximately $88.9 million relating to staff expansion
and IT services was obtained 68 to 134 days after the modification was
executed.
 MDL did not always publish contract awards on eMM within 30 days of
award as required by State law and procurement regulations for contracts over
$50,000. We tested 11 information technology and professional services
1 eMM is an internet-based, interactive procurement system managed by the Department of
General Services (DGS). Effective July 2019, DGS replaced eMM with eMaryland Marketplace
Advantage (eMMA).
10

--- Page 13 ---
contract awards totaling approximately $79.4 million made during the period
from June 2019 through November 2020, each exceeding $50,000. As of
February 2021, 3 of these 11 contract awards totaling $712,802 had not been
published on eMM, and 4 awards totaling $3.5 million, were published
between 52 and 140 days after the award. A similar condition was
commented upon in our preceding audit report.
Recommendation 3
We recommend that MDL comply with State law and procurement
regulations for all contract procurements and modifications.
Specifically we recommend that MDL
a. seek the required BPW approval before the related modifications are
executed, and
b. publish contract awards on eMMA within 30 days of the contract award
(repeat).
Federal Funds
Finding 4
MDL did not always submit requests for reimbursement of federal fund
expenditures in a timely manner, resulting in lost interest income totaling
approximately $233,400.
Analysis
MDL did not always submit requests for reimbursement of federal fund
expenditures related to grant funding for Unemployment Insurance and
Workforce Development grants in a timely manner. Consequently, the State lost
investment interest income that would have been earned had the funds been
requested and received more timely. These expenditures primarily related to
indirect costs and non-personnel service. According to the State’s records, during
fiscal year 2020 MDL grant expenditures for these grants totaled $160.5 million.
Our review of 11 federal grant reimbursement requests totaling $39.2 million,
made during fiscal years 2019 and 2020, disclosed that 4 requests, totaling $31.1
million, were submitted an average of 140 days late. For example, one request for
reimbursement of expenditures incurred from July 2019 through April 2020,
totaling $18.6 million, was not made until the end of June 2020. Similarly,
another request for reimbursement of expenditures incurred from November 2018
through July 2019, totaling $4.6 million was not made until mid-September 2019.
11

--- Page 14 ---
Federal guidelines for these grants permit expenditures to be requested when
expenditures are incurred. We determined that the delayed recovery of funds
tested resulted in lost investment interest income totaling approximately $233,400
for related expenditures incurred during fiscal years 2019 and 2020, based on
reimbursements being obtained as soon as permitted by the federal guidelines.
Recommendation 4
We recommend that MDL submit federal fund reimbursement requests as
soon as permitted under federal guidelines (for example, monthly).
Payroll
Finding 5
MDL had not established adequate controls to ensure the propriety of
biweekly payroll payments and leave balances.
Analysis
MDL did not establish adequate controls to ensure the propriety of biweekly
payroll payments and leave balances. According to State records, MDL’s payroll
expenditures totaled approximately $91.9 million in calendar year 2020.
Total Payroll Disbursements Were Not Reconciled
Biweekly payroll payments from the State’s Central Payroll Bureau (CPB) were
not reconciled, in the aggregate, to the payroll payments reflected in reports
generated from the Statewide Personnel System (SPS). Generally, employees
recorded their work time directly into SPS for online approval by their assigned
supervisors and payroll payments were processed by CPB based on the approved
work time for the pay period and the salary information reflected in SPS.
However, MDL did not compare the total payroll as reflected in the CPB payroll
registers, with the SPS payroll summary reports to ensure payments were properly
supported by time records and salary information maintained within SPS.
MDL advised us that it did not reconcile SPS reports with CPB reports because it
believed that there was an automated control to ensure that the two systems
reconcile. However, SPS contains certain unique system design features, which
often resulted in differences between CPB and SPS. For example, CPB payroll
registers only reflect activity processed during the particular pay period while SPS
payroll summary reports will reflect all activity relevant to the pay period
irrespective of when the transactions were processed.
12

--- Page 15 ---
We obtained MDL’s payroll register from CPB and the related report from SPS
for the pay period ending on June 16, 2020. Our review disclosed that the CPB
reported payroll expense exceeded the related amount in SPS by $103,000. Most
of this amount was attributable to employees who were assigned to different
supervisory organizations within SPS but paid by MDL.
Employee Pay and Leave Balance Adjustments Were Not Adequately Reviewed
Adjustments to employee pay and leave balances were not adequately reviewed
for propriety. During the period August 2016 through October 2020, MDL
processed 1,199 adjustments that changed employee pay by a total of $389,681
(increase of $309,818 and decrease of $79,863). During this period MDL also
processed 2,447 leave adjustments that changed employee leave balances by
82,115 hours (increase of 33,430 and decrease of 48,685 hours) which we
calculated to be equivalent to approximately $570,000 in salary.
Each pay period, an MDL employee was responsible for submitting a manually
prepared listing of payroll adjustments to the Department of Budget and
Management for processing in SPS. MDL did not have a procedure for
supervisory personnel to review the listing. In addition MDL did not have a
procedure to verify the propriety of leave balance adjustments that could be
processed by seven MDL employees directly in SPS. MDL also did not use
available system output reports of all payroll and leave adjustments recorded to
ensure that only authorized adjustments had been processed. Our tests of ten
leave adjustments, and ten payroll adjustments did not disclose any improper
transactions.
Recommendation 5
We recommend that MDL
a. reconcile total payroll as reflected in CPB payroll registers each pay
period with SPS payroll summary reports, investigate any differences,
and ensure that those reconciliations are documented; and
b. independently verify pay and leave balance adjustments to ensure that
only authorized adjustments have been processed and take appropriate
corrective action when errors are noted.
13

--- Page 16 ---
Maryland Employment Advancement Right Now Grants
Finding 6
MDL did not notify all grantees that received Maryland Employment
Advancement Right Now (EARN) grant awards of the opportunity to receive
supplemental grant funds.
Analysis
MDL did not notify all grantees that received Maryland EARN grant awards of
the opportunity to receive supplemental grant funds. MDL’s Division of
Workforce Development and Adult Learning administers the EARN program.
MDL policy requires that existing grantees be notified of the opportunity to apply
for supplemental funds as they become available during the year. Supplemental
awards represent the majority of the EARN grant funds awarded. According to
MDL’s records, during fiscal years 2017 through 2020, $21.9 million of the $27.3
million EARN grant funds awarded were supplemental awards.
Our review of supplemental grants awarded in 2019 disclosed that MDL only
notified 10 of the then existing 56 EARN grantees of the opportunity to apply for
these supplemental funds. According to MDL records, 9 of the 10 grantees that
applied received $2.2 million in 2019.
EARN was established in 2014 to identify the needs of employers within
Maryland to provide education and skills training for unemployed and under
employed Marylanders through grants. Potential grantees (such as community
colleges and non-profit organizations) develop training programs within a specific
industry sector (for example cybersecurity, clean energy, or opportunity zones)
and then apply through a public solicitation process to receive EARN funding.
Once selected, the grantees have an opportunity to receive additional grant funds,
if available, to expand the number of individuals trained.
Recommendation 6
We recommend that MDL ensure that all eligible grantees are notified of
opportunities to apply for additional funds, and that the related notifications
are documented.
14

--- Page 17 ---
Information Systems Security and Control
Background
MDL’s information technology (IT) support services are provided by a
combination of internal MDL operations and support from the Maryland
Department of Information Technology (DoIT). MDL personnel supported
certain systems including occupational and professional licensing registration and
renewal, and workforce (non-unemployment) related applications, which operated
on MDL computer center servers. DoIT provided IT support services for the
following functions:
 network firewalls and IT security services (such as firewall and intrusion
detection prevention systems operations and maintenance),
 workstation management, and
 hardware and software support (including malware prevention procedures).
DoIT operates a Statewide network for MDL that connects MDL’s local offices
and the MDL headquarters. The Statewide network provides MDL users access
to various information technology services including the aforementioned
applications, network services, email services, and internet access. In addition,
third-party service providers (both primary and subservice providers) maintain
MDL’s Maryland Workforce Exchange system.
Finding 7
MDL lacked assurance that adequate IT security and operational controls
existed over its Workforce Exchange system that was hosted, operated, and
maintained by a primary service provider and two subservice providers.
Analysis
MDL lacked assurance that adequate IT security and operational controls existed
over its Workforce Exchange system that was hosted, operated, and maintained
by a primary service provider and two data center hosting subservice providers.
The Workforce Exchange system is a comprehensive web-based workforce
application used by job seekers, employers, MDL staff, and local partner
agencies. The system stores a vast amount of personally identifiable information.
Our review determined that MDL had obtained the primary service provider’s
System and Organization Control (SOC) 2 Type 2 report, dated July 20, 2020,
covering the period from July 1, 2019 to June 30, 2020. However, as of January
2021, MDL had not reviewed the report. In addition, as of March 2021, MDL
had not obtained the most recent SOC 2 Type 2 reports for the two subservice
providers. At our request, in March 2021, MDL obtained the most recent SOC 2
15

--- Page 18 ---
Type 2 review reports of the subservice providers, dated October 1, 2020 and
December 8, 2020. The reports covered the periods from September 1, 2019 to
September 30, 2020 and October 1, 2019 to September 30, 2020, respectively.
Our review concluded that none of the aforementioned SOC reports disclosed any
significant control weaknesses.
The American Institute of Certified Public Accountants has issued guidance for
various reviews of service organizations. Based on this guidance, service
organizations (like the aforementioned service providers) may contract for an
independent review of controls, for which the resultant independent auditor’s
report is referred to as a SOC report. The aforementioned SOC 2 Type 2 reports
includes the results of the auditor’s review of controls placed in operation and
tests of operating effectiveness for the period under review and could include an
evaluation of system security, availability, processing integrity, confidentiality,
and/or privacy.
Recommendation 7
We recommend that MDL, for ongoing Workforce Exchange system
operations,
a. timely obtain and review copies of SOC 2 Type 2 reports for the primary
service provider and any subservice providers, and verify that the related
service providers implement all critical report recommendations; and
b. document the aforementioned reviews and retain them for future
reference.
Finding 8
MDL lacked assurance that the underlying code for its E-Licensing System
web application was properly secured.
Analysis
MDL lacked assurance that the underlying code for its E-Licensing System (ELS)
web application was properly secured. MDL did not obtain, nor require the
system software development contractor to provide for an independent security
vulnerability assessment to help identify the existence of any potentially serious
security vulnerabilities within the ELS web application code. The ELS
application was subject to a previous independent security vulnerability
assessment and selective code review; however, the assessment occurred in 2011.
Additionally, over the last four years, there were 18 significant application
changes made to the ELS application code. Accordingly, the ELS web
application may be exposed to web-based security vulnerabilities, which if
16

--- Page 19 ---
exploited, could possibly result in improper changes to website data and program
files.
Web application code vulnerability assessments are recognized as a necessary
means to find and diagnose security problems which cannot otherwise be found.
The State of Maryland Information Technology Security Manual requires that
system hardening procedures shall be created and maintained to ensure up-to-date
security best practices are deployed at all levels of information technology
systems.
Recommendation 8
We recommend that MDL
a. either procure or require the system contractor to obtain an independent
security vulnerability assessment for the ELS web application code;
b. remediate all confirmed vulnerabilities identified by the assessment,
document these efforts, and retain this documentation for future
reference; and
c. periodically obtain such assessments in the future when significant
application changes are made to the ELS web application code.
Finding 9
MDL did not have an IT disaster recovery plan for recovering computer
operations.
Analysis
MDL did not have an IT disaster recovery plan (DRP) for recovering computer
operations from disaster scenarios (for example, a fire). MDL had a hybrid IT
operation where DoIT managed certain MDL servers and the MDL internal
network. Separately, MDL managed a computer center containing servers for
certain significant systems, including electronic licensing and renewal. MDL
relied upon the DoIT Enterprise IT DRP for providing recovery coverage for its
entire IT operations, however, that plan did not address all of MDL’s unique IT
disaster recovery requirements. For example, the DoIT DRP did not contain
required listings of MDL operated hardware and software components, nor
priorities of MDL applications for restoration. Additionally, no DRP test for
MDL operated servers had been performed. The State of Maryland Information
Technology Security Manual provides the minimum required elements needed for
a DRP.
Without a complete and tested DRP reflecting MDL’s hybrid operations, a
disaster could cause significant delays (for an undetermined period of time) in
17

--- Page 20 ---
restoring information systems operations above and beyond the expected delays
that would exist in a planned recovery scenario. A similar condition was
commented upon in our preceding audit report.
Recommendation 9
We recommend that MDL, in conjunction with DoIT
a. develop and implement a comprehensive DRP that covers all of MDL’s
IT operations and is in compliance with the Information Technology
Security Manual (repeat); and
b. periodically test the DRP, document the testing, and retain the
documentation for future reference.
Finding 10
MDL’s computer network had significant security weaknesses involving the
lack of periodic assessments of its firewall rules, assignment of local
administrative rights, and security settings for password and account
controls for user network authentication.
Analysis
MDL’s computer network had significant security weaknesses involving the lack
of periodic assessments of its firewall rules, assignment of local administrative
rights, and security settings for password and account controls involved with user
network authentication. We noted the following conditions.
 A combined MDL and DoIT periodic review of MDL’s defined firewall rules
did not occur to ensure that the rules were accurate and allowed only
necessary connections to MDL network resources. MDL personnel advised
us during December 2020 that no formal documented reviews of the MDL
firewall rules were made together with DoIT personnel after the firewall’s
implementation over 4 years earlier. We reviewed MDL’s firewall rule base
and noted a few insecure rules. One insecure rule created a significant
security weakness, and allowed improper network-level access from four
business partners’ networks to the entire MDL internal network over all ports,
via virtual private network connections. Such business partner access should
be limited via filters to permit access to only those network resources related
to their responsibilities.
Large organizations like MDL have complicated networks with network
access requirements that frequently change over time. Periodic reviews of
firewall rules are necessary to verify that rules remain properly defined, with
insecure or outdated rules, like the above mentioned rule being removed or
18

--- Page 21 ---
properly limited. The State of Maryland Information Technology Security
Manual requires that agency systems shall be configured to monitor and
control communications at external boundaries and that information systems
must employ the concept of least privilege, allowing only authorized access
for users which are necessary to accomplish assigned tasks and configuration
settings should be reviewed at least annually.
 We identified improper local administrative rights assigned to 313 user
accounts defined on 280 MDL workstations for users who were not working
as system or network administrators. In addition, MDL and DoIT did not
provide documentation that authorized and supported the necessity of these
assigned administrative rights. Consequently, if the above workstations were
infected with malware, the malware would run with administrative rights and
expose these workstations to a greater risk of compromise than if the
workstations’ user accounts operated with only user rights. The State’s
Information Technology Security Manual requires that agencies ensure that
software installation policies are enforced through automated methods,
implementation of least privilege and periodic review of user accounts and
that only authorized users are given necessary privileges to install software. A
similar condition was noted in our preceding audit report.
 Certain password and account control settings defined for authenticating MDL
network users, including internal users of MDL’s unemployment insurance
application, were not in accordance with the State’s Information Technology
Security Manual requirements concerning password length, complexity,
history, minimum age and account lockout. Our work determined there were
approximately 3,500 defined MDL network accounts involved with either all
parts or a portion of this control weakness. A similar condition was noted in
our preceding audit report.
Recommendation 10
We recommend that MDL
a. together with DoIT, periodically review its firewall rules to ensure the
rules remain accurate, allow only necessary network-level access, are
adjusted when necessary including for the aforementioned instance, with
these efforts being recorded and related documentation retained;
b. limit the assignment of administrative rights on workstations to only
system or network administrators and those users specifically allowed
such rights, with any such assignments to non-IT administrators being
justified, approved, documented, and regularly reviewed to determine
whether the rights are still needed (repeat); and
19

--- Page 22 ---
c. establish appropriate password and account controls over user network
authentication (repeat).
20

--- Page 23 ---
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the Maryland Department of
Labor (MDL) – Office of the Secretary, Division of Administration, and Division
of Workforce Development and Adult Learning for the period beginning August
17, 2016 and ending October 15, 2020. The audit was conducted in accordance
with generally accepted government auditing standards. Those standards require
that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient, appropriate evidence to
provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit
objectives. We believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for
our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives.
As prescribed by the State Government Article, Section 2-1221 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, the objectives of this audit were to examine MDL’s financial
transactions, records, and internal control, and to evaluate its compliance with
applicable State laws, rules, and regulations.
In planning and conducting our audit, we focused on the major financial-related
areas of operations based on assessments of significance and risk. The areas
addressed by the audit included information system security, cash receipts,
payroll, federal funds, procurement and disbursements activities, and grants. Our
audit included a review of certain support services (such as payroll, data
processing, maintenance of accounting records, and related fiscal functions
including cash receipts processed through MDL’s online licensing system)
provided by MDL to its divisions. We also determined the status of the findings
contained in our preceding audit report.
Our audit did not include an evaluation of internal controls over compliance with
federal laws and regulations for federal financial assistance programs and an
assessment of MDL’s compliance with those laws and regulations because the
State of Maryland engages an independent accounting firm to annually audit such
programs administered by State agencies, including MDL.
Our assessment of internal controls was based on agency procedures and controls
in place at the time of our fieldwork. Our tests of transactions and other auditing
procedures were generally focused on the transactions occurring during our audit
period of August 17, 2016 to October 15, 2020, but may include transactions
before or after this period we considered necessary to achieve our audit
objectives.
To accomplish our audit objectives, our audit procedures included inquiries of
appropriate personnel, inspections of documents and records, tests of transactions,
21

--- Page 24 ---
and to the extent practicable, observations of MDL’s operations. Generally,
transactions were selected for testing based on auditor judgment, which primarily
considers risk, the timing or dollar amount of the transaction, or the significance
of the transaction to the area of operation reviewed. As a matter of course, we do
not normally use sampling in our tests, so unless otherwise specifically indicated,
neither statistical nor non-statistical audit sampling was used to select the
transactions tested. Therefore, unless sampling is specifically indicated in a
finding, the results from any tests conducted or disclosed by us cannot be used to
project those results to the entire population from which the test items were
selected.
We also performed various data extracts of pertinent information from the State’s
Financial Management Information System (such as revenue and expenditure
data) and the State’s Central Payroll Bureau (payroll data). The extracts are
performed as part of ongoing internal processes established by the Office of
Legislative Audits and were subject to various tests to determine data reliability.
We determined that the data extracted from these sources were sufficiently
reliable for the purposes the data were used during this audit. We also extracted
data from MDL’s automated online financial systems for the purpose of testing
certain areas, such as federal reimbursements. We performed various tests of the
relevant data and determined that the data were sufficiently reliable for the
purposes the data were used during the audit. Finally, we performed other
auditing procedures that we considered necessary to achieve our audit objectives.
The reliability of data used in this report for background or informational
purposes was not assessed.
MDL’s management is responsible for establishing and maintaining effective
internal control. Internal control is a process designed to provide reasonable
assurance that objectives pertaining to the reliability of financial records;
effectiveness and efficiency of operations, including safeguarding of assets; and
compliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations are achieved. As provided
in Government Auditing Standards, there are five components of internal control:
control environment, risk assessment, control activities, information and
communication, and monitoring. Each of the five components, when significant
to the audit objectives, and as applicable to MDL, were considered by us during
the course of this audit.
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate.
22

--- Page 25 ---
Our reports are designed to assist the Maryland General Assembly in exercising
its legislative oversight function and to provide constructive recommendations for
improving State operations. As a result, our reports generally do not address
activities we reviewed that are functioning properly.
This report includes findings relating to conditions that we consider to be
significant deficiencies in the design or operation of internal control that could
adversely affect the MDL’s ability to maintain reliable financial records, operate
effectively and efficiently, and/or comply with applicable laws, rules, and
regulations. Our report also includes findings regarding significant instances of
noncompliance with applicable laws, rules, or regulations. Other less significant
findings were communicated to MDL that did not warrant inclusion in this report.
MDL’s response to our findings and recommendations is included as an appendix
to this report. As prescribed in the State Government Article, Section 2-1224 of
the Annotated Code of Maryland, we will advise MDL regarding the results of
our review of its response.
23

--- Page 26 ---
APPENDIX
OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY
500 N. Calvert Street
#401
Baltimore, MD 21202
December 15, 2021
Mr. Gregory A. Hook, CPA
Legislative Auditor
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Maryland General Assembly
301 West Preston Street, Room 1202
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Re: Maryland Department of Labor Audit Report
Dear Mr. Hook:
I would like to acknowledge receipt of your most recent Legislative Audit of the Maryland
Department of Labor for the Office of the Secretary, Division of Administration and Division of
Workforce Development and Adult Learning dated November 30, 2021. This Audit contained
findings for which the Agency anticipates having procedures in place to resolve the issues by the
noted completion dates.
I want to thank Michael J. Murdzak , R. Brendan Coffey, Edwin L. Paul , Lisa M. Beers ,
Anthony V. Calcagno, Michael K. Bliss, Matthew D. Walbert , Adam D. Dean, Dorian A.
Fournier, Oluwafemi E. Ogundolie, Dominick R. Abril, and Malcolm J. Woodard. Your team
provided us with valuable advice and suggestions. Please express our gratitude to your audit
team for their hard work during our audit.
Sincerely,
Tiffany P. Robinson
Secretary
Maryland Department of Labor
Phone: 410-230-6020 • Facebook: MarylandLabor • TWITTER: @MD_LABOR • Internet labor.maryland.gov
LARRY HOGAN, GOVERNOR | BOYD K. RUTHERFORD, LT. GOVERNOR | TIFFANY P. ROBINSON, SECRETARY

--- Page 27 ---
Maryland Department of Labor
Agency Response Form
Procurement and Disbursements
Finding 1
The Maryland Department of Labor (MDL) did not obtain documentation to support
vendor billings it paid for additional staffing at its Division of Unemployment Insurance
(DUI) and for modernizing DUI’s unemployment insurance system.
We recommend that MDL
a. obtain and review available detailed data and documentation to support the propriety
of all vendor invoices, and document steps taken to verify invoiced costs; and
b. identify, investigate, and resolve any invoice discrepancies, including those noted above,
and recover any amounts that are determined to have been improperly paid.
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 1a Agree Estimated Completion Date: Ongoing
Please provide details of MDOL has obtained the requisite documentation from the vendor to
corrective action or verify services rendered. MDOL plans to take the following steps to
explain disagreement. continue to verify invoiced costs, identify, investigate, and recover any
amount that is determined to be improper. 1st level of review. MDOL’s
contract monitor will review and approve that services were rendered
according to scope of work. 2nd level of review. MDOL will reconcile
the vendors billing statement against the vendors’ utilization report to
confirm hours billed vs hours received and all costs are consistent with
the vendor's price proposal. MDOL will ensure that all costs improperly
paid are recovered and reflected on future billing statements.
Recommendation 1b Agree Estimated Completion Date: Ongoing
Please provide details of MDOL did discover a potential overbilling during the legislative
corrective action or audit. MDOL was already reviewing the overbilling with their contract
explain disagreement. monitor and the vendor. During MDOL’s discovery process MDOL
requested detailed backup documentation from the vendor, using the
vendor's utilization report. MDOL reconciled the variance in the audit
finding between the hours billed and the hours received. MDOL has
received credits from the vendor for the overbilling and is providing that
documentation to the legislative auditors. Additionally, MDOL
continues to review documentation with the vendor and receive
additional credits where appropriate.
Page 1 of 10

--- Page 28 ---
Maryland Department of Labor
Agency Response Form
Finding 2
MDL did not ensure it received technology enterprise services valued at $3.8 million from
the Department of Information Technology (DoIT).
We recommend that MDL
a. pursue with DoIT the establishment of an MOU that provides for the receipt of
required detailed invoice information to support amounts invoiced;
b. in the future, ensure that all technology enterprise services invoiced have been received;
and
c. verify receipt of the services noted above as invoiced for fiscal year 2020.
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 2a Agree Estimated Completion Date: February
2021
Please provide details of MDL will enter negotiations with DoIT to address concerns in the draft
corrective action or MOU language for the purpose of resolving differences leading to
explain disagreement. execution of the MOU.
Recommendation 2b Agree Estimated Completion Date: March 2021
Please provide details of MDL instituted an internal review process and a process to review with
corrective action or DoIT.
explain disagreement.
Recommendation 2c Agree Estimated Completion Date: March 2022
Please provide details of The process referenced in Recommendation 2b was successfully utilized
corrective action or for review of fiscal year 2021 enterprise services. Labor will utilize the
explain disagreement. same process to ensure receipt of services invoiced in fiscal year 2020.
Page 2 of 10

--- Page 29 ---
Maryland Department of Labor
Agency Response Form
Finding 3
MDL did not always obtain required Board of Public Works approval for contract
modifications prior to execution and did not publish certain contract awards on eMaryland
Marketplace, as required.
We recommend that MDL comply with State law and procurement regulations for all
contract procurements and modifications.
Specifically we recommend that MDL
a. seek the required BPW approval before the related modifications are executed, and
b. publish contract awards on eMMA within 30 days of the contract award (repeat).
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 3a Agree Estimated Completion Date: Ongoing
Please provide details of MDL agrees and will seek the required BPW approval before
corrective action or modifications are executed in non-emergency situations.
explain disagreement.
Recommendation 3b Agree Estimated Completion Date: October 2021
Please provide details of MDL agrees with the recommendation. MDL will ensure that all
corrective action or contract awards exceeding $50,000 are published on eMMA within 30
explain disagreement. days of the contract award date. Additional training to ensure
compliance with this requirement was provided to procurement staff.
Page 3 of 10

--- Page 30 ---
Maryland Department of Labor
Agency Response Form
Federal Funds
Finding 4
MDL did not always submit requests for reimbursement of federal fund expenditures in a
timely manner, resulting in lost interest income totaling approximately $233,400.
We recommend that MDL submit federal fund reimbursement requests as soon as
permitted under federal guidelines (for example, monthly).
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 4 Agree Estimated Completion Date: Ongoing
Please provide details of MDL will adhere to the drawdown criteria in the annual CMIA
corrective action or agreement. Payroll will be drawn the next day and other charges
explain disagreement. including indirect will be drawn down on a monthly basis. Staff will be
cross-trained on drawing the different federal funding sources so that
awards are not assigned to one person and reimbursements are received
in a more timely manner.
Page 4 of 10

--- Page 31 ---
Maryland Department of Labor
Agency Response Form
Payroll
Finding 5
MDL had not established adequate controls to ensure the propriety of biweekly payroll
payments and leave balances.
We recommend that MDL
a. reconcile total payroll as reflected in CPB payroll registers each pay period with SPS
payroll summary reports, investigate any differences, and ensure that those
reconciliations are documented; and
b. independently verify pay and leave balance adjustments to ensure that only authorized
adjustments have been processed and take appropriate corrective action when errors
are noted.
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 5a Agree Estimated Completion Date: October 2021
Please provide details of A written standard operating procedure was developed for staff
corrective action or instruction. The written standard operating procedures include the
explain disagreement. necessary steps for investigating any differences and ensure those
reconciliations are documented.
Recommendation 5b Agree Estimated Completion Date: Ongoing
Please provide details of Written procedures that describe the process for independent verification
corrective action or of employee pay and leave balance adjustments have been established by
explain disagreement. the Office of Human Resources. The approval process for payroll inputs
was implemented on September 21, 2021.
Page 5 of 10

--- Page 32 ---
Maryland Department of Labor
Agency Response Form
Maryland Employment Advancement Right Now (EARN) Grants
Finding 6
MDL did not notify all grantees that received Maryland Employment Advancement Right
Now (EARN) grant awards of the opportunity to receive supplemental grant funds.
We recommend that MDL ensure that all eligible grantees are notified of opportunities to
apply for additional funds through the LOI process and the related notifications are
documented.
Agency Response
Background / Factually accurate
Analysis
Please explain any
concerns with factual
accuracy.
Recommendation Agree Estimated Completion
June 2021
Date:
Please provide details We have prepared LOI announcements to notify grantees of the
of corrective action or opportunity to apply for funds. The Department has updated its policies
explain disagreement. and procedures for the grant award process. For instance, the
Department now has a set schedule for releasing Letter of Intent
opportunities. In addition, an independent reviewer will review each
award process to ensure grants are awarded with competition, and
supporting documents are prepared and retained to support the grant
award process.
Page 6 of 10

--- Page 33 ---
Maryland Department of Labor
Agency Response Form
Information Systems Security and Control
Finding 7
MDL lacked assurance that adequate IT security and operational controls existed over its
Workforce Exchange system that was hosted, operated, and maintained by a primary
service provider and two subservice providers.
We recommend that MDL, for ongoing Workforce Exchange system operations,
a. timely obtain and review copies of SOC 2 Type 2 reports for the primary service
provider and any subservice providers, and verify that the related service providers
implement all critical report recommendations; and
b. document the aforementioned reviews and retain them for future reference.
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 7a Agree Estimated Completion Date: 10/31/2021
Please provide details of Appropriate staff are now set to get the distribution of SOC reports
corrective action or concerning the Workforce Exchange system
explain disagreement.
Recommendation 7b Agree Estimated Completion Date: 10/31/2022
Please provide details of IT staff will review and document the review of these reports in the
corrective action or future,
explain disagreement.
Page 7 of 10

--- Page 34 ---
Maryland Department of Labor
Agency Response Form
Finding 8
MDL lacked assurance that the underlying code for its E-Licensing System web application
was properly secured.
We recommend that MDL
a. either procure or require the system contractor to obtain an independent security
vulnerability assessment for the ELS web application code;
b. remediate all confirmed vulnerabilities identified by the assessment, document these
efforts, and retain this documentation for future reference; and
c. periodically obtain such assessments in the future when significant application changes
are made to the ELS web application code.
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 8a Agree Estimated Completion Date: 12/31/2022
Please provide details of Labor agrees to have an independent Security vulnerability review
corrective action or of the ELS system. DoIT is piloting a program for third party review
explain disagreement. and penetration testing of Maryland systems and we have been
asked to participate. So, this should provide us with the required
review.
Recommendation 8b Agree Estimated Completion Date: 12/31/2022
Please provide details of Labor agrees to address any security vulnerabilities found during
corrective action or the vulnerability review. Completion date to be determined based on
explain disagreement. when assessment is completed, and scope of issues found.
Recommendation 8c Agree Estimated Completion Date: 12/31/2022
Please provide details of Labor agrees to perform vulnerability assessments in the future
corrective action or after any significant application changes.
explain disagreement.
Page 8 of 10

--- Page 35 ---
Maryland Department of Labor
Agency Response Form
Finding 9
MDL did not have an IT disaster recovery plan for recovering computer operations.
We recommend that MDL, in conjunction with DoIT
a. develop and implement a comprehensive DRP that covers all of MDL’s IT operations
and is in compliance with the Information Technology Security Manual (repeat); and
b. periodically test the DRP, document the testing, and retain the documentation for
future reference.
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 9a Agree Estimated Completion Date: 1/31/2022
Please provide details of Labor is currently migrating our services to the DoIT hosting data
corrective action or center. Once in the data center they will be covered under the DoIT
explain disagreement. disaster recovery plan.
Recommendation 9b Agree Estimated Completion Date: 1/31/2022
Please provide details of Labor agrees to participate and document any disaster recovery
corrective action or testing offered by DoIT after we are moved into their data center.
explain disagreement.
Page 9 of 10

--- Page 36 ---
Maryland Department of Labor
Agency Response Form
Finding 10
MDL’s computer network had significant security weaknesses involving the lack of
periodic assessments of its firewall rules, assignment of local administrative rights, and
security settings for password and account controls for user network authentication.
We recommend that MDL
a. together with DoIT, periodically review its firewall rules to ensure the rules remain
accurate, allow only necessary network-level access, are adjusted when necessary,
including for the aforementioned instance, with these efforts being recorded and related
documentation retained;
b. limit the assignment of administrative rights on workstations to only system or network
administrators and those users specifically allowed such rights, with any such
assignments to non-IT administrators being justified, approved, documented, and
regularly reviewed to determine whether the rights are still needed (repeat); and
c. establish appropriate password and account controls over user network authentication
(repeat).
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 10a Agree Estimated Completion Date: 8/31/2022
Please provide details of Labor is working with DoIT to establish a procedure to complete an
corrective action or annual review of firewall rules
explain disagreement.
Recommendation 10b Agree Estimated Completion Date: 9/30/2022
Please provide details of Labor and DoIT have agreed to work together to review
corrective action or workstation administrative rights assignments for Labor staff to
explain disagreement. determine need for admin access. After this review need for admin
rights will be documented for those that require it, and admin access
will be removed for those that do not require it.
Recommendation 10c Agree Estimated Completion Date: 10/31/2021
Please provide details of This item has been completed. DoIT Security Policy password rules
corrective action or are now being enforced across all Labor systems.
explain disagreement.
Page 10 of 10

--- Page 37 ---
A T
UDIT EAM
Michael J. Murdzak, CPA
Audit Manager
R. Brendan Coffey, CPA, CISA
Edwin L. Paul, CPA, CISA
Information Systems Audit Managers
Lisa M. Beers, CFE
Anthony V. Calcagno
Senior Auditors
Michael K. Bliss
Matthew D. Walbert, CISA
Information Systems Senior Auditors
Adam D. Dean
Dorian A. Fournier
Oluwafemi E. Ogundolie
Staff Auditors
Dominick R. Abril
Malcolm J. Woodard
Information Systems Staff Auditors