Title: Maryland Department of Planning
Date: 01/13/2022
Type: Fiscal Compliance
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=61e0762ca1ce580da05ababa
Extracted: 2025-06-20T00:11:17.157921
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Audit Report
Maryland Department of Planning
April 2017
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
For further information concerning this report contact:
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
301 West Preston Street, Room 1202
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Phone: 410-946-5900 · 301-970-5900
Toll Free in Maryland: 1-877-486-9964
Maryland Relay: 711
TTY: 410-946-5401 · 301-970-5401
E-mail: OLAWebmaster@ola.state.md.us
Website: www.ola.state.md.us
The Office of Legislative Audits operates a Fraud Hotline to report fraud, waste, or abuse
involving State of Maryland government resources. Reports of fraud, waste, or abuse
may be communicated anonymously by a toll-free call to 1-877-FRAUD-11, by mail to the
Fraud Hotline, c/o Office of Legislative Audits, or through the Office’s website.
The Department of Legislative Services does not discriminate on the basis of age, ancestry, color,
creed, marital status, national origin, race, religion, gender, gender identity, sexual orientation,
or disability in the admission or access to its programs, services, or activities. The Department’s
Information Officer has been designated to coordinate compliance with the nondiscrimination
requirements contained in Section 35.107 of the Department of Justice Regulations. Requests for
assistance should be directed to the Information Officer at 410-946-5400 or 410-970-5400.

--- Page 3 ---
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AuDITs
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY
Warren G. Deschenaux ThomasJ. BarnickelIII,CPA
Executive Director Legislative Auditor
April 12, 2017
Senator Craig J. Zucker, Co-Chair, Joint Audit Committee
Delegate C. William frick, Co-Chair, Joint Audit Committee
Members ofJoint Audit Committee
Annapolis, Maryland
Ladies and Gentlemen:
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit ofthe Maryland Department of
Planning (MDP) for the period beginning November 13, 2013 and ending
November 20, 2016. MDP provides information and services that improve the
ability ofState and local governments, community development organizations,
and environmental organizations to support desirable growth in Maryland.
Our audit did not disclose any findings that warrant mention in this report.
We wish to acknowledge the cooperation extended to us during the course ofthis
audit by MDP.
Respectfully submitted,
7
Thomas J. Bamickel III, CPA
Legislative Auditor
301 West Preston Street Room 1202 Baltimore, Maryland 21201
410-946-5900/301-970-5900 fax 410-946-5999/301-970-5999
Toll Free in Maryland 877-486-9964 Fraud Hotline 877-FRAUD-il

--- Page 4 ---
2

--- Page 5 ---
Background Information
Agency Responsibilities
The Maryland Department of Planning (MDP) provides information and services
that improve the ability of State and local governments, as well as community
development and environmental organizations, to support growth that fosters
vibrant, livable communities; preserves and protects the environment; and makes
efficient use of State resources. MDP provides services such as planning and
urban design, computer application development, and technical studies.
According to the State’s records, MDP’s operating expenditures totaled
approximately $28.7 million during fiscal year 2016.
Findings and Recommendations
Our audit did not disclose any significant deficiencies in the design or operation
of MDP’s internal control. Our audit also did not disclose any significant
instances of noncompliance with applicable laws, rules, or regulations. A less
significant finding was communicated to MDP that did not warrant inclusion in
this report.
A draft copy of this report was provided to MDP. Since there are no
recommendations in this report, a written response was not necessary.
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the Maryland Department of
Planning (MDP) for the period beginning November 13, 2013 and ending
November 20, 2016. The audit was conducted in accordance with generally
accepted government auditing standards. Those standards require that we plan
and perform the audit to obtain sufficient, appropriate evidence to provide a
reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives.
We believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings
and conclusions based on our audit objectives.
As prescribed by the State Government Article, Section 2-1221 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, the objectives of this audit were to examine MDP’s financial
transactions, records, and internal control, and to evaluate its compliance with
applicable State laws, rules, and regulations.
3

--- Page 6 ---
In planning and conducting our audit, we focused on the major financial-related
areas of operations based on assessments of significance and risk. The areas
addressed by the audit included procurements and disbursements, payroll, cash
receipts, and grants and tax credits for the rehabilitation of historical properties.
To accomplish our audit objectives, our audit procedures included inquiries of
appropriate personnel, inspections of documents and records, observations of
MDP’s operations, and tests of transactions. Generally, transactions were
selected for testing based on auditor judgment, which primarily considers risk.
Unless otherwise specifically indicated, neither statistical nor non-statistical audit
sampling was used to select the transactions tested. Therefore, the results of the
tests cannot be used to project those results to the entire population from which
the test items were selected.
We also performed various data extracts of pertinent information from the State’s
Financial Management Information System (such as revenue and expenditure
data) and the State’s Central Payroll Bureau (payroll data), as well as from the
contractor administering the State’s Corporate Purchasing Card Program (credit
card activity). The extracts are performed as part of ongoing internal processes
established by the Office of Legislative Audits and were subject to various tests to
determine data reliability. We determined that the data extracted from these
various sources were sufficiently reliable for the purposes the data were used
during this audit. Finally, we performed other auditing procedures that we
considered necessary to achieve our audit objectives. The reliability of data used
in this report for background or informational purposes was not assessed.
MDP’s management is responsible for establishing and maintaining effective
internal control. Internal control is a process designed to provide reasonable
assurance that objectives pertaining to the reliability of financial records,
effectiveness and efficiency of operations including safeguarding of assets, and
compliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations are achieved.
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate.
Our reports are designed to assist the Maryland General Assembly in exercising
its legislative oversight function and to provide constructive recommendations for
improving State operations. As a result, our reports generally do not address
activities we reviewed that are functioning properly.
4

--- Page 7 ---
AUDIT TEAM
Michael J. Murdzak, CPA
Audit Manager
W. Thomas Sides
Senior Auditor
Tony M. Kinsler
Staff Auditor