Title: Department of General Services - Office of the Secretary and Other Units
Date: 01/27/2022
Type: Fiscal Compliance
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=61f1c3dfa1ce580d8c4837b4
Extracted: 2025-06-20T00:12:50.560735
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Audit Report
Department of General Services
Office of the Secretary and Other Units
August 2017
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
For further information concerning this report contact:
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
301 West Preston Street, Room 1202
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Phone: 410-946-5900 · 301-970-5900
Toll Free in Maryland: 1-877-486-9964
Maryland Relay: 711
TTY: 410-946-5401 · 301-970-5401
E-mail: OLAWebmaster@ola.state.md.us
Website: www.ola.state.md.us
The Office of Legislative Audits operates a Fraud Hotline to report fraud, waste, or abuse
involving State of Maryland government resources. Reports of fraud, waste, or abuse
may be communicated anonymously by a toll-free call to 1-877-FRAUD-11, by mail to the
Fraud Hotline, c/o Office of Legislative Audits, or through the Office’s website.
The Department of Legislative Services does not discriminate on the basis of age, ancestry, color,
creed, marital status, national origin, race, religion, gender, gender identity, sexual orientation,
or disability in the admission or access to its programs, services, or activities. The Department’s
Information Officer has been designated to coordinate compliance with the nondiscrimination
requirements contained in Section 35.107 of the Department of Justice Regulations. Requests for
assistance should be directed to the Information Officer at 410-946-5400 or 410-970-5400.

--- Page 4 ---
2

--- Page 5 ---
Table of Contents
Background Information 4
Agency Responsibilities 4
Status of Finding From Preceding Audit Report 4
Findings and Recommendations 5
Cash Receipts and Non-Cash Credits
Finding 1 – Controls over cash receipts and non-cash credits 5
were not sufficient.
Budgetary Closeout
Finding 2 – DGS improperly recorded transactions totaling $968,000 and 7
$425,000 during its closeout process for fiscal years 2016 and 2014,
respectively, and failed to revert these funds to the General Fund.
Procurements and Disbursements
Finding 3 – DGS lacked sufficient controls to ensure that all disbursement 8
transactions were independently approved and that all commodities
purchased were received.
Finding 4 – DGS awarded multiple contracts for roof repair and 9
replacement services to a roofing contractor without soliciting bids
as required.
Real Estate Commission Rebates
Finding 5 – DGS lacked independent records and monitoring procedures 10
to ensure that all commission rebates due for certain real estate
transactions were received.
Payroll
Finding 6 – Adjustments to employee pay and leave balances 11
were not subject to independent supervisory review and approval.
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology 13
Agency Response Appendix
3

--- Page 6 ---
Background Information
Agency Responsibilities
The Department of General Services (DGS) consists of six units, including the
Office of the Secretary. This audit included the operations of the following five
units:
• Office of the Secretary
• Office of Facilities Security
• Office of Facilities Operation and Maintenance
• Office of Real Estate
• Office of Facilities, Planning, Design, and Construction
These five DGS units provide professional and technical services for the planning,
design, construction, and maintenance of most State facilities; manage and
maintain multi-agency State facilities; and coordinate the State’s real estate
activities. The remaining DGS unit (Office of Procurement and Logistics) is
audited and reported upon separately. According to the State’s records, the
operating expenditures (excluding statewide capital project expenditures) for the
five DGS units included in this audit totaled approximately $95.2 million during
fiscal year 2016.
Status of Finding From Preceding Audit Report
Our audit included a review to determine the status of the finding contained in our
preceding audit report dated October 8, 2014. We determined that DGS
satisfactorily addressed this finding.
4

--- Page 7 ---
Findings and Recommendations
Cash Receipts and Non-Cash Credits
Finding 1
Controls over cash receipts and non-cash credits were not sufficient.
Analysis
The Department of General Services (DGS) had not established adequate controls
over checks received in the mail, which totaled approximately $23.6 million
during fiscal year 2016, as well as over non-cash credits posted to accounts
receivable. The majority of checks were initially received by finance office
employees, who restrictively endorsed and recorded them on a log, and deposited
them using a remote deposit system. DGS’ collections related primarily to
renewable energy reimbursements and State auction sales proceeds, and also
included rental payments for which accounts receivable records were maintained.
As a result of these conditions, errors or other discrepancies could occur without
timely detection.
• Checks received were not always accounted for and safeguarded through
immediate recordation, secure storage, and timely deposit. Our review of 285
checks collected on 20 days during fiscal years 2015 and 2016, totaling
approximately $13.5 million, disclosed that 103 checks totaling $2.2 million
were recorded 1 to 6 business days after receipt (as determined by the date
stamp on the envelope), and 230 checks totaling $8.3 million were deposited 2
to 14 business days after receipt. For example, 3 checks received in April
2016, totaling approximately $126,000, were not deposited for 14 days.
Furthermore, although these checks were stored in a locked safe or cabinet
prior to recordation and deposit, the checks were still accessible to several
employees, two of whom had the capability to process non-cash credits in the
automated accounts receivable records.
• Non-cash credits recorded in the accounts receivable records were not subject
to independent on-line approval, nor were output reports generated for
subsequent review by supervisory personnel. Nine employees, including the
aforementioned two employees with access to collections, had online access
capability to record non-cash credits. Non-cash credits posted to accounts
receivable during fiscal year 2016 totaled approximately $800,000.
• Deposit verifications performed were not effective since the employee who
initially recorded collections on the check log did not provide a copy of the
5

--- Page 8 ---
log directly to the employee responsible for verifying recorded collections to
deposit. Instead, the check log and the related checks were forwarded first to
the employee who prepared the remote deposit. As a result, unauthorized
changes could be made to the check log that would not be detected by the
employee responsible for verifying the recorded checks to validated bank
deposit documentation.
• Checks to be destroyed after being deposited through a remote deposit system
were not first reconciled to the check log, as required, to ensure all checks
were destroyed. Remote deposit is a process that scans the images of checks
and electronically transmits those images to the bank for deposit.
The Comptroller of Maryland’s Accounting Procedures Manual requires cash
receipts to be immediately recorded and deposited within a day, as well as
adequately safeguarded prior to deposit. The Manual also requires an
independent verification of collections to deposit, which should be performed
from the recordation of checks received. Finally, the Manual requires supervisory
review and approval of non-cash credits to accounts receivable records and the
segregation of cash receipts handling duties from the accounts receivable record
keeping duties. The State Treasurer’s Policy on the Use of Remote Deposit
Services by Maryland State Agencies requires that agencies using remote deposit
ensure that checks to be destroyed are first independently reconciled to the record
of checks received.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that DGS
a. adequately account for and safeguard checks by recording, securing, and
depositing them in accordance with the aforementioned Manual
requirements;
b. ensure that non-cash credits to accounts receivable are subject to
independent supervisory review and approval;
c. ensure that the initial record of checks received, or a copy thereof, is
given directly to the independent employee responsible for verifying that
all recorded collections were deposited; and
d. independently reconcile checks to be destroyed to the initial record of
checks received.
6

--- Page 9 ---
Budgetary Closeout
Finding 2
DGS improperly recorded special fund revenues totaling $968,000 at the
close of fiscal year 2016 and failed to revert these funds to the General Fund
as required. Accrued expenditures totaling $425,000 were also improperly
recorded to retain general funds at the close of fiscal year 2014.
Analysis
DGS improperly recorded deferred revenue totaling $968,000 to avoid reverting
accumulated and unspent special fund revenues at the end of fiscal year 2016.
DGS also improperly recorded general fund accrued expenditures totaling
$425,000 at the end of fiscal year 2014 as a means to retain the funds for future
maintenance projects.
• During its fiscal year 2016 closeout process, DGS improperly recorded as
deferred revenue $968,000 in excess special fund fees received from vendors
for DGS-controlled electronic procurement transactions. In August 2011,
DGS received approval from the Board of Public Works to collect fees on
these types of procurements to pay for the costs incurred to operate its
electronic procurement system (eMaryland Marketplace). However, State law
does not specify that these fees received in excess of costs incurred are to be
retained in a nonlapsing fund, nor does the law dedicate the fees collected for
any specific purpose. Accordingly, DGS did not have legal authority to retain
the excess fees by classifying them as deferred revenue to offset future years’
costs. The State’s Department of Budget and Management advised us that
DGS should have reverted these funds to the General Fund. As of February
23, 2017, these funds remained unspent.
• DGS improperly recorded accrued general fund expenditures totaling
$425,000 during the fiscal year 2014 closeout process. We were advised by
DGS management that the accrued expenditures were recorded as a means to
carry forward funds to be used for a backlog of critical maintenance projects.
However, the accrued expenditures did not represent goods or services that
were received prior to fiscal year-end; therefore, these funds should have been
reverted to the General Fund. DGS further advised us that these retained
funds were, in fact, spent during fiscal year 2015 on critical maintenance
projects.
The Comptroller of Maryland – General Accounting Division’s closing
instructions state that deferred revenue should be recorded only when revenue has
been collected in the fiscal year, but will not be earned and recognized until the
7

--- Page 10 ---
next fiscal year. The instructions further require that all fund balances carried into
the next fiscal year be done so in accordance with State statute, regulation, or
policy. Finally, the State Policy on Accounts Payable, Accrued Expenditures, and
Encumbrances, which is included in these closing instructions, states that
expenditures should be accrued only when goods or services have been received
prior to fiscal year-end, but not invoiced.
Recommendation 2
We recommend that DGS
a. record fiscal year-end transactions, including deferred revenue and
accrued expenditures, only in accordance with the aforementioned
instructions and policy; and
b. revert funds improperly retained to the General Fund.
Procurements and Disbursements
Finding 3
DGS lacked sufficient controls to ensure that all disbursement transactions
were independently approved and that all commodities purchased were
received.
Analysis
DGS had not established sufficient controls to ensure that all disbursements
processed on the State’s Financial Management Information System (FMIS) were
subject to independent approval, and that all commodities purchased were
received prior to payment.
• Five employees had system access capabilities that allowed them to process
certain disbursement transactions with no further independent on-line
approval required. In lieu of an on-line approval process, which is available
in FMIS, we were advised by DGS that independent employees were required
to manually review supporting documentation prior to system release for
payment; however, this manual approval process was not documented. These
employees processed disbursements totaling approximately $50.3 million
during our audit period. We reviewed approximately $1 million of these
expenditures and found that documentation existed to support receipt of the
related goods or services procured.
• DGS frequently did not use the appropriate payment method for commodity
disbursement transactions. During our audit period, DGS processed 873
disbursements for commodity procurements totaling $2.2 million using a
8

--- Page 11 ---
method that allowed for the payment of invoices without electronically
matching them with the corresponding receiving reports. Rather than use this
automated control, DGS required a manual match of receiving documentation
to each invoice. However, our test of eight disbursements for commodities
totaling approximately $918,000 disclosed that, for seven disbursements
totaling $886,000, the required receiving documentation was not on file.
Consequently, there was a lack of assurance that the purchased commodities
were received.
The Department of Information Technology’s FMIS Internal Control and Security
Policy and Procedures Manual requires, when automated system approvals are
not established, alternate approval processes be implemented outside of FMIS.
Specifically, a documented review and approval of supporting documents for 100
percent of the transactions should be performed to ensure that the related goods or
services were received. In addition, the Manual states that the automated
matching feature should be used for the purchase of commodities. Implementing
an automated control would help ensure that all purchases of commodities include
a verification to adequate receiving documentation prior to payment.
Recommendation 3
We recommend that DGS
a. establish independent online approval requirements for all critical
disbursement transactions, or if DGS elects to use alternate approval
processes, comply with the applicable requirements of the Manual;
b. use the appropriate FMIS payment method to ensure that invoices are
matched to the corresponding receiving reports prior to payment; and
c. investigate to ensure that the commodities relating to the aforementioned
disbursements of $886,000 were received.
Finding 4
DGS awarded multiple contracts for roof repair and replacement services to
a roofing contractor without soliciting bids, as required.
Analysis
DGS awarded multiple contracts for roof repair and replacement services to the
same vendor without soliciting bids, as required. Specifically, during the period
from July 2013 through September 2014, DGS awarded 27 contracts to one
vendor, totaling approximately $1 million, with each contract ranging from
$15,000 to $50,000. Our test of 14 of these contracts totaling approximately
$629,000 disclosed that DGS did not solicit bids from multiple vendors as
required for any of the 14 contracts. Further, we were advised that DGS
9

--- Page 12 ---
contacted this vendor directly, rather than solicit bids on eMaryland Marketplace
as required. Without obtaining competitive bids, there is no assurance that DGS
received the best price for the services provided.
According to State procurement regulations, DGS procurements of construction
projects valued between $15,000 and $50,000 require written solicitations to be
posted to eMaryland Marketplace for at least three days before bids are due and
responsive bids from at least two vendors should be obtained. If only one
responsive bid is received, an award may be made to the bidder if the
procurement officer determines the price submitted is fair and reasonable and the
other vendors had reasonable opportunity to respond.
Recommendation 4
We recommend that DGS comply with the aforementioned State
procurement regulations to help ensure DGS receives the best value for the
goods or services.
Real Estate Commission Rebates
Finding 5
DGS lacked independent records and monitoring procedures to ensure that
all commission rebates due for certain real estate transactions were received.
Analysis
DGS had not established independent records and monitoring procedures to
ensure that it received all commission rebates due from a vendor it had contracted
with to provide real estate brokerage services on behalf of State agencies.
According to the contract between DGS and this vendor, the vendor was required
to collect a commission from each landlord leasing property to State agencies and
subsequently remit 28 percent of the commission to DGS as a rebate; the
remainder of the commission was retained by the vendor as its compensation.
Although DGS received certain lease information and data from the vendor, such
as property locations and commissions received, DGS did not maintain an
independent record of all approved leases, and did not actively monitor the leases
for commissions and rebates due. For example, DGS did not detect in a timely
manner that rebates totaling approximately $430,000 relating to fiscal year 2015
commissions had not been paid as of December 2015. After being contacted by
DGS, the vendor submitted rebate payments of $606,730 in January 2016;
however, the vendor did not provide any supporting documentation with these
payments. As of July 2016, DGS had not determined the specific leases and years
10

--- Page 13 ---
to which these payments applied. Because DGS relied on the contractor to
calculate and submit the required rebate payments, there was a lack of assurance
that all rebates due were received.
In September 2014, DGS entered into a three-year contact, with two one-year
renewal options with this vendor who was the incumbent contractor on the
previous contract. During fiscal years 2014 through 2016, DGS received
commission rebates totaling approximately $1.7 million.
Recommendation 5
We recommend that DGS
a. maintain an independent record of all leases established under the
contract and establish monitoring procedures to ensure that all rebates
due are received in a timely manner, and
b. verify that all rebates due since July 1, 2013 have been received.
Payroll
Finding 6
Adjustments to employee pay and leave balances were not subject to
independent supervisory review and approval.
Analysis
Adjustments to employee pay and leave balances were not reviewed for propriety
by independent supervisory personnel. Specifically, one employee was
responsible for submitting a manual list of payroll adjustments to the Department
of Budget and Management (DBM) for processing in the Statewide Personnel
System (SPS). Although DGS advised us that the listing was reviewed by
supervisory personnel prior to submission, there was no documentation that this
occurred. In addition, DGS did not have a procedure in place to verify the
propriety of leave balance adjustments that were processed by five employees in
SPS. DGS did not use available system output reports of all payroll and leave
adjustments recorded to ensure that only authorized adjustments had been
processed. As a result, there was a lack of assurance that critical adjustments,
such as payments for accumulated leave, were proper.
DGS began using SPS for employee time keeping and leave management on May
25, 2016. During the period from May 25, 2016 through December 6, 2016, 155
payroll adjustments and 240 leave balance adjustments were processed, which
increased employee pay and leave balances by approximately $128,000 and
11

--- Page 14 ---
10,450 hours, respectively. According to State’s records, DGS’ payroll
expenditures totaled approximately $42.8 million during fiscal year 2016.
Recommendation 6
We recommend that DGS
a. ensure that manual listings of payroll adjustments submitted to DBM for
processing are first approved by independent supervisory personnel, and
that this approval is documented; and
b. independently verify output reports of payroll and leave adjustments
processed to initial supporting documentation, at least on a test basis.
12

--- Page 15 ---
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the following units of the
Department of General Services (DGS) for the period beginning July 1, 2013 and
ending May 30, 2016:
• Office of the Secretary
• Office of Facilities Security
• Office of Facilities Operation and Maintenance
• Office of Real Estate
• Office of Facilities, Planning, Design, and Construction
The audit was conducted in accordance with generally accepted government
auditing standards. Those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to
obtain sufficient, appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our
findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives. We believe that the
evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions
based on our audit objectives.
As prescribed by the State Government Article, Section 2-1221 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, the objectives of this audit were to examine DGS’ financial
transactions, records, and internal control, and to evaluate its compliance with
applicable State laws, rules, and regulations.
In planning and conducting our audit, we focused on the major financial-related
areas of operations based on assessments of significance and risk. The areas
addressed by the audit included capital projects, energy contracts, disbursements,
real estate, cash receipts, payroll, and accounts receivable. Our audit also
included support services (such as invoice processing and maintenance of
accounting records) provided by DGS – Office of the Secretary to DGS – Office
of Procurement and Logistics. In addition, our audit included similar services
provided by DGS for certain capital projects authorized by law under the State’s
operating budget (that is, the Board of Public Works – Capital Appropriations)
and the capital project budget (for example, Maryland Consolidated Capital Bond
Loans). We also determined the status of the finding contained in our preceding
audit report.
Our audit did not include certain support services provided by DGS – Office of
Procurement and Logistics to the other DGS units. These support services (such
as procurement and equipment management) are included within the scope of our
audit of the Office of Procurement and Logistics. Our audit also did not include
activities related to the operation and maintenance of Government House.
13

--- Page 16 ---
Although DGS receives an appropriation for these activities, these activities are
audited as part of the Executive Department – Governor. In addition, our audit
did not include an evaluation of internal controls over compliance with federal
laws and regulations for federal financial assistance programs and an assessment
of DGS’ compliance with those laws and regulations because the State of
Maryland engages an independent accounting firm to annually audit such
programs administered by State agencies, including DGS.
To accomplish our audit objectives, our audit procedures included inquiries of
appropriate personnel, inspections of documents and records, observations of
DGS’ operations, and tests of transactions. Generally, transactions were selected
for testing based on auditor judgment, which primarily considers risk. Unless
otherwise specifically indicated, neither statistical nor non-statistical audit
sampling was used to select the transactions tested. Therefore, the results of the
tests cannot be used to project those results to the entire population from which
the test items were selected.
We also performed various data extracts of pertinent information from the State’s
Financial Management Information System (such as revenue and expenditure
data) and the State’s Central Payroll Bureau (payroll data). These extracts are
performed as part of ongoing internal processes established by the Office of
Legislative Audits and were subject to various tests to determine data reliability.
We determined that the data extracted from these sources were sufficiently
reliable for the purposes the data were used during this audit. We also extracted
data from the Statewide Personnel System (SPS) for the purpose of testing certain
payroll and leave transactions, including the conversion of employee data to SPS.
We performed various tests of the relevant data and determined that the data were
sufficiently reliable for the purposes the data were used during the audit. Finally,
we performed other auditing procedures that we considered necessary to achieve
our objectives. The reliability of data used in this report for background or
informational purposes was not assessed.
DGS’ management is responsible for establishing and maintaining effective
internal control. Internal control is a process designed to provide reasonable
assurance that objectives pertaining to the reliability of financial records,
effectiveness and efficiency of operations including safeguarding of assets, and
compliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations are achieved.
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate.
14

--- Page 17 ---
Our reports are designed to assist the Maryland General Assembly in exercising
its legislative oversight function and to provide constructive recommendations for
improving State operations. As a result, our reports generally do not address
activities we reviewed that are functioning properly.
This report includes findings relating to conditions that we consider to be
significant deficiencies in the design or operation of internal control that could
adversely affect DGS’ ability to maintain reliable financial records, operate
effectively and efficiently, and/or comply with applicable laws, rules, and
regulations. Our report also includes findings regarding significant instances of
noncompliance with applicable laws, rules, or regulations. Other less significant
findings were communicated to DGS that did not warrant inclusion in this report.
DGS’ response to our findings and recommendations is included as an appendix
to this report. As prescribed in the State Government Article, Section 2-1224 of
the Annotated Code of Maryland, we will advise DGS regarding the results of our
review of its response.
15

--- Page 19 ---
Cash Receipts and Non-Cash Credits
Finding 1
Controls over cash receipts and non-cash credits were not sufficient.
OLA’s Recommendation 1
We recommend that DGS:
a. adequately account for and safeguard checks by recording, securing, and
depositing them in accordance with the aforementioned Manual requirements;
b. ensure that non-cash credits to accounts receivable are subject to independent
supervisory review and approval;
c. ensure that the initial record of checks received, or a copy thereof, is given
directly to the independent employee responsible for verifying that all
recorded collections were deposited; and
d. independently reconcile checks to be destroyed to the initial record of checks
received.
Corrective Actions Taken or Planned:
a. DGS concurs with the finding. Recommended action completed. A locked
bag has been obtained and access is restricted to appropriate authorized
personnel.
b. DGS concurs with the finding. FMIS security access will be reviewed for
the individuals cited and access restricted as the system allows to comply
with the recommendation to be completed before December 2017.
c. DGS concurs with the finding. Recommended action completed. An
independent person has been assigned this task.
d. DGS concurs with the finding. Recommended action completed. An
independent person has been assigned this task.

--- Page 20 ---
Budgetary Closeout
Finding 2
DGS improperly recorded special fund revenues totaling $968,000 at the
close of fiscal year 2016 and failed to revert these funds to the General Fund
as required. Accrued expenditures totaling $425,000 were also improperly
recorded to retain general funds at the close of fiscal year 2014.
OLA’s Recommendation 2
We recommend that DGS:
a. record fiscal year-end transactions, including deferred revenue and accrued
expenditures, only in accordance with the aforementioned instructions and
policy; and
b. revert funds improperly retained to the General Fund.
Corrective Actions Taken or Planned:
a. DGS concurs with the finding. DGS intends to fully comply with all
General Accounting Divisions closing instructions.
b. DGS concurs with the finding. Recommended action completed. DGS
reverted $968,000 to the General Fund in Fiscal Year 2017.

--- Page 21 ---
Procurements and Disbursements
Finding 3
DGS lacked sufficient controls to ensure that all disbursement transactions
were independently approved and that all commodities purchased were
received.
OLA’s Recommendation 3
We recommend that DGS:
a. establish independent online approval requirements for all critical
disbursement transactions, or if DGS elects to use alternate approval
processes, comply with the applicable requirements of the Manual;
b. use the appropriate FMIS payment method to ensure that invoices are
matched to the corresponding receiving reports prior to payment; and
c. investigate to ensure that the commodities relating to the aforementioned
disbursements of $886,000 were received.
Corrective Actions Taken or Planned:
a. DGS concurs with the finding. Recommended action completed. DGS
has immediately implemented an alternate approval process that
complies with State applicable requirements.
b. DGS concurs with the finding. Recommended action completed. DGS
will continue a manual match process but require all signed receiving
reports from across the Agency to be sent to the Finance Office to
properly match to invoices before payment. Standard Operating
Procedures will be revised and an internal review will be periodically
conducted to ensure compliance.
c. DGS concurs with the finding. Recommended action completed. DGS
has investigated through inventory reports that the eight test
disbursements for commodities in question have been received and
utilized in State service.

--- Page 22 ---
Finding 4
DGS awarded multiple contracts for roof repair and replacement services to
a roofing contractor without soliciting bids, as required.
OLA’s Recommendation 4
We recommend that DGS comply with the aforementioned State procurement
regulations to help ensure DGS receives the best value for the goods or services.
Corrective Actions Taken or Planned:
DGS concurs with the finding. All contracts discovered by DLS occurred prior to
January of 2015 and were conducted by staff that have since retired or been
transferred to other roles within DGS. DLS did sample small procurements
conducted after January 2015 and found evidence that this issue had been
corrected. Small procurements made since these staffing changes took effect
have complied and will continue to comply with the State procurement
regulations.
In addition the division implemented new internal procedures in January of 2015
for unexpected projects. Per COMAR emergency project regulations start at
$25,000. DGS believes most of the 14 contracts referenced by DLS were
emergency in nature, but below this COMAR emergency threshold, hence did
emergency documentation in the project files. To correct this, beginning in
January of 2015, the division requires a letter from the requesting entity for any
unplanned/emergency/unexpected project regardless of dollar value explaining
the urgent nature of the project. A response letter from DGS is then generated
accepting or rejecting the emergency request. These letters are retained for future
reference.

--- Page 23 ---
Real Estate Commission Rebates
Finding 5
DGS lacked independent records and monitoring procedures to ensure that
all commission rebates due for certain real estate transactions were received.
OLA’s Recommendation 5
We recommend that DGS:
a. maintain an independent record of all leases established under the contract
and establish monitoring procedures to ensure that all rebates due are
received in a timely manner, and
b. verify that all rebates due since July 1, 2013 have been received.
Corrective Action Taken or Planned:
a. DGS has implemented a rebate tracking system which is independent of the
Sales Force system maintained by its broker. On a monthly basis DGS updates
and maintains a spreadsheet which includes the following: a listing of leases
approved by the Board of Public Works; the commission amount agreed to in the
Commission Rate Agreement executed between the broker and the landlord; the
required rebate amount; and the date the rebate check is received. Rebate checks
should be received within 90 days of BPW approval or the effective date of the
lease. The brokers are queried monthly on outstanding rebate checks, and
whether in lieu of a lump sum, installment payments have been agreed to which
would result in a delay in DGS receiving the required rebate fees.
b. Rebate fees not received by DGS from July 1, 2013 to the present are a result
of non-payment by the landlord to the broker. The DGS AG’s Office has
reviewed the current broker contract dated 9/1/14 and has advised that if the
landlord does not pay the commission, DGS is nevertheless entitled to be paid the
agreed rebate percentage regardless of whether the broker tries to collect the
commission from the landlord. The rebate is due when the commission is
"earned" or when the lease is approved by the Board of Public Works. Based
upon this information, DGS is consulting with the AG’s Office on the best way to
seek restitution for the unpaid rebate fees. This could include requesting the
State agency located in the leased space to withhold the outstanding rebate
amount from future lease payments to the landlord.

--- Page 24 ---
Payroll
Finding 6
Adjustments to employee pay and leave balances were not subject to
independent supervisory review and approval.
OLA’s Recommendation 6
We recommend that DGS:
a. ensure that manual listings of payroll adjustments submitted to DBM for
processing are first approved by independent supervisory personnel, and that
this approval is documented; and
b. independently verify output reports of payroll and leave adjustments
processed to initial supporting documentation, at least on a test basis.
Corrective Actions Taken or Planned:
a. DGS concurs with the finding. Recommended action completed. Payroll will
forward input file to Fiscal Services Director or Fiscal Services Deputy Director
who will verify adjustments to approved Statewide Personnel System (SPS)
transactions. All processes will be documented for audit retention and reviewed
on a test basis.
b. DGS concurs with the finding. Recommended action completed. Payroll
Clerks will provide a leave balance report per pay period to Payroll Supervisor
who will independently review and verify report to SPS transactions. All
processes will be documented for audit retention and reviewed on a test basis.

--- Page 25 ---
AUDIT TEAM
Mark S. Hagenbuch, CPA
Audit Manager
Menachem Katz, CPA
Brian S. Han, CPA
Senior Auditors
Tony M. Kinsler
Larry M. Richardson
Syed M. A. Taqvi
Staff Auditors