Title: Statewide Review of Budget Closeout Transactions for Fiscal Year 2021
Date: 01/26/2022
Type: Special Reports and Letters
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=61f15fdca1ce580d8c480d3d
Extracted: 2025-06-20T00:12:36.718378
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Special Report
Statewide Review of
Budget Closeout Transactions for
Fiscal Year 2021
January 2022
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Senator Clarence K. Lam, M.D. (Senate Chair) Delegate Carol L. Krimm (House Chair)
Senator Malcolm L. Augustine Delegate Steven J. Arentz
Senator Adelaide C. Eckardt Delegate Mark S. Chang
Senator George C. Edwards Delegate Nicholas P. Charles II
Senator Katie Fry Hester Delegate Andrea Fletcher Harrison
Senator Cheryl C. Kagan Delegate Trent M. Kittleman
Senator Benjamin F. Kramer Delegate David Moon
Senator Cory V. McCray Delegate Julie Palakovich Carr
Senator Justin D. Ready Delegate Elizabeth G. Proctor
Senator Craig J. Zucker Delegate Geraldine Valentino-Smith
To Obtain Further Information
Office of Legislative Audits
The Warehouse at Camden Yards
351 West Camden Street, Suite 400
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Phone: 410-946-5900
Maryland Relay: 711
TTY: 410-946-5401 ꞏ 301-970-5401
E-mail: OLAWebmaster@ola.state.md.us
Website: www.ola.state.md.us
To Report Fraud
The Office of Legislative Audits operates a Fraud Hotline to report fraud, waste, or abuse involving State
of Maryland government resources. Reports of fraud, waste, or abuse may be communicated anonymously
by a toll-free call to 1-877-FRAUD-11, by mail to the Fraud Hotline, c/o Office of Legislative Audits, or
through the Office’s website.
Nondiscrimination Statement
The Department of Legislative Services does not discriminate on the basis of age, ancestry, color, creed,
marital status, national origin, race, religion, gender, gender identity, sexual orientation, or disability in the
admission or access to its programs, services, or activities. The Department’s Information Officer has been
designated to coordinate compliance with the nondiscrimination requirements contained in Section 35.107
of the United States Department of Justice Regulations. Requests for assistance should be directed to the
Information Officer at 410-946-5400 or 410-970-5400.

--- Page 3 ---
January 26, 2022
Senator Clarence K. Lam, M.D., Senate Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Delegate Carol L. Krimm, House Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Members of Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Annapolis, Maryland
Ladies and Gentlemen:
We have conducted a review of the State’s budget closeout transactions for the
fiscal year ended June 30, 2021. Our review of closeout transactions disclosed
general compliance with the applicable laws, regulations, and policies. However,
we determined that certain transactions pertaining to the following agencies were
not in compliance:
Maryland Department of Health
Maryland Department of Labor
Maryland Insurance Administration
Maryland State Department of Education
Additionally, we noted significant potential liabilities pertaining to the Maryland
Department of Health and the Maryland Health Benefit Exchange that were
reported at June 30, 2021.
A summary of our findings, by agency, is included in Exhibit 1.
Generally, the non-compliant transactions we identified suggest that additional
State funds may be required to eliminate potential deficits. Specifically, one State
department had federal fund revenues totaling $4,775,000 on its records at June
30, 2021 that have been deemed unrecoverable. Another department, because of
certain automated system failures, made estimated payments totaling
approximately $1.06 billion to behavioral health service providers between
January and August 2020, resulting in overpayments which, as of September 2,
2021, totaled approximately $240.9 million. At the time of our review, the

--- Page 4 ---
department was formulating and implementing a recoupment plan which,
according to the department, includes a level of debt forgiveness. We also found
that another department retained $3.7 million in unused State grant funds without
legal authority, and had a year-end federal fund deficit balance totaling
approximately $3 million.
In addition, one department reported a total of $129.5 million in unprovided for
general fund payables or other general fund liabilities as of June 30, 2021 (Exhibit
2). Specifically, this department reported a liability of approximately $34.2
million attributable to the disallowance of certain claims by the federal
government. A similar condition was included in our reports on the review of
fiscal years 2020, 2019, 2018, 2017, 2016, and 2015 closeout transactions related
to this department. The department also reported another potential liability to the
federal government of approximately $49.3 million related to its obligation to use
these funds for specified program expenditures which it had not yet done. We
also identified one other agency that had a potential $28.4 million federal liability.
The expenditures related to these liabilities may have to be funded with
subsequent year appropriations (or through a deficiency appropriation).
Finally, one agency did not transfer funds totaling $5.3 million to another
department as required by State law, and did not properly report a deficit fund
balance of $1.0 million at fiscal year-end.
The primary objective of this annual review is to alert the Maryland General
Assembly to significant financial and budgetary closeout practices that do not
comply with applicable laws, regulations, and policies and to determine if other
significant liabilities existed at fiscal year-end. The issues identified during this
review will be fully addressed, as appropriate, in our fiscal compliance audit
reports on the applicable agencies, which will include relevant recommendations.
We wish to acknowledge the cooperation extended to us during the course of our
review by the Comptroller of Maryland’s General Accounting Division and by the
various State agencies.
Respectfully submitted,
Gregory A. Hook, CPA
Legislative Auditor
2

--- Page 5 ---
Table of Contents
Background Information 5
Introduction, Objectives, and Scope 6
Findings 7
Revenue Transactions
Finding 1 – The Maryland Department of Labor had unsubstantiated 8
accrued federal fund revenues totaling $4,775,000 that it had
previously deemed to be unrecoverable.
Expenditure Transactions
Finding 2 – According to a report prepared by the Maryland Department 9
of Health (MDH), because of certain automated system failures,
estimated payments totaling approximately $1.06 billion were made to
behavioral health service providers between January and August 2020,
resulting in overpayments that, as of September 2, 2021, totaled
approximately $240.9 million.
Encumbrance Transaction
Finding 3 – The Maryland State Department of Education (MSDE) 10
improperly encumbered State grant funds totaling approximately $3.7
million.
Federal Fund Deficit Balance
Finding 4 – MSDE had a federal fund deficit balance of approximately 10
$3.0 million as of June 30, 2021 that may require State general funds
to eliminate.
Other Liabilities
Finding 5 – MDH reported a total of $129.5 million in unprovided for 11
general fund payables or other general fund liabilities as of
June 30, 2021.
Finding 6 – The Maryland Health Benefit Exchange had a potential $28.4 12
million liability to the federal government related to certain
misallocated expenditures.
3

--- Page 6 ---
Finding 7 – The Maryland Insurance Administration (MIA) Health Care 13
Regulatory Fund had a deficit balance of $1.0 million as of
June 30, 2021.
Other Issues
Finding 8 – MIA could not justify retention of the June 30, 2021 balance 14
in the Health Care Provider Rate Stabilization Fund, which totaled
$5.3 million.
Exhibit 1 – Summary of Fiscal Year 2021 Closeout Review Findings 15
by State Agency
Exhibit 2 – Schedule of June 30, 2021 Unprovided for General Fund 16
Payables and Other Liabilities Reported to the General
Accounting Division
4

--- Page 7 ---
Background Information
The Comptroller of Maryland – General Accounting Division (GAD) annually
provides State agencies with instructions for completing the fiscal year-end
budget closeout process. State agencies individually report to GAD their fiscal
year-end closeout transactions that have not been previously recorded in the
State’s accounting records. GAD is responsible for closing the State’s accounting
records on a statewide basis and for preparing the State’s Annual Comprehensive
Financial Report.
GAD contracts with an independent accounting firm for the purpose of expressing
an opinion on the State’s basic financial statements contained in the Annual
Comprehensive Financial Report, which, as of January 13, 2022, had not yet been
finalized for fiscal year 2021. The firm will determine whether the State’s
financial statements have been presented fairly, in all material respects, the
respective financial position of the State of Maryland as of June 30, 2021, and the
respective changes in the financial position and cash flows, for the year then
ended in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United
States of America (referred to as GAAP).
5

--- Page 8 ---
Introduction, Objectives, and Scope
We conducted a review of the State’s budget closeout transactions for the fiscal
year ended June 30, 2021. This review was conducted under the authority of the
State Government Article, Section 2-1220 of the Annotated Code of Maryland.
The objective of our review was to determine whether budget closeout
transactions, for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2021, were properly supported and
made in accordance with State budgetary laws, regulations, and accounting
policies and to determine if other significant liabilities existed at fiscal year-end.
Our review consisted of tests of significant year-end transactions for 11
departments and independent agencies, based on our assessment of risk and
materiality, to ascertain if the transactions were properly supported and made in
accordance with State budgetary laws, regulations, and accounting policies and to
determine if other significant liabilities existed at fiscal year-end. We reviewed,
on a limited basis, transactions processed subsequent to June 30, 2021 to
determine if the transactions were properly recorded (such as charged or credited
to the proper fiscal year).
As part of our current review, we contacted various officials of State agencies.
Our review excluded public colleges and universities and transactions processed
through the Transportation Trust Fund because the related financial activity does
not involve the State’s General Fund and/or because agencies have the authority
to retain unspent funds at year-end. Our conclusions for the aforementioned
objective are contained on page 7 of this report.
We also determined that seven of findings included in this report were conditions
repeated from our January 26, 2021 report entitled Statewide Review of Budget
Closeout Transactions for Fiscal Year 2020 (see Exhibit 1).
Our review was limited to the procedures necessary to accomplish the
aforementioned objective. These procedures did not constitute an audit conducted
in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards (GAGAS).
Had we conducted an audit in accordance with GAGAS, those standards would
require the issuance of recommendations as part of our reporting process. In
addition, other matters may have come to our attention that would have been
reported. We advised the appropriate agencies of our findings. Formal responses
were not requested since this report contains no recommendations. Our fieldwork
was conducted during the period from September 2021 to January 2022.
6

--- Page 9 ---
Findings
Conclusion
Our review of State agencies’ budget closeout transactions disclosed that such
transactions were generally properly supported and made in accordance with State
budgetary laws, regulations, and accounting policies. However, we determined
that three departments or agencies were not in compliance primarily because
certain year-end transactions were not properly recorded, could not be
substantiated, or did not comply with budget closeout requirements. Additionally,
we determined that four agencies or departments had significant payables or
liabilities at June 30, 2021 that may require general funds.
Revenue Transactions
One department recorded federal fund revenues totaling approximately $4.8
million to cover certain expenditures. Although the department has advised the
Comptroller of Maryland – General Accounting Division (GAD) of its plan to
fund these expenditures using future sources of revenue, to the extent these funds
are not received, general funds will be required to eliminate the deficits resulting
from these transactions.
Expenditure Transactions
One department, because of certain automated system failures, made estimated
payments totaling approximately $1.06 billion to behavioral health service
providers between January and August 2020, resulting in overpayments, which as
of September 2, 2021 totaled $240.9 million. At the time of our review the
department was formulating and implementing a recoupment plan which,
according to the department, includes a level of debt forgiveness.
Encumbrance Transaction
One department improperly encumbered unused State grant funds totaling $3.7
million.
Federal Fund Deficit Balance
One department had a year-end federal fund deficit balance totaling $3 million.
Other Liabilities
One department reported a total of $129.5 million in unprovided for general fund
payables or other general fund liabilities as of June 30, 2021. For example, this
department, which had a similar issue in our six preceding closeout reports, may
require general funds of approximately $34.2 million to cover an unfunded
liability attributable to the disallowance of certain federal reimbursement claims.
Another agency had a potential $28.4 million liability to the federal government
7

--- Page 10 ---
related to certain misallocated expenditures. Furthermore, one agency could not
readily explain a deficit of $1 million.
According to an opinion of the Attorney General, unprovided for payables are not
a violation of State law if the General Assembly enacts a budget bill for the
subsequent year containing an appropriation that can be used to fund these
expenditures.
Other Issues
One agency could not justify retention of a certain fund balance, which totaled
$5.3 million as of June 30, 2021.
A summary of our findings, by agency, is included in Exhibit 1.
Revenue Transactions
Finding 1
The Maryland Department of Labor (MDL) had unsubstantiated accrued
federal fund revenue totaling $4,775,000 that it had previously deemed to be
unrecoverable.
Analysis
As of June 30, 2021, MDL had unsubstantiated accrued federal fund revenue
totaling $4,775,000, which it had deemed to be unrecoverable. This amount was
reduced from a balance of $5,875,000 as reported in our January 26, 2021 report
on the Statewide Review of Budget Closeout Transactions for Fiscal Year 2020.
These accrued revenues related to the projected recovery of past indirect costs
incurred to administer certain federal programs.
In a letter dated September 30, 2020 to the Chairs of the Senate Budget and
Taxation and House Appropriations Committees, MDL indicated that it would
offset these unrecovered costs, which initially totaled $6,375,000, over several
years by an indirect cost surcharge to most MDL programs until recovered. The
funding source was anticipated to be split between general funds and special
funds from MDL’s Special Administrative Expense Fund; however, to the extent
these funds are not received, general funds will be required to eliminate the
deficits resulting from these transactions. During fiscal year 2021, MDL advised
us that approximately $1.1 million was applied to reduce the balance to
$4,775,000 as of June 30, 2021. MDL reported this activity to GAD in its fiscal
year 2021 closing process.
8

--- Page 11 ---
Expenditure Transactions
Finding 2
According to a report prepared by the Maryland Department of Health
(MDH), because of certain automated system failures, estimated payments
totaling approximately $1.06 billion were made to behavioral health service
providers between January and August 2020, resulting in overpayments that,
as of September 2, 2021, totaled approximately $240.9 million.
Analysis
In an October 1, 2021 report to the Senate Budget and Taxation Committee and
the House Appropriations Committee, MDH noted that, because of certain
technical and system failures associated with its January 2020 transition to a new
Administrative Service Organization (ASO) that impacted payments to behavioral
health providers, MDH management directed the ASO to provide weekly
estimated payments to providers beginning January 23, 2020 and continuing
through August 3, 2020 to ensure providers were paid for services rendered.1
MDH’s report stated that during this period the ASO made estimated payments
totaling $1.06 billion. Estimated payments stopped August 3, 2020, and,
according to MDH, beginning August 13, 2020 payments have been made based
on actual claims submitted. This action on the part of MDH was also disclosed in
our report on the Statewide Review of Budget Closeout Transactions for Fiscal
Year 2020.
MDH’s October 2021 report also addressed action it was taking with the ASO and
providers to reconcile estimated payments made with actual claims for the
aforementioned period, and to recoup overpayments made, which according to
MDH, totaled $240.9 million due from 2,149 providers as of September 2, 2021.
According to MDH, because of the difficult and time consuming nature of the
reconciliation process, and to provide equity where the reconciliation process may
be onerous to providers, it has included in its recoupment plan a level of debt
forgiveness for certain providers. According to MDH’s report, it planned to
forgive debt for providers owing less than $10,000, with the exception of certain
providers, such as hospitals and laboratories. MDH estimated that this action will
cost $3.5 million. Furthermore, MDH stated that for providers with outstanding
or fully paid balances between $10,001 and $50,000, it will engage the provider
community and will evaluate providing additional relief. MDH advised us that
forgiving these balances would allow it to focus on recoupment from providers
with more significant outstanding balances due.
1 Estimated weekly payments to each provider were based on that provider’s average weekly
claims for calendar year 2019.
9

--- Page 12 ---
It is uncertain if such debt forgiveness would require Board of Public Works
approval, or if MDH could rely on such forgiveness authority vested with the
State’s Central Collection Unit. At the time of our review, MDH had not obtained
clarification on the necessity of such third party approval for its debt forgiveness
plans.
Encumbrance Transaction
Finding 3
The Maryland State Department of Education (MSDE) improperly
encumbered State grant funds totaling approximately $3.7 million.
Analysis
MSDE improperly encumbered unused State grant funds totaling approximately
$3.7 million. Through the Maryland Center for School Safety, MSDE provided
grants to Local Education Agencies (LEAs) in order to help them maintain
adequate School Resource Officer coverage within schools in Maryland. These
grants, which were for the period July 1, 2019 to June 30, 2020, were
reimbursable in nature, and required the LEAs to submit any final reimbursement
requests within 45 days of the end of the grant period. MSDE had no such
requests or other documentation to support the continued encumbrance of the $3.7
million in unused General Fund grant appropriations. A similar condition relating
to a different grant program was commented upon in our report on the Statewide
Review of Budget Closeout Transactions for Fiscal Year 2020.
This practice violated the yearly closing instructions of the Comptroller of
Maryland – General Accounting Division since the encumbrances did not
represent actual fiscal year-end commitments by the State for goods and services
and consequently would not qualify as a valid encumbrance.
Federal Fund Deficit Balance
Finding 4
MSDE had a federal fund deficit balance of approximately $3.0 million as of
June 30, 2021 that may require State general funds to eliminate.
Analysis
MSDE had a federal fund deficit balance totaling approximately $3.0 million
within its Division of Rehabilitation Services at June 30, 2021. MSDE could not
10

--- Page 13 ---
readily explain the reason for the deficit balance, or identify the related
expenditures which created the deficit. In addition, MSDE had not submitted a
request for federal reimbursement to cover the related expenditures, and was
uncertain if federal funds would be available to cover the balance. If federal
funds are not available, a deficiency appropriation for State general funds may be
needed to eliminate this deficit. MSDE prepared an improper accounting
transaction to temporarily eliminate the deficit for fiscal year 2021 closing
purposes. Accordingly, MSDE did not disclose this deficit balance to GAD as
required.
Other Liabilities
Finding 5
MDH reported a total of $129.5 million in unprovided for general fund
payables and other general fund liabilities as of June 30, 2021.
Analysis
MDH reported unprovided for payables and other general fund liabilities totaling
$129.5 million. This amount consists of three different components; $34.2
million in disallowed federal fund claims related to the Developmental
Disabilities Administration’s (DDA’s) residential habilitation add-on services
under its Community Pathways waiver program (a Medicaid funded program),
$46.0 million in estimated reimbursements to Medicaid providers related to the
Medical Care Programs Administration (MCPA), and an additional potential
liability to the federal government of approximately $49.3 million for an
obligation relating to the Rebalancing Fund Demonstration which is associated
with the MCPA Money Follows the Person (MFP) program.
Regarding the $34.2 million in disallowed claims, the federal Department of
Health and Human Services (HHS) – Office of the Inspector General (OIG), in its
June 2015 audit report, disallowed these DDA claims and recommended that
DDA refund the overbilled amount to the federal HHS Centers for Medicare and
Medicaid Services (CMS).
In MDH’s September 24, 2015 response to the audit report and to CMS, MDH
disagreed with the OIG’s interpretation of waiver requirements and urged CMS to
reconsider requiring MDH to refund the $34.2 million in disallowed claims. In a
letter dated June 26, 2018, CMS issued a formal disallowance letter requiring the
refund of the identified $34.2 million. On August 23, 2018, MDH issued a
Request for Reconsideration letter to HHS to begin the appeals process related to
CMS' determination. In a letter to MDH dated October 23, 2018, CMS affirmed
11

--- Page 14 ---
the decision to disallow the claims, and in December 2018, the Maryland Office
of the Attorney General filed an appeal of the disallowance with the HHS
Departmental Appeals Board. As of January 2022, MDH had received no further
correspondence from HHS regarding resolution of this matter.
The CMS disallowance letter provided that MDH could elect to either retain or
return the funds in question during the appeals process; however, should HHS
confirm CMS' decision, any amount retained by MDH would be subject to
interest. MDH's Request for Reconsideration stated that it had elected to retain
the funds during the appeals process; therefore, depending on HHS’ final
determination, MDH could be required to pay the federal government the original
$34.2 million in disallowed claims and any accrued interest. Comments regarding
this matter have been made in our six preceding Statewide Review of Budget
Closeout Transactions reports.
MDH also reported a potential liability to the federal government of
approximately $49.3 million for an obligation relating to the Rebalancing Fund
Demonstration which is associated with the MCPA MFP program. By
participating in the Rebalancing Demonstration, the State agreed to accept federal
funds covering 75 percent of its MFP program expenditures, with the remaining
25 percent supported by State funds, instead of the more traditional 50 percent
federal and 50 percent State funding arrangement used in many other federal
assistance programs. However, the 25 percent savings that the State realized from
the enhanced federal reimbursement rate is required to be spent on additional
MFP program expenditures. The aforementioned $49.3 million represents this
enhanced funding for which the required additional MFP expenditures had not
been made as of June 30, 2021. The Rebalancing Fund Demonstration was to end
September 30, 2020, however CMS extended the program until September 30,
2025.
Finding 6
The Maryland Health Benefit Exchange (MHBE) had a potential $28.4
million liability to the federal government related to certain misallocated
expenditures.
Analysis
MHBE had a $28.4 million potential liability to the federal government related to
a previous audit finding by the HHS – OIG of certain misallocated expenditures.
This issue was also addressed in our reports on the Statewide Review of Budget
Closeout Transactions for Fiscal Year 2018, 2019, and 2020, dated January 15,
2019, January 16, 2020, and January 26, 2021, respectively. In a letter dated
12

--- Page 15 ---
September 1, 2019 to the Chairs of the Senate Budget and Taxation and House
Appropriations Committees, MHBE noted that the HHS – Office of General
Counsel had recommended that MHBE rely on a previous determination by HHS’
CMS that MHBE followed CMS’ guidance when allocating establishment grant
expenditures. In correspondence dated October 8, 2020, CMS informed MHBE
that there was no change to that recommendation, but also that no formal
resolution of the audit finding was yet available. We were informed by MHBE
that, as of January 11, 2022, there still had been no formal resolution of the audit
finding.
Finding 7
The Maryland Insurance Administration (MIA) Health Care Regulatory
Fund had a deficit balance of $1.0 million as of June 30, 2021.
Analysis
MIA had a deficit balance in the Health Care Regulatory Fund. MIA administers
the Fund, which consists of assessments on specified providers of health
insurance in the State. State law provides that annual assessments are to cover all
costs relating to activities of MIA’s Appeals and Grievances Unit. This condition
was also commented upon in our report on the Statewide Review of Budget
Closeout Transactions for Fiscal Year 2020. In that report we noted that the Fund
had a deficit balance of approximately $250,000 as of June 30, 2017, which
increased to a deficit of approximately $1.4 million as of June 30, 2020, and that
this $1.4 million deficit was improperly offset at fiscal year-end by unrelated
surplus funds in the Insurance Regulation Fund. Our current review disclosed
that there was a deficit balance of $1.0 million in the Fund at June 30, 2021.
According to MIA management that balance was again improperly offset by
unrelated surplus funds in the Insurance Regulation Fund, and therefore MIA
again did not report this deficit at fiscal year-end to GAD as required.
MIA management advised us that, based on consultation with its legal counsel, a
plan was developed to reduce the deficit balance with elimination to occur by
fiscal year 2025. Although a temporary deficit balance may periodically occur
due to the timing of related transactions; however, a long-term deficit balance,
such as this deficit that began in fiscal year 2017, may be indicative of inaccurate
assessments and/or recording errors.
13

--- Page 16 ---
Other Issues
Finding 8
MIA could not justify retention of the June 30, 2021 balance in the Health
Care Provider Rate Stabilization Fund (RSF), which totaled $5.3 million.
Analysis
MIA could not justify retention of the RSF fund balance at June 30, 2021, which
totaled $5.3 million. State law required funds in the RSF to be transferred to
MDH for the purpose of retaining certain health care providers in the State.
Specifically, premium taxes collected by MIA from health maintenance
organizations (HMO) and managed care organizations (MCO) prior to July 1,
2021 were to be credited to the State’s RSF, which was administered by MIA.
Funds in the RSF should be periodically transferred by MIA to MDH. This
condition was also commented upon in our report on the Statewide Review of
Budget Closeout Transactions for Fiscal Year 2020.
MIA management claimed that the fund balance was necessary to cover any
HMO and MCO premium tax refunds that were required to be paid. However,
HMO and MCO premium tax refunds processed during fiscal years 2020 and
2021 totaled $3.0 million and $3.2 million, respectively, each total well below the
$5.3 million retained by MIA at June 30, 2021.
Furthermore, Chapter 538, Laws of Maryland 2020, repealed the RSF effective
July 1, 2021, after which all premium tax payments were to be deposited to the
General Fund. However, as of December 2021, MIA continued to retain the RSF
with a fund balance of approximately $3.3 million.
14

--- Page 17 ---
Exhibit 1
Summary of Fiscal Year 2021 Closeout Review
Findings by State Agency
Finding
Agency Finding Description
Number
Maryland Department of 1* $4,775,000 in recorded federal fund
Labor revenues is unrecoverable.
2* Reported overpayment to behavioral health
service providers totaling $240.9 million as
of September 2, 2021.
Maryland Department of
Health 5* Unprovided for general fund payables and
liabilities of approximately $129.5 million
may have to be funded with State general
funds.
3* Encumbrance totaling $3.7 million was
improperly retained.
Maryland State
Department of Education
4 MSDE had a year-end federal fund deficit
balance totaling $3 million.
6* A potential federal liability of
Maryland Health Benefit
approximately $28.4 million may have to
Exchange
be funded with State general funds.
7* A $1.0 million deficit was improperly
offset by unrelated surplus funds and could
not be explained.
Maryland Insurance
Administration
8* The retention of $5.3 million in Health Care
Provider Rate Stabilization funds could not
be justified.
 Denotes item repeated in full or part from preceding report
15

--- Page 18 ---
Exhibit 2
Schedule of June 30, 2021 Unprovided for General Fund Payables
and Other Liabilities Reported to the General Accounting
Division
Amount of Reported
Agency Reporting Unprovided for General
Fund Payables / Other
Liabilities
As of June 30, 2021
Maryland Department of Health $129,472,000
Total $129,472,000
16

--- Page 19 ---
A T
UDIT EAM
Bekana Edossa, CPA, CFE
Audit Manager
Anthony V. Calcagno
James M. Fowler, CFE
Sandra C. Medeiros
W. Thomas Sides
Edward J. Welsh, CFE
Senior Auditors
Stephen R. Alexander, CFE
Jennifer N. Sayre, CFE
Staff Auditors