Title: Calvert County Public Schools
Date: 01/25/2022
Type: Local School Systems
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=61f15fbea1ce580d8c47f806
Extracted: 2025-06-20T00:11:57.712255
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Financial Management Practices Audit Report
Calvert County Public Schools
January 2022
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Senator Clarence K. Lam, M.D. (Senate Chair) Delegate Carol L. Krimm (House Chair)
Senator Malcolm L. Augustine Delegate Steven J. Arentz
Senator Adelaide C. Eckardt Delegate Mark S. Chang
Senator George C. Edwards Delegate Nicholas P. Charles II
Senator Katie Fry Hester Delegate Andrea Fletcher Harrison
Senator Cheryl C. Kagan Delegate Trent M. Kittleman
Senator Benjamin F. Kramer Delegate David Moon
Senator Cory V. McCray Delegate Julie Palakovich Carr
Senator Justin D. Ready Delegate Elizabeth G. Proctor
Senator Craig J. Zucker Delegate Geraldine Valentino-Smith
To Obtain Further Information
Office of Legislative Audits
The Warehouse at Camden Yards
351 West Camden Street, Suite 400
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Phone: 410-946-5900
Maryland Relay: 711
TTY: 410-946-5401 ꞏ 301-970-5401
E-mail: OLAWebmaster@ola.state.md.us
Website: www.ola.state.md.us
To Report Fraud
The Office of Legislative Audits operates a Fraud Hotline to report fraud, waste, or abuse involving State
of Maryland government resources. Reports of fraud, waste, or abuse may be communicated anonymously
by a toll-free call to 1-877-FRAUD-11, by mail to the Fraud Hotline, c/o Office of Legislative Audits, or
through the Office’s website.
Nondiscrimination Statement
The Department of Legislative Services does not discriminate on the basis of age, ancestry, color, creed,
marital status, national origin, race, religion, gender, gender identity, sexual orientation, or disability in the
admission or access to its programs, services, or activities. The Department’s Information Officer has been
designated to coordinate compliance with the nondiscrimination requirements contained in Section 35.107
of the United States Department of Justice Regulations. Requests for assistance should be directed to the
Information Officer at 410-946-5400 or 410-970-5400.

--- Page 3 ---
January 25, 2022
Senator Clarence K. Lam, M.D., Senate Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Delegate Carol L. Krimm, House Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Members of Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Annapolis, Maryland
Ladies and Gentlemen:
We conducted an audit of the financial management practices of the Calvert
County Public Schools (CCPS) in accordance with the requirements of the State
Government Article, Section 2-1220(e) of the Annotated Code of Maryland. The
objectives of this audit were to evaluate whether CCPS’ procedures and controls
were effective in accounting for and safeguarding its assets and whether its
policies provided for the efficient use of financial resources.
Our audit disclosed that CCPS’ procurement policies were not sufficiently
comprehensive and were not always consistently used when obtaining goods and
services under intergovernmental cooperative purchasing agreements.
Furthermore, we found that certain components of the payments to bus
contractors did not reflect actual costs or could not be supported.
Our audit also disclosed that CCPS needs to improve internal controls and
accountability in certain areas, including payroll processing, information systems,
and health care claims and fee processing. For example, CCPS did not ensure that
employee access to its automated financial management system applications, such
as procurement, accounts payable, human resources, and payroll, was properly
restricted resulting in numerous employees with unnecessary or incompatible
access capabilities. Additionally, CCPS did not ensure critical human resources
and payroll transactions were independently reviewed for propriety. Specifically,
the processing of new hires, other earnings transactions (including leave payouts),

--- Page 4 ---
and rate increases were not subject to independent review and comparison to
supporting documentation.
In addition, certain security and control risks that existed within CCPS’ computer
network. For example, sensitive personally identifiable information was
maintained without adequate safeguards and identification, and the CCPS
computer network was not properly secured. In this regard, certain servers having
increased security risk were located in CCPS’ internal network rather than being
isolated in a separate protected zone to minimize security threats.
Finally, based on our current audit assessment of significance and risk to our audit
objectives, our audit included a review to determine the status of 8 of the 12
findings contained in our preceding audit report. CCPS satisfactorily addressed 2
of the 8 prior findings we reviewed. The remaining 6 findings are repeated in this
report.
We conducted our audit fieldwork from October 1, 2020 to June 2, 2021. Our
fieldwork was conducted during a period in which the local education agencies
were impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic health crisis. Specifically, beginning
on March 16, 2020, the State Superintendent of Schools decided to close school
and administrative buildings to employees and the public for a two-week period.
This was eventually extended for the remainder of the 2019-2020 school year
with limited access by certain employees. All CCPS facilities were open during
the entire period of our fieldwork and, as a result, the objectives and scope of our
audit were not impacted. To the extent that the COVID-19 crisis continues to
impact CCPS operations, certain recommendations in this report may need to be
adjusted to ensure proper controls under the modified operations.
CCPS’ response to this audit is included as an appendix to this report. We
reviewed the response and noted agreement to our findings and related
recommendations, and while there are other aspects of CCPS’ response which
will require further clarification, we do not anticipate these will require the Joint
Audit and Evaluation Committee’s attention to resolve. Finally, we have edited
CCPS’ response to remove certain vendor names or products and certain detailed
information regarding information systems security, as allowed by our policy.
We wish to acknowledge the cooperation extended to us during our audit by
2

--- Page 5 ---
CCPS and its willingness to address the audit issues and to implement appropriate
corrective actions.
Respectfully submitted,
Gregory A. Hook, CPA
Legislative Auditor
3

--- Page 6 ---
4

--- Page 7 ---
Table of Contents
Background Information 7
Statistical Overview 7
Oversight 8
External Audits 9
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report 10
Findings and Recommendations 12
Revenue and Billing Cycle 12
Federal Funds 13
Procurement and Disbursement Cycle
Finding 1 – Calvert County Public Schools’ (CCPS) procurement 14
policies did not incorporate certain requirements of State law and
recognized best practices when participating in intergovernmental
cooperative purchasing agreements (ICPA). In addition, ICPA invoices
were not always verified to related price lists.
Finding 2 – CCPS did not always obtain Board approval for purchases 17
exceeding $25,000 as required by its policy. Additionally, CCPS’
automated financial management system lacked automated controls to
prevent certain purchases from bypassing requirements for competitive
bidding and Board approval.
Human Resources and Payroll
 Finding 3 – CCPS did not ensure critical human resources and payroll 18
transactions were independently reviewed for propriety.
Equipment Control and Accountability 19
Information Technology
 Finding 4 – CCPS did not ensure employee access to its automated 20
financial management system applications was appropriate and
adequately controlled resulting in employees with unnecessary or
incompatible access.
* Denotes item repeated in full or part from preceding audit report
5

--- Page 8 ---
Finding 5 – Sensitive personally identifiable information was maintained 21
without adequate safeguards and being identified.
 Finding 6 – CCPS did not have malware protection software installed 21
for 46 of 126 of its servers and multiple password controls for certain
applications and the internal computer network were not sufficient.
 Finding 7 – Certain servers were improperly located within the internal 22
network, intrusion detection prevention system coverage did not exist
for untrusted encrypted traffic, and remote access to the internal CCPS
network by faculty, staff, and students used a single authentication
measure rather that the more secure multi-factor authentication.
Facilities Construction, Renovation, and Maintenance 24
Transportation Services
 Finding 8 – Certain elements of the payments to bus contractors could 26
not be supported.
Food Services 27
School Board Oversight 28
Management of Other Risks
 Finding 9 – CCPS did not audit or adequately verify the propriety of 29
health care claims, insurance premiums and administrative fees
paid to the third-party administrator, and the eligibility of enrolled
dependents.
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology 31
Agency Response Appendix
* Denotes item repeated in full or part from preceding audit report
6

--- Page 9 ---
Background Information
Statistical Overview
Enrollment
According to student enrollment records compiled by the Maryland State
Department of Education (MSDE), Calvert County Public Schools (CCPS) ranks
13th in student enrollment among the 24 public school systems in Maryland.
Fiscal year 2020 full-time student enrollment was 16,022 students. CCPS had 25
schools, consisting of 13 elementary schools, 6 middle schools, 4 high schools,
and 2 other types of schools (vocational and special education).
Funding
CCPS revenues consist primarily of funds received from Calvert County, the
State, and the federal government. According to CCPS’ audited financial
statements, revenues from all sources totaled approximately $266.8 million in
fiscal year 2020; including approximately $107.0 million from the State. See
Figure 1 below for CCPS’ revenue sources per enrolled student in fiscal year
2020 according to its audited financial statements.
Figure 1
CCPS Revenue Sources Per Enrolled Student
Fiscal Year 2020
Source: CCPS’ Fiscal Year 2020 Audited Financial Statements and MSDE Data
7

--- Page 10 ---
Expenditures
According to CCPS’ audited financial statements, fiscal year 2020 expenditures
were approximately $261.4 million. The largest expenditure category was
salaries and wages, including benefits, which accounted for approximately 75
percent of total expenditures during fiscal year 2020. According to MSDE
records, during the 2019-2020 school year, CCPS had 2,109 full-time equivalent
positions, which consisted of 1,444 instructional and 665 non-instructional
positions. Instruction accounted for over half of CCPS’ expenditures on a
categorical basis (see Figure 2).
Figure 2
CCPS Expenditures by Category and Selected Statistical Data
Fiscal Year 2020
(amounts in millions)
$156
Instruction
60%
$34
Facilities & Capital Projects
13%
Enrollment
$28
Special Education 11% 16,022
$24
Administration & Support Employees
9%
2,109
$15
Transportation
5% Cost Per Pupil
$5 $16,313
Food Service
2%
Source: CCPS’ Fiscal Year 2020 Audited Financial Statements and MSDE Data
Oversight
CCPS is governed by a local school board, consisting of five elected voting
members and one non-voting student member. The State and the Calvert County
government provide the vast majority of CCPS funding. In addition, MSDE
exercises considerable oversight through the establishment and monitoring of
various financial and academic policies and regulations, in accordance with
certain provisions of the Annotated Code of Maryland. MSDE also works with
CCPS to comply with the requirements and mandates of federal law. The Calvert
County government exercises authority over CCPS primarily through the review
and approval of CCPS’ annual operating and capital budgets.
8

--- Page 11 ---
External Audits
CCPS engages a certified public accounting firm to independently audit its annual
financial statements. The firm performs procedures to verify the amounts and
disclosures in the financial statements. The firm also evaluates the
appropriateness of accounting policies used and the reasonableness of significant
accounting estimates made by management. In the related audit reports, the firm
stated that the financial statements presented fairly, in all material respects, the
financial position of CCPS as of June 30, 2016, 2017, 2018, 2019, and 2020, and
the changes in its financial position and its cash flows for the years then ended in
accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of
America.
Additionally, in accordance with Government Auditing Standards, as part of the
audited financial statements the accounting firm also issued separate reports on
CCPS’ control over financial reporting and its tests of CCPS’ compliance with
certain provisions of laws, regulations, contracts, grant agreements and other
matters. This report is an integral part of the annual independent audited financial
statements. Furthermore, the accounting firm also conducts the Single Audit of
CCPS’ federal grant programs. The Single Audit is intended to provide assurance
to the federal government that adequate internal controls are in place, and the
entity is generally in compliance with program requirements.
We reviewed the aforementioned financial statement audits and Single Audit
reports for fiscal years 2016 through 2020, and examined the related work papers
for the fiscal year 2020 audits, which were the latest available during our audit
fieldwork.
Certain work of the independent certified public accounting firm, which we
determined was reliable, covered areas included in the scope of our audit. As a
result, we did not conduct any audit work related to the following areas:
 State and local government revenues received via wire transfer
 Accounts receivables
 Federal grant activity
 Student Activity Funds
The independent accounting firm did not disclose any material deficiencies in
these areas.
9

--- Page 12 ---
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report
Based on our current assessment of significance and risk relative to our audit
objectives, our audit included a review to determine the status of 8 of the 12
findings contained in our preceding audit report dated July 20, 2016. As
disclosed in Figure 3, we determined that CCPS satisfactorily addressed 2 of these
findings. The remaining 6 findings are repeated in this report.
10

--- Page 13 ---
Figure 3
Status of Preceding Findings
Preceding Implementation
Finding Description
Finding Status
Adequate accountability and control had not been established, as
collections were not recorded and checks restrictively endorsed Not repeated
Finding 1
immediately upon receipt, collections were not properly secured, and
certain collections were not subject to independent deposit verification.
CCPS had not established a process to periodically assess the propriety
of the capabilities assigned to users on its automated procurement and Repeated
Finding 2
accounts payable system; consequently, several employees had (Current Finding 4)
incompatible or unnecessary system capabilities.
Human resources and payroll system user access capabilities were not
Repeated
monitored, and payroll transaction review procedures were inadequate,
Finding 3 (Current Findings 3
as certain necessary automated or manual controls to ensure the
and 4)
propriety of transactions processed were not in place.
Personal service contracts that provided unique employment benefits to
Not repeated
Finding 4 five executive employees valued at $500,000 were executed without
(Not followed up on)
Board approval as required by State law.
CCPS equipment policies were not comprehensive because they did
not address requirement for tagging equipment, specifically the Not repeated
Finding 5
frequency of physical inventories, and account for all non-capitalized (Not followed up on)
sensitive equipment.
CCPS network domain account and password controls did not meet
certain best practice standards and certain accounts unnecessarily had
Finding 6 Not repeated
full access to the student information database. Security event
monitoring was insufficient.
The CCPS intrusion detection prevention system was not used to scan
Repeated
Finding 7 all appropriate network traffic and 20 publicly accessible servers were
(Current Finding 7)
improperly located in the internal network.
Workstations and servers were not sufficiently protected against Repeated
Finding 8
malware. (Current Finding 6)
Certain elements used to determine payments to bus contractors did not
consider market conditions, actual costs, or available discounts, Repeated
Finding 9
resulting in higher payments than necessary for student transportation (Current Finding 8)
services.
Cashiers in school cafeterias could void transactions on their automated Not repeated
Finding 10
cash register systems without independent review and approval. (Not followed up on)
CCPS lacked documentation to substantiate that the cash register Not repeated
Finding 11
closeout process was subject to supervisory review. (Not followed up on)
CCPS did not ensure the propriety of employee and retiree health care
Repeated
Finding 12 claims paid, nor verify the stop-loss insurance was correctly applied
(Current Finding 9)
and plan administrative fees were properly charged.
11

--- Page 14 ---
Findings and Recommendations
Revenue and Billing Cycle
Background
Calvert County Public Schools (CCPS) revenues consist primarily of funds
received from Calvert County, the State, and the federal government. According
to CCPS’ audited financial statements, revenues from all sources totaled
approximately $266.8 million in fiscal year 2020; including approximately $107.0
million from the State.
External Audits
There were similarities between the work of the independent certified public
accounting firm that audited the CCPS financial statements and the objectives of
our audit of certain revenue activities. As a result, we relied on this work to
provide audit coverage for State and local government revenues received via wire
transfer and accounts receivable, for which the auditor’s procedural review and
testing disclosed no material weaknesses or significant deficiencies.
School Activity Funds
Schools collect funds for other purposes such as student activities, clubs, and
school publications. Because they are not considered school revenue, these
school activity funds are accounted for separately by each school, and reported in
summary in the audited financial statements. During fiscal year 2020, school
activity collections totaled $3.7 million and the June 30, 2020 fund balance was
$2.0 million.
CCPS’ Board of Education (the Board) has a fiduciary responsibility to ensure
that school activity funds were used only for intended purposes. CCPS contracts
with an independent certified public accountant (CPA) to conduct annual reviews
of all school activity funds on a rotating basis. The results of the CPA’s reviews
were provided to CCPS management to be addressed. Our review of the CPA’s
findings during fiscal years 2016 through 2020 generally found the management
of these funds to be adequate and that any control weaknesses identified were not
prevalent. The CPA’s testing did not identify any improprieties in regards to the
use of funds.
Conclusion
Based on our current assessment of significance and risk relative to our audit
objectives, we relied on the work of others to provide audit coverage in this area
including procedures and controls related to the accounting for and safeguarding
of cash receipts with respect to revenue and billing. Specifically, we considered
12

--- Page 15 ---
the work performed by the independent certified public accounting firm and
reviews of school activity funds performed by the CPA.
Federal Funds
Background
CCPS receives funds pertaining to federal government programs that are
generally restricted for use for a specific program (such as the School Lunch
Program or Special Education). According to CCPS’ Single Audit, fiscal year
2020 expenditures totaled $9.8 million, not including federally funded fee-for-
service programs such as Medicaid reimbursement for special education services.
Single Audit Reports Disclosed No Material Weaknesses Regarding Federal
Grant Management
There were similarities in the work performed by the independent certified public
accounting firm that conducted the Single Audits of CCPS’ federal grants and the
objectives of our audit in this area. In addition to expressing an opinion on
CCPS’ compliance with the terms of several grant programs, the auditor also
considered the existing internal control structure’s impact on compliance and
audited the required Schedules of Expenditures of Federal Awards (which
includes claimed and reported grant expenditures) for fiscal years 2016 to 2020.
The related reports stated that CCPS complied, in all material respects, with the
requirements applicable to its major federal programs. With respect to internal
controls over compliance with, and the operation of, major federal programs, the
auditor identified two significant deficiencies that were not considered material
weaknesses for fiscal year 2020. CCPS generally agreed to take action to correct
the deficiencies such as revising procedures for performing and documenting
physical inventories of equipment and documenting the approval of substitute
teacher work hours.
Medicaid Funds for Eligible Services
CCPS has established a procedure to identify children eligible for Medicaid-
subsidized services and the services rendered. Medicaid is an entitlement
program for which certain service costs can be reimbursed to CCPS. Medicaid
activity is not covered by the Single Audit of federal grants.
The Maryland State Department of Education’s Interagency Medicaid Monitoring
Team issued a report in August 28, 2020 of the results of its review of 42 student
case files for 80 criteria (including the correct billing of Medicaid for eligible
services). The report found that CCPS was 100 percent compliant with 65 criteria
13

--- Page 16 ---
and 0 percent compliant with 3 criteria (related to a waiver for autism for one
student) and between 79 to 99 percent compliant with the remaining 12 criteria.
According to CCPS records, fiscal year 2020 state and federal reimbursements for
Medicaid-subsidized services totaled approximately $519,000.
Conclusion
Based on our current assessment of significance and risk relative to our audit
objectives, our audit did not include a review of Medicaid subsidized services.
Further, we relied on the work of the independent certified public accounting firm
that conducted the Single Audits for all other work in the federal funds area,
including policies, procedures, and controls with respect to federal grants and
expenditures.
Procurement and Disbursement Cycle
Background
According to the audited financial statements and CCPS records, disbursements
(excluding payroll) totaled $66.7 million during fiscal year 2020. CCPS uses an
automated system for purchases and disbursements. Requisitions are created in
the system by departments and are subject to on-line departmental approvals.
Purchase orders are automatically prepared on the system as a result of the
departmental requisition approvals. The purchasing department generally handles
the solicitation, bid evaluation, and establishment of contracts. The receipt of
goods and services is confirmed by the receiving school or department. Payments
are processed by the finance department through the automated system, which
either prints vendor checks or transfers the funds electronically and then posts the
payment to the financial records.
CCPS’ written procurement policies require that procurements exceeding $25,000
be competitively bid. Contracts and agreements exceeding $25,000 are to be
approved by the Board.
Finding 1
CCPS procurement policies did not incorporate certain requirements of
State law and recognized best practices when participating in
intergovernmental cooperative purchasing agreements (ICPA). In addition,
ICPA invoices were not always verified to related price lists.
Analysis
Certain requirements of State law and recognized best practices were not
incorporated into CCPS policies and were not used consistently by CCPS when
14

--- Page 17 ---
participating in an ICPA. Specifically, our review of CCPS procurement policies
disclosed that the following statutory requirement and critical best practices were
not included.
 Prepare a written assessment of the benefits of using an ICPA, as required
by State law
 Analyze all costs of conducting competitive solicitations
 Research, compare, and evaluate available ICPAs
 Verify ICPA has a clause allowing utilization by other parties
 Verify the ICPA solicitation was competitively bid and publicly advertised
and obtain originating agency’s competitive procurement documentation
(including public advertisements and proposal evaluations)
 Verify terms, scope of services, specifications, and price meet the entity’s
needs
 Execute an addendum of participation with the lead contract agency and
remove or incorporate necessary local terms and conditions
 Obtain a copy of the ICPA and related price lists for invoice verification
We tested CCPS’ participation in seven ICPAs (selected based on significance)
during fiscal years 2019 through 2021 with contract awards totaling
approximately $8.6 million. Our review disclosed that CCPS did not have a
written assessment of the benefits of using an ICPA for any of the ICPAs tested,
as required by State law. In addition, two of the seven best practices (analyzing
the costs of conducting competitive solicitations and researching, comparing, and
evaluating other available ICPAs) were not performed for any of the ICPAs tested
and at least one of the remaining five best practices was not performed for five of
the seven ICPAs.
Incorporating the statutory requirement and best practices into CCPS policies
could help ensure they are consistently used when goods and services are obtained
under an ICPA. In this regard, best practices for allowing utilization by other
parties, verifying terms and scope, and executing addendums of participation were
incorporated into six of the seven ICPAs we reviewed, but were not included in
CCPS’ policies.
CCPS also did not ensure that amounts invoiced by ICPA vendors agreed with the
related contract pricing. Specifically, our test of eight payments totaling $930,000
related to six of the aforementioned ICPAs disclosed that for three payments
totaling $288,000, CCPS had either not obtained the price lists from the lead
agency or had not obtained manufacturer price information to verify it was being
charged the rates, or receiving the discounts, stated in the governing ICPA. In
addition, the invoices for five payments totaling $642,000 were not sufficiently
15

--- Page 18 ---
detailed or contained differing product descriptions and could not be verified to
inclusion in the ICPA.
State law, which legal counsel to the Maryland General Assembly advised us is
applicable to local education agencies, allows the use of cooperative purchasing
arrangements or ICPAs only after the using entity has determined (or assessed) in
writing that the use of such arrangements will provide cost benefits, promote
administrative efficiencies, or promote intergovernmental cooperation1.
Furthermore, the Institute for Public Procurement, formerly known as the
National Institute of Government Purchasing, as well as other public and
educational organizations have published ICPA best practices. These practices
include comprehensive multi-step checklists that require, among other things (as
per the list above), that prospective ICPA users verify that the contract allows
other entities to participate. In addition, ICPA users should ensure that the
contract was awarded through a competitive procurement process, and requires
that addendums be executed documenting their participation and incorporating
local required terms and conditions.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that CCPS
a. incorporate the aforementioned statutory requirement and other
identified and acknowledged best practices into its procurement policies,
and ensure that the performance of the requirement and best practices is
documented when evaluating the participation in ICPAs; and
b. ensure that amounts invoiced by ICPA vendors agreed with the related
contract pricing.
1 Section 13-110 of the State Finance and Procurement Article, of the Annotated Code of
Maryland in part, defines an intergovernmental cooperative purchasing agreement (ICPA). As
defined, an ICPA is a contract that is entered into by at least one governmental entity in a certain
manner, that is available for use by the governmental entity entering the contract and at least one
additional governmental entity, and that is intended to promote efficiency and savings that can
result from intergovernmental cooperative purchasing. The aforementioned law applies to all
ICPAs regardless of the services, goods, or commodities purchased. In addition, Section 5-
112(a)(3) of the Education Article, of the Code provides that local education agencies do not
need to conduct competitive procurements for goods and commodities if they use a contract
awarded by public agencies or intergovernmental purchasing organizations and the originating
procuring agency followed public bidding procedures.
16

--- Page 19 ---
Finding 2
CCPS did not always obtain Board approval for purchases exceeding $25,000
as required by its policy, and its automated system did not have controls to
prevent certain purchases from bypassing requirements for competitive
bidding and Board approval.
Analysis
CCPS did not always obtain Board approval for purchases exceeding $25,000 as
required by its policy, and its automated system did not have controls to prevent
certain purchases from bypassing requirements for competitive bidding and Board
approval.
 CCPS did not obtain required Board of Education approval for certain
purchases. Specifically, our test of 10 purchases totaling $8.9 million, made
during the period from fiscal year 2017 to fiscal year 2021, disclosed that 4
purchases (3 intergovernmental cooperative purchasing agreements and 1 sole
source) totaling approximately $6.6 million were not approved by CCPS’
Board as required by its policy. Of the 10 purchases tested, 7 were
intergovernmental cooperative purchasing agreements, 1 was a sole source
contract, and 2 were competitive bid contracts. Our selection of test items was
based on the materiality of total vendor payment activity during the audit
period, procurements just below approval thresholds, and procurements
resulting from the COVID-19 state of emergency.
Additionally, CCPS did not obtain required Board approval for any of its 24
student transportation contracts. Although the contracts were approved by the
Superintendent, CCPS’ procurement policies do not exempt student
transportation services contracts from Board review and approval. According
to CCPS records, payments to bus contractors totaled approximately $13.2
million in fiscal year 2020.
 CCPS’ automated financial management system did not have automated
controls to prevent purchases that are delegated to individual departments and
schools from bypassing important procurement processes. Once requisitions
were approved by two department or school employees, they automatically
converted into finalized purchase orders regardless of their value.
Consequently, there was no mechanism to identify purchases that exceed the
required $25,000 threshold, which required competitive bidding and Board
approval.
According to CCPS records, it approved 212 purchase orders totaling $44.7
million (each exceeding $25,000) during fiscal year 2020.
17

--- Page 20 ---
Recommendation 2
We recommend that CCPS
a. obtain Board approval for purchases that exceed $25,000 as required by
its policy, including the purchases noted above; and
b. establish system controls to ensure that delegated purchase orders comply
with its procurement policies for competitive bidding and Board approval
requirements.
Human Resources and Payroll
Background
Payroll expense represents the largest single cost component in the CCPS budget.
According to CCPS’ records, fiscal year 2020 salary, wage, and benefit costs
totaled $194.7 million, representing approximately 75 percent of the total
expenditures. According to Maryland State Department of Education reports,
during the 2019-2020 school year CCPS had 2,109 full-time positions, which
consisted of 1,444 instructional positions and 665 non-instructional positions.
CCPS uses automated systems to maintain human resources information, record
employee time, track leave usage, and process and record payroll transactions.
Leave for full time employees is approved by supervisors in a time management
system which is then uploaded to the payroll system to create electronic bi-weekly
time records, and any adjustments are processed by central payroll personnel.
Manual timesheets are used to record overtime hours, which are approved by
supervisors prior to processing by central payroll personnel.
Finding 3
CCPS did not ensure critical human resources and payroll transactions were
independently reviewed for propriety.
Analysis
CCPS did not ensure critical human resources and payroll transactions entered in
the system were independently reviewed for propriety. Specifically, the
processing of new hires, other earnings transactions (including leave payouts),
and rate increases were not subject to independent review and comparison to
supporting documentation. Although we were advised that system reports were
produced for certain transactions, the employees that reviewed the reports were
not independent of the payroll process. Our tests of 10 employee additions or
terminations, 10 other earnings transactions totaling approximately $420,000, and
10 salary increases totaling approximately $197,000 did not disclose any
inappropriate transactions.
18

--- Page 21 ---
A similar condition regarding the lack of supervisory review and approval of
critical transactions was commented upon in our two preceding audit reports.
Recommendation 3
We recommend that CCPS perform a documented independent supervisory
review of human resources and payroll transactions entered in the system to
appropriate supporting documentation, at least on a test basis (repeat).
Equipment Control and Accountability
Background
According to CCPS’ audited financial statements, the undepreciated value of its
capital equipment inventory was $10.4 million as of June 30, 2020. CCPS
maintains centralized automated records for equipment with a cost of $5,000 or
more (including assets capitalized for financial statement purposes). In addition,
CCPS’ Department of Information Technology maintains inventory records of
certain computer hardware assigned to schools, students, and employees.
Conclusion
Based on our current assessment of significance and risk relative to our audit
objectives, our audit did not include a review of policies, procedures, and controls
with respect to the equipment area of operations.
Information Technology
Background
The CCPS Department of Information Technology maintains and administers
CCPS’ computer network and computer operations and supports major
information system applications. CCPS operates a wide area network, with
internet connectivity, which connects the individual schools’ local networks to the
computer resources located at the CCPS headquarters. The Department of
Information Technology maintains a computer room at the headquarters location
in which numerous computer servers operate to support CCPS information system
applications. CCPS operates a finance application that includes modules for
payroll, human resources, accounts payable, fixed assets, and purchasing and a
student information application that includes modules for grades, student
demographics, attendance, scheduling, and discipline.
19

--- Page 22 ---
Finding 4
CCPS did not ensure employee access to its automated financial management
system applications was appropriate and adequately controlled resulting in
employees with unnecessary or incompatible access.
Analysis
CCPS did not ensure employee access to modules on its automated financial
management system applications (such as, purchasing, account payable, human
resources, and payroll) was appropriate and adequately controlled resulting in
employees with unnecessary or incompatible access. Although we were advised
by CCPS management that it periodically reviewed employee access, the review
has not been formally documented since August 2017 and did not include an
assessment of whether employees had incompatible or unnecessary access.
Our test of certain critical procurement and accounts payable access capabilities
assigned to 11 employees disclosed 4 employees had the ability to process
disbursements and update vendor information without independent review and
approval. Furthermore, our test of certain critical human resource and payroll
access capabilities assigned to 19 other employees disclosed 4 employees who
processed payroll transactions that had unnecessary access to human resources
functions including changing pay rate information and personnel data. As a
result, these employees could improperly process accounts payable or human
resource/payroll transactions and such transactions would not be readily detected.
A similar condition regarding incompatible system access to human resources and
payroll capabilities has been commented upon in our two preceding audit reports.
Recommendation 4
We recommend that CCPS
a. periodically perform a documented review of employee access capabilities
to ensure all access is appropriate and incompatible duties are segregated
(repeat); and
b. correct any improper capabilities or control issues, including those noted
above.
20

--- Page 23 ---
Finding 5
Sensitive personally identifiable information was maintained without
adequate safeguards and being identified.
Analysis
Sensitive personally identifiable information (PII) was maintained without
adequate safeguards and being identified. CCPS operated a computer system
which contained a significant amount of sensitive PII. As of January 5, 2021, we
noted that this system’s database included a significant number of unique
sensitive information records which were maintained in a manner that made the
information vulnerable to improper disclosure. CCPS personnel also advised us
that this sensitive PII was not subject to other substantial mitigating security
controls.
Furthermore, CCPS had not performed an inventory of its systems to identify all
stored sensitive PII, determined if it was necessary to retain the PII, and deleted
PII identified as unnecessary. Detailed aspects of this finding were omitted from
this report; however, the related detailed information, including a sensitive
information record count, was previously shared with CCPS for purposes of
implementing the following recommendation.
Best practices as prescribed by the State of Maryland Information Technology
Security Manual require that agencies protect confidential data using adequate
safeguards and/or other substantial mitigating controls.
Recommendation 5
We recommend that CCPS
a. implement appropriate information security safeguards for its stored
sensitive PII; and
b. perform an annual inventory of all of its systems, identify all sensitive PII,
and delete all unnecessary PII.
Finding 6
CCPS did not have malware protection software installed for 46 of 126 of its
servers, and multiple password controls for certain applications and the
internal computer network were not sufficient.
Analysis
CCPS’ malware protection controls for servers and multiple password controls for
certain applications and the internal computer network were not sufficient.
21

--- Page 24 ---
 As of March 2021, our review determined that 46 of 126 servers did not have
malware protection software installed. Best practices within the State of
Maryland’s Information Security Policy require that agencies, at a minimum,
must protect against malicious code (viruses, worms, Trojan horses) by
implementing anti-malware solutions that, to the extent possible, include a
capability for automatic updates. A similar condition was commented upon in
our preceding audit report.
 Multiple password controls over CCPS’ internal network and its financial and
student information systems were not in accordance with best practices as
specified by the State’s Information Technology Security Manual. For
example, password complexity, minimum age, and expiration were either not
enforced or did not provide a sufficient level of security for various groups of
accounts used for accessing CCPS’ network or critical applications.
Recommendation 6
We recommend that CCPS
a. ensure that malware protection software is installed and maintained on
all servers (repeat); and
b. establish password controls over its internal network, financial and
student information system applications that comply with the
recommended controls prescribed by the State’s Information Technology
Security Manual.
Finding 7
Certain servers were improperly located within the internal network,
intrusion detection prevention system coverage did not exist for untrusted
encrypted traffic, and remote access to the internal CCPS network by
faculty, staff, and students used a single authentication measure rather than
the more secure multi-factor authentication.
Analysis
CCPS’ computer network had certain insecure elements. The following three
conditions affected network security.
 Certain servers were not properly isolated in a separate protected network
zone from the CCPS internal network to minimize security risks. These
servers, by their nature and lack of proper isolation, created unnecessary
security risk for the internal network. Best practices in the State of Maryland
Information Technology Security Manual include placing such servers in an
external protected zone to protect those servers as well as the entity’s internal
22

--- Page 25 ---
network. Detailed aspects of this finding were omitted from this report;
however, the related information was previously shared with CCPS for the
purposes of implementing appropriate corrective actions. A similar condition
was commented upon in our preceding audit report.
 Intrusion detection prevention system (IDPS) coverage did not exist for
untrusted encrypted traffic entering the CCPS network. CCPS operated
network appliances having integrated IDPS, which had the capability to
decrypt and analyze encrypted network traffic received; however, this feature
was not enabled. Additionally, server (host-based) intrusion prevention
system coverage did not exist for this untrusted encrypted traffic. We
identified several firewall rules that allowed encrypted traffic from any source
to numerous CCPS internal network destinations without IDPS coverage.
This absence of IDPS coverage creates a network security risk as the untrusted
encrypted traffic could contain undetected malicious data. Best practices in
the State of Maryland Information Technology Security Manual require
protection against malicious code and attacks by using IDPS to monitor
system events, detect attacks, and identify unauthorized use of information
systems and/or confidential information. A similar condition was commented
upon in our preceding audit report.
 We determined that remote access by faculty, staff, and students to CCPS’
internal network, using a virtual private network (VPN) connection, required a
stronger security authentication measure than was in place during the audit.
CCPS personnel advised us that approximately 18,000 individuals across the
above user categories had such VPN-based remote network access capability.
These remote VPN connections into CCPS’ internal network did not require
multi-factor authentication (MFA) for establishing access. Instead, access
was provided based upon only single factor authentication. MFA uses two or
more different credential factors to authenticate user network connections.
Access to critical networks and resources requires layers of security
protections, which include use of MFA, to help prevent security risks tied to
compromised user credentials. Best practices, as specified in the State of
Maryland Information Technology Security Manual, require Maryland
agencies to ensure that MFA mechanisms are employed for all remote access
to networks.
Recommendation 7
We recommend that CCPS
a. isolate servers, as appropriate, in a separate protected network zone to
limit security exposures to the internal network segment (repeat);
23

--- Page 26 ---
b. perform a documented review and assessment of its network security
risks and identify how IDPS coverage should be applied to its network for
all untrusted traffic, including encrypted traffic, and implement this
coverage (repeat); and
c. implement multi-factor authentication for remote VPN connections into
the CCPS network by all users.
Facilities Construction, Renovation, and Maintenance
Background
CCPS employs a staff of 218 employees to maintain 25 schools (including
vocational and special education) and a number of other facilities (such as
administrative and support offices). According to its fiscal year 2021 Capital
Improvement Plan, necessary construction, major renovations, and systemic
improvements to CCPS’ facilities over the next six years are estimated to cost
approximately $118 million.
CCPS Capital Projects Were Properly Approved and Related Expenditures
Were Generally Properly Supported
Our review of the two highest dollar value construction-related procurements
awarded during fiscal years 2017 and 2019 totaling $72.4 million disclosed that
both contracts were competitively procured and properly approved by the Board.
In addition, our test of four invoices totaling $7.4 million for these contracts
disclosed that the invoices were properly supported and the amounts invoiced
were in accordance with contract terms.
Processes are in Place to Promote Ongoing Facility Maintenance and to
Minimize Energy Costs
CCPS has processes in place to promote ongoing facility maintenance and to
minimize energy costs. For example, CCPS provides preventive maintenance of
its buildings and equipment to prevent emergency repairs. In addition, CCPS
reviews utility billings to monitor energy usage and related costs. CCPS also has
written policies that encourage both students and employees to be aware of and
limit their energy use. CCPS participates in various programs with the local
utility companies such as the Demand Response Program that reduces energy
usage during various non-peak periods, like the summer months, and the
EMPOWER program whereby CCPS receives rebates for the installation of
eligible energy efficient equipment.
24

--- Page 27 ---
Conclusion
Our audit did not disclose any significant deficiencies in the design or operation
of CCPS’ internal control over the facilities construction, renovation, and
maintenance financial-related areas of operations reviewed. Our audit also did
not disclose any significant instances of noncompliance with applicable laws,
rules, or regulations.
Transportation Services
Background
According to statistics compiled by the Maryland State Department of Education
(MSDE), CCPS has approximately 15,606 students eligible to receive student
transportation service. CCPS reported that 3.3 million route miles were traveled
to transport students for the 2018-2019 school year and 2.3 million route miles for
the 2019-2020 school year. The decline in route miles was attributed to students
not requiring transportation during virtual learning as a result of COVID-19.
These students were transported using 138 contractor-owned buses. According to
CCPS financial records, fiscal year 2019 transportation costs totaled $14.7 million
with $12.9 million (88 percent) representing payments for the contracted bus
services and fiscal year 2020 transportation costs totaled $14.8 million with $13.2
million (89 percent) representing payments for the contracted bus services.
CCPS bus contracts are for the 12-year service life of the contractor’s buses,
subject to the Board’s right to terminate the contract for various reasons (such as,
available funding, cause, contractor insolvency, termination of routes to reduce or
consolidate routes). As noted in Figure 4 below, payments to bus contractors
consist of several components, primarily including hourly reimbursements for
drivers, a per-mile maintenance fee, and fuel costs. Additional components
include a per-vehicle allotment (PVA) intended as reimbursement for the cost of
purchasing a bus and a flat rate for return on investment, reimbursement for non-
routine bus trips such as field trips and athletic events, an operations fee that
represents a reimbursement of certain administrative costs (such as bus driver
training, physicals, and drug testing), and other costs such as the fee for spare
buses, contributions to the benefit trust, and driver sick leave reimbursement.
25

--- Page 28 ---
Figure 4
Cost Components for Bus Contractor Payments
Fiscal Year 2019*
(dollar amounts in millions)
Cost Component Amount
Reimbursements for Drivers Hourly Rates $4.7 36%
Maintenance Fee and Fuel Costs $4.5 35%
Per-vehicle Allotment (PVA) $1.9 15%
School Activities (Field Trips, Athletics) and
$0.7 5%
Summer School
Operations Fee $0.6 5%
Other Costs - Spare Buses, Benefit Trust
$0.5 4%
Contribution, Driver Sick Leave
Total $12.9
* Fiscal year 2019 was used for our analysis since it represented a full year of bus operations,
whereas bus operations for fiscal year 2020 were shortened due to the onset of the COVID-19
pandemic in March 2020 that led to school closures, virtual learning, and the decline in student
transportation services.
Source: CCPS Records
Finding 8
Certain elements of the payments to bus contractors could not be supported.
Analysis
Certain elements of the payments to bus contractors could not be supported.
Based on the 3.3 million route miles traveled, during the 2018-2019 school year,
the CCPS cost per mile for transporting students was 22 cents per mile higher
($4.43) than the average cost per mile for four other similarly sized school
systems ($4.21).
 CCPS could not support the appropriateness of the estimated $3.3 million it
paid to bus contractors for per-mile bus maintenance costs ($0.99 per mile)
during fiscal year 2019. The per-mile bus maintenance cost is intended to
fund the expenses incurred by the bus contractors for maintaining the bus. A
similar condition was commented upon in our preceding report.
 CCPS could not document how it determined the reasonableness of
administrative costs, known as the operations fee, annually paid to bus
contractors. According to CCPS records, operations fee payments for all
26

--- Page 29 ---
contractors totaled $575,000 during fiscal year 2019. The operations fee is
intended to reimburse the bus contractors for administrative costs and this
amount has increased since 2014 without any documented estimates to
support the basis for the fee or the increases to the fee.2 A similar condition
was commented upon in our preceding report.
 The standard contract language used by CCPS for its bus contracts did not
include a right to audit provision. Such a provision would allow CCPS to
verify the contractors’ actual costs of purchasing and maintaining the buses
when negotiating the PVA, plus hourly reimbursements for drivers, the per-
mile maintenance fee, fuel costs, and the annual administrative fees. The
State of Maryland has established a preference in regulation that all contracts
require contractors to make their records available for audit by authorized
representatives of the State at all reasonable times.
Recommendation 8
We recommend that CCPS
a. use actual documented maintenance costs, cost studies, or independently
derived estimates for establishing contractor rates for per-mile
maintenance costs (repeat),
b. document the reasonableness of the annual administrative costs
(operations fee) paid to contractors (repeat), and
c. include provisions to audit the bus contractors in future contracts and use
it to determine the actual cost of operating contractor buses.
Food Services
Background
According to CCPS’ audited financial statements, food service operating
expenditures totaled $4.7 million in fiscal year 2020, and were primarily funded
with federal funds totaling $1.6 million and food sales totaling $3.0 million.
According to CCPS records, in fiscal year 2020 CCPS had 116 food service
positions for its 25 schools, consisting of 108 cafeteria positions and 8
administrative positions.
According to MSDE records, 19.5 percent of CCPS students qualified for free and
reduced-price meals as of October 31, 2019.
2 Contractors receive differing annual operations fee payments based on the year that their bus was
placed into service ($1,501 for buses placed into service prior to fiscal year 2014; $5,464 for
buses placed into service between fiscal years 2014 and 2018; $7,780 or $7,926 for buses placed
into service after fiscal year 2019 with the higher amount for special education buses).
27

--- Page 30 ---
Conclusion
Based on our current assessment of significance and risk relative to our audit
objectives, our audit did not include a review of policies, procedures, and controls
with respect to the Food Service financial area of operations.
School Board Oversight
Background
The Calvert County Board of Education (the Board) is composed of five elected
adult members and one non-voting student member. As noted in the Background
Information section, the Board contracted with a certified public accounting firm
for independent audits of the CCPS financial statements and federal programs.
The Board does not have any of its own committees. However, a citizen advisory
committee was established, which meets with the Board periodically and serves as
a channel for public concerns.
CCPS Adopted an Ethics Policy that Met the Requirements of State Law
The CCPS Board has adopted a detailed ethics policy that conforms to State Law
and was approved by the State Ethics Commission. The policy is applicable to
both Board members and CCPS employees and includes provisions for conflicts
of interest and financial disclosures by Board members and certain employees.
Specifically, annual financial disclosure statements are required to be filed by
Board members, candidates for the Board, the Superintendent, and other
administrators (assistant superintendents, executive directors, directors, and
school principals) by April 30th of each year.
In accordance with the policy, CCPS established an Ethics Panel consisting of
three members appointed by the Board to interpret ethics policies and provide
advice on policy implementation. The Panel also reviews and rules on any
reported complaints of ethics violations. Our review of the records for Board
members and CCPS employees required to submit financial disclosure forms for
calendar year 2019 disclosed that all forms were submitted as required.
Conclusion
Our audit did not disclose any reportable conditions related to school board
oversight.
28

--- Page 31 ---
Management of Other Risks
Healthcare Background
CCPS is self-insured and ultimately covers the cost of the medical services
received by its employees, dependents, and retirees. CCPS negotiates contracts
with a third-party administrator (TPA) firm for health care claims processing
services for employee and retiree medical, vision, dental, pharmacy costs, and for
stop-loss insurance coverage. CCPS pays the TPA a monthly subscription charge
based on the number of participants and their medical coverage, and an
administrative fee. The monthly payment also includes the stop-loss insurance,
which indemnifies CCPS against health insurance claim amounts that exceed
$300,000 per participant per plan year (as of the 2020-2021 plan year).
Medical providers submit claims to the TPA who pays them on behalf of CCPS.
In a year-end settlement process, for the plan year ending June 30th, the TPA nets
the amount of medical claims it paid, and related fees, excess stop-loss amounts
and rebates, against the monthly subscription charges billed to and paid by CCPS
to determine any excess amount due from or to be reimbursed to either party.
CCPS contracts with a consultant to help manage the health plans. The consultant
assisted CCPS with the procurement of its TPA contract, performs data analysis
of the health services utilization and costs, provides recommendations on
potential rate changes, evaluates the merits of the health plan proposals,
reconciles paid claims to the year-end settlements, and determines the
reasonableness of stop-loss costs paid by the TPA.
As of April 1, 2021, CCPS health insurance benefits were provided to
approximately 6,700 enrolled employees, dependents, and retirees. According to
TPA records, during the 2019-2020 contract year health care payments totaled
$24.9 million, including $1.5 million for administrative fees and $815,000 for
stop-loss insurance coverage.
Finding 9
CCPS did not audit or adequately verify the propriety of health care claims,
insurance premiums and administrative fees paid to the TPA, and the
eligibility of enrolled dependents.
Analysis
CCPS did not audit or adequately verify the propriety of health care claims,
insurance premiums, and administrative fees paid to the TPA, and the eligibility
of enrolled dependents.
29

--- Page 32 ---
 CCPS did not audit the medical claims paid on its behalf by the TPA to ensure
that the services were actually provided, covered by the health plans,
appropriately priced, and accurately reported on the year-end settlement.
Furthermore, CCPS did not receive detailed claims data from the TPA to
verify the propriety of the aforementioned items and accuracy of the year-end
settlement. The State of Maryland’s Office of Personnel Services and
Benefits administers self-insured health plans for State employees and
contracts for comprehensive reviews of claims paid by plan administrators. A
similar condition was commented upon in our preceding audit report.
 CCPS did not adequately compare the number of plan participants billed by
the TPA against its own records to ensure that administrative fees and
premiums paid by CCPS were for enrolled plan participants. Specifically, the
comparison performed by CCPS did not include retiree plan participants and
only focused on employment changes noted in the CCPS records. A similar
condition was commented upon in our preceding audit report.
 CCPS did not ensure all enrolled dependents were eligible to participate in the
CCPS health plan. Although CCPS had established dependent eligibility
verification procedures and enrollment documentation criteria, CCPS had not
performed a dependent eligibility audit since 2010 to identify previously
enrolled dependents that were no longer eligible to be plan participants.
We have noted that certain other local school systems utilize their independent
health plan consultants to aid in the performance of the aforementioned actions.
Recommendation 9
We recommend that CCPS
a. conduct audits of the propriety of health care claims paid, and ensure
documentation is obtained supporting amounts reported on the year-end
settlement by the TPA (repeat);
b. perform documented comparisons of its records of enrolled participants
to TPA invoices and contract rates to determine the propriety of
premiums and administrative fees billed (repeat); and
c. conduct unannounced periodic audits of enrolled dependents to ensure
that previously enrolled dependents were still eligible to be enrolled in the
plans.
30

--- Page 33 ---
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We conducted a performance audit to evaluate the effectiveness and efficiency of
the financial management practices of the Calvert County Public Schools (CCPS).
We conducted this audit under the authority of the State Government Article,
Section 2-1220(e) of the Annotated Code of Maryland, and performed it in
accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards. Those
standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient,
appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and
conclusions based on our audit objectives. We believe that the evidence obtained
provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit
objectives.
We had two broad audit objectives:
1. Evaluate whether the CCPS procedures and controls were effective in
accounting for and safeguarding its assets.
2. Evaluate whether the CCPS policies provided for the efficient use of
financial resources.
In planning and conducting our audit of CCPS, we focused on 11 major financial-
related areas of operations as approved on December 6, 2016 by the Joint Audit
and Evaluation Committee of the Maryland General Assembly in accordance with
the enabling legislation. The scope of the work performed in each of these areas
was based on our assessments of significance and risk. Therefore, our follow-up
on the status of findings included in our preceding audit report on CCPS dated
July 20, 2016, was limited to those findings that were applicable to the current
audit scope for each of the 11 areas.
The audit objectives excluded reviewing and assessing student achievement,
curriculum, teacher performance, and other academic-related areas and functions.
Also, we did not evaluate the CCPS Comprehensive Education Master Plan or
related updates, and we did not review the activities, financial or other, of any
parent teacher association, group, or funds not under the local board of
education’s direct control or management.
To accomplish our objectives, we reviewed applicable State laws and regulations
pertaining to public elementary and secondary education, as well as policies and
procedures issued and established by CCPS. We also interviewed personnel at
CCPS and the Maryland State Department of Education (MSDE), and staff at
other local school systems in Maryland (as appropriate). Our audit procedures
31

--- Page 34 ---
included inspections of documents and records, and to the extent practicable,
observations of CCPS operations. We also tested transactions and performed
other auditing procedures that we considered necessary to achieve our objectives,
generally for the period from July 14, 2016 to October 15, 2020. Generally,
transactions were selected for testing based on auditor judgment, which primarily
considers risk, the timing or dollar amount of the transaction, or the significance
of the transaction to the area of operation reviewed. As a matter of course, we do
not normally use sampling in our tests, so unless otherwise specifically indicated,
neither statistical nor non-statistical audit sampling was used to select the
transactions tested. Therefore, unless sampling is specifically indicated in a
finding, the results from any tests conducted or disclosed by us cannot be used to
project those results to the entire population from which the test items were
selected. For certain areas within the scope of the audit, we relied on the work
performed by the independent accounting firm that annually audits CCPS’
financial statements and conducts the federal Single Audit.
We used certain statistical data—including financial and operational—compiled
by MSDE from various informational reports submitted by the Maryland local
school systems. This information was used in this audit report for background or
informational purposes, and was deemed reasonable.
We also extracted data from the CCPS automated financial management system
for the purpose of testing expenditure and payroll transactions. We performed
various audit procedures on the relevant data and determined the data were
sufficiently reliable for the purposes the data were used during the audit.
CCPS’ management is responsible for establishing and maintaining effective
internal control. Internal control is a process designed to provide reasonable
assurance that objectives pertaining to the reliability of financial records;
effectiveness and efficiency of operations including safeguarding of assets; and
compliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations are achieved. As
provided in Government Auditing Standards, there are five components of
internal control: control environment, risk assessment, control activities,
information and communication, and monitoring. Each of the five components,
when significant to the audit objectives, and as applicable to CCPS, were
considered by us during the course of this audit.
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate. In addition
to the conditions included in this report, other findings were communicated to
32

--- Page 35 ---
CCPS that were not deemed significant and, consequently, did not warrant
inclusion in this report.
We conducted our audit fieldwork from October 1, 2020 to June 2, 2021. On
March 16, 2020, due to the COVID-19 pandemic health crisis, the State
Superintendent of Schools decided to close school and administrative buildings to
employees and the public for a two-week period. This was eventually extended
for the remainder of the 2019-2020 school year with limited access by certain
employees. All CCPS buildings were open during the entire period of our
fieldwork, so the objectives and scope of our audit were not impacted. To the
extent that the COVID-19 crisis continues to impact CCPS operations, certain
recommendations in this report may need to be adjusted to ensure proper controls
under the modified operations.
The CCPS response to our findings and recommendations is included as an
Appendix to this report. As prescribed in the State Government Article, Section
2-1224 of the Annotated Code of Maryland, we will advise CCPS regarding the
results of our review of its response.
33

--- Page 36 ---
APPENDIX

--- Page 37 ---
Calvert County Public Schools
Agency Response Form
Procurement and Disbursement Cycle
Finding 1
CCPS procurement policies did not incorporate certain requirements of State law and
recognized best practices when participating in intergovernmental cooperative purchasing
agreements (ICPA). In addition, ICPA invoices were not always verified to related price
lists.
We recommend that CCPS
a. incorporate the aforementioned statutory requirement and other identified and
acknowledged best practices into its procurement policies, and ensure that the
performance of the requirement and best practices is documented when evaluating the
participation in ICPAs; and
b. ensure that amounts invoiced by ICPA vendors agreed with the related contract
pricing.
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide CCPS has no concerns with the factual accuracy of the finding.
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 1a Agree Estimated Completion Date: 7/1/21
Please provide details of CCPS has taken corrective action by developing and implementing a
corrective action or comprehensive checklist that is completed when obtaining goods or
explain disagreement. services under an ICPA. This checklist and supporting documentation
are maintained in the contract file.
Recommendation 1b Agree Estimated Completion Date: 7/1/21
Please provide details of CCPS has taken corrective action by implementing the use of the bid
corrective action or price lists, a part of the checklist referenced in Section 1a, above, to
explain disagreement. ensure that the amounts invoiced by ICPA vendors agree with the related
contract pricing.
Page 1 of 9

--- Page 38 ---
Calvert County Public Schools
Agency Response Form
Finding 2
CCPS did not always obtain Board approval for purchases exceeding $25,000 as required
by its policy, and its automated system did not have controls to prevent certain purchases
from bypassing requirements for competitive bidding and Board approval.
We recommend that CCPS
a. obtain Board approval for purchases that exceed $25,000 as required by its policy,
including the purchases noted above; and
b. establish system controls to ensure that delegated purchase orders comply with its
procurement policies for competitive bidding and Board approval requirements.
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide CCPS has no concerns with the factual accuracy of the finding.
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 2a Agree Estimated Completion Date: 8/17/21
Please provide details of CCPS has taken corrective action by developing and implementing a
corrective action or daily report to show all purchase requisitions pending approval,
explain disagreement. including the total amount of each purchase requisition. Purchase
requisitions with a total amount exceeding $25,000 will be reviewed to
determine if a competitive bid process is required. CCPS will confirm
its procurement procedures are met prior to processing any such orders,
including approval by the Board of Education.
Recommendation 2b Agree Estimated Completion Date: 8/17/21
Please provide details of CCPS has taken corrective action by developing and implementing a
corrective action or daily report to show all purchase requisitions pending approval,
explain disagreement. including the total amount of each purchase requisition. Purchase
requisitions with a total amount exceeding $25,000 will be reviewed to
determine if a competitive bid process is required. CCPS will confirm
its procurement procedures are met prior to processing any such orders.
Page 2 of 9

--- Page 39 ---
Calvert County Public Schools
Agency Response Form
Human Resources and Payroll
Finding 3
CCPS did not ensure critical human resources and payroll transactions were
independently reviewed for propriety.
We recommend that CCPS perform a documented independent supervisory review of
human resources and payroll transactions entered in the system to appropriate supporting
documentation, at least on a test basis (repeat).
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide CCPS has no concerns with the factual accuracy of the finding.
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 3 Agree Estimated Completion Date: 8/25/21
Please provide details of As a result of the finding noted during the previous legislative audit,
corrective action or CCPS implemented the process of having an administrator review
explain disagreement. selected payroll transactions prior to the pay runs. We have received
clarification from the legislative auditors that the expectation of the OLA
is that the review will be conducted after the pay runs. CCPS will add
the post pay run review by an administrator to our existing practices.
Page 3 of 9

--- Page 40 ---
Calvert County Public Schools
Agency Response Form
Information Technology
Finding 4
CCPS did not ensure employee access to its automated financial management system
applications was appropriate and adequately controlled resulting in employees with
unnecessary or incompatible access.
We recommend that CCPS
a. periodically perform a documented review of employee access capabilities to ensure all
access is appropriate and incompatible duties are segregated (repeat); and
b. correct any improper capabilities or control issues, including those noted above.
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide CCPS has no concerns with the factual accuracy of the finding.
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 4a Agree Estimated Completion Date: 11/1/2021
Please provide details of DIT will collaborate with HR, Finance, and Procurement to review the
corrective action or security reports annually to:
explain disagreement. 1. Ensure that security roles accurately reflect the job
responsibilities of their employees
2. Guarantee that segregation of duties are clear and accurate
3. Document and store their findings
4. Inform DIT so that the necessary security modifications are made
within our ERP system
Recommendation 4b Agree Estimated Completion Date: 11/15/2021
Please provide details of Part 4 of the process above will ensure that DIT is informed of the
corrective action or security changes at least annually. DIT will enter the requested security
explain disagreement. changes within one week of being informed. Once the changes are
executed, DIT will ask HR, Finance, and Procurement to sign off on a
form that documents the validation. This validation will be added to the
documentation found in #3 of the process outlined above in
Recommendation A.
Page 4 of 9

--- Page 41 ---
Calvert County Public Schools
Agency Response Form
Finding 5
Sensitive personally identifiable information was maintained without adequate safeguards
and being identified.
We recommend that CCPS
a. implement appropriate information security safeguards for its stored sensitive PII; and
b. perform an annual inventory of all of its systems, identify all sensitive PII, and delete all
unnecessary PII.
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide CCPS has no concerns with the factual accuracy of the finding.
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 5a Agree Estimated Completion Date: 7/1/2022
Please provide details of CCPS will review PII retained in the student information system against
corrective action or the data requirements outlined in the 2020 Maryland Students Records
explain disagreement. System Manual and our Medicare reimbursement vendor to ensure that
only necessary PII is retained.
Recommendation 5b Agree Estimated Completion Date: 7/15/2022
Please provide details of A partial review of PII in the financial system is performed annually in
corrective action or April as part of the open enrollment preparation. The review will be
explain disagreement. expanded to scan for and include any additional PII information. A PII
review process for the student information system will be added to the
annual rollover process.
Page 5 of 9

--- Page 42 ---
Calvert County Public Schools
Agency Response Form
Finding 6
CCPS did not have malware protection software installed for 46 of 126 of its servers, and
multiple password controls for certain applications and the internal computer network
were not sufficient.
We recommend that CCPS
a. ensure that malware protection software is installed and maintained on all servers
(repeat); and
b. establish password controls over its internal network, financial and student information
system applications that comply with the recommended controls prescribed by the
State’s Information Technology Security Manual.
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide CCPS has no concerns with the factual accuracy of the finding.
additional comments as CCPS has malware protection installed on all servers.
deemed necessary. All Staff is assigned to Primary PSO.
Recommendation 6a Agree Estimated Completion Date: 10/1/2021
Please provide details of All CCPS servers have malware protection software installed. Servers
corrective action or are centrally managed using a malware protection central
explain disagreement. console. Malware is automatically remediated on all servers running
malware protection software.
Recommendation 6b Agree Estimated Completion Date: 11/1/2021
Please provide details of CCPS password length is eight characters, and all staff are authenticated
corrective action or through Multi Factor Authentication when authenticating against our
explain disagreement. primary cloud service. We do not plan on increasing the password length
to 12 characters. We will ask a key vendor to apply MFA protocols
when staff access enterprise student and financial systems while off the
CCPS Network.
Page 6 of 9

--- Page 43 ---
Calvert County Public Schools
Agency Response Form
Finding 7
Certain servers were improperly located within the internal network, intrusion detection
prevention system coverage did not exist for untrusted encrypted traffic, and remote access
to the internal CCPS network by faculty, staff, and students used a single authentication
measure rather than the more secure multi-factor authentication.
We recommend that CCPS
a. isolate servers, as appropriate, in a separate protected network zone to limit security
exposures to the internal network segment (repeat);
b. perform a documented review and assessment of its network security risks and identify
how IDPS coverage should be applied to its network for all untrusted traffic, including
encrypted traffic, and implement this coverage (repeat); and
c. implement multi-factor authentication for remote VPN connections into the CCPS
network by all users.
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide CCPS has no concerns with the factual accuracy of the finding.
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 7a Agree Estimated Completion Date: 8/26/2021
Please provide details of Granular controls have been implemented and all servers have been
corrective action or isolated to a sperate protected network zone.
explain disagreement.
Recommendation 7b Agree Estimated Completion Date: 9/2/2022
Please provide details of CCPS will review and implement IDPS as outlined in the
corrective action or recommendation above.
explain disagreement.
Recommendation 7c Agree Estimated Completion Date: 8/4/2021
Please provide details of CCPS has restricted VPN access to staff and MFA has been
corrective action or implemented on the VPN.
explain disagreement.
Page 7 of 9

--- Page 44 ---
Calvert County Public Schools
Agency Response Form
Transportation Services
Finding 8
Certain elements of the payments to bus contractors could not be supported.
We recommend that CCPS
a. use actual documented maintenance costs, cost studies, or independently derived
estimates for establishing contractor rates for per-mile maintenance costs (repeat),
b. document the reasonableness of the annual administrative costs (operations fee) paid to
contractors (repeat), and
c. include provisions to audit the bus contractors in future contracts and use it to
determine the actual cost of operating contractor buses.
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide CCPS has no concerns with the factual accuracy of the finding.
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 8a Agree Estimated Completion Date: 6/30/2023
Please provide details of Following the last legislative audit, CCPS launched an initiative to
corrective action or develop a formula for determining a reasonable M & O factor based
explain disagreement. upon the maintenance costs incurred over the 12-year life of a bus. We
had begun working on this process which included working with some
of our bus contractors. However, the work was halted when the COVID-
19 pandemic hit. We plan to resume this work this year.
Recommendation 8b Agree Estimated Completion Date: 6/30/2023
Please provide details of CCPS will attempt to develop a calculation to support the administrative
corrective action or cost/operations fee paid annually to the bus contractors. We will utilize a
explain disagreement. methodology similar to that to be used to determine the reasonableness
of the M & O factor.
Recommendation 8c Agree Estimated Completion Date: 11/1/2021
Please provide details of CCPS obtained legal counsel on including provisions to audit the bus
corrective action or contractors in future contracts and using the results of said audits to
explain disagreement. determine the actual cost of operating contractor buses. The attorney has
advised us that bus contractors are just like any other vendor, and we do
not/cannot audit vendors. The attorney stated that we could only conduct
an audit if the bus contractors agreed to the insertion of such a provision
in the transportation contract.
Page 8 of 9

--- Page 45 ---
Calvert County Public Schools
Agency Response Form
Management of Other Risks
Finding 9
CCPS did not audit or adequately verify the propriety of health care claims, insurance
premiums and administrative fees paid to the TPA, and the eligibility of enrolled
dependents.
We recommend that CCPS
a. conduct audits of the propriety of health care claims paid, and ensure documentation is
obtained supporting amounts reported on the year-end settlement by the TPA (repeat);
b. perform documented comparisons of its records of enrolled participants to TPA
invoices and contract rates to determine the propriety of premiums and administrative
fees billed (repeat); and
c. conduct unannounced periodic audits of enrolled dependents to ensure that previously
enrolled dependents were still eligible to be enrolled in the plans.
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide CCPS has no concerns with the factual accuracy of the finding.
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 9a Agree Estimated Completion Date: 12/31/21
Please provide details of CCPS will work with our consulting vendor regarding any audit that
corrective action or may already be conducted annually. After consultation, CCPS will
explain disagreement. develop a plan to either partner with our consulting vendor to complete
the process or will develop a process to appropriately conduct an audit.
Recommendation 9b Agree Estimated Completion Date: 12/31/21
Please provide details of CCPS will work with our consulting vendor and our internal IT
corrective action or department to create a process to compare our records with our billed
explain disagreement. invoices. St. Mary’s County Public Schools may be contacted to
investigate creating this process if necessary.
Recommendation 9c Agree Estimated Completion Date: 12/31/21
Please provide details of Although CCPS has an ongoing process in place since the last audit was
corrective action or completed in 2010 to ensure child dependents under the age of 26
explain disagreement. remain eligible until aging out, we recognize and agree to the need for
periodic audits for spousal dependents. CCPS will work with our
consulting vendor to develop a process to conduct audits for these
dependents at a minimum of once every 5 years.
Page 9 of 9

--- Page 46 ---
A T
UDIT EAM
Heather A. Warriner, CPA
Audit Manager
R. Brendan Coffey, CPA, CISA
Edwin L. Paul, CPA, CISA
Information Systems Audit Managers
Nelson W. Hopkins, CPA
Senior Auditor
Edward O. Kendall, CISA
Matthew D. Walbert, CISA
Information Systems Senior Auditors
Steven A. Crocker, CFE
Keli R. Edmonds
Lindsay M. Dunn, CPA
Staff Auditors
Malcolm J. Woodard
Information Systems Staff Auditor