Title: Maryland Department of Labor - Division of Racing
Date: 01/26/2022
Type: Fiscal Compliance
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=61f1ab06a1ce580d8c482277
Extracted: 2025-06-20T00:12:11.294681
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Audit Report
Maryland Department of Labor
Division of Racing
January 2022
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Senator Clarence K. Lam, M.D. (Senate Chair) Delegate Carol L. Krimm (House Chair)
Senator Malcolm L. Augustine Delegate Steven J. Arentz
Senator Adelaide C. Eckardt Delegate Mark S. Chang
Senator George C. Edwards Delegate Nicholas P. Charles II
Senator Katie Fry Hester Delegate Andrea Fletcher Harrison
Senator Cheryl C. Kagan Delegate Trent M. Kittleman
Senator Benjamin F. Kramer Delegate David Moon
Senator Cory V. McCray Delegate Julie Palakovich Carr
Senator Justin D. Ready Delegate Elizabeth G. Proctor
Senator Craig J. Zucker Delegate Geraldine Valentino-Smith
To Obtain Further Information
Office of Legislative Audits
The Warehouse at Camden Yards
351 West Camden Street, Suite 400
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Phone: 410-946-5900
Maryland Relay: 711
TTY: 410-946-5401 ꞏ 301-970-5401
E-mail: OLAWebmaster@ola.state.md.us
Website: www.ola.state.md.us
To Report Fraud
The Office of Legislative Audits operates a Fraud Hotline to report fraud, waste, or abuse involving State
of Maryland government resources. Reports of fraud, waste, or abuse may be communicated anonymously
by a toll-free call to 1-877-FRAUD-11, by mail to the Fraud Hotline, c/o Office of Legislative Audits, or
through the Office’s website.
Nondiscrimination Statement
The Department of Legislative Services does not discriminate on the basis of age, ancestry, color, creed,
marital status, national origin, race, religion, gender, gender identity, sexual orientation, or disability in the
admission or access to its programs, services, or activities. The Department’s Information Officer has been
designated to coordinate compliance with the nondiscrimination requirements contained in Section 35.107
of the United States Department of Justice Regulations. Requests for assistance should be directed to the
Information Officer at 410-946-5400 or 410-970-5400.

--- Page 3 ---
January 26, 2022
Senator Clarence K. Lam, M.D., Senate Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Delegate Carol L. Krimm, House Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Members of Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Annapolis, Maryland
Ladies and Gentlemen:
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the Maryland Department of
Labor – Division of Racing (DOR) for the period beginning June 14, 2017 and
ending August 31, 2021. DOR is responsible for implementing the policies of the
Maryland Racing Commission, which regulates the conduct of horseracing and
pari-mutuel wagering in the State. DOR is also responsible for the distribution of
certain video lottery terminal funds in accordance with certain provisions of State
law.
Our audit did not disclose any findings.
We wish to acknowledge DOR’s efforts to satisfactorily address the finding
contained in our preceding audit report. We also wish to acknowledge the
cooperation extended to us during the audit by DOR.
Respectfully submitted,
Gregory A. Hook, CPA
Legislative Auditor

--- Page 4 ---
2

--- Page 5 ---
Background Information
Agency Responsibilities
The Maryland Department of Labor – Division of Racing (DOR) is responsible
for implementing the policies of the Maryland Racing Commission, which
operates under the provisions of Title 11 of the Business Regulation Article of the
Annotated Code of Maryland. The Commission, which consists of nine members
who are appointed by the Governor, is responsible for regulating the conduct of
horseracing and pari-mutuel wagering in the State.
DOR is also responsible for the allocation of certain video lottery terminal funds.
Specifically, DOR distributes these funds, originally collected by the Maryland
Lottery and Gaming Control Agency, for the purposes established in the State
Government Article, Title 9 of the Annotated Code of Maryland (purse
dedication, racetrack facility renewal, and local impact grants).
According to its records, during fiscal year 2021, DOR distributed $171 million in
video lottery terminal funds, and its operating expenses totaled $3.2 million.
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report
Our audit included a review to determine the status of the one finding contained in
our preceding audit report dated January 4, 2018. We determined that DOR
satisfactorily addressed this finding.
Findings and Recommendations
Our audit did not disclose any deficiencies in the design or operation of DOR’s
internal control. Our audit also did not disclose any instances of noncompliance
with applicable laws, rules, or regulations.
A draft copy of this report was provided to DOR. Since there are no
recommendations in this report, a written response was not necessary.
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the Maryland Department of
Labor (MDL) – Division of Racing (DOR) for the period beginning June 14, 2017
3

--- Page 6 ---
and ending August 31, 2021. The audit was conducted in accordance with
generally accepted government auditing standards. Those standards require that
we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient, appropriate evidence to
provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit
objectives. We believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for
our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives.
As prescribed by the State Government Article, Section 2-1221 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, the objectives of this audit were to examine DOR’s financial
transactions, records, and internal control, and to evaluate its compliance with
applicable State laws, rules, and regulations.
In planning and conducting our audit, we focused on the major financial-related
areas of operations based on assessments of significance and risk. The areas
addressed by the audit included cash receipts, racing funds, distribution of video
lottery terminal funds, payroll, and certain licensee (racetrack) requirements
regarding the reporting and distribution of pari-mutuel wagering revenue. We
also determined the status of the finding contained in our preceding audit report.
Our audit did not include certain support services provided by the MDL – Office
of the Secretary. These support services (such as purchasing, data processing,
maintenance of accounting records, and related fiscal functions) are included
within the scope of our audits of the Office of the Secretary.
Our assessment of internal controls was based on agency procedures and controls
in place at the time of our fieldwork. Our tests of transactions and other auditing
procedures were generally focused on the transactions occurring during our audit
period of June 14, 2017 to August 31, 2021, but may include transactions before
or after this period as we considered necessary to achieve our audit objectives.
To accomplish our audit objectives, our audit procedures included inquiries of
appropriate personnel, inspections of documents and records, tests of transactions,
and to the extent practicable, observations of DOR’s operations. Generally,
transactions were selected for testing based on auditor judgment, which primarily
considers risk, the timing or dollar amount of the transaction, or the significance
of the transaction to the area of operation reviewed. As a matter of course, we do
not normally use sampling in our tests, so unless otherwise specifically indicated,
neither statistical nor non-statistical audit sampling was used to select the
transactions tested. Therefore, unless sampling is specifically indicated in a
finding, the results from any tests conducted or disclosed by us cannot be used to
project those results to the entire population from which the test items were
selected.
4

--- Page 7 ---
We also performed various data extracts of pertinent information from the State’s
Financial Management Information System (such as revenue and expenditure
data) and the State’s Central Payroll Bureau (payroll data). The extracts are
performed as part of ongoing internal processes established by the Office of
Legislative Audits and were subject to various tests to determine data reliability.
We determined that the data extracted from these sources were sufficiently
reliable for the purposes the data were used during this audit. We also extracted
data from the Statewide Personnel System (SPS) for the purpose of testing certain
payroll transactions. We performed various tests of the relevant data and
determined that the data were sufficiently reliable for the purposes the data were
used during the audit. Finally, we performed other auditing procedures that we
considered necessary to achieve our audit objectives. The reliability of data used
in this report for background or informational purposes was not assessed.
DOR’s management is responsible for establishing and maintaining effective
internal control. Internal control is a process designed to provide reasonable
assurance that objectives pertaining to the reliability of financial records;
effectiveness and efficiency of operations, including safeguarding of assets; and
compliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations are achieved. As
provided in Government Auditing Standards, there are five components of
internal control: control environment, risk assessment, control activities,
information and communication, and monitoring. Each of the five components,
when significant to the audit objectives, and as applicable to DOR, were
considered by us during the course of this audit.
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate.
Our reports are designed to assist the Maryland General Assembly in exercising
its legislative oversight function and to provide constructive recommendations for
improving State operations. As a result, our reports generally do not address
activities we reviewed that are functioning properly.
5

--- Page 8 ---
A T
UDIT EAM
Robert A. Wells, Jr., CPA
Audit Manager
Walter L. Horan, IV
Senior Auditor
Jacob M. Kasten
Staff Auditor