Title: Comptroller of Maryland - Information Technology Division (Fiscal Operations)
Date: 02/02/2022
Type: Fiscal Compliance
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=61f99198a1ce580e009f5dae
Extracted: 2025-06-20T00:13:18.510527
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Audit Report
Comptroller of Maryland
Information Technology Division
(Fiscal Operations)
February 2022
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Senator Clarence K. Lam, M.D. (Senate Chair) Delegate Carol L. Krimm (House Chair)
Senator Malcolm L. Augustine Delegate Steven J. Arentz
Senator Adelaide C. Eckardt Delegate Mark S. Chang
Senator George C. Edwards Delegate Nicholas P. Charles II
Senator Katie Fry Hester Delegate Andrea Fletcher Harrison
Senator Cheryl C. Kagan Delegate Trent M. Kittleman
Senator Benjamin F. Kramer Delegate David Moon
Senator Cory V. McCray Delegate Julie Palakovich Carr
Senator Justin D. Ready Delegate Elizabeth G. Proctor
Senator Craig J. Zucker Delegate Geraldine Valentino-Smith
To Obtain Further Information
Office of Legislative Audits
The Warehouse at Camden Yards
351 West Camden Street, Suite 400
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Phone: 410-946-5900
Maryland Relay: 711
TTY: 410-946-5401 ꞏ 301-970-5401
E-mail: OLAWebmaster@ola.state.md.us
Website: www.ola.state.md.us
To Report Fraud
The Office of Legislative Audits operates a Fraud Hotline to report fraud, waste, or abuse involving State
of Maryland government resources. Reports of fraud, waste, or abuse may be communicated anonymously
by a toll-free call to 1-877-FRAUD-11, by mail to the Fraud Hotline, c/o Office of Legislative Audits, or
through the Office’s website.
Nondiscrimination Statement
The Department of Legislative Services does not discriminate on the basis of age, ancestry, color, creed,
marital status, national origin, race, religion, gender, gender identity, sexual orientation, or disability in the
admission or access to its programs, services, or activities. The Department’s Information Officer has been
designated to coordinate compliance with the nondiscrimination requirements contained in Section 35.107
of the United States Department of Justice Regulations. Requests for assistance should be directed to the
Information Officer at 410-946-5400 or 410-970-5400.

--- Page 3 ---
February 2, 2022
Senator Clarence K. Lam, M.D., Senate Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Delegate Carol L. Krimm, House Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Members of Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Annapolis, Maryland
Ladies and Gentlemen:
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the Comptroller of Maryland
(COM) – Information Technology Division (ITD) for the period beginning May
31, 2017 and ending May 31, 2021. ITD provides computing and network
resources and operates as a computer services bureau for the COM and certain
other customer agencies.
Our audit disclosed that ITD expended $955,953 during fiscal years 2018 through
2021 for one contractual senior executive employee, instead of filling a vacant
existing State position to perform these services. Furthermore, unclear contract
provisions and certain inadequate monitoring of hours worked resulted in salary
payments, including both regular pay and overtime, to this employee totaling
$232,068 more than the contractually set maximum amounts.
Our audit included a review to determine the status of the finding contained in our
preceding ITD audit report. We determined that ITD did not satisfactorily
address this finding, which is repeated in this report.
COM’s response to this audit, on behalf of ITD, is included as an appendix to this
report. We reviewed the response to our findings and related recommendations,
and have concluded that the corrective actions identified are sufficient to address
all audit issues.

--- Page 4 ---
We wish to acknowledge the cooperation extended to us during the audit by ITD
and its willingness to address the audit issues and implement appropriate
corrective actions.
Respectfully submitted,
Gregory A. Hook, CPA
Legislative Auditor
2

--- Page 5 ---
Background Information
Agency Responsibilities
The Information Technology Division (ITD) of the Comptroller of Maryland
(COM) operates the Annapolis Data Center (ADC) as a shared cost data center.
All operating costs of the ADC are reimbursed by user agencies that are charged
for services performed. In addition to operating a statewide computer network
and providing data center disaster recovery capabilities, ITD develops and
maintains application systems for the COM and certain other State agencies.
Additionally, ITD maintains the operating system and security software
environment in which agency applications are executed. Finally, ITD monitors
information technology related services and maintains the information technology
equipment inventory records for the COM. According to the State’s records,
ITD’s operating costs totaled approximately $40.0 million during fiscal year
2020.
Our audit focused on ITD’s fiscal operations. A separate audit of the computer
operations of the ADC is conducted and a separate audit report is issued.
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report
Our audit included a review to determine the status of the finding contained in
our preceding audit report dated November 13, 2017. We determined that ITD
did not satisfactorily address this finding; therefore, it is repeated in this report as
Finding 2.
3

--- Page 6 ---
Findings and Recommendations
Contractual Senior Executive Employee
Finding 1
The Information Technology Division (ITD) hired a contractual employee as
a long-term senior executive rather than using an existing vacant State
position. In addition, the amounts paid to the employee exceeded annual
maximums stipulated in the contract, which we concluded were not properly
monitored.
Analysis
ITD hired a contractual employee as a long-term senior executive rather than
using an existing vacant State position. In addition the amounts paid to the
employee exceeded annual maximums stipulated in the contract, and hours
worked in excess of the standard work week (40 hours according to the related
contract) were not properly monitored for propriety. During fiscal years 2018
through 2021 the contractual employee was paid $955,953 (See Figure 1).
Figure 1
Payments to Contractual Employee
Annual Payments
Fiscal
Total Payments Contract Exceeding
Year
Maximum Maximum
2018 $206,410 $180,215 $26,195
2019 236,782 174,720 62,062
2020 258,025 184,475 73,550
2021 254,736 184,475 70,261
Total $955,953 $723,885 $232,068
Source: State payroll records and employment contracts
Contractual Position Created Instead of Using Existing Budgeted Position
ITD created a contractual senior executive management position, rather than
using an existing comparable vacant position. Specifically, an existing ITD
contractual employee was hired to fill a newly created contractual senior
executive position rather than using an existing vacant budgeted regular employee
position. In this new position, the employee was to manage all information
technology services for the Comptroller of Maryland (COM) - Office of the
Comptroller (OOC) and the daily operations of the Annapolis Data Center, and
4

--- Page 7 ---
act as the Chief Information Officer for the agency. ITD had an existing budgeted
senior executive management position with a salary level of $132,600, and this
position had previously been filled by an individual who performed the
aforementioned services. OOC management advised the Department of Budget
and Management (DBM) that this employee was uniquely qualified for the vacant
budgeted position, but declined it when offered. It is our opinion that ITD
believed increased compensation was necessary to obtain this individual’s
services and, consequently, in November 2017, ITD hired the individual as a
contractual employee, which enabled ITD to pay a higher compensation of up to
$184,475 per year and ultimately paid up to $258,025 (see Figure 1).
Subsequently, the previous vacant budgeted senior executive management
position was reclassified to create an additional ITD management position. The
practical effect of this action was to create a permanent contractual position for a
critical State function.
Regardless of the perceived necessity of increased compensation, State law
requires that services from a contractual employee be infrequent, time limited,
unusual, or for when the services need to be implemented quickly and for which
there is no reasonable alternative. State law also prohibits DBM from continuing
to certify contractual employment agreements if the services performed under the
contracts encompass permanent functions and are regularly performed on a basis
that is at least equal to 50 percent of the work responsibility of a full-time
employee. We were advised by a DBM official that while there was no specific
exception to the aforementioned law, DBM permitted the ITD contractual
arrangement to continue as it was deemed to be in the best interest of the State.
Payments to the Contractual Employee Exceed Contract Maximums
Although the annual contracts for fiscal years 2018 through 2021 contained a
maximum compensation ranging from $174,720 to $184,475 per year (See Figure
1), ITD paid the contractual employee $231,568 more than the maximum allowed
in the approved annual contracts. This occurred because the maximum
compensation was based on a set hourly rate for a standard 40 hour work week,
while these additional payments were made for hours worked in excess of the 40
hours per week (basically, overtime). Consequently, although the contract
allowed for overtime, there was no set dollar amount or allowance for this
included in the stipulated annual maximum compensation; and accordingly, that
compensation amount was exceeded each year. For example, in fiscal year 2020,
the contract maximum amount was $184,475, but the contractual employee was
paid $258,025, resulting in total payments exceeding the maximum amount by
$73,550.
5

--- Page 8 ---
Overtime was Not Monitored for Propriety and Justification was Not Documented
ITD did not monitor overtime hours charged by the contractual employee and
there was no documentation to justify the overtime hours worked. We were
advised by OOC management that it was aware of the general tasks performed by
this employee through routine periodic meetings. However, there were no
specific procedures to ensure overtime hours worked were appropriate such as
pre-approval of the overtime and requirements for documenting the justification
for the overtime hours. Our test of 20 pay periods in fiscal years 2018 through
2021 during which the employee was compensated approximately $75,200 for
894 overtime hours disclosed that there was no documented explanations or pre-
approvals for any of the hours worked.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that ITD
a. evaluate if the aforementioned senior executive position should continue
to be contractual or a regular budgetary position be established with an
appropriate level of compensation;
b. in conjunction with DBM, ITD should work to create an appropriate
permanent regular budgetary position that is in accordance with State
law;
c. ensure that contract maximum compensation amounts include
anticipated or permissible overtime payments; and
d. implement procedures to monitor hours worked in excess of a standard
weekly schedule by obtaining pre-approval when reasonable and written
justifications.
Equipment
Finding 2
Procedures and controls over equipment were not adequate.
Analysis
ITD had not established adequate procedures and controls over equipment, and
was not in compliance with certain requirements of the Department of General
Services’ (DGS) Inventory Control Manual. According to its records, ITD’s
equipment was valued at approximately $14.2 million as of June 30, 2021, which
consisted of $2.0 million in sensitive equipment, and $12.2 million in non-
6

--- Page 9 ---
sensitive equipment.1 ITD’s equipment records include the Annapolis Data
Center and all information technology equipment for the Comptroller of
Maryland.
 Certain inventory and recordkeeping functions were not properly segregated
as required. Specifically, the employee responsible for conducting physical
inventories of equipment and investigating the differences between the
inventory results and the related detailed records, also maintained the detail
records and processed equipment disposals. We were advised by ITD that a
separate employee was responsible for reviewing adjustments to the detail
records; however, this review was not documented and this employee was not
independent of the physical inventory. A similar condition was commented
upon in our preceding report.
 ITD did not maintain a control account to ensure that the detail records
accurately reflected all equipment balances. Instead, the detail records were
compared to a running balance that was updated with data obtained from the
same detail records.
 Physical inventories for sensitive equipment were not conducted within the
required time frames. Specifically, as of June 2021, 305 items classified as
sensitive equipment, such as computer laptops and tablets, with a recorded
cost of $462,000, had not been inventoried within one year, as required. A
similar condition was commented upon in our preceding report.
The DGS Inventory Control Manual requires the duties of record keeping and
conducting physical inventories be segregated. The Manual further requires that
an independent control account be maintained on a current basis and be
periodically reconciled with the detail records, and that a physical inventory be
conducted for sensitive equipment items on an annual basis.
Recommendation 2
We recommend that ITD comply with the requirements of the DGS
Inventory Control Manual. Specifically, we recommend that ITD
a. segregate the duties of performing physical inventories and maintaining
the equipment detail records (repeat),
1 In addition, to the $14.2 million in equipment, ITD also capitalized computer software as
equipment totaling $36.7 million. We did not include the computer software in the equipment
total because it was not subject to the same risks as equipment, such as computers, which could
be misappropriated.
7

--- Page 10 ---
b. establish an independent equipment control account and periodically
reconcile the balance of that account with the total of the related detail
records and investigate any differences, and
c. conduct annual physical inventories of sensitive equipment as required
(repeat).
We advised ITD on accomplishing the necessary separation of duties using
existing personnel.
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the Comptroller of Maryland
(COM) – Information Technology Division (ITD) for the period beginning May
31, 2017 and ending May 31, 2021. The audit was conducted in accordance with
generally accepted government auditing standards. Those standards require that
we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient, appropriate evidence to
provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit
objectives. We believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for
our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives.
As prescribed by the State Government Article, Section 2-1221 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, the objectives of this audit were to examine ITD’s financial
transactions, records, and internal control, and to evaluate its compliance with
applicable State laws, rules, and regulations.
In planning and conducting our audit, we focused on the major financial-related
areas of operations based on assessments of significance and risk. The areas
addressed by the audit included procurement, payroll, and equipment. Our audit
also included certain support services provided by ITD to the other units of the
COM. These support services consisted of monitoring information technology
related services and maintaining information technology equipment inventory
records. We also determined the status of the finding included in our preceding
audit report.
Our audit did not include the computer operations and security controls of ITD’s
Annapolis Data Center (ADC). Rather, a separate audit is conducted of the ADC
and a separate audit report is issued. Our audit also did not include certain
support services provided to ITD by the COM – Office of the Comptroller. These
support services (such as processing of invoices, maintenance of accounting
records, and related fiscal functions) are included in the scope of our audits of the
Office of the Comptroller.
8

--- Page 11 ---
Our assessment of internal controls was based on agency procedures and controls
in place at the time of our fieldwork. Our tests of transactions and other auditing
procedures were generally focused on the transactions occurring during our audit
period of May 31, 2017 to May 31, 2021, but may include transactions before or
after this period as we considered necessary to achieve our audit objectives.
To accomplish our audit objectives, our audit procedures included inquiries of
appropriate personnel, inspections of documents and records, tests of transactions,
and to the extent practicable, observations of ITD’s operations. Generally,
transactions were selected for testing based on auditor judgment, which primarily
considers risk, the timing or dollar amount of the transaction, or the significance
of the transaction to the area of operation reviewed. As a matter of course, we do
not normally use sampling in our tests, so unless otherwise specifically indicated,
neither statistical nor non-statistical audit sampling was used to select the
transactions tested. Therefore, unless sampling is specifically indicated in a
finding, the results from any tests conducted or disclosed by us cannot be used to
project those results to the entire population from which the test items were
selected.
We also performed various data extracts of pertinent information from the State’s
Financial Management Information System (such as revenue and expenditure
data) and the State’s Central Payroll Bureau (payroll data). The extracts are
performed as part of ongoing internal processes established by the Office of
Legislative Audits and were subject to various tests to determine data reliability.
We determined that the data extracted from these sources were sufficiently
reliable for the purposes the data were used during this audit. We also extracted
data from the Maryland Inventory Tracking System for the purpose of testing ITD
equipment records. We performed various tests of the relevant data and
determined that the data were sufficiently reliable for the purposes the data were
used during the audit. Finally, we performed other auditing procedures that we
considered necessary to achieve our audit objectives. The reliability of data used
in this report for background or informational purposes was not assessed.
ITD’s management is responsible for establishing and maintaining effective
internal control. Internal control is a process designed to provide reasonable
assurance that objectives pertaining to the reliability of financial records;
effectiveness and efficiency of operations, including safeguarding of assets; and
compliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations are achieved. As
provided in Government Auditing Standards, there are five components of
internal control: control environment, risk assessment, control activities,
information and communication, and monitoring. Each of the five components,
when significant to the audit objectives, and as applicable to ITD, were
considered by us during the course of this audit.
9

--- Page 12 ---
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate.
Our reports are designed to assist the Maryland General Assembly in exercising
its legislative oversight function and to provide constructive recommendations for
improving State operations. As a result, our reports generally do not address
activities we reviewed that are functioning properly.
This report includes findings relating to conditions that we consider to be
significant deficiencies in the design or operation of internal control that could
adversely affect ITD’s ability to maintain reliable financial records, operate
effectively and efficiently, and/or comply with applicable laws, rules, and
regulations. Our report also includes findings regarding significant instances of
noncompliance with applicable laws, rules, or regulations.
The response from COM, on behalf of ITD, to our findings and recommendations
is included as an appendix to this report. As prescribed in the State Government
Article, Section 2-1224 of the Annotated Code of Maryland, we will advise COM
regarding the results of our review of its response.
10

--- Page 13 ---
APPENDIX
Peter Franchot
Comptroller
John U. Hiter, Jr.
Director
Information Technology Division
January 31, 2022
Mr. Gregory A. Hook, CPA
Legislative Auditor
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
301 West Preston Street, Room 1202
Baltimore, MD 21201
Dear Mr. Hook:
We acknowledge receipt of the draft audit report on the Information Technology Division for the
period beginning May 31, 2017, and ending May 31, 2021, and have submitted a written response
to the report.
The Comptroller and the Director of the Information Technology Division appreciate your objective
appraisal of our operations and commends your auditors for their professionalism and thorough
review.
Sincerely,
Andrew Schaufele
Deputy Comptroller
John U. Hiter, Jr.
Director, Information Technology Division
cc: Honorable Peter V. R. Franchot, Comptroller
110 Carroll Street Annapolis, Maryland 21404-2999
 MRS 711  TTY 410-260-7400 www.marylandtaxes.com

--- Page 14 ---
Comptroller of Maryland
Information Technology Division
Agency Response Form
Contractual Senior Executive Employee
Finding 1
The Information Technology Division (ITD) hired a contractual employee as a long-term
senior executive rather than using an existing vacant State position. In addition, the
amounts paid to the employee exceeded annual maximums stipulated in the contract, which
we concluded were not properly monitored.
We recommend that ITD
a. evaluate if the aforementioned senior executive position should continue to be
contractual or a regular budgetary position be established with an appropriate level of
compensation;
b. in conjunction with DBM, ITD should work to create an appropriate permanent
regular budgetary position that is in accordance with State law;
c. ensure that contract maximum compensation amounts include anticipated or
permissible overtime payments; and
d. implement procedures to monitor hours worked in excess of a standard weekly schedule
by obtaining pre-approval when reasonable and written justifications.
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide At the recommendation of the OLA, an evaluation of the senior
additional comments as executive position in question was completed.
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 1a Agree Estimated Completion Date: 4/1/2022
Please provide details of The Comptroller of Maryland (COM) will continue to perform the
corrective action or requested evaluation on an annual basis pending resolution of
explain disagreement. Recommendation 1b.
Recommendation 1b Agree Estimated Completion Date: TBD
Please provide details of
corrective action or
explain disagreement.
Recommendation 1c Agree Estimated Completion Date: 4/1/2022
Page 1 of 3

--- Page 15 ---
Comptroller of Maryland
Information Technology Division
Agency Response Form
Please provide details of In response to the audit findings, the terms of the contract are being
corrective action or amended to establish fair compensation based on the qualifications,
explain disagreement. experience and performance of the individual and the consideration of
overtime will be eliminated.
Recommendation 1d Agree Estimated Completion Date:
Please provide details of This will no longer be applicable for this individual due to the
corrective action or modifications being made to the terms of the contract which will include
explain disagreement. elimination of overtime pay.
Page 2 of 3

--- Page 16 ---
Comptroller of Maryland
Information Technology Division
Agency Response Form
Equipment
Finding 2
Procedures and controls over equipment were not adequate.
We recommend that ITD comply with the requirements of the DGS Inventory Control
Manual. Specifically, we recommend that ITD
a. segregate the duties of performing physical inventories and maintaining the equipment
detail records (repeat),
b. establish an independent equipment control account and periodically reconcile the
balance of that account with the total of the related detail records and investigate any
differences, and
c. conduct annual physical inventories of sensitive equipment as required (repeat).
We advised ITD on accomplishing the necessary separation of duties using existing
personnel.
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide We appreciate the recommendations made by the OLA and we agree.
additional comments as Two of the recommendations resulted in process changes which were
deemed necessary. implemented shortly after receiving the finding in 2021, as is indicated
below.
Recommendation 2a Agree Estimated Completion Date: 9/22/2021
Please provide details of We have updated our process to include an official sign-off of the
corrective action or reviews done by someone independent of the physical inventory.
explain disagreement.
Recommendation 2b Agree Estimated Completion Date: 4/5/2022
Please provide details of We are working with Administration and Finance to establish an
corrective action or independent control account that will be used to periodically reconcile
explain disagreement. the balance. This will be implemented by April 5, 2022.
Recommendation 2c Agree Estimated Completion Date: 9/22/2021
Please provide details of We have already modified our process to ensure all assets, to include
corrective action or sensitive items, are inventoried annually.
explain disagreement.
Page 3 of 3

--- Page 17 ---
A T
UDIT EAM
Heather A. Warriner, CPA
Audit Manager
Mindy R. Garrett
Senior Auditor
Benjamin H. Straube
Staff Auditor