Title: Board of Public Works
Date: 02/04/2022
Type: Fiscal Compliance
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=62011e04a1ce5813c0e793be
Extracted: 2025-06-20T00:13:28.111529
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Audit Report
Board of Public Works
November 2017
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
For further information concerning this report contact:
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
301 West Preston Street, Room 1202
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Phone: 410-946-5900 · 301-970-5900
Toll Free in Maryland: 1-877-486-9964
Maryland Relay: 711
TTY: 410-946-5401 · 301-970-5401
E-mail: OLAWebmaster@ola.state.md.us
Website: www.ola.state.md.us
The Office of Legislative Audits operates a Fraud Hotline to report fraud, waste, or abuse
involving State of Maryland government resources. Reports of fraud, waste, or abuse
may be communicated anonymously by a toll-free call to 1-877-FRAUD-11, by mail to the
Fraud Hotline, c/o Office of Legislative Audits, or through the Office’s website.
The Department of Legislative Services does not discriminate on the basis of age, ancestry, color,
creed, marital status, national origin, race, religion, gender, gender identity, sexual orientation,
or disability in the admission or access to its programs, services, or activities. The Department’s
Information Officer has been designated to coordinate compliance with the nondiscrimination
requirements contained in Section 35.107 of the Department of Justice Regulations. Requests for
assistance should be directed to the Information Officer at 410-946-5400 or 410-970-5400.

--- Page 4 ---
2

--- Page 5 ---
Background Information
Agency Responsibilities
The Board of Public Works (BPW) was established by Article XII of the State
Constitution and comprises the Governor, the Comptroller of Maryland, and the
State Treasurer. BPW reviews, approves, and/or oversees a number of statutorily
mandated projects and programs, including significant State expenditures and
general obligation bond issuances. BPW maintains an administrative staff, which
is directed by the Executive Secretary. According to State records, BPW’s
expenditures totaled approximately $7.6 million during fiscal year 2017.
Findings and Recommendations
Our audit did not disclose any significant deficiencies in the design or operation
of BPW’s internal control. Our audit also did not disclose any significant
instances of noncompliance with applicable laws, rules, or regulations. A finding
that did not warrant inclusion in this report was separately communicated to
BPW.
A draft copy of this report was provided to BPW. Since there are no
recommendations in this report, a written response was not necessary.
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the Board of Public Works
(BPW) for the period beginning March 24, 2014 and ending July 10, 2017. The
audit was conducted in accordance with generally accepted government auditing
standards. Those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain
sufficient, appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and
conclusions based on our audit objectives. We believe that the evidence obtained
provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit
objectives.
As prescribed by the State Government Article, Section 2-1221 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, the objectives of this audit were to examine BPW’s financial
transactions, records, and internal control, and to evaluate its compliance with
applicable State laws, rules, and regulations.
3

--- Page 6 ---
In planning and conducting our audit, we focused on the major financial-related
areas of operations based on assessments of significance and risk. The areas
addressed by the audit included grants to nonprofits, the State’s contingent fund,
cash receipts, and procurement activity.
Our audit did not include BPW’s Capital Appropriation that is administered by
the Department of General Services and is audited during our fiscal compliance
audit of that Department. In addition, our audit did not include the Interagency
Committee for Public School Construction which, although a budgetary unit of
BPW, is audited and reported upon separately.
Furthermore, our audit did not include the Small, Minority, and Women-Owned
Businesses Account, which was statutorily under BPW’s authority but
administered by the Department of Commerce (DOC) in accordance with a
Memorandum of Understanding between the two entities. The Office of
Legislative Audits was required to conduct an annual audit of certain Account
activity until the State law was changed during the 2016 Legislative Session to
eliminate that requirement. At that time, we had audited activity through fiscal
year 2014 for which separate reports were issued. Effective July 1, 2017, State
law transferred the authority for all aspects of the Account to DOC. Accordingly,
all Account activities after July 1, 2014 will be included in the scope of our fiscal
compliance audits of DOC.
Our audit also did not include certain support services (such as payroll, processing
of invoices, maintenance of accounting records, and related fiscal functions)
provided to BPW by the Comptroller of Maryland – Office of the Comptroller.
These support services are included in the scope of our audits of the Office of the
Comptroller.
To accomplish our audit objectives, our audit procedures included inquiries of
appropriate personnel, inspections of documents and records, observations of the
BPW’s operations, and tests of transactions. Generally, transactions were
selected for testing based on auditor judgment, which primarily considers risk.
Unless otherwise specifically indicated, neither statistical nor non-statistical audit
sampling was used to select the transactions tested. Therefore, the results of the
tests cannot be used to project those results to the entire population from which
the test items were selected.
We also performed various data extracts of pertinent information from the State’s
Financial Management Information System (such as revenue and expenditure
data). The extracts are performed as part of ongoing internal processes
established by the Office of Legislative Audits and were subject to various tests to
4

--- Page 7 ---
determine data reliability. We determined that the data extracted from this source
were sufficiently reliable for the purposes the data were used during this audit.
Finally, we performed other auditing procedures that we considered necessary to
achieve our audit objectives. The reliability of data used in this report for
background or informational purposes was not assessed.
BPW’s management is responsible for establishing and maintaining effective
internal control. Internal control is a process designed to provide reasonable
assurance that objectives pertaining to the reliability of financial records,
effectiveness and efficiency of operations, including safeguarding of assets, and
compliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations are achieved.
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate.
Our reports are designed to assist the Maryland General Assembly in exercising
its legislative oversight function and to provide constructive recommendations for
improving State operations. As a result, our reports generally do not address
activities we reviewed that are functioning properly.
5

--- Page 8 ---
A T
UDIT EAM
Michael J. Murdzak, CPA
Audit Manager
Tu N. Vuong
Senior Auditor
John B. Wachter
Staff Auditor