Title: Board of License Commissioners for Prince George's County
Date: 02/08/2022
Type: Performance
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=6202d903a1ce58170c1b03b2
Extracted: 2025-06-20T00:13:54.618478
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Performance Audit Report
Board of License Commissioners
for Prince George’s County
February 2022
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Senator Clarence K. Lam, M.D. (Senate Chair) Delegate Carol L. Krimm (House Chair)
Senator Malcolm L. Augustine Delegate Steven J. Arentz
Senator Adelaide C. Eckardt Delegate Mark S. Chang
Senator George C. Edwards Delegate Nicholas P. Charles II
Senator Katie Fry Hester Delegate Andrea Fletcher Harrison
Senator Cheryl C. Kagan Delegate Trent M. Kittleman
Senator Benjamin F. Kramer Delegate David Moon
Senator Cory V. McCray Delegate Julie Palakovich Carr
Senator Justin D. Ready Delegate Elizabeth G. Proctor
Senator Craig J. Zucker Delegate Geraldine Valentino-Smith
To Obtain Further Information
Office of Legislative Audits
The Warehouse at Camden Yards
351 West Camden Street, Suite 400
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Phone: 410-946-5900
Maryland Relay: 711
TTY: 410-946-5401 ꞏ 301-970-5401
E-mail: OLAWebmaster@ola.state.md.us
Website: www.ola.state.md.us
To Report Fraud
The Office of Legislative Audits operates a Fraud Hotline to report fraud, waste, or abuse involving State
of Maryland government resources. Reports of fraud, waste, or abuse may be communicated anonymously
by a toll-free call to 1-877-FRAUD-11, by mail to the Fraud Hotline, c/o Office of Legislative Audits, or
through the Office’s website.
Nondiscrimination Statement
The Department of Legislative Services does not discriminate on the basis of age, ancestry, color, creed,
marital status, national origin, race, religion, gender, gender identity, sexual orientation, or disability in the
admission or access to its programs, services, or activities. The Department’s Information Officer has been
designated to coordinate compliance with the nondiscrimination requirements contained in Section 35.107
of the United States Department of Justice Regulations. Requests for assistance should be directed to the
Information Officer at 410-946-5400 or 410-970-5400.

--- Page 3 ---
February 8, 2022
Senator Clarence K. Lam, M.D., Senate Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Delegate Carol L. Krimm, House Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Members of Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Annapolis, Maryland
Ladies and Gentlemen:
We have conducted a performance audit to evaluate the effectiveness and
efficiency of the management practices of the Board of License Commissioners
for Prince George’s County (BOLC) as required by the State Government Article,
Section 2-1220 of the Annotated Code of Maryland. The law requires our audit to
focus on BOLC operations relating to licensing, inspections, disciplinary
procedures, and management oversight, which broadly represent the four audit
objectives established. BOLC issued 632 active alcoholic beverage licenses and
123 entertainment permits as of November 2020 and collected $1.5 million during
fiscal year 2020, primarily derived from license fees.
This is our second audit of the BOLC and we have noticed that BOLC made
improvement from our prior audit by adequately addressing 10 of the 17 prior
report findings. For example, BOLC established procedures to conduct quarterly
inspections of licensed establishments and monitored follow-up inspections on
establishments that were temporarily closed. Additionally, BOLC’s written
policies and procedures governing its operations were formally adopted by the
Board. Nevertheless, our current audit disclosed instances in which BOLC did
not comply with State law or policy, and did not establish adequate internal
controls and record keeping procedures over certain aspects of its operations in
each of the four areas reviewed.
Licensing
BOLC did not ensure that applications were properly completed and evidence was
lacking that all required documents were obtained and conditions met prior to the

--- Page 4 ---
issuance of licenses and permits as required, including completed criminal
background checks and verifications of no unpaid State and county taxes.
Additionally, BOLC had not established adequate record keeping procedures and
internal controls over license fees and other office collections.
Inspections
Inspection reports were not properly completed or subject to an independent
documented supervisory review. Our review of the results of 55 inspections
performed during January 1, 2019 through October 28, 2020 disclosed that 5
inspection reports were signed by the inspectors rather than the owner or manager
of the licensed business as required and 38 inspection reports did not have
documented independent supervisory review.
Disciplinary Procedures
BOLC had not established adequate procedures and internal controls over its
disciplinary process and the maintenance of related records. Specifically,
independent supervisory review of violation fine records, collection, and follow-
up collection efforts were not documented. In addition, fines receivable records
were not reliable since they were not always updated with fine amount, late fee,
violation date, the status of the receivable, current outstanding balances, follow-
up notices, and the related payment receipt number to ensure that amount due was
paid. Furthermore, BOLC did not always assess required late fees on delinquent
fines and failed to issue summons timely for licensees to appear at a delinquency
hearing.
Management Oversight
BOLC’s established management practices were not comprehensive and did not
ensure adequate controls over access to critical electronic files and systems.
Specifically, the Board had not established policies and procedures governing
safeguarding electronic files with personal identifiable information and
monitoring of users access capabilities. For example, 24 users had unnecessary
access to BOLC’s unsecured electronic files, 16 users had unnecessary access to
close complaint referrals, and 9 employees had the ability to process licensing
transaction without any automated independent review and approval.
Our audit scope, objectives, and methodology are explained on page 7. BOLC’s
response to this audit is included as an appendix to this report. We reviewed the
response and noted general agreement to our findings and related
recommendations. Subsequent to the response receipt, but prior to the issuance of
the final report, we contacted BOLC staff and obtained verbal clarification that
satisfactorily resolved all outstanding questions and issues. Consequently, we
have concluded that the written responses and verbal clarification together
2

--- Page 5 ---
indicate that the BOLC corrective actions identified are sufficient to address all
audit issues.
We wish to acknowledge the cooperation extended to us during the audit by the
Board and the staff of the BOLC. We also wish to acknowledge the Board’s
willingness to address the audit issues and implement appropriate corrective
actions.
Respectfully submitted,
Gregory A. Hook, CPA
Legislative Auditor
3

--- Page 6 ---
4

--- Page 7 ---
Table of Contents
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology 7
Audit Scope 7
Objectives and Methodology 7
Fieldwork and Agency Response 9
Background Information 10
Agency Responsibilities 10
Status of Findings from Preceding Audit Report 11
Findings and Recommendations 13
Objective 1 – Licensing
Objective and Methodology 13
Background 13
New, Renewal, and Transfer Licenses 16
Conclusion 17
Findings
* Finding 1 – The Board of License Commissioners for Prince George’s 17
County (BOLC) did not ensure that all documents required by
State law or BOLC policy were obtained prior to the issuance of
licenses and permits.
* Finding 2 – BOLC did not always have adequate documentation of 19
criminal background checks of license applicants and could not
support that it verified applicants did not have taxes due to the
State or Prince George’s County prior to issuing licenses.
* Finding 3 – BOLC had not established adequate record keeping 20
procedures and internal controls over license fees and other office
collections.
* Denotes item repeated in full or part from preceding audit report
5

--- Page 8 ---
Objective 2 – Inspections
Objective and Methodology 22
Background 23
Conclusion 24
Finding
* Finding 4 – Inspection reports were not always properly completed or 24
subject to an independent documented supervisory review.
Objective 3 – Disciplinary Procedures
Objective and Methodology 26
Background 26
Conclusion 28
Finding
* Finding 5 – BOLC did not maintain adequate records, did not 28
adequately review the assessment and collection process, and did not
always assess late fees or take other required action on delinquent
accounts.
Objective 4 – Management Oversight
Objective and Methodology 30
Conclusion 30
Finding
* Finding 6 – BOLC did not adequately monitor user access to the 30
License Manager System, the County’s 311 System, and to critical
data files on BOLC’s network resulting in employees with improper
or unnecessary access.
Agency Response Appendix
* Denotes item repeated in full or part from preceding audit report
6

--- Page 9 ---
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
Audit Scope
The State Government Article, Section 2-1220(g) of the Annotated Code of
Maryland requires the Office of Legislative Audits, at least once every three
years, to conduct a performance audit of the Board of License Commissioners for
Prince George’s County (BOLC) to evaluate the effectiveness and efficiency of
the management practices of BOLC and the economy with which BOLC uses
resources. The law also states the audit shall focus on operations relating to
liquor inspections, licensing, disciplinary procedures, and management oversight.
Our audit was performed in accordance with generally accepted government
auditing standards. Those standards require we plan and perform the audit to
obtain sufficient, appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our
findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives. We believe that the
evidence obtained for our findings and conclusions met those standards.
Objectives and Methodology
Our audit included the following objectives:
1. Evaluate the adequacy of procedures for alcoholic beverage licensing and the
maintenance of related records, and determine if the licensing process
complied with State law and Board requirements.
2. Evaluate the adequacy of BOLC policies and procedures for conducting
inspections of alcoholic beverage licensees and maintaining related records,
and determine whether inspections were properly performed in accordance
with governing laws, policies, and procedures.
3. Evaluate the disciplinary process and determine if BOLC complied with
applicable State law, enforced applicable Board rules and regulations
governing licensees, and maintained accurate disciplinary records.
4. Evaluate management processes to determine if proper oversight exists over
BOLC operations.
To accomplish our objectives, we reviewed applicable State laws, and the policies
and procedures established by the Board and BOLC administrative personnel
governing the licensing process and related records. We also reviewed pertinent
sections of the BOLC Standard Operating Procedures that govern BOLC
administrative functions; the Rules and Regulations of the Board of License
Commissioners for Prince George’s County, an internal document that governs
7

--- Page 10 ---
the conduct of licensee business operations; and applicable Prince George’s
County policies.
Additionally, we interviewed BOLC staff to determine the processes used to issue
licenses, conduct inspections, administer disciplinary proceedings, and maintain
related records. Due to the mandatory teleworking resulting from the COVID-19
pandemic health crisis, we did not observe the licensing and inspection processes.
We were able to virtually observe the disciplinary hearing processes.
We obtained data files of active BOLC licensees for the 2019-2020 and 2020-
2021 license years, and liquor inspections performed and licensee violations for
fiscal years 2019 to 2021. These files were obtained from the BOLC licensing
(License Manager System) and inspection databases, maintained by the Prince
George’s County Office of Information Technology. We used the data files to
perform various tests of the licensing, inspection, and disciplinary procedures, and
performed various tests of the relevant data and determined that these data files
were sufficiently reliable for the purposes they were used for during the audit.
We also reviewed the scanned licensee paper files and the minutes for Board
hearings that evidenced the decisions and actions taken by the Board.
Furthermore, we obtained records of complaints received by BOLC, as well as
complaints registered through the Prince George’s County 311 Community
Relations Service Request System (311 System), to evaluate the BOLC process
for complaint-initiated inspections.
Generally, transactions were selected for testing based on auditor judgment,
which primarily considers risk, the timing or dollar amount of the transaction, or
the significance of the transaction to the area of operation reviewed. As a matter
of course, we do not normally use sampling in our tests, so unless otherwise
specifically indicated, neither statistical nor non-statistical audit sampling was
used to select the transactions tested. Therefore, unless sampling is specifically
indicated in a finding, the results from any tests conducted or disclosed by us
cannot be used to project those results to the entire population from which the test
items were selected. The reliability of data used in this report for background or
informational purposes was not assessed. In addition to the conditions included in
this report, other findings were communicated to BOLC that were not deemed
significant and, consequently, did not warrant inclusion in this report.
8

--- Page 11 ---
Fieldwork and Agency Response
We conducted our fieldwork from October 2020 to July 2021. During this period,
BOLC’s operations were impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic health crisis.
Specifically, the Governor’s Executive Order, effective March 12, 2020,
permitted State and local government licensees to extend license and permit
renewals for license years 2019-2020 and 2020-2021 until 30 days after the
pandemic state of emergency was rescinded. Consequently, license revenue was
reduced from $2.1 million in fiscal year 2019 to $1.5 million in fiscal year 2020, a
decrease of $635,000, with a continued reduction from customary revenue levels
expected until the COVID-19 pandemic health crisis is over.
Further, during the period from March 16, 2020 through June 1, 2020, all
restaurants and bars in Prince George’s County were closed (except for food and
beverages carry-out, drive-through, or delivery), which resulted in BOLC
performing focused inspections to ensure that establishments complied with the
executive order. Additionally, Prince George’s County issued an Executive
Order, effective March 16, 2020, that suspended all in-person meetings and
hearings and closed all county facilities to the public. This resulted in BOLC’s
Board, which is a unit of the County government, holding meetings virtually and
employees teleworking. Although the BOLC’s facilities were closed to the public
during our fieldwork, this did not significantly impact our ability to conduct the
audit.
BOLC’s response to our findings and recommendations is included as an
appendix to this audit report. As prescribed in the State Government Article,
Section 2-1224 of the Annotated Code of Maryland, we will advise BOLC
regarding the results of our review of its response.
9

--- Page 12 ---
Background Information
Agency Responsibilities
The Board of License Commissioners for Prince George’s County (BOLC) is an
agency of the County. BOLC operations are governed by Title 26 of the
Alcoholic Beverages Article of the Annotated Code of Maryland. BOLC is
responsible for processing applications for and renewals of licenses to sell beer,
wine, and liquor; conducting periodic inspections of businesses licensed to sell
alcoholic beverages; collecting all license fees and fines; and fining licensees, or
suspending, or revoking their licenses, for violations of alcoholic beverage laws.
BOLC also issues licenses for special venues (a casino, convention center, or
stadium), as well as permits and other privileges1 for alcoholic beverage sales
during special events (such as beer and wine festivals) and when providing
entertainment (such as music, dancing, or adult). According to BOLC records,
which we verified through testing, there were 632 active alcoholic beverage
licenses2 and 422 permits and other privileges as of November 19, 2020.
All revenues from licenses issued, fines, and late fees collected are paid to BOLC
and deposited in a County bank account, and all BOLC expenditures are paid by
the County. Furthermore, BOLC is included in the County’s annual budget and
its financial activity is included in the County’s Comprehensive Annual Financial
Report. BOLC’s budget for fiscal year 2021 was approximately $1.8 million with
provision for 9 full-time and 17 part-time employees. According to County
records, BOLC fiscal year 2020 revenues totaled $1.5 million and expenditures
totaled $1.4 million. In accordance with State law, BOLC revenues in excess of
its expenditures and salaries are to be used by the County Executive and County
Council for the general purposes of the County.
BOLC is governed by a five-person Board, appointed by the County Executive of
Prince George’s County, subject to confirmation by the Maryland Senate. As of
1 Entertainment permits are valid for one year and renew in November of each year. Similar to
licenses, noted above, permit holders had the option to defer permit renewal until 30 days after
the state of emergency declaration was rescinded. Other privileges are renewed with the license
as they are added privileges on the license such as Sunday off-sale service.
2 Licenses are valid for one year and renew in April, May, or June of each year depending on the
type of license. Due to the Governor’s Executive Order related to the COVID-19 pandemic
health crisis, State and local government licensees had the option to defer the license renewal for
license years 2020-2021 and 2021-2022 until 30 days after the state of emergency declaration
was rescinded. Therefore, we obtained a data file from the BOLC licensing database of all
active licensees for the 2019-2020 and 2020-2021 license years to determine the number of
active licenses as of November 19, 2020.
10

--- Page 13 ---
November 2020, BOLC had 9 full-time staff – which included 1 executive staff
position, 3 supervising inspectors, and 5 support staff – as well as 12 part-time
inspectors.
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report
Our audit included a review to determine the status of the 17 findings contained in
our preceding audit report dated March 29, 2019. As disclosed in Figure 1, we
determined that BOLC satisfactorily addressed 10 of these findings. The
remaining 7 findings are repeated in this report, 2 of which were combined and
presented as one finding in this report.
11

--- Page 14 ---
Figure 1
Status of Preceding Findings
Preceding Implementation
Finding Description
Finding Status
Licensing procedures and controls were inadequate, as there was a lack of separation
Finding 1 of application processing, approval, and recording functions. In addition, an Not Repeated
independent supervisory review of these functions was not performed.
BOLC did not ensure that all required documents were obtained prior to the issuance Repeated
Finding 2
of licenses and permits as required. (Current Finding 1)
BOLC did not adequately document criminal background checks of license
Repeated
Finding 3 applicants and had not established a process to receive updates of subsequent changes
(Current Finding 2)
to licensee criminal records, as required by law.
BOLC did not always verify that license applicants had no undisputed taxes due to Repeated
Finding 4
the State or Prince George’s County prior to issuing licenses as required by State law. (Current Finding 2)
BOLC had not established adequate record keeping procedures and internal controls Repeated
Finding 5
over license fees and other office collections. (Current Finding 3)
Finding 6 Not all licensees were subject to periodic inspection, as required by State law. Not Repeated
Inspection reports were not comprehensive, properly completed, or subject to an Repeated
Finding 7
independent documented supervisory review. (Current Finding 4)
No procedures had been established to ensure all completed inspection reports were
Finding 8 properly recorded in the BOLC inspection database and all scheduled inspections Not Repeated
were performed.
Adequate procedures had not been established for the follow-up of inspections
Finding 9 Not Repeated
aborted because the licensee’s business was closed at the time of the inspector’s visit.
Licensee complaints received both directly by BOLC and through the County’s 311
Finding 10 System were not always timely investigated and resolved or subject to supervisory Not Repeated
review. Further, employee access to complaint records was not controlled.
The Board delegated its discretionary functions, in certain cases, to its staff in
conflict with State law. The Board did not review and approve administrative staff
Finding 11 Not Repeated
decisions to refer violations for a hearing or make offers of compromise and the
disposition of all reported violations was not verified.
Formal accounts receivable records had not been established for fines assessed by the Repeated
Finding 12
Board and related late fees due were sometimes not collected. (Current Finding 5)
The Board did not adequately explain the basis for its decisions regarding the
Finding 13 Not Repeated
continued active status of two licensees who had pleaded guilty to criminal charges.
Written policies and procedures governing BOLC operations were not sufficiently
Finding 14 Not Repeated
comprehensive and had not been formally adopted by the Board.
The Board had not adopted formal measures to evaluate inspector performance and
Finding 15 Not Repeated
determine annual workload requirements.
User access to critical BOLC data files was not adequately monitored and restricted
Repeated
Finding 16 to BOLC employees whose job duties required such access, and user transaction
(Current Finding 6)
reports were not available to review for propriety.
BOLC had not established procedures to monitor employee compliance with
Finding 17 statutory independence restrictions concerning secondary employment, business Not Repeated
investments, and political activities.
12

--- Page 15 ---
Findings and Recommendations
Objective 1 – Licensing
Objective and Methodology
Our objective for the Board of License Commissioners for Prince George’s
County (BOLC) licensing function was to evaluate the adequacy of procedures
for alcoholic beverage licensing and the maintenance of related records, and to
determine, based on the evaluation and transaction testing, if the licensing process
complied with State law and Board requirements. To accomplish our objective,
we reviewed applicable State laws, the BOLC Standard Operating Procedures,
and the Rules and Regulations of the Board of License Commissioners for Prince
George’s County.
Additionally, we interviewed BOLC staff to determine the processes used to
screen applicants; collect fees; issue, renew, or transfer licenses; and maintain
related records. We obtained a data file from the County-maintained BOLC
licensing database, the License Manager System (LMS), of all active BOLC
licensees for the 2019-2020 and 2020-2021 license years as of November 19,
2020. Based on our analysis of the licensee data files and similar prior audit files
we performed various tests of the licensing process including issuance of new
licenses, license renewals, license transfers, and collection of related cash receipts
during our audit period. We performed various tests of the relevant data and
determined that the data was sufficiently reliable for the purposes of our audit.
Due to the Governor’s Executive Order related to the COVID-19 pandemic health
crisis, State and local government licensees had the option to defer the license
renewal for license year 2020-2021 and 2021-2022 until 30 days after the state of
emergency declaration was rescinded. Additionally, the State’s Office of the
Comptroller suspended tax holds3 for alcohol license renewals due to the
pandemic. Accordingly, we reviewed BOLC’s process for monitoring deferred
renewals.
Background
BOLC processes applications for new licenses, license renewals and
modifications, and transfers of existing licenses to sell beer, wine, and liquor in
Prince George’s County. There are four different classes of licenses and each
class is valid for one year.
3 State law requires BOLC to verify with the Comptroller of Maryland and the County that all
undisputed taxes have been paid, prior to issuing or renewing a license.
13

--- Page 16 ---
 Class A licenses are issued to liquor stores and expire on April 30.
 Class B licenses are issued to restaurants and expire on May 31.
 Class C and D licenses are issued to private membership clubs (such as
veterans’ organizations) and to taverns and convenience stores, respectively,
and both expire on June 30.
BOLC also issues licenses for special venues (casino, convention center, or
stadium), as well as permits for alcoholic beverage sales during special events
(such as beer and wine festivals) and when providing entertainment (such as
music, dancing, or adult). According to BOLC records, there were 632 active
alcoholic beverage licenses as of November 19, 2020. Additionally, 422 permits
and other privileges were issued for various activities (such as, tasting licenses).
Annual fees for alcoholic beverage licenses issued are established in State law and
vary depending on the type of establishment and what beverages are sold. Figure
2 includes the types of licenses issued by BOLC along with the related license
fees. Additional permits and other privileges with fees issued by BOLC can be
found in Figure 3. According to BOLC records, revenues from licenses, permits,
and fines totaled approximately $1.5 million in fiscal year 2020.
14

--- Page 17 ---
Figure 2
Annual License Fees and Active Licenses as of November 19, 2020
Annual Total
License Type License Active
Fee Licenses
Class A Beer and Wine $500 1
Class A Beer, Wine, and Liquor $910 140
Class B Beer $365 4
Class B Beer and Wine $365 27
Class B Beer and Wine (Baseball Stadium) $2,420 1
Class B Beer, Wine, and Liquor $2,305 127
Class B Beer, Wine, and Liquor (Arts & Entertainment) $3,600 7
Class B Beer, Wine, and Liquor (Caterer) $4,480 7
Class B Beer, Wine, and Liquor (Convention Center) $22,000 1
Class B Beer, Wine, and Liquor (Development District) $3,025 10
Class B Beer, Wine, and Liquor (Education Conference Facility) $5,175 1
Class B Beer, Wine, and Liquor (Educational Conference Facility/Dining $8,275 1
Service)
Class B Beer, Wine, and Liquor (Entertainment Concessionaire) $5,000 2
Class B Beer, Wine, and Liquor (Entertainment Facility) $22,000 1
Class B Beer, Wine, and Liquor (Equestrian Center Restaurant) $2,420 1
Class B Beer, Wine, and Liquor (Golf Course) $500 3
Class B Beer, Wine, and Liquor (Hotel) $5,000 26
Class B Beer, Wine, and Liquor (Luxury-Type Restaurant) $3,875 116
Class B Beer, Wine, and Liquor (Plus) $3,270 25
Class B Beer, Wine, and Liquor (Racetrack) $60 per day 1
used
Class B Beer, Wine, and Liquor (Stadium) $21,780 1
Class B Beer, Wine, and Liquor (Theme Park) $4,290 1
Class B Liquor (Microbrewery) $1,090 1
Class C Beer and Wine $245 1
Class C Beer, Wine and Liquor (Concessionaire) $1,815 6
Class C Beer, Wine and Liquor (Fraternal/Sororal/Service Organization) $910 14
Class C Beer, Wine and Liquor (Veterans' Organization or Club) $910 18
Class D Beer $500 16
Class D Beer and Wine $500 72
Total Licenses 632
Source: Annotated Code of Maryland, Rules and Regulations of the Board of License Commissioners for
Prince George’s County, and BOLC’s License Manager System
License Type Classes: A-Package Goods; B-Restaurant; C-Private Membership Club; D-Tavern and
Convenience Stores
15

--- Page 18 ---
Figure 3
Active Permits and Privileges and Related Fees
as of November 19, 2020
Annual Number of
Permits and Other Privileges
Fee Active Permits
Special Entertainment Permit $1,500 112
Family Entertainment Permit $250 11
Beer Tasting License* $120 2
Beer and Wine Tasting License* $120 25
Beer, Wine, and Liquor Tasting License* $220 136
$250 one-time
Delivery Permit 19
advertising fee
Distillery On-Premise Consumption Permit $500 1
Draft Beer Container Permit $500 13
Sunday Off-Sale Permit - Class A Beer, Wine, and Liquor Only $2,590 88
Sunday Off-Sale Permit - Class B Beer, Wine, and Liquor with an
$1,080 15
Off-Sale Privilege Only
Total Permits and Other Privileges 422
Source: Annotated Code of Maryland, Rules and Regulations of the Board of License Commissioners for Prince
George’s County, and BOLC’s License Manager System
Note: Delivery permit has a one-time advertisement fee of $250 which was waived during the pandemic.
 License is an add-on permit to provide additional privileges to existing license holders.
New, Renewal, and Transfer Licenses
Applicants (new licenses, license renewals, or license transfers) submit a
completed application form along with certain required documents (such as a
driver’s license for identification) and an application fee. The applications are
processed and added to the next scheduled public Board hearing agenda to be
discussed and voted on. If approved by the Board, applicants must submit certain
additional documents (such as a certificate of liability insurance and proof of
personal property tax payment) and pay the applicable license fee before BOLC
prints and issues the license.
BOLC e-mails all current licensees a renewal notice in January each year, but the
expiration dates vary by class of license. License transfers occur when there is a
change in ownership, location, or more than 50 percent of the stock or
membership interest in the business. A new license must be processed whenever
there is a change in a licensee’s corporate officers. The licensing records are
maintained by BOLC in the LMS, which is located on the Prince George’s
County government’s network.
16

--- Page 19 ---
Conclusion
BOLC did not always follow established procedures for reviewing and verifying
documents required for licensing and renewal of licenses. BOLC also did not
retain documentation supporting criminal background checks on licensees and a
verification that licensees and business did not owe outstanding State or county
taxes. Additionally, BOLC did not immediately restrictively endorse checks and
ensure adequate segregation of duties over collections and recordkeeping.
Findings
Finding 1
BOLC did not ensure that all documents required by State law or BOLC
policy were obtained prior to the issuance of licenses and permits.
Analysis
BOLC did not ensure that all required documents were obtained prior to the
issuance of licenses and permits. Our review of 45 applications (9 new, 1
conversion, 5 transfer, 4 substitution of corporate officers, 16 renewals, 8
entertainment permits, and 2 Sunday sales permits) disclosed that each lacked
certain information or documentation required by State law or BOLC policy.
 Twenty-four applications did not have one or more documents in the license
holder’s file, as required by State law. For example, for the files reviewed,
BOLC could not provide us with lease agreements or deeds, photo
identification, interior design layout, use and occupancy permit, or worker’s
compensation insurance.
 BOLC did not require applicants to submit security plans for all eight
entertainment permits tested, as required by State law. For two of these
permits, BOLC also could not provide documentation that the County police
department reviewed the applicant’s security plan, as required by State law.
Additionally, three of the permits (including the two permits mentioned
above) were granted temporary approval by the Board in December 2019 with
the stipulation that a correct use and occupancy permit will be submitted to
BOLC within 90 days. However, as of May 2021 BOLC had not obtained the
use and occupancy permit from these applicants.
 BOLC did not verify that 13 applications were complete and that accurate
responses were provided to questions regarding the applicants’ previous
violations. For example, for four of the applications tested, a required current
17

--- Page 20 ---
consent statement allowing BOLC access to the premises4 was not provided
with the application. Additionally, BOLC did not verify the accuracy of the
applicant’s response regarding previous violations of alcoholic beverage laws
or rules and regulation with its violations records. Specifically, based upon
our review of the Board’s hearing minutes, we found that 2 of the 13
applicants had prior violations, but the applicants responded that they did not
have violations. There was no documentation that BOLC followed up on
these discrepancies.
 BOLC did not have a documented supervisory review of 11 applications and
permits (including 1 application for the substitution of corporate officers, 2
Sunday sales, and 8 entertainment permits). BOLC advised us that it did not
require supervisory review for applications related to entertainment permits
and Sunday sales. In our opinion, all licensing transactions should be
subjected to supervisory review and approval to ensure that transactions are
properly completed and supported by required documentation (see the
previous bullets for examples of improperly completed transactions).
In accordance with State law, applications are to include documentation related to
certain requirements such as an applicant’s residency and citizenship, and a
license renewal application shall be accompanied by a consent statement signed
by the owner of the license premises allowing BOLC staff access to the premises
in the same manner as for an original application. Further, BOLC’s policies
stipulate the information and form of documentation that applicants are required
to submit in order for the Board to approve the issuance of a license. Similar
conditions were commented upon in our preceding report.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that BOLC
a. ensure all license applications are properly completed and all required
documentation is received before the applications are processed, in
accordance with governing statutes and BOLC rules and regulations
(repeat); and
b. revise its policies to require documented independent supervisory review
for all licensing activities, including applications for the substitution of
corporate officers and entertainment permits.
4 State law does allow a license holder to renew the license without obtaining a consent statement
if the license holder has a lease on the entire building for at least the term of the renewed license
and the building owner had previously filed a consent statement with the original or another
renewal application. However, since BOLC does not maintain a copy of the licensee’s lease
agreement on file, we could not determine whether the lease term extended for the entire
renewal period allowing for an exemption from the consent statement.
18

--- Page 21 ---
Finding 2
BOLC did not always have adequate documentation of criminal background
checks of license applicants and could not support that it verified applicants
did not have taxes due to the State or Prince George’s County prior to
issuing licenses.
Analysis
BOLC did not always have adequate documentation of criminal background
checks of license applicants and could not support that it verified applicants did
not have taxes due to the State or Prince George’s County prior to issuing
licenses, as required by law. Based on materiality and risk, we judgmentally
selected from BOLC records, 45 applications (29 non-renewal and 16 renewals),
approved from October 2017 to October 2020 for testing.
 BOLC did not have adequate documentation of background checks for 5 of
the 33 applicants that required a background check. State law and BOLC
policy require applicants for a new license, transfer, or substitution of
corporate officers to undergo a criminal background check through the
Maryland Criminal Justice Information System (CJIS) and have the results e-
mailed directly to the BOLC. The Board may deny or revoke a license for a
felony conviction of a license holder.
 BOLC could not document that 31 of the applicants were verified as not
having undisputed taxes due to the State or Prince George’s County prior to
issuance, as required by State law. For example, 29 applications lacked
documentation of County tax verification, 22 of which also lacked
documentation from the Comptroller of Maryland for State tax verification5.
According to State law, the Board may not issue, transfer, or renew a license
unless the Board is provided verification from the Comptroller and the County
that the new license applicant or license transferor has paid all undisputed
taxes or provided for payment of the taxes.
Similar conditions were commented upon in our preceding report.
Recommendation 2
We recommend that BOLC
a. adequately document criminal background checks of license applicants,
by retaining criminal records received from CJIS (repeat); and
5 This includes all new licenses which were not affected by the Comptroller of Maryland’s tax
verification suspension and any renewals tested prior to the COVID-19 pandemic health crisis.
19

--- Page 22 ---
b. maintain adequate documentation of verifications of undisputed State
and County taxes due for license applicants (repeat).
Finding 3
BOLC had not established adequate record keeping procedures and internal
controls over license fees and other office collections.
Analysis
BOLC had not established adequate record keeping procedures and internal
controls over license fees and other office collections. According to the County’s
records, collections deposited by BOLC during fiscal year 2020 totaled
approximately $1.5 million, which primarily consisted of license fees.
 Collections (checks and money orders) were not always immediately recorded
and restrictively endorsed upon receipt. Specifically, we noted 14 checks on
hand as of April 8, 2021, totaling approximately $24,000 that were not
recorded or restrictively endorsed. Although some of the supporting
documentation had been date stamped up to a month prior to our review, due
to lack of immediate recordation upon receipt we could not determine how
long the checks remained undeposited. BOLC management advised us that
generally checks were not recorded and endorsed until the supervisory review
indicated that the applications were sufficiently complete.
 Collections were not deposited daily, as required. Our test of nine collections,
totaling $125,300 deposited between February 2019 and March 2020,
identified delays ranging from three to nine business days for each collection.
 Collection, recordkeeping, deposit, and licensing duties were not adequately
segregated. Specifically, three employees handling collections also had
access or the responsibility to modify approved violation records, fine
receivable records, and could print and issue licenses. As a result, the related
collections could be misappropriated without detection.
The County procedures, which were not changed during the COVID-19 pandemic
health crisis, require adequate internal controls be established that safeguard
revenue and segregate duties where possible. Although our review did not
disclose any license application or issuance fees that were not ultimately
deposited, the aforementioned control deficiencies could allow the manipulation
of records and misappropriation of collections without timely detection. Similar
conditions related to recordation, untimely deposit, and segregation of duties were
commented upon in our preceding audit report.
20

--- Page 23 ---
Recommendation 3
We recommend that BOLC establish adequate internal controls over office
collections in accordance with County standards. Specifically, we
recommend that BOLC
a. record collections (repeat) and restrictively endorse checks immediately
upon receipt;
b. deposit collections daily in accordance with County policy (repeat); and
c. separate the collection, recordkeeping, deposit, and licensing duties
(repeat).
We advised BOLC how to achieve the necessary separation of duties using
existing personnel.
21

--- Page 24 ---
Objective 2 – Inspections
Objective and Methodology
Our objective for the inspection process was to evaluate the adequacy of Board
policies and procedures for conducting inspections of alcoholic beverage
licensees and maintaining related records, and to determine whether inspections
selected for review and testing were performed in accordance with governing
laws, policies, and procedures.
To accomplish our objective, we reviewed applicable State laws, and the policies
and procedures established by the Board and BOLC administrative personnel
governing the inspection process and related records. We interviewed BOLC
staff to determine the processes used to schedule, conduct, record, and monitor
inspections.
We obtained a data file from the inspection database maintained on the Prince
George’s County network, of liquor inspections performed during fiscal years
2018 through 2020, which we deemed reliable for our purposes. We
judgmentally selected 55 licensees to determine if inspections were properly
documented and supported with an inspection report. We also obtained electronic
spreadsheets used by BOLC to schedule certain types of inspections for all
licensees, and matched them to the LMS to determine whether all active licenses
were actually inspected. Finally, we tested inspections related to complaints
received by BOLC, as well as complaints registered through the Prince George’s
County 311 Community Relations Service Request System (311 System), to
evaluate BOLC’s process for complaint-initiated inspections.
Due to the COVID-19 pandemic health crisis, BOLC suspended quarterly routine
inspections from March 16, 2020 through May 2020 and quarterly entertainment
inspections from March 16, 2020 through June 2020. Instead, during this period
BOLC only performed one of its four regular types of inspections - focused
inspections, which were to ensure establishments complied with the pandemic
executive orders. BOLC resumed quarterly routine inspections in June 2020 and
entertainment inspections in July 2020 after the County authorized establishments
to open with limited capacity.
22

--- Page 25 ---
Background
State law requires BOLC to conduct periodic Figure 4
inspections of businesses licensed to sell
Inspections Conducted
alcoholic beverages (licensees), including those Fiscal Year 2020
who have also been issued permits to provide
entertainment in Prince George’s County. The
Type Number
law does not specify the frequency of the
inspections that are to be conducted. BOLC Routine 3,074
conducts four types of inspections, routine, Focused 1,513
focused, compliance, and entertainment (added Compliance 164
in fiscal year 2019). During fiscal year 2020, Entertainment 478
BOLC inspectors conducted 5,229 inspections Total 5,229
(See Figure 4). Source: BOLC Records
 Routine inspections are standard in scope, and cover operating requirements
established for licensees in various Board policies, including having a current
license properly displayed, having applicable permits, not serving minors, and
not serving after hours. Routine inspections are assigned to all inspectors to
be completed monthly according to established routes in designated areas,
with the goal of inspecting all licensees at least quarterly.
 Focused inspections are narrow in scope and address a specific requirement,
complaint, or common problem with licensees and are used for training
purposes. These inspections are assigned to inspectors as needed such as to
verify whether licensees complied with the County’s pandemic executive
orders.
 Compliance inspections are conducted to identify licensees that allow minors
(under age 21) to illegally purchase alcoholic beverages. The inspection is
performed using at least two inspectors and a minor operative, who attempts
to purchase an alcoholic beverage at the selected licensed establishment.
There is no set number of inspections to be conducted as they are scheduled
on an intermittent basis depending on the availability of minor operatives or in
response to a complaint.
 Entertainment inspections are standard in scope, and cover the basic
operating requirements in various Board policies for licensees with
entertainment permits, including having applicable permits, not posing a
threat to the peace and safety of the community, not allowing minors on the
establishment’s premise, and not serving after hours. Entertainment
inspections are assigned to all inspectors to be completed monthly according
23

--- Page 26 ---
to established routes in designated areas, with the goal of inspecting all
licensees at least quarterly.
Certain of the aforementioned inspections include following-up on complaints,
which are received at the BOLC via telephone, e-mail, or in-person, and through
the County’s 311 System. According to BOLC and County records, BOLC
received 30 complaints in fiscal year 2020 – 13 at BOLC and 17 from the 311
System.
For each inspection, BOLC inspectors prepare an Inspector’s Report, which is
used to document the areas reviewed as well as any violations and corrective
actions needed. In April 2018, BOLC began using the inspection database to
prepare electronic inspection reports (previously in paper form).
The rules for inspections were promulgated by Board policy under the authority
of State law, which also established rules of conduct to govern licensee business
operations. The inspection policies stipulate that all license holders must
cooperate with representatives of the BOLC whenever these persons are on the
licensed premises on official business. In addition, the BOLC Standard
Operating Procedures, established general written guidelines for liquor
inspectors. As of November 2020, BOLC employed 3 supervising inspectors
(chief inspector and 2 deputy chief inspectors) and 12 part-time inspectors.
Conclusion
Based on our review, inspections were not always properly completed and were
not always subject to an independent supervisory review.
Finding
Finding 4
Inspection reports were not always properly completed or subject to an
independent documented supervisory review.
Analysis
Inspection reports were not always properly completed or subject to an
independent documented supervisory review. According to BOLC policy, each
inspection report must be completed fully, including the signature of the licensee
or their designee before submission. A supervising inspector will complete an
independent review of all inspection reports to ensure they were completed
properly. We judgmentally selected for testing 55 inspections (including 20
routine, 10 focused, 10 compliance, and 15 entertainment) performed during the
period of January 1, 2019 through October 28, 2020.
24

--- Page 27 ---
 Five inspections performed between July 2020 through October 2020 (three
routine, one entertainment, and one focused) were signed by the inspector
rather than the owner or manager of the licensed business. BOLC
management had temporarily allowed inspectors to sign on behalf of the
owner between mid-March through mid-June 2020 due to the COVID-19
pandemic health crisis, but BOLC management advised us that this policy was
reversed effective mid-June 2020, and all five inspections were subsequent to
the aforementioned period.
 Thirty-eight inspections (3 routine, 10 focused, 10 compliance, and 15
entertainment) did not have a documented independent supervisory review, as
required by BOLC policy. BOLC management advised us that contrary to the
written requirements in the BOLC policy, as a practice, supervisors only
review routine inspections.
Similar conditions were commented upon in our preceding audit report.
Recommendation 4
We recommend that BOLC ensure all inspection reports are
a. signed by the owner or manager of the licensed business to provide
assurance that the inspection was actually performed (repeat); and
b. subject to an independent documented supervisory review according to
written BOLC policy, to ensure proper completion of the inspection
(repeat).
25

--- Page 28 ---
Objective 3 – Disciplinary Procedures
Objective and Methodology
Our objective for the BOLC disciplinary procedures section was to evaluate the
disciplinary process, BOLC’s compliance with applicable State law, its
enforcement of applicable Board rules and regulations governing licensees, and
its maintenance of disciplinary records.
To accomplish this objective, we interviewed BOLC employees and reviewed
BOLC Standard Operating Procedures, and the Rules and Regulations of the
Board of License Commissioners for Prince George’s County to determine the
types of disciplinary proceedings that existed and the process for each. We also
observed two virtual public Board hearings.
BOLC used three methods for tracking fines assessed and the collection of
violation fines: (1) the BOLC License Manager System (LMS) is used to record
violations taken to the board, hearing dates, fines assessed, and payment status,
(2) a spreadsheet, implemented in March 2020, is used to record the offer letter
sent including fine amount, payment plan, late fee, and payment status, and (3) a
folder containing paper copies of the unpaid fine letters, which serves as the
detailed records. We performed testing of violations recorded on LMS from
March 2018 through December 2020; the spreadsheet; and the folder to evaluate
(for the specific activity tested) whether the disciplinary process was properly
administered and documented. We also reviewed the licensee paper files and the
minutes for Board hearings that evidenced the decisions and actions taken for the
violations tested.
Due to the COVID-19 pandemic health crisis, the Board hearings were held in a
virtual manner effective March 2020. In addition, BOLC allowed payment plans
for fines assessed and established the secondary receivable spreadsheet to track all
fines assessed, paid, and on the payment plan.
Background
Most disciplinary action is generated from periodic inspections of the businesses
licensed to sell alcoholic beverages. Disciplinary action also results from County
and municipality police referrals, Board order violations, and reports from the
Comptroller of Maryland. BOLC inspectors, County police, and the Comptroller
of Maryland identify instances of potential licensee noncompliance with laws and
BOLC rules and regulations. The Board is responsible for adjudicating cases to
determine if violations have actually occurred and for setting the related penalties.
According to BOLC’s records as of December 2020, it adjudicated all 102
violations issued in fiscal year 2019 and 56 issued in fiscal year 2020.
26

--- Page 29 ---
State law provides that a local licensing board may revoke or suspend a license at
its discretion for any reason to promote the peace or safety of the community in
which the premises are located. The law further provides that a board may adopt
regulations regarding the conduct of business by license holders. Additionally,
the law states that a board shall revoke or suspend a license under certain specific
circumstances (such as making any material false statement in any application for
a license or permit). The law also allows that, for a first offense, instead of or in
addition to suspending or revoking the license, a board may impose a fine not
exceeding $1,500 (unless the offense is furnishing for or allowing underage
consumption in which case the minimum fine is $1,500). For a second offense in
the same 24-month period, a fine not exceeding $6,000, or for a third offense a
fine of $7,500, may be imposed.
While State law provides the Board may initiate revocation or suspension
procedures, it also provides that a license holder against whom proceedings are
brought shall be entitled to a hearing. The Board meets twice a month in public
hearing sessions to adjudicate cases resulting from violations and once a month to
grant new licenses and license transfers. The hearings are quasi-judicial and
include testimony from inspectors, police, licensees, and their legal
representatives.
BOLC’s Director and Chief Inspector are responsible for screening reported
violations received to determine those that warrant being placed on the Board’s
monthly administrative hearing schedule. The Board determines during the
administrative hearing whether a violation warrants having a public hearing with
the licensee. Licensees may be required to attend a public Board hearing, allowed
to pay a fine without a public hearing, or allow their license to be suspended or
revoked in lieu of paying the fine.
During a Board hearing, the Board determines the guilt or innocence of the
licensee based upon the evidence presented. Licensees may be represented by
counsel, and the Board will hear testimony and obtain other information (such as
any violation of the licensee during the preceding two years) prior to making a
decision and determining whether a penalty is appropriate. Licensees are
provided the Board’s rulings verbally at the hearing and in writing if the ruling
results in a penalty (fine, suspension, or revocation) via an Offer Letter Notice.
The Notice includes the law or rule violated, the amount of the penalty, and the
amount of time the licensee has to pay the fine (usually up to 21 days). The
Board’s decision is documented in the meeting minutes and a copy of the Offer
Letter Notice is included in the licensee files to document the Board’s action.
Licensees may appeal the decisions of the Board to the Circuit Court. The
licensee is summoned to appear before the Board for a delinquency hearing if
27

--- Page 30 ---
they are 7 days late in paying the fine by the required 21 days allowed (28 days
since fine assessed).
Conclusion
BOLC did not maintain adequate receivable records, assess late fees, and have an
independent supervisory review to monitor the assessment and collection of
violation fines.
Finding
Finding 5
BOLC did not maintain adequate records, did not adequately review the
assessment and collection process, and did not always assess late fees or take
other required action on delinquent accounts.
Analysis
BOLC did not maintain adequate records, did not adequately review the
assessment and collection process, and did not always assess late fees or take
other required action on delinquent accounts. According to the LMS, BOLC
issued violation fines totaling approximately $77,600 during fiscal year 2020.
 BOLC’s automated records were not reliable since they were not always
updated with information needed to monitor receivables, such as the fine
amount, any applicable late fee, violation date, and the status of the
receivable. Additionally, the records did not track the current outstanding
balances, issuance of follow-up notices, and the related payment receipt
number to ensure that amount due was paid. For example, for one violation,
the LMS reflected no amount due when the separately maintained spreadsheet
indicated an outstanding late fee of $500.
 BOLC did not always assess required late fees on delinquent fines and failed
to issue summons timely for the licensee to appear at a delinquency hearing.
Our test of the resolution of 16 violations heard between February 2019 and
November 2020, identified 7 violations with fines totaling $27,500 that had
not been paid within 21 days and a summons for a delinquency hearing had
not been issued as required. Additionally, for three of these violations, BOLC
had not assessed the required $500 late fee timely. For example, one licensee
did not pay their $1,500 fine due in September 2020, and BOLC did not assess
a late fee or issue a summons for a delinquency hearing until five months
later.
28

--- Page 31 ---
 BOLC’s supervisory review of violation fines recordation, collection, and
follow-up recordkeeping processes were not documented. BOLC policy
requires a supervisor to ensure that violations and fines are properly recorded
and payments had been received, including late fees. Although BOLC
management advised that the reviews were conducted, there was no
documentation to support these assertions.
Similar conditions were commented upon in our preceding audit report.
Recommendation 5
We recommend that BOLC
a. maintain adequate account receivable records (repeat);
b. monitor fines assessed by performing documented follow-up, ensuring
that proper late fees are assessed and collected (repeat), and notifying the
Board of delinquencies as required; and
c. perform documented independent supervisory review of violation fines
recordation, collection, and follow-up recordkeeping processes (repeat).
29

--- Page 32 ---
Objective 4 – Management Oversight
Objective and Methodology
Our objective was to determine if adequate oversight exists over BOLC
operations. To accomplish this objective, we reviewed Board policies,
interviewed BOLC employees, and reviewed BOLC’s procedures with respect to
payroll, employee performance evaluations, employee work load requirements,
user access to critical data files, financial disclosures, and employee compliance
with statutory independence restrictions. We also tested payroll processing,
employee productivity, user access to critical data files, and employee
independence. Our review was restricted to BOLC oversight of its operations and
compliance with certain County policies. Our review did not include an
assessment of the appropriateness or suitability (to achieve the stated purpose) of
the County governance practices or policies.
Conclusion
We determined that BOLC was not monitoring user access to their systems and
critical data files on its network, or its employees’ access to County systems.
Finding
Finding 6
BOLC did not adequately monitor user access to the License Manager
System (LMS), the County’s 311 System, and to critical data files on BOLC’s
network resulting in employees with improper or unnecessary access.
Analysis
BOLC did not adequately monitor user access to LMS, the County’s 311 System,
and to critical data files on BOLC’s network (maintained by the Prince George’s
County government). Although the network was maintained by the County,
BOLC was responsible for authorizing user access and our review disclosed that
BOLC did not perform periodic user access reviews, did not establish a process to
ensure user access was restricted commensurate with each employee’s duties, and
did not have access removed timely when it was no longer needed. As a result,
we noted that access to certain BOLC and County systems was not adequately
restricted and certain employees had improper or unnecessary access. As of
February 2021, 9 BOLC employees had access to LMS and 30 users had access to
critical data files on BOLC’s network, and as of April 2021, 22 BOLC users had
access to the County’s 311 System.
30

--- Page 33 ---
 All nine BOLC employees with access to LMS had the ability to process
critical transactions without any automated independent review and approval,
and without a record to track the transactions processed. BOLC advised that
the LMS did not have the ability to set user access restrictions, did not save
transaction history, and did not have the capability to generate user transaction
reports of critical changes for independent supervisory review. In response to
our inquiries, BOLC implemented view only access for four of these
employees. BOLC further advised that it is planning to pursue a new system
with the ability to restrict access and generate transaction history reports,
which is necessary to permit an after-the-fact independent supervisory review
of the propriety of transactions processed.
 As of February 2021, 24 of the BOLC users with access to BOLC’s network
had unnecessary access to critical BOLC files, such as violation fines
receivable records or personal identifiable information on the application.
These users included 23 current employees (5 commissioners, 3 full-time
inspectors, 3 administrative employees, 11 part-time inspectors, and BOLC
legal counsel) and 1 former employee who resigned in May 2020.
 As of April 2021, 16 BOLC users (7 inspectors, 1 administrative employee,
and 8 former employees – ranging from 10 months to 3 years from their last
day of employment) had access capabilities to the County’s 311 System that
were unnecessary for their job duties. These users had the ability to record
comments regarding follow-up actions taken to address the complaint and
change the status of the complaint (open versus closed). We were advised by
BOLC that these function should be performed by management instead of the
aforementioned employees.
According to the County’s Access Control Standard, user IDs that are unused for
45 days should be disabled and deleted within 90 days, access to sensitive
information should be restricted, and managers of organizational units are
responsible for approving and implementing procedures to ensure consistency
with the County’s policy. Although not required by County policies, best
practices in the State of Maryland Information Security Policy requires audit trails
be maintained for user activity and processes and periodic access reviews be
performed at least semi-annually. Similar conditions regarding the lack of a
documented supervisory review of critical systems and maintaining
documentation of system changes were commented upon in our preceding report.
Recommendation 6
We recommend that BOLC ensure compliance with County IT policies, and
that the BOLC in conjunction with the County, should consider establishing
31

--- Page 34 ---
additional access controls over critical systems and data files. Specifically,
the following actions should be taken or considered, as appropriate,
a. perform documented periodic access review of all critical systems and
timely remove access when an employee leaves or no longer requires it
(including those identified above);
b. establish a formal documented process, subject to supervisory review, to
ensure user access is adequately restricted commensurate with each
employee’s duties (repeat); and
c. implement system changes to capture a user’s transaction history and
generate a report for independent documented review (repeat).
32

--- Page 35 ---
APPENDIX

--- Page 36 ---
Board of License Commissioners
for Prince George’s County
Agency Response Form
Finding 1
BOLC did not ensure that all documents required by State law or BOLC policy were
obtained prior to the issuance of licenses and permits.
We recommend that BOLC
a. ensure all license applications are properly completed and all required documentation
is received before the applications are processed, in accordance with governing statutes
and BOLC rules and regulations (repeat); and
b. revise its policies to require documented independent supervisory review for all
licensing activities, including applications for the substitution of corporate officers and
entertainment permits.
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 1a Agree Estimated Completion Date: 03/01/22
Please provide details of The Board of License Commissioners (BOLC) has implemented a three
corrective action or (3) level review and approval process. Procedures were developed to
explain disagreement. segregate the duties of the licensing process. The applications are
reviewed by two (2) members of the administrative staff. Both
members will sign the application after ensuring that ALL required
documents and information has been received. A supervisor will
conduct a final review and sign after ensuring that the application is
complete and accurate. A check list will be developed which will
delineate the documentation required to effectuate the license for the
different type of business entities.
Recommendation 1b Agree Estimated Completion Date: 03/01/22
Please provide details of The BOLC agrees to revise its policies to require documented
corrective action or independent supervisory review for all licensing activities, including
explain disagreement. applications for the substitution of corporate officers and entertainment
permits.
Page 1 of 6

--- Page 37 ---
Board of License Commissioners
for Prince George’s County
Agency Response Form
Finding 2
BOLC did not always have adequate documentation of criminal background checks of
license applicants and could not support that it verified applicants did not have taxes due to
the State or Prince George’s County prior to issuing licenses.
We recommend that BOLC
a. adequately document criminal background checks of license applicants, by retaining
criminal records received from CJIS (repeat); and
b. maintain adequate documentation of verifications of undisputed State and County taxes
due for license applicants (repeat).
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide The Board does not require background checks for renewals. Some of
additional comments as the test items which the auditors took note of fell into this category.
deemed necessary. Background checks completed during the original application process
were destroyed based on the previous interpretation of the law.
Recommendation 2a Agree Estimated Completion Date: 12/01/21
Please provide details of The BOLC agrees that there are some deficiencies in obtaining
corrective action or background checks for SCO’s. A policy was developed which includes
explain disagreement. key controls and procedures for tracking CJIS Information. The Chief
Liquor Inspector will maintain a password protected log and copies of
CJIS reports submitted to the BOLC.
Recommendation 2b Agree Estimated Completion Date: 01/01/22
Please provide details of The BOLC will forward all tax request verifications to the State’s
corrective action or Comptroller’s Office and the County’s Treasury Division.
explain disagreement. Documentation will be maintained in a separate, password protected
folder in the agency’s internal database for tracking. These agencies will
only notify the BOLC of licensees that currently have outstanding taxes.
Page 2 of 6

--- Page 38 ---
Board of License Commissioners
for Prince George’s County
Agency Response Form
Finding 3
BOLC had not established adequate record keeping procedures and internal controls over
license fees and other office collections.
We recommend that BOLC establish adequate internal controls over office collections in
accordance with County standards. Specifically, we recommend that BOLC
a. record collections (repeat) and restrictively endorse checks immediately upon receipt;
b. deposit collections daily in accordance with County policy (repeat); and
c. separate the collection, recordkeeping, deposit, and licensing duties (repeat).
We advised BOLC how to achieve the necessary separation of duties using existing
personnel.
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide During the COVID-19 pandemic, in order to maintain a safe and healthy
additional comments as environment, employees were required to telework. The county has now
deemed necessary. resumed near normal operations, the BOLC will adhere to its standard
operating procedures.
Recommendation 3a Agree Estimated Completion Date: 12/01/21
Please provide details of Revenue is immediately recorded by the staff member receiving the
corrective action or payment into a spreadsheet maintained solely by that staff member.
explain disagreement.
Recommendation 3b Agree Estimated Completion Date: 12/01/21
Please provide details of The Board of License Commissioners incorporated a teller scan digital
corrective action or check system to deposit the revenue. Deposits are made daily when
explain disagreement. possible; when the deposit is not completed the same day, the funds will
be maintained in a locked safe.
Recommendation 3c Agree Estimated Completion Date: 12/01/21
Please provide details of The Administrative Manager will assume the responsibility of
corrective action or maintaining the violations spreadsheet to separate the collection,
explain disagreement. recordkeeping, deposit, and licensing duties of the administrative staff.
The BOLC’s staffing level does not allow for complete separation of
duties.
Page 3 of 6

--- Page 39 ---
Board of License Commissioners
for Prince George’s County
Agency Response Form
Finding 4
Inspection reports were not always properly completed or subject to an independent
documented supervisory review.
We recommend that BOLC ensure all inspection reports are
a. signed by the owner or manager of the licensed business to provide assurance that the
inspection was actually performed (repeat); and
b. subject to an independent documented supervisory review according to written BOLC
policy, to ensure proper completion of the inspection (repeat).
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 4a Agree Estimated Completion Date: 03/01/22
Please provide details of Effective September 24, 2021, the Director made it optional for
corrective action or Inspectors to sign on behalf of the Licensee/Manager for all inspections
explain disagreement. due to continued COVID-19 concerns. This option has been
discontinued and signature of licensee or designee is now required.
Recommendation 4b Agree Estimated Completion Date: 04/01/22
Please provide details of The current Board of License Commissioners SOP 2.403 (Scheduling
corrective action or Inspection Assignments and Reporting) will be revised, referring to the use of
explain disagreement. a color-coded database, to verify that inspections were completed at all
establishments each quarter.
Page 4 of 6

--- Page 40 ---
Board of License Commissioners
for Prince George’s County
Agency Response Form
Finding 5
BOLC did not maintain adequate records, did not adequately review the assessment and
collection process, and did not always assess late fees or take other required action on
delinquent accounts.
We recommend that BOLC
a. maintain adequate account receivable records (repeat);
b. monitor fines assessed by performing documented follow-up, ensuring that proper late
fees are assessed and collected (repeat), and notifying the Board of delinquencies as
required; and
c. perform documented independent supervisory review of violation fines recordation,
collection, and follow-up recordkeeping processes (repeat).
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 5a Agree Estimated Completion Date: 02/01/22
Please provide details of Each administrative staff maintains their individual monthly
corrective action or reconciliation log. As receipts are written, they are added to the log. The
explain disagreement. Administrative Manager performs a reconciliation of receipts as deposits
are made. The full reconciliation is performed at the end of the month.
Recommendation 5b Agree Estimated Completion Date: 03/01/22
Please provide details of A formal follow up process will be formulated. The BOLC will send
corrective action or reminder notices for violation payments. The BOLC will consult with
explain disagreement. the Office of Information to inquire if the current License Management
System has the capability to provide reminder notifications and/or add
due date field. Late fees accrued were not always assessed. The
Administrative Manager will be responsible for maintaining the
violation spreadsheet and data entry into the License Manager System so
that late payments can be brought to the Board’s attention.
Recommendation 5c Agree Estimated Completion Date: 03/01/22
Please provide details of The Director or his/her designee will perform a documented independent
corrective action or supervisory review of violation fines recordation, collection, and follow-
explain disagreement. up recordkeeping on a monthly basis.
Page 5 of 6

--- Page 41 ---
Board of License Commissioners
for Prince George’s County
Agency Response Form
Finding 6
BOLC did not adequately monitor user access to the License Manager System (LMS), the
County’s 311 System, and to critical data files on BOLC’s network resulting in employees
with improper or unnecessary access.
We recommend that BOLC ensure compliance with County IT policies, and that the BOLC
in conjunction with the County, should consider establishing additional access controls
over critical systems and data files. Specifically, the following actions should be taken or
considered, as appropriate,
a. perform documented periodic access review of all critical systems and timely remove
access when an employee leaves or no longer requires it (including those identified
above);
b. establish a formal documented process, subject to supervisory review, to ensure user
access is adequately restricted commensurate with each employee’s duties (repeat); and
c. implement system changes to capture a user’s transaction history and generate a report
for independent documented review (repeat).
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 6a Agree Estimated Completion Date: 02/01/22
Please provide details of The BOLC will implement the practice of contacting the Office of
corrective action or Information Technology (OIT), in January of each year, to perform
explain disagreement. documented access review of all critical systems and timely remove
access when an employee leaves or no longer requires access.
Recommendation 6b Agree Estimated Completion Date: 03/01/22
Please provide details of The BOLC will establish a formal documented process, subject to supervisory
corrective action or and IT Coordinator review, to ensure user access is adequately restricted
explain disagreement. commensurate with each employee’s duties.
Recommendation 6c Agree Estimated Completion Date: 07/01/22
Please provide details of The BOLC is consulting with OIT toward the purchase and/or development of
corrective action or a system that will capture a user’s transaction history and generate a report for
explain disagreement. independent documented review.
Page 6 of 6

--- Page 42 ---
A T
UDIT EAM
Catherine M. Clarke, CPA, CIA, CFE
Audit Manager
Tu N. Vuong
Senior Auditor
Matthew P. Henry
Gary B. Staples, CPA
Staff Auditors