Title: Baltimore City Community College
Date: 02/09/2022
Type: Fiscal Compliance
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=6203f85aa1ce5812d83d8b14
Extracted: 2025-06-20T00:14:09.776800
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Audit Report
Baltimore City Community College
February 2022
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Senator Clarence K. Lam, M.D. (Senate Chair) Delegate Carol L. Krimm (House Chair)
Senator Malcolm L. Augustine Delegate Steven J. Arentz
Senator Adelaide C. Eckardt Delegate Mark S. Chang
Senator George C. Edwards Delegate Nicholas P. Charles II
Senator Katie Fry Hester Delegate Andrea Fletcher Harrison
Senator Cheryl C. Kagan Delegate Trent M. Kittleman
Senator Benjamin F. Kramer Delegate David Moon
Senator Cory V. McCray Delegate Julie Palakovich Carr
Senator Justin D. Ready Delegate Elizabeth G. Proctor
Senator Craig J. Zucker Delegate Geraldine Valentino-Smith
To Obtain Further Information
Office of Legislative Audits
The Warehouse at Camden Yards
351 West Camden Street, Suite 400
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Phone: 410-946-5900
Maryland Relay: 711
TTY: 410-946-5401 ꞏ 301-970-5401
E-mail: OLAWebmaster@ola.state.md.us
Website: www.ola.state.md.us
To Report Fraud
The Office of Legislative Audits operates a Fraud Hotline to report fraud, waste, or abuse involving State
of Maryland government resources. Reports of fraud, waste, or abuse may be communicated anonymously
by a toll-free call to 1-877-FRAUD-11, by mail to the Fraud Hotline, c/o Office of Legislative Audits, or
through the Office’s website.
Nondiscrimination Statement
The Department of Legislative Services does not discriminate on the basis of age, ancestry, color, creed,
marital status, national origin, race, religion, gender, gender identity, sexual orientation, or disability in the
admission or access to its programs, services, or activities. The Department’s Information Officer has been
designated to coordinate compliance with the nondiscrimination requirements contained in Section 35.107
of the United States Department of Justice Regulations. Requests for assistance should be directed to the
Information Officer at 410-946-5400 or 410-970-5400.

--- Page 3 ---
February 9, 2022
Senator Clarence K. Lam, M.D., Senate Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Delegate Carol L. Krimm, House Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Members of Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Annapolis, Maryland
Ladies and Gentlemen:
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the Baltimore City Community
College (BCCC) for the period beginning November 30, 2016 and ending
November 30, 2020. BCCC is an urban two-year institution that primarily offers
associate of arts degrees and certificate programs in the business and health
services fields, as well as general studies for the purpose of continuing education
at a four-year institution.
Our audit disclosed that BCCC did not require or obtain a review of the
automated system used by its vendor responsible for processing student refunds,
to ensure that sensitive student information residing on the system was properly
safeguarded. In addition, BCCC had not established sufficient controls over
significant aspects of its financial aid award and record keeping processes.
Furthermore, BCCC was unable to provide adequate documentation to support the
propriety of a $72,700 payroll adjustment that increased the payments made to a
senior BCCC management employee. In addition, BCCC overpaid another
employee $8,900 due to an undetected adjustment miscalculation.
Our audit also disclosed that BCCC did not always adhere to State procurement
regulations regarding competitive procurement solicitations, obtaining Board of
Public Works approval of contracts, and publicizing bid solicitations and contract
awards. In addition, contract invoices were not always adequately verified.
Furthermore, BCCC did not comply with State law and, during the period of this
audit, Department of Information Technology policies for the procurement and
monitoring of its two resource sharing agreements.

--- Page 4 ---
Effective July 1, 2021, State law exempts BCCC from most provisions of State
procurement law, as well as State oversight of its Information Technology (IT)
policies, standards, and procurements. The law also effectively exempts BCCC
from Department of Information Technology oversight of its resource sharing
agreements. However, the law requires BCCC to develop procurement policies
and procedures that promote the purposes of State procurement law, and an IT
plan that includes IT policies and standards that are functionally compatible with
the statewide IT master plan and BCCC’s strategic plan. In light of the
aforementioned findings relating to procurement and resource sharing
agreements, we deem it essential for good governance that BCCC’s newly
developed procurement policies and procedures and IT plan include the controls
addressed in our recommendations relating to those findings, and that BCCC’s
Board of Trustees be provided a formal oversight function.
We also noted that adequate safeguards were not in place to protect BCCC’s
computer network and related administrative systems from security risks.
Sensitive personally identifiable information (PII) maintained by BCCC was
stored in a manner that made the information vulnerable to improper disclosure
and malware protection for BCCC computers was not sufficient to provide
adequate assurance that these computers were properly protected.
Finally, we found that BCCC did not conduct physical inventories of equipment
and did not maintain complete equipment records as required.
Our audit included a review to determine the status of the eight findings contained
in our preceding audit report. We call your attention to our determination that
BCCC satisfactorily addressed six of these findings. The remaining two findings,
including a finding related to the safeguarding of PII, are repeated in the report.
BCCC’s response to this audit is included as an appendix to this report. In
accordance with State law, we have reviewed the response and while BCCC
generally agrees with the recommendations we identified certain instances in
which statements in the response conflict with or disagree with the report
findings. In each instance, we reviewed and reassessed our audit documentation,
and reaffirmed the validity of our finding. In accordance with generally accepted
government auditing standards, we have included “auditor’s comments” within
the response to explain our position. We will advise the Joint Audit and
Evaluation Committee of any outstanding issues that we cannot resolve with
BCCC. Additionally, we have edited BCCC’s response to remove certain vendor
names or products and certain detailed information regarding information systems
security, as allowed by our policy.
2

--- Page 5 ---
We wish to acknowledge the cooperation extended to us during the audit by
BCCC and its willingness to address the audit issues and implement appropriate
corrective actions.
Respectfully submitted,
Gregory A. Hook, CPA
Legislative Auditor
3

--- Page 6 ---
4

--- Page 7 ---
Table of Contents
Background Information 7
Agency Responsibilities 7
Financial Statement Audits 7
Procurement Law and Information Technology Exemptions 7
Resource Sharing Agreements 8
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report 9
Findings and Recommendations 10
Student Personal Information
Finding 1 – Baltimore City Community College (BCCC) did not require 10
or obtain a review of the automated system used by its vendor
responsible for processing student refunds, to ensure that sensitive
information residing on the system was properly safeguarded.
Student Financial Aid
Finding 2 – BCCC had not established sufficient controls over significant 11
aspects of the financial aid award and record keeping processes within
the financial aid office.
Payroll
Finding 3 – BCCC was unable to provide adequate documentation to 12
support a payroll adjustment increasing a senior BCCC management
employee’s compensation by $72,700. In addition, BCCC overpaid
another employee $8,900 due to an undetected adjustment
miscalculation.
Procurements and Disbursements
Finding 4 – BCCC did not always adhere to State procurement regulations 14
regarding conducting competitive solicitations, obtaining Board of
Public Works approval of contracts, and the publication of bid
solicitations and awards. In addition, contract invoices were not
always adequately verified prior to payment.
Finding 5 – During our audit period, BCCC did not comply with State law 15
and Department of Information Technology policies for the
procurement and monitoring of its two resource sharing agreements.
5

--- Page 8 ---
Information Systems Security and Control
* Finding 6 – Sensitive personally identifiable information was maintained 17
without adequate safeguards and identification.
Finding 7 – Malware protection controls for BCCC computers were not 18
sufficient to provide adequate assurance that computers were properly
protected from security risks.
Equipment
* Finding 8 – BCCC did not conduct physical inventories of equipment and 19
did not maintain complete equipment records as required.
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology 21
Agency Response Appendix
* Denotes item repeated in full or part from preceding audit report
6

--- Page 9 ---
Background Information
Agency Responsibilities
The Baltimore City Community College (BCCC) is an urban two-year institution
and operates under the jurisdiction of BCCC’s Board of Trustees. BCCC
primarily offers associate degrees and certificate programs across the areas of
behavioral and social sciences, pre-health professions, business, visual and
performing arts, and STEM (science, technology, engineering, and mathematics).
The degrees and certificates offered allow students to graduate and enter the
workforce as well as continue their education at four-year institutions. BCCC has
one main campus, and three additional educational locations. BCCC’s reported
full-time equivalent enrollment for credit courses in the spring 2020 semester was
1,102. According to the State’s accounting records, BCCC’s fiscal year 2020
revenues totaled approximately $69.8 million, which included a State General
Fund appropriation of approximately $40.1 million.
Financial Statement Audits
BCCC engaged an independent accounting firm to perform audits of its financial
statements and those of its associated foundation, for the fiscal years ended June
30, 2017, 2018, 2019, and 2020. In the related audit reports, the firm stated that
BCCC’s and its foundation’s (referred to as “discretely presented unit”) financial
statements presented fairly, in all material respects, the respective financial
position of BCCC and the respective changes in financial position and, where
applicable, cash flows thereof for the years then ended in accordance with
accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America.
Procurement Law and Information Technology Exemptions
Chapter 732, Laws of Maryland 2021, effective July 1, 2021 exempts BCCC from
most provisions of State procurement law and from State oversight of its (1)
information technology (IT) policies, standards, and procurement and (2) capital
improvement and service contracts valued at $500,000 or less. The law further
provides that, subject to review and approval of the Board of Public Works,
BCCC must develop policies and procedures governing procurement by the
college, including those governing conflict of interest issues. The policies and
procedures must promote the purposes of State procurement law.
The law requires the BCCC Board of Trustees to also develop an IT plan that
includes IT policies and standards that are functionally compatible with the
7

--- Page 10 ---
statewide IT master plan and BCCC’s strategic plan. The law would also exempt
BCCC from oversight from the Department of Information Technology regarding
resource sharing agreements.
Due to the effective date of the referenced legislation, which was subsequent to
our audit period, our review of BCCC operations included the activities prior to
the implementation of the aforementioned legislation.
Resource Sharing Agreements
On November 18, 2016, we issued a report on our Special Review of Resource
Sharing Lease Agreements payments deposited into escrow accounts maintained
outside of State control by a law firm. Under these agreements, three State
agencies received compensation from telecommunication companies for the use
of the State’s communications infrastructure, such as the installation of private
communication systems on State-owned towers. As a result of the concerns
identified during the special review, we conducted a performance audit to
evaluate the State’s use and oversight of telecommunications resource sharing
agreements between multiple State agencies and private companies.
On August 3, 2018, we issued a performance audit report on Telecommunication
Resource Sharing Agreements which contained several additional findings related
to BCCC. This report included a number of findings related to selected agencies,
but emphasized the need for the Department of Information Technology to
exercise greater oversight of the resource sharing agreements entered into by State
agencies in general. The performance audit included the following select findings
related to BCCC.
 BCCC did not verify that all monetary compensation was received,
 BCCC did not always include adequate provisions to protect State interests,
 BCCC allowed telecommunications companies to continue using State
resources after agreements had expired,
 BCCC had not obtained Board of Public Works approval for resource sharing
agreement renewals as required by State law.
BCCC agreed to the findings and recommendations in the August 2018 report.
During our current audit we reviewed procedures and controls over BCCC’s two
resource sharing agreements. The related results of our review are included in
finding 5.
8

--- Page 11 ---
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report
Our audit included a review to determine the status of the eight findings contained
in our preceding audit report dated November 14, 2017. As disclosed in Figure 1,
we determined that BCCC satisfactorily addressed six of these findings. The
remaining two findings are repeated in this report.
Figure 1
Status of Preceding Findings
Preceding Implementation
Finding Description
Finding Status
The Baltimore City Community College’s (BCCC) Facilities
Planning and Operations Department circumvented State
Finding 1 regulations in the procurement of certain goods and services. Not repeated
Based on our review, certain of these procurements and related
payments appeared questionable.
Several BCCC employees shared their corporate purchasing
Finding 2 cards, precluding effective accountability and control, and did Not repeated
not have required documentation to support certain payments.
BCCC granted salary incentives or increases totaling $129,250
to four senior management positions without adequate
Finding 3
justifications, including three increases that were not approved Not repeated
by its Board of Trustees.
BCCC did not maintain a current and comprehensive
agreement with its affiliated foundation, as required. In
addition, the most recent agreement did not contain any
Finding 4 financial or operational goals and outcomes to be achieved by Not repeated
the foundation even though BCCC subsidized a significant
percentage of the foundation’s expenses during fiscal years
2015 and 2016.
Sensitive personally identifiable information maintained by Repeated
Finding 5
BCCC was stored without adequate safeguards. (Current Finding 6)
Malware protection for BCCC computers was not sufficient to
Finding 6 provide BCCC with adequate assurance that its computers Not repeated
were properly protected.
BCCC did not immediately restrictively endorse checks and
Finding 7 Not repeated
deposit collections timely at its Liberty Campus.
BCCC did not maintain complete and accurate equipment
records, could not locate certain equipment, and could not
Repeated
Finding 8 document that it conducted physical inventories of equipment
(Current Finding 8)
as required. In addition, 40 computers purchased several years
ago were never placed into service.
9

--- Page 12 ---
Findings and Recommendations
Student Personal Information
Finding 1
Baltimore City Community College (BCCC) did not require or obtain a
review of the automated system used by its vendor responsible for processing
student refunds, to ensure that sensitive student information residing on the
system was properly safeguarded.
Analysis
BCCC did not require or obtain an independent review of the automated system
used by its vendor responsible for processing student refunds, to ensure that
sensitive student information residing on the system was properly safeguarded.
According to BCCC records, student refunds issued during fiscal year 2020
totaled approximately $4.9 million. State law requires that a unit of State
government, including a public institution of higher education, or a third-party
service provider under contract with the unit, such as the aforementioned vendor,
shall implement reasonable security procedures and practices to protect personal
information.
Our review disclosed that BCCC’s contract with its vendor did not require the
vendor to obtain and formally report the results of any such review of the
vendor’s automated system. As a result, there is a lack of assurance that sensitive
BCCC student information was being adequately safeguarded by the vendor. In
an effort to meet its legal requirement to protect personal student information, the
University System of Maryland (USM) requires all USM institutions in such
circumstances to obtain and review a control assessment report based on a system
review performed by a recognized independent audit organization. Although
BCCC is not a USM institution, and is therefore not subject to USM policy
requirements, the USM policy does provide several examples of reports BCCC
could adopt in order to meets its legal obligation to protect student information,
including reports recommended by the American Institute of Certified Public
Accountants (AICPA).
The AICPA has issued guidance concerning examinations of service providers
and issuance of System and Organization Controls (SOC) reports, including the
SOC 2 Type 2 report. The SOC 2 Type 2 report contains the service
organization’s description of its system and the results of the auditor’s
examination of the suitability of the system design and operating effectiveness for
the period under review, and can include an evaluation of system security, data
10

--- Page 13 ---
availability, processing integrity, confidentiality, and privacy trust services
criteria.
Subsequent to our inquiries, BCCC obtained from the vendor a SOC 1, Type 2
report. However, SOC 1 reports are generally intended to focus on service
organization controls relevant to financial reporting for user entities and would
not provide BCCC the degree of assurances necessary for confirming the security
of sensitive student information.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that BCCC comply with State law by requiring the vendor to
obtain a formal control assessment report, such as a SOC 2 Type 2 report,
and implement a process to obtain and review the results to ensure sensitive
student information provided to the vendor is properly safeguarded.
Student Financial Aid
Finding 2
BCCC had not established sufficient controls over significant aspects of the
financial aid award and record keeping processes within the financial aid
office.
Analysis
BCCC had not established sufficient controls over significant aspects of the
financial aid award and record keeping processes within the financial aid office.
Specifically, BCCC did not conduct independent supervisory reviews of manual
adjustments to financial aid awards. In addition, BCCC did not conduct
independent supervisory reviews of the verifications of financial aid application
data and satisfactory academic progress by financial aid recipients that were
performed by financial aid office staff. As a result, there was a lack of assurance
that these adjustments and verifications were properly performed and
documented. Our test of financial aid awards, manual adjustments, and
verifications did not disclose any material deficiencies.
The accuracy and validity of these processes are critical to ensuring the propriety
of student financial aid awards, which during academic year 2019-2020 totaled
approximately $11.6 million. During fiscal year 2020, awards manually input
into the financial aid system, and not subject to independent supervisory review
and approval, totaled approximately $1.0 million.
11

--- Page 14 ---
Recommendation 2
We recommend that BCCC ensure that manual adjustments to financial aid
awards, as well as required verifications of financial aid application data and
satisfactory academic progress by financial aid recipients are subject to
independent supervisory review and approval.
Payroll
Finding 3
BCCC was unable to provide adequate documentation to support a payroll
adjustment increasing a senior BCCC management employee’s
compensation by $72,700. In addition, BCCC overpaid another employee
$8,900 due to an undetected adjustment miscalculation.
Analysis
BCCC was unable to provide adequate documentation to support the propriety of
a $72,700 adjustment that increased the payroll payments made to a senior
management employee. In addition, BCCC overpaid another employee $8,900
due to an undetected adjustment miscalculation. BCCC policy does not
specifically address the documentation requirements (criteria) or the related
departmental or executive approvals needed for payroll adjustments. However,
we were verbally advised that adjustments are documented on a form for that
purpose, which must be signed by the payroll employee processing the adjustment
and approved by a payroll supervisor. We selected ten payroll adjustments1
processed for ten employees between July 2018 and November 2020, and totaling
$327,500. Payroll adjustments (increasing employee salary compensation) totaled
approximately $3.0 million during our audit period. Our review disclosed the
following conditions.
 BCCC could not provide documentation supporting an adjustment for $72,700
paid to a senior management employee in July 2018 that was coded in
BCCC’s payroll records as a miscellaneous adjustment. BCCC could not
provide us with documentation to justify the adjustment, and given the amount
and employee’s senior position, documentation that the BCCC Board of
Trustees was advised and approved of the payment. During our audit, we
made several requests for documentation supporting the dollar amount and the
basis for this adjustment. As of October 2021, BCCC was unable to provide
us with documentation to support the propriety of this payment.
1 We selected significant adjustment amounts coded as miscellaneous or final pay.
12

--- Page 15 ---
 BCCC processed another adjustment totaling $19,700 designated in the
payroll records as a final leave payout to a professor of which we noted
$8,900 was an overpayment due to a miscalculation. Although this
adjustment was approved by a payroll supervisor, the overpayment was not
detected at that time, but discovered during our testing. Specifically, BCCC
made an error when adjusting the amount of pay for an employee who worked
21 pay periods and was to be paid out over 26 pay periods.
Recommendation 3
We recommend that BCCC
a. develop formal policies and procedures governing the criteria,
documentation, and approvals (such as Board of Trustees) needed for
adjustments;
b. ensure that all payroll adjustments are supported with adequate
documentation and properly calculated; and
c. determine the propriety of the aforementioned unsupported payroll
adjustments and take appropriate action to recover any amounts that
cannot be supported.
Procurements and Disbursements
Background
During the period from December 2016 through October 2020 BCCC issued
1,309 purchase orders for goods and services, with related payments totaling
approximately $26.3 million. We tested 12 procurements (generally selected
based on dollar significance) made by BCCC during our audit period totaling $6.1
million. We also reviewed BCCC’s two resource sharing agreements valued at
$2.2 million (not included in the aforementioned totals).
In addition, we received a referral to our fraud, waste, and abuse hotline regarding
concerns with BCCC’s procurement of catering, information technology, and a
summer youth program obtained from three vendors. As a result, we reviewed
the procurement of the services from these vendors. Based on our review, we
were able to substantiate the concerns raised in the allegation for two of the
vendors, which are included in finding 4. However, the results of our review did
not identify any issues that warranted a referral to the Office of the Attorney
General – Criminal Division.
As noted in the Background Section under the heading “Procurement Law and
Information Technology Exemptions”, BCCC is now exempt from most State
procurement laws and regulations, including the inherent controls and oversight.
13

--- Page 16 ---
Consequently, and in light of the findings noted below, we deem it essential for
good governance that BCCC’s newly developed procurement policies and
procedures include similar controls to those required of other State agencies, and
that the Board of Trustees be provided a formal oversight function.
Finding 4
BCCC did not always adhere to State procurement regulations regarding
conducting competitive solicitations, obtaining Board of Public Works
(BPW) approval of contracts, and the publication of bid solicitations and
awards. In addition, contract invoices were not always adequately verified
prior to payment.
Analysis
BCCC did not always adhere to State procurement regulations regarding
performing competitive solicitations, obtaining BPW approval of contracts, and
publicizing bid solicitations and awards. In addition, contract invoices were not
always adequately verified.
 BCCC did not have documentation, such as solicitation and bid documents, to
support the competitive procurement process for five procurements totaling
$167,000. In addition, BCCC could not provide a written contract or purchase
order for two others valued at $24,000 and $75,000. Two of these vendors
with procurements totaling $75,000 and $5,000 were included in the
allegation to our fraud, waste, and abuse hotline.
 BCCC did not publish the solicitation and award of 3 of the 12 contracts
totaling $173,700 on eMaryland Marketplace (eMM),2 as required. One of
these vendors with procurements totaling $75,000 was included in the
allegation to our fraud, waste, and abuse hotline.
 BCCC paid another of the 12 vendors tested, $721,000 between January 2018
and August 2019 for information technology (IT) services without soliciting
bids and obtaining BPW approval, as required. In July 2019 (18 months after
payments to this vendor began), after subsequent submission to BPW, the
Board retroactively approved the procurement as a sole source. Furthermore,
our test of three invoices from this vendor totaling $86,000 disclosed that
BCCC could not document it verified invoiced rates to the rate schedule in the
related contract documents to ensure amounts invoiced were proper.
2 eMM is an Internet-based, interactive procurement system managed by the Department of
General Services (DGS). Effective July 2019, DGS replaced eMM with eMaryland Marketplace
Advantage (eMMA).
14

--- Page 17 ---
 BCCC did not consolidate the procurement of catering services obtained from
one vendor included in the allegation to our fraud, waste, and abuse hotline.
Specifically, during the six months between September 2017 and February
2018 BCCC repeatedly procured services from this vendor totaling $37,965
(including the aforementioned $5,000 tested above). By not consolidating
these procurements, BCCC circumvented certain enhanced requirements for
contracts over $15,000, and may not have obtained the most favorable pricing
based on the requirement for a competitive procurement when contracts
exceed $15,000.
State procurement regulations generally applicable to BCCC during the audit
period require that procurement files include all bids or offers received and a
listing of every bidder or offeror solicited. The regulations also require the
solicitation of bids for contracts in excess of $15,000 to be published on eMM
three days prior to the bid submission date, and twenty days prior to the bid
submission date for contracts in excess of $50,000. In addition, these regulations
require the publication of contract awards over $50,000 on eMM within thirty
days after the contract execution and approval date. Finally, the regulations
provide that procurements of contracts over $200,000 in value and contract
modifications over $50,000 require BPW approval.
Recommendation 4
We recommend that BCCC ensure that
a. contracts are awarded though a competitive procurement process as
appropriate, and related documentation of the procurement be
maintained;
b. all bid solicitation and award publishing requirements are adhered to;
c. contracts receive proper independent approval as applicable;
d. vendor invoices are correct by verifying invoice charges to contractual
billing rates; and
e. purchases from vendors are consolidated to maximize the State’s
purchasing power.
Finding 5
During our audit period, BCCC did not comply with State law and
Department of Information Technology (DoIT) policies for the procurement
and monitoring of its two resource sharing agreements (RSAs).
Analysis
BCCC did not comply with State law and DoIT policies for the procurement and
monitoring of its two RSAs during the period of our audit. BCCC has a single
15

--- Page 18 ---
telecommunication tower located off campus on which it leases space to two
telecommunication companies under lease agreements or RSAs.
 BCCC continued to use one RSA valued at $473,000 after the initial
agreement and all renewal options expired in 2008. Since the RSA was not
renegotiated, payments were generally maintained at the level established
during the final renewal period. Had the RSA been renegotiated using
updated rates, additional revenue could have been earned. For example, using
suggested rates developed by DoIT at the time, BCCC would have earned
$97,000 more than the $112,000 paid by the telecommunication company
during the period May 2017 to April 2021.
 BCCC did not advertise a new $1.7 million RSA agreement on eMM, and did
not submit the agreement to the General Assembly’s Legislative Policy
Committee (LPC) for review and approval, as required. In October 2020,
BCCC entered into a five year RSA with one of the companies with three
potential extensions of five years each valued at $1.7 million, but did not first
obtain approval for the agreement from DoIT.
 BCCC did not include certain critical provisions in its RSAs to ensure that
BCCC received the appropriate compensation and was protected from
liability. Specifically, the agreements did not include language to address
BCCC’s right to audit the records of the telecommunication companies and
requirements for a security deposit or late fees. In addition, the agreements
did not include language protecting BCCC from liability resulting from the
private company’s negligence.
State law applicable to BCCC during the audit period required that agencies
advise DoIT of all RSA proposals so DoIT can determine the value of the
proposal. DoIT’s Resource Sharing Agreements Program Policy required
proposals valued at more than $100,000 be advertised on eMM for 30 days, be
submitted by BCCC to the LPC for a 60-day review, and be subject to approval
by BPW. DoIT’s Policy also states that the existing use of an RSA that did not
obtain the statutory reviews and approvals must be submitted to DoIT for review
to determine the extent to which retroactive approval must be obtained.
Recommendation 5
We recommend that BCCC
a. establish new agreements for any expired RSAs which include
consideration of higher rates (for example, those suggested by DoIT);
16

--- Page 19 ---
b. consider widely advertising solicitations for RSAs and submit them to the
appropriate authorities as determined by BCCC’s policies, including the
RSA noted above; and
c. include all significant provisions in future RSAs, and modify its existing
agreements to include those provisions to the extent allowed.
Information Systems Security and Control
Background
BCCC’s Information Technology Services Division (ITSD) manages the
development, maintenance, and support of BCCC’s information and technology
infrastructure including all related networking, telecommunications, and business
information systems. ITSD maintains critical enterprise applications as well as
departmental systems supporting student, human resource, and financial
information systems.
Finding 6
Sensitive personally identifiable information (PII) was maintained without
adequate safeguards and identification.
Analysis
Sensitive PII was maintained without adequate safeguards and identification.
BCCC supported computer operations for multiple applications which processed
such sensitive information, but without adequate protections. As of June 30,
2021, we determined that numerous applications’ databases included a substantial
number of unique sensitive information records which were maintained in a
manner that made the information vulnerable to improper disclosure. BCCC
personnel also advised us that this sensitive PII was not subject to other
substantial mitigating security controls.
Furthermore, although BCCC had procedures for performing automated scanning
of servers for PII identification, it had not manually inventoried its applications
nor used the results of the scans to identify all stored sensitive PII across its entire
IT environment, determined if it was necessary to retain the PII, and deleted PII
identified as unnecessary. Detailed aspects of this finding were omitted from this
report; however, the related detailed information, including a sensitive
information record count, was previously shared with BCCC for purposes of
implementing the following recommendations.
Similar conditions were commented upon in our preceding audit report. The State
of Maryland Information Technology Security Manual requires that agencies
17

--- Page 20 ---
protect confidential data using adequate safeguards and/or other substantial
mitigating controls.
Recommendation 6
We recommend that BCCC
a. perform an inventory of all of its servers, identify all sensitive PII, and
delete all unnecessary sensitive PII (repeat); and
b. implement appropriate information security safeguards for the sensitive
PII it maintains (repeat).
Finding 7
Malware protection controls for BCCC computers were not sufficient to
provide adequate assurance that computers were properly protected from
security risks.
Analysis
Malware protection for BCCC computers was not sufficient to provide adequate
assurance that computers were properly protected from security risks. BCCC
advised us that numerous software management consoles were reviewed to
monitor malware protection software installation and operational status, software
version, and signature updates. However, as of May 25, 2021, BCCC advised that
documented reviews of these consoles had not been performed since September
2020. In addition, BCCC did not have malware protection software installed on
all of its active computers. As of May 25, 2021, our review determined that 62 of
569 active computers did not have malware protection software installed.
Best practices as specified in State of Maryland Information Technology Security
Manual state that agencies, at a minimum, must protect against malicious code
(viruses, worms, Trojan horses) by implementing protections (anti-virus, anti-
malware) that, to the extent possible, include a capability for automatic updates.
Recommendation 7
We recommend that BCCC ensure that malware protection software is
installed and maintained on all computers by regularly monitoring related
software management consoles to verify its computers’ malware protection
software status, document these reviews and adjustment actions, and retain
this documentation for future reference.
18

--- Page 21 ---
Equipment
Finding 8
BCCC did not conduct physical inventories of equipment and did not
maintain complete equipment records as required.
Analysis
BCCC did not conduct physical inventories of equipment and did not maintain
complete equipment records as required. According to BCCC’s records, its
equipment inventory was valued at $32.8 million as of June 30, 2020.
 Physical inventories of sensitive and non-sensitive equipment were not
conducted since 2014. In February 2017, BCCC contracted with a third-party
vendor to perform a complete physical inventory. However, due to a lack of
adequate performance by the vendor, BCCC terminated the contract in
February 2018. Since that time, no further attempts have been made to
perform a physical inventory.
 BCCC’s detailed equipment records were not complete. Our test of 10
purchases of 76 equipment items totaling $54,0003, disclosed that 14 items,
such as computers, totaling $15,000 had not been recorded in the detail
records. In addition, 58 items that were recorded in the records totaling
$37,000 did not include the specific location of the item (such as a room
number) to enable effective control over the equipment.
Similar conditions were noted in our preceding audit report. The Department of
General Services’ Inventory Control Manual applicable to BCCC during the audit
period requires that physical inventories be conducted for sensitive equipment
items annually and for non-sensitive equipment items every three years and the
results reconciled to the related detail records. Furthermore, the records should
include all equipment purchases, as well as all relevant information, such as
location.
Recommendation 8
We recommend that BCCC
a. conduct timely periodic documented physical inventories of sensitive and
non-sensitive equipment and reconcile the results to the detail inventory
record (repeat), and
3 The selection was made by analyzing equipment purchases and selecting purchases from vendors
that had significant total payments from BCCC.
19

--- Page 22 ---
b. ensure that the equipment records are maintained in a complete and
accurate manner (repeat).
20

--- Page 23 ---
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit the Baltimore City Community
College (BCCC) for the period beginning November 30, 2016 and ending
November 30, 2020. The audit was conducted in accordance with generally
accepted government auditing standards. Those standards require that we plan
and perform the audit to obtain sufficient, appropriate evidence to provide a
reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives.
We believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings
and conclusions based on our audit objectives.
As prescribed by the State Government Article, Section 2-1221 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, the objectives of this audit were to examine BCCC’s financial
transactions, records, and internal control, and to evaluate its compliance with
applicable State laws, rules, and regulations.
In planning and conducting our audit, we focused on the major financial-related
areas of operations based on assessments of significance and risk. The areas
addressed by the audit included purchases and disbursements, student accounts
receivable, financial aid, cash receipts, payroll, corporate purchasing cards,
equipment, resource sharing agreements, affiliated foundation, and information
technology. Furthermore, we reviewed the procurement of certain contracts for
catering, information technology, and a summer youth program regarding a
referral received from our fraud, waste, and abuse hotline. We also determined
the status of the findings contained in our preceding audit report.
Our audit did not include an evaluation of internal controls over compliance with
federal laws and regulations for federal financial assistance programs and an
assessment of BCCC’s compliance with those laws and regulations because the
State of Maryland engages an independent accounting firm to annually audit such
programs administered by State agencies, including BCCC.
Our assessment of internal controls was based on agency procedures and controls
in place at the time of our fieldwork. Our tests of transactions and other auditing
procedures were generally focused on the transactions occurring during our audit
period of November 30, 2016 to November 30, 2020, but may include
transactions before or after this period as we considered necessary to achieve our
audit objectives.
To accomplish our audit objectives, our audit procedures included inquiries of
appropriate personnel, inspections of documents and records, tests of transactions,
and to the extent practicable, observations of BCCC operations. Generally,
21

--- Page 24 ---
transactions were selected for testing based on auditor judgment, which primarily
considers risk, the timing or dollar amount of the transaction, or the significance
of the transaction to the area of operation reviewed. As a matter of course, we do
not normally use sampling in our tests, so unless otherwise specifically indicated,
neither statistical nor non-statistical audit sampling was used to select the
transactions tested. Therefore, unless sampling is specifically indicated in a
finding, the results from any tests conducted or disclosed by us cannot be used to
project those results to the entire population from which the test items were
selected.
We also performed various data extracts of pertinent information from the State’s
Financial Management Information System (such as revenue and expenditure
data) and the State’s Central Payroll Bureau (payroll data), as well as from the
contractor administering the State’s Corporate Purchasing Card Program (credit
card activity). The extracts are performed as part of ongoing internal processes
established by the Office of Legislative Audits and were subject to various tests to
determine data reliability. We determined that the data extracted from these
sources were sufficiently reliable for the purposes the data were used during this
audit. We also extracted data from BCCC’s financial system for the purpose of
testing certain areas, such as student accounts receivable. We performed various
tests of the relevant data and determined that the data were sufficiently reliable for
the purposes the data were used during the audit. Finally, we performed other
auditing procedures that we considered necessary to achieve our audit objectives.
The reliability of data used in this report for background or informational
purposes was not assessed.
BCCC’s management is responsible for establishing and maintaining effective
internal control. Internal control is a process designed to provide reasonable
assurance that objectives pertaining to the reliability of financial records;
effectiveness and efficiency of operations including safeguarding of assets; and
compliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations are achieved. As
provided in Government Auditing Standards, there are five components of
internal control: control environment, risk assessment, control activities,
information and communication, and monitoring. Each of the five components,
when significant to the audit objectives, and as applicable to BCCC, were
considered by us during the course of this audit.
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate.
22

--- Page 25 ---
Our reports are designed to assist the Maryland General Assembly in exercising
its legislative oversight function and to provide constructive recommendations for
improving State operations. As a result, our reports generally do not address
activities we reviewed that are functioning properly.
This report includes findings relating to conditions that we consider to be
significant deficiencies in the design or operation of internal control that could
adversely affect BCCC’s ability to maintain reliable financial records, operate
effectively and efficiently, and/or comply with applicable laws, rules, and
regulations. Our report also includes findings regarding significant instances of
noncompliance with applicable laws, rules, or regulations. Other less significant
findings were communicated to BCCC that did not warrant inclusion in this
report.
BCCC’s response to our findings and recommendations is included as an
appendix to this report. As prescribed in the State Government Article, Section 2-
1224 of the Annotated Code of Maryland, we will advise BCCC regarding the
results of our review of its response.
23

--- Page 26 ---
APPENDIX
Office of the President
January 25, 2022
Mr. Gregory A. Hook, CPA
Office of Legislative Audits
The Warehouse at Camden Yards
351 West Camden Street, Suite 400
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Dear Mr. Hook:
The responses to the Fiscal Compliance Audit Report for Baltimore City Community College are
attached.
The electronic transmittal of responses was previously sent on January 24, 2022. The attached
document reflects what was communicated on January 24th.
On behalf of Baltimore City Community College, thank you for the comprehensive review of the
College’s financial transactions, internal controls, and the evaluation of our compliance with
applicable State of Maryland laws.
Sincerely,
Debra L. McCurdy, PhD
President
Enclosures
cc: Kurt L. Schmoke, J.D., Chair, Board of Trustees, BCCC
Lyllis M. Green, Chief Internal Auditor
Baltimore City Community College
2901 Liberty Heights Avenue, Baltimore, MD 21215 | 410-462-7799

--- Page 27 ---
BaltimoreCityCommunityCollege
AgencyResponseForm
Student Personal Information
Finding 1
Baltimore City Community College (BCCC) did not require or obtain a review of the
automated system used by its vendor responsible for processing student refunds, to ensure
that sensitive student information residing on the system was properly safeguarded.
We recommend that BCCC comply with State law by requiring the vendor to obtain a
formal control assessment report, such as a SOC 2 Type 2 report, and implement a process
to obtain and review the results to ensure sensitive student information provided to the
vendor is properly safeguarded.
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 1 Agree EstimatedCompletion Date: 1/31/2022
Please provide details of BCCC has confirmed with our vendor that a SOC 2 Report is available
corrective action or and will be forthcoming.
explain disagreement.
Going forward, BCCC will follow the process of obtaining and
reviewing the automated system used by its vendors responsible for
processing student refunds to ensure that sensitive student information
residing on the system is properly safeguarded.
Page 1of12

--- Page 28 ---
BaltimoreCityCommunityCollege
Agency Response Form
Student Financial Aid
Finding 2
BCCC had not established sufficient controls over significant aspects of the financial aid
award and record keeping processes within the financial aid office.
We recommend that BCCC ensure that manual adjustments to financial aid awards, as
well as required verifications of financial aid application data and satisfactory academic
progress by financial aid recipients are subject to independent supervisory review and
approval.
AgencyResponse
Analysis
Please provide
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 2 Agree EstimatedCompletionDate: Implemented and
ongoing
Please provide details of BCCC will ensure that manual adjustments to financial aid awards, as
corrective action or well as required verifications of financial aid application data and
explain disagreement. satisfactory academic progress by financial aid recipients are subject to
independent supervisory review and approval. The College has hired a
third-party to conduct this review and will continue to utilize that third-
party.
Page 2of12

--- Page 29 ---
BaltimoreCityCommunityCollege
AgencyResponseForm
Payroll
Finding 3
BCCC was unable to provide adequate documentation to support a payroll adjustment
increasing a senior BCCC management employee’s compensation by $72,700. In addition,
BCCC overpaid another employee $8,900 due to an undetected adjustment miscalculation.
We recommend that BCCC
a. develop formal policies and procedures governing the criteria, documentation, and
approvals (such as Board of Trustees) needed for adjustments;
b. ensure that all payroll adjustments are supported with adequate documentation and
properly calculated; and
c. determine the propriety of the aforementioned unsupported payroll adjustments and
take appropriate action to recover any amounts that cannot be supported.
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide We expanded these procedures due to COVID and working remotely to
additional comments as ensure that the College is processing adjustments correctly.
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 3a Agree Estimated Completion Date: Implemented and
ongoing
Please provide details of The noted adjustment and overpayment above occurred prior to the
corrective action or current administration. The College now requires management level
explain disagreement. approval on all payroll adjustments. This includes review by the HR
Director, VP of Finance and Administration, and President prior to
processing the adjustment.
Recommendation 3b Agree Estimated Completion Date: Implemented and
ongoing
Please provide details of HR/Payroll created an adjustment process which includes supporting
corrective action or documentation for approval signatures.
explain disagreement.
Recommendation 3c Disagree EstimatedCompletionDate:
Please provide details of We will have to determine that the funds need to be recovered. Based on
corrective action or how faculty contracts are paid out, there were not any payments that
explain disagreement. were overpaid.
Page 3of12

--- Page 30 ---
BaltimoreCityCommunityCollege
Agency Response Form
Auditor’s Comment: Although BCCC indicated that it disagreed with our recommendation
to determine the propriety of the unsupported payroll adjustments and take action to recover
amounts that cannot be supported; the plain language of its response indicated that it will
have to determine that the funds need to be recovered. We will presume if BCCC determines
that funds need to be recovered, preferably in consultation with its legal counsel, it will seek
recovery.
Page 4of12

--- Page 31 ---
BaltimoreCityCommunityCollege
AgencyResponseForm
Procurements and Disbursements
Finding 4
BCCC did not always adhere to State procurement regulations regarding conducting
competitive solicitations, obtaining Board of Public Works (BPW) approval of contracts,
and the publication of bid solicitations and awards. In addition, contract invoices were not
always adequately verified prior to payment.
We recommend that BCCC ensure that
a. contracts are awarded though a competitive procurement process as appropriate, and
related documentation of the procurement be maintained;
b. all bid solicitation and award publishing requirements are adhered to;
c. contracts receive proper independent approval as applicable;
d. vendor invoices are correct by verifying invoice charges to contractual billing rates; and
e. purchases from vendors are consolidated to maximize the State’s purchasing power.
AgencyResponse
Analysis
Please provide BCCC concurs with the findings and recommendations. Going forward,
additional comments as BCCC is in process of a procurement transformation due to new
deemed necessary. delegated authority approved up to $500,000 by the General Assembly
on July 1, 2021. Until formal approval on the College’s procurement
policy and procedures are given; the College’s procurements shall abide
by COMAR Title 21 until formal approval is received. Oversight of all
procurements will be conducted by the Director of Procurement and
Legal Counsel going forward to ensure compliance to state’s
procurement rules and regulations. Delegation of authority and approvals
shall be established based on contract value and will be approved
accordingly per statue.
Recommendation 4a Agree Estimated Completion
06/30/2022
Date:
Please provide details of BCCC concurs with the recommendation. Contracts will be awarded
corrective action or though a competitive procurement process as appropriate, and related
explain disagreement. documentation of the procurement will be maintained.
Recommendation 4b Agree Estimated Completion Immediately and
Date: ongoing
Please provide details of BCCC concurs with the recommendation. Contracts will receive proper
corrective action or independent approval as applicable. Independent approval will be made
explain disagreement. by BCCC’s Board of Trustees and / or Board of Public Work as
applicable.
Page 5of12

--- Page 32 ---
BaltimoreCityCommunityCollege
AgencyResponseForm
Recommendation 4c Agree Estimated Completion Immediately and
Date: ongoing
Please provide details of BCCC concurs with the recommendation. Contracts shall include
corrective action or verifiable billing rates to validate invoice payment prior to payment
explain disagreement. being made. Additional documentation as evidence shall be required to
validate payment to validate performance of work (e.g., timecards, proof
of performance signed by College representative).
Recommendation 4d Agree Estimated Completion Immediately and
Date: ongoing
Please provide details of BCCC concurs with the recommendation. Effective immediately, all bid
corrective action or solicitations and contracts awards as required by COMAR Title 21 shall
explain disagreement. be posted on the state’s official bid board, eMaryland Marketplace
Advantage (eMMA).
Recommendation 4e Agree Estimated Completion
6/30/2022
Date:
Please provide details of BCCC concurs with the recommendation. Review of current purchasing
corrective action or practices to determine the appropriate contracts to be established to
explain disagreement. maximize the purchasing power of the College. Increase utilization and
participation of intergovernmental purchasing agreements, and the
establishment of larger value and longer term contracts to increase the
effectivenessand efficienciesoftheoperationsofthe College.
Page 6of12

--- Page 33 ---
BaltimoreCityCommunityCollege
AgencyResponseForm
Finding 5
During our audit period, BCCC did not comply with State law and Department of
Information Technology (DoIT) policies for the procurement and monitoring of its two
resource sharing agreements (RSAs).
We recommend that BCCC
a. establish new agreements for any expired RSAs which include consideration of higher
rates (for example, those suggested by DoIT);
b. consider widely advertising solicitations for RSAs and submit them to the appropriate
authorities as determined by BCCC’s policies, including the RSA noted above; and
c. include all significant provisions in future RSAs, and modify its existing agreements to
include those provisions to the extent allowed.
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 5a Agree EstimatedCompletionDate: October 2020 andongoing
Please provide details of BCCC concurs with the recommendation. One of the RSA agreements
corrective action or was renewed effective October 2020. The new agreement includes
explain disagreement. annual increases in rates. The other RSA is in the final stages of
approval. It will be placed on BPW’s agenda by DoIT once all
signatures are obtained. Once BPW approves it, it will be finalized.
Recommendation 5b Disagree EstimatedCompletionDate:
Please provide details of BCCC does not concur with the recommendation. The Tower currently
corrective action or is being used by the radio station and is being leased by two commercial
explain disagreement. tenants and one Federal Government tenant. The resources of the Tower
are primarily present for the function of running the radio station.
Additional solicitations are not necessarily possible as they depend on
the resources available on the Tower.
Auditor’s Comment: BCCC disagreed with our recommendation to consider widely
advertising solicitations for RSAs because the resources of the tower are primarily present
for the functions of the radio station. Since the response also acknowledges that there are
two commercial tenants, in addition to the federal government, using the tower, our
recommendation is both reasonable and practicable to help ensure that tower revenue is
maximized to BCCC’s benefit. Consequently, we continue to believe that BCCC needs to
consider advertising in the future to ensure that the best possible rates are received from
commercial tenants.
Page 7of12

--- Page 34 ---
BaltimoreCityCommunityCollege
AgencyResponseForm
Recommendation 5c Agree EstimatedCompletionDate: Implemented andongoing
Please provide details of The RSA that is almost completed considered provisions to the extent
corrective action or possible. With respect to modifying existing agreements, our Legal
explain disagreement. Counsel advised that “the document cannot be amended without both
parties’ agreement, and it is unclear why the lessee would agree to
modifications at this point. Please note that the College sent the
agreement to DoIT and they did not identify any problems with it.”
Page 8of12

--- Page 35 ---
BaltimoreCityCommunityCollege
AgencyResponseForm
Information Systems Security and Control
Finding 6
Sensitive personally identifiable information (PII) was maintained without adequate
safeguards and identification.
We recommend that BCCC
a. perform an inventory of all of its servers, identify all sensitive PII, and delete all
unnecessary sensitive PII (repeat); and
b. implement appropriate information security safeguards for the sensitive PII it
maintains (repeat).
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide There are no concerns with the factual accuracy.
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 6a Agree EstimatedCompletionDate: December 2022
Please provide details of BCCC will perform a manual inventory of the enterprise system
corrective action or servers annually to coincide with the daily scans of servers already in
explain disagreement. progress with automated scanning-based inventory since December
of 2019. All unmarked files on the spreadsheet will be deleted by
ITS upon the completion date.
Recommendation 6b Agree EstimatedCompletionDate: December 2022
Please provide details of BCCC will submit the collected PII inventory to the college's
corrective action or departments for review to determine required PII files that shall be
explain disagreement. retained for business purposes. PII files that shall be retained for
business purposes and files marked as required will be safely recorded
at the file system level to meet FIPS 140-2 compliance.
Page 9of12

--- Page 36 ---
BaltimoreCityCommunityCollege
AgencyResponseForm
Finding 7
Malware protection controls for BCCC computers were not sufficient to provide adequate
assurance that computers were properly protected from security risks.
We recommend that BCCC ensure that malware protection software is installed and
maintained on all computers by regularly monitoring related software management
consoles to verify its computers’ malware protection software status, document these
reviews and adjustment actions, and retain this documentation for future reference.
AgencyResponse
Analysis
Please provide The college has hired a CIO and Deputy CIO to begin in February that
additional comments as will cover the Approver role for the documented weekly malware
deemed necessary. review.
Recommendation 7 Agree EstimatedCompletionDate: April 2022
Please provide details of In October, BCCC began documenting a resolution matching the total
corrective action or number of domain computers against the total number of computers
explain disagreement. running malware protection software. Reviews and adjustment actions
will be documented and retained for future reference.
Page 10of12

--- Page 37 ---
BaltimoreCityCommunityCollege
AgencyResponseForm
Equipment
Finding 8
BCCC did not conduct physical inventories of equipment and did not maintain complete
equipment records as required.
We recommend that BCCC
a. conduct timely periodic documented physical inventories of sensitive and non-sensitive
equipment and reconcile the results to the detail inventory record (repeat), and
b. ensure that the equipment records are maintained in a complete and accurate manner
(repeat).
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide A full and complete inventory has not been completed, following
additional comments as attempts to have vendors assist, and the task has been too large to do in
deemed necessary. house. In the past, the excess property disposal process has not been
fully utilized to dispose of furniture and equipment that are no longer
usable. Instead, these items have been kept in storage areas for many
years. We are now working on correcting these deficiencies.
Recommendation 8a Agree EstimatedCompletionDate: November 2022
Please provide details of The College has recently hired a Logistics Manager to oversee the
corrective action or Property Division. On September 15, 2021, AVP for Facilities and
explain disagreement. logistics staff attended a training with the Department of General
Services (DGS) Property Manager in which the inventory and the excess
property disposal declaration processes were discussed. On September
16, 2021, the logistics team met with the asset management company for
training and implementation of the new inventory system software. The
DGS Property Manager was invited to the meeting to review and ensure
that the new inventory system meets the state’s requirements for asset
systems. The logistics teams are preparing to use new software to
restart the entire comprehensive inventory of the campus once the asset
system is approved by DGS. First, there are several areas where EPDs
are required. On Friday, September 17, 2021, DGS Property Manager
conducted a site visit to review areas with large amounts of property
requiring disposal for possible bulk EPDs or setting up sale
opportunities for Gov Deals.
Page 11of12

--- Page 38 ---
BaltimoreCityCommunityCollege
AgencyResponseForm
Recommendation 8b Agree EstimatedCompletionDate: November 2022
Please provide details of Once the new inventory is complete, the logistics team will perform
corrective action or monthly cycle checks so that a full inventory is completed on an annual
explain disagreement. basis. New items coming into shipping and receiving are currently being
recorded properly, which includes the use of both the asset system and
FMIS. There is also a future plan to implement the receiving function of
the college’s new ERP system which will be rolled out later this year.
Page 12of12

--- Page 39 ---
A T
UDIT EAM
Adam J. Westover, CPA
Audit Manager
Edwin L. Paul, CPA, CISA
Information Systems Audit Manager
Menachem Katz, CPA
Senior Auditor
Eric Alexander, CPA, CISA
Information Systems Senior Auditor
Anjelecia N. Jacobs
Thomas J. Kraemer
Staff Auditors