Title: Maryland State Department of Education - Division of Early Childhood
Date: 03/14/2022
Type: Fiscal Compliance
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=622f4fe6a1ce5810dc93112d
Extracted: 2025-06-20T00:15:42.849735
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Audit Report
Maryland State Department of Education
Division of Early Childhood
September 2019
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Senator Craig J. Zucker (Senate Chair) Delegate Shelly L. Hettleman (House Chair)
Senator Adelaide C. Eckardt Delegate Steven J. Arentz
Senator George C. Edwards Delegate Andrew P. Cassilly
Senator Guy J. Guzzone Delegate Mark S. Chang
Senator Katie Fry Hester Delegate Keith E. Haynes
Senator Cheryl C. Kagan Delegate Michael A. Jackson
Senator Benjamin F. Kramer Delegate David Moon
Senator Cory V. McCray Delegate April R. Rose
Senator Douglas J.J. Peters Delegate Geraldine Valentino-Smith
Senator Justin D. Ready Delegate Karen Lewis Young
To Obtain Further Information
Office of Legislative Audits
301 West Preston Street, Room 1202
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Phone: 410-946-5900 ꞏ 301-970-5900 ꞏ 1-877-486-9964 (Toll Free in Maryland)
Maryland Relay: 711
TTY: 410-946-5401 ꞏ 301-970-5401
E-mail: OLAWebmaster@ola.state.md.us
Website: www.ola.state.md.us
To Report Fraud
The Office of Legislative Audits operates a Fraud Hotline to report fraud, waste, or abuse involving State
of Maryland government resources. Reports of fraud, waste, or abuse may be communicated anonymously
by a toll-free call to 1-877-FRAUD-11, by mail to the Fraud Hotline, c/o Office of Legislative Audits, or
through the Office’s website.
Nondiscrimination Statement
The Department of Legislative Services does not discriminate on the basis of age, ancestry, color, creed,
marital status, national origin, race, religion, gender, gender identity, sexual orientation, or disability in the
admission or access to its programs, services, or activities. The Department’s Information Officer has been
designated to coordinate compliance with the nondiscrimination requirements contained in Section 35.107
of the United States Department of Justice Regulations. Requests for assistance should be directed to the
Information Officer at 410-946-5400 or 410-970-5400.

--- Page 5 ---
Table of Contents
Background Information 4
Agency Responsibilities and Audit Scope 4
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report 4
Findings and Recommendations 5
Criminal Background Checks (CBC)
* Finding 1 – The Division of Early Childhood (DEC) headquarters did not 6
provide sufficient oversight to ensure that regional offices were
effectively monitoring child care facility compliance with CBC
requirements.
Child Care Facility Inspections
Finding 2 – DEC headquarters did not ensure that regional offices 9
conducted comprehensive annual inspections of child care facilities,
followed up with facilities regarding the correction of deficiencies, and
took appropriate administrative action when facilities did not correct
deficiencies.
Child Care Subsidy Program
Finding 3 – DEC lacked sufficient procedures to effectively monitor 12
subsidy program eligibility determinations and the related payments
made by its vendor, certain of which could not be supported.
Information Systems Security and Control
Finding 4 – DEC lacked assurance that its Child Care Administration 14
Tracking System was sufficiently protected against operational and
security risks.
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology 16
Agency Response Appendix
* Denotes item repeated in full or part from preceding audit report
3

--- Page 6 ---
Background Information
Agency Responsibilities and Audit Scope
The Maryland State Department of Education’s Division of Early Childhood
(DEC) is responsible for overseeing all child care programs in the State, including
licensing child care facilities and monitoring and enforcing facility compliance
with regulations (such as health and safety standards and criminal background
check requirements). DEC oversees these facilities through its 13 regional child
care offices across the State. According to State records, as of August 2017, the
State’s licensed child care facilities consisted of 5,942 family child care homes
and 2,700 child care centers, which were licensed to serve approximately 217,000
children.
DEC is also responsible for the Child Care Subsidy Program, which provides
financial assistance to eligible families to meet their child care needs. This
program is primarily administered by a vendor, under contract with DEC, in
conjunction with the State’s 24 local departments of social services. According to
State records, during fiscal year 2017, child care subsidy program expenditures
totaled approximately $76.9 million ($40.8 million in general funds and $36.1
million in federal funds).
DEC uses the Child Care Administration Tracking System (CCATS) to record,
approve, and monitor child care facility licenses; to track individuals associated
with those facilities and help ensure that all required criminal background checks
are obtained; and to process subsidy-related eligibility, vouchers, and payments.
CCATS is operated by a primary service provider, under a State of Maryland
contract, which is responsible for system management and operations support,
with related system hosting services being provided by a subcontractor.
According to the State’s records, DEC’s operating expenditures totaled
approximately $166.7 million during fiscal year 2017. The operations of DEC
were previously audited in conjunction with our audit of the Maryland State
Department of Education.
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report
Our audit included a review to determine the status of the two findings related to
DEC that were contained in our preceding audit report of the Maryland State
Department of Education dated June 22, 2016. We determined that DEC
satisfactorily addressed one of these findings. The remaining finding is repeated
in this report as Finding 1.
4

--- Page 7 ---
Findings and Recommendations
Criminal Background Checks
Background
As part of its responsibility for overseeing all child care programs in the State, the
Maryland State Department of Education’s Division of Early Childhood (DEC) is
responsible for ensuring that licensed child care facilities comply with criminal
background check (CBC) requirements. According to State and federal law, on or
before the first day of employment at a licensed child care facility, all individuals
who will have unsupervised access to children must apply for a CBC, which
includes checks of federal and State criminal background databases and sex
offender registries. Child care facilities are required to enforce this CBC
requirement to ensure that individuals with any qualifying criminal history are
precluded from being a child care provider. To facilitate DEC monitoring of the
CBC requirements, child care facilities are required to provide their respective
DEC regional office with information on each new employee (such as name,
address, date of birth, and social security number). In addition, the facilities must
forward to DEC a notarized child protective services (CPS) clearance check
authorization signed by the employee.
DEC regional office personnel enter the new employee information into the Child
Care Administration Tracking System (CCATS) and complete the CPS clearance
checks by reviewing the Department of Human Services’ Children’s Electronic
Social Services Information Exchange for information about the child protective
services history of each new employee. Each regional office also obtains daily
updates from the Criminal Justice Information System (CJIS) on the results of
child care facility employee CBCs and alerts on any subsequent criminal activity
for these employees. Weekly summaries of the alerts are also sent to DEC
headquarters. Regional office personnel are to review the CBC and alert
information to determine if offenses identified are qualifying crimes that would
preclude an individual from being a child care provider.
Because the CBC process is initiated when an employee is hired to work for a
child care provider, timely action to identify and resolve any disqualifying past
events is necessary to limit the employee’s interaction with children or to remove
the employee from that environment. According to its records, DEC was notified
of approximately 75,600 CBC results and 5,900 alerts in fiscal year 2017.
5

--- Page 8 ---
Finding 1
DEC headquarters did not provide sufficient oversight to ensure that the
regional offices were effectively monitoring child care facility compliance
with CBC and CPS clearance check requirements. Our tests disclosed
numerous instances in which employees had not obtained required CBCs or
CPS clearances, and in which alerts of subsequent criminal activity were not
subject to sufficient follow-up.
Analysis
DEC did not provide sufficient oversight to ensure that the regional offices were
effectively monitoring child care facility compliance with CBC and CPS
clearance check requirements. Our tests disclosed numerous instances in which
employees had not obtained required CBCs or CPS clearances, and in which
alerts of subsequent criminal activity were not subject to sufficient follow-up.
DEC Procedures were Not Sufficient to Track Child Care Facility Employees and
Ensure All Required CBCs and CPS Clearances Were Obtained
DEC did not have comprehensive oversight procedures to ensure that all
employees reported to regional offices by child care facilities were recorded in
CCATS, and that DEC had obtained the required CBCs and CPS clearances.
Specifically, DEC did not require its regional offices to maintain a log of new
employees reported by child care facilities. Accordingly, there was no formal
means for the regional offices and DEC headquarters to ensure that all new
employees reported by the facilities were properly recorded in CCATS, the
required CBC results were received and reviewed timely, and CPS clearances
were properly verified. Based on our testing, we noted that several employees
reported by the facilities had not been recorded in CCATS, and DEC regional
offices did not have documentation of the required CBCs and complete CPS
clearances on file for certain employees.
Our test of 20 child care employees recorded on personnel lists provided to DEC
by 13 facilities disclosed that two employees hired by one facility–one prior to
September 2014 and one prior to August 2016–had not been recorded in CCATS
as of February 2018. In addition, our test of these 20 employees and an additional
11 employees we selected from CCATS records disclosed that DEC regional
offices did not have all the required CBCs or a complete CPS clearance on file for
12 employees who had been hired between 6 months and 11 years prior to our
test. For example, for the aforementioned two employees who had not been
recorded in CCATS, DEC regional offices did not have any record of State and
federal CBCs or CPS clearances being performed.
6

--- Page 9 ---
We were advised by DEC management that, during the audit period, CCATS did
not have the capability to track the CBC and CPS compliance. However, based
on our feedback during the audit, DEC advised us that it intends to implement
system enhancements to enable monitoring of this activity.
DEC Did Not Have Sufficient Procedures to Track CBC-related Alerts from CJIS
and Ensure They Were Properly Investigated
DEC did not have adequate procedures to ensure that regional offices conducted
comprehensive follow-up of all CBC-related alerts from CJIS. As a result, our
tests disclosed that certain alerts were not subject to investigation by regional
office personnel, and the investigation and follow-up of other alerts were not
sufficiently comprehensive. DEC headquarters maintained an automated
centralized log of alerts compiled from the weekly summaries received from CJIS
on which regional office personnel were to document their alert investigations and
follow-up actions.
 DEC headquarters did not include all alerts received from CJIS on its central
alert log. Specifically, when numerous alerts were received for the same
individual with the same employer information, DEC headquarters only
recorded the first alert on the log. For example, DEC headquarters received
10 alerts during fiscal year 2017 for one individual but only recorded one of
the alerts on the log. Since each alert may identify a new qualifying crime
requiring follow-up action, DEC should have recorded all the alerts on the log
for follow-up by regional office personnel. DEC headquarters, therefore,
could not ensure regional office personnel appropriately followed up on alerts
that were omitted from the log. During fiscal year 2017, approximately 1,400
alerts relating to 960 individuals were excluded from the log because of this
practice.
 DEC headquarters did not follow up with the regional offices when they did
not sufficiently investigate alerts. Our test of 37 alerts recorded on the alert
log that were to be investigated by 11 of its 13 regional offices during the
period from July 2014 through December 2017 disclosed that DEC
headquarters did not follow up on 26 alerts that were not adequately
investigated.
Specifically, for 7 alerts, the log indicated that the individuals were end-dated
(that is, no longer working at a facility) on CCATS. In accordance with its
procedures, regional office personnel did not confirm whether the individuals
were currently employed at the child care facility. For 2 alerts, although
regional office personnel requested information from the facilities, the
information was never received.
7

--- Page 10 ---
Finally, for the remaining 17 alerts, the log indicated that no follow-up action
was taken by regional office personnel because the entities listed on the alerts
were not recorded in CCATS. Our research disclosed that, while these entities
were not child care facilities, these entities appeared to provide child care-
related services such as schools and independent staffing agencies that
provided personnel to regulated child care facilities and to other facilities
serving children. Therefore, in our opinion, in order to safeguard the welfare
of children in these facilities, the DEC regional offices should have conducted
additional follow-up to determine if these individuals had been assigned to
regulated child care facilities by these entities and taken other appropriate
actions.
The lack of adequate procedures to ensure compliance with CBC requirements
was commented upon in our preceding audit report of the Maryland State
Department of Education.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that DEC headquarters establish adequate oversight
procedures to ensure that the regional offices are effectively monitoring child
care facility compliance with CBC and CPS requirements. Specifically, we
recommend that DEC
a. require regional offices to maintain a log of new employees reported by
the child care facilities for monitoring purposes;
b. periodically review these logs to ensure that all child care facility
employees are properly recorded in CCATS, and that all employees have
obtained complete and timely CBC and CPS clearances, including those
identified above (repeat);
c. record all CJIS alerts in its centralized monitoring log, including those
identified above; and
d. take appropriate follow-up action to ensure regional offices sufficiently
investigate and resolve all recorded alerts (repeat).
Child Care Facility Inspections
Background
Regional office licensing staff are required to conduct annual inspections of each
licensed child care facility to ensure compliance with State laws and regulations.
The inspections are used to monitor the facilities’ compliance with critical
requirements such as CBCs, staffing ratios, child supervision, cleanliness and
sanitation, health and nutrition, and abuse and neglect reporting. According to
8

--- Page 11 ---
DEC records, DEC regional offices conducted 9,884 inspections of 8,137
facilities during fiscal year 2017.
Finding 2
DEC headquarters did not ensure that regional offices conducted
comprehensive annual inspections of child care facilities, followed up with
facilities regarding the correction of deficiencies, and took appropriate
administrative action when facilities did not correct deficiencies.
Analysis
DEC headquarters did not have procedures to monitor child care facility
inspections performed by regional office licensing staff and ensure that the related
follow-up efforts taken were comprehensive and deficiencies were corrected. Our
tests of child care facilities disclosed that regional DEC licensing staff did not
always document that child care facilities were compliant with certain critical
requirements, ensure facilities corrected deficiencies, and always ensure facilities
took appropriate administrative action when deficiencies were not corrected
timely.
 During child care facility inspections, the regional office licensing staff did
not always ensure that employees working at the facilities had been recorded
in CCATS. As a means to monitor facility reporting of new employees,
DEC’s Guidance for Verifying Staff Employment procedure required licensing
staff to review the facility’s employment records during inspections and
ensure all current employees were recorded in CCATS.
Our test of the most recent inspections for 14 facilities (in 11 regions) that
employed 105 child care workers disclosed that 6 of the 14 employees then
employed at one facility inspected in March 2017 had not been recorded in
CCATS as of February 2018. While we found that the facility provided a list
of all employees to the licensing staff prior to the March 2017 inspection, the
licensing staff did not identify that these 6 employees had not been recorded
in CCATS when they were initially hired. In addition, licensing staff did not
subsequently record these employees, as required, following the inspection.
The recordation of facility employees into CCATS could facilitate DEC’s
monitoring of CBC requirements.
 The regional office licensing staff was not required to document on the
inspection form that they verified whether volunteers working at child care
facilities were adequately supervised. State regulations exclude volunteers
from CBC requirements, but provide that volunteers are not allowed to have
9

--- Page 12 ---
unsupervised access to children. Our review disclosed that the inspection
results for the 14 facilities tested did not document the number of volunteers
working at the facilities, the work schedule of the volunteers, and whether
regional office staff sighted volunteers during the inspections to ensure that
adequate supervision was in place. As a result, there is a lack of assurance
that volunteers were properly supervised.
 The regional office licensing staff was not required to document on the DEC
inspection form if facilities performed comprehensive investigations of CBC
alerts for individuals hired before October 2005. In accordance with State
regulations, facility employees hired prior to October 2005 are subject to
monitoring by the respective facilities, rather than by the DEC regional
offices.1 However, the regional offices did not ensure that the facilities were
monitoring these employees by investigating related alerts. According to
DEC records, at least 2,860 individuals were actively employed at child care
facilities as of April 2018 that were hired prior to October 2005.
 The regional office licensing staff did not ensure that facilities corrected
deficiencies (violations of licensing regulations) noted during the annual
inspections and did not always take available administrative action when
deficiencies were known to not have been corrected timely, as required.
According to DEC records, at a minimum, 420 of the 9,884 inspections
performed during fiscal year 2017 had one or more unresolved deficiency as
of April 2018. DEC procedures require the regional office licensing staff to
document the follow-up efforts in CCATS. DEC procedures also require the
regional offices to follow up with facilities until all deficiencies are resolved.
Facilities that do not address deficiencies may be subject to administrative
action (such as temporary closure).
Our test of inspections conducted for 11 facilities (in 4 regions) during the
period from March 2015 through December 2017 disclosed that, as of March
2018, no information was recorded in CCATS that 31 deficiencies identified
at 4 facilities had been corrected for periods from 80 days to almost three
years. For example, of the 7 deficiencies noted for one facility from its March
2015 inspection, 2 were repeated in its March 2017 inspection and had not
been resolved as of March 2018. These deficiencies included missing
emergency contact information for children and incomplete personnel files for
staff. There were no records in CCATS of any DEC follow-up or
administrative action taken related to these facilities.
1 While State regulations state employees hired prior to October 2005 are subject to monitoring by
the facilities, the corresponding State law does not specify such a date.
10

--- Page 13 ---
Recommendation 2
We recommend that DEC headquarters establish appropriate procedures to
a. monitor the annual child care facility inspections conducted by regional
office personnel to ensure the inspections are comprehensive, including
verifications that all employees were entered into CCATS, that facilities
were adequately supervising any volunteers, and that all alerts are
investigated for employees hired before October 2005; and
b. ensure regional offices follow up on deficiencies noted during inspections
and initiate administrative actions, as deemed appropriate, for facilities
with continued non-compliance.
Child Care Subsidy Program
Background
DEC is responsible for the Child Care Subsidy Program, which provides financial
assistance to eligible families to meet their child care needs. According to State
records, during fiscal year 2017, child care subsidy program expenditures totaled
approximately $76.9 million ($40.8 million in general funds and $36.1 million in
federal funds).
The State’s 24 local departments of social services processed the subsidy
applications for individuals receiving Temporary Cash Assistance (TCA) benefits,
which accounted for approximately 32 percent of the expenditures during fiscal
year 2017. The remaining activity was processed by a vendor under contract with
DEC. During our current audit we reviewed the procedures and controls for
monitoring the eligibility determinations and subsidy payments processed by the
vendor. The vendor’s five-year $29.6 million contract covers the period from
April 23, 2015 through April 30, 2020.
In determining eligibility, the vendor is required to verify applicant income,
identity, and residency, and confirm that the applicant is involved in an approved
activity (such as school or job) that would preclude the applicant from providing
his or her own child care. The vendor also determines the amount of the subsidy
based on the hours needed by the applicant for this activity. Finally, the vendor is
responsible for recording the qualifying child care facility selected by an
approved applicant on the associated voucher. The selected facility will submit
bi-weekly invoices to the vendor for the care provided. The vendor will then
enter the subsidy payment in CCATS, and the payment will be processed through
an interface with the State’s financial accounting system.
11

--- Page 14 ---
Finding 3
DEC lacked sufficient procedures to effectively monitor subsidy program
eligibility determinations and the related payments made by its vendor,
certain of which could not be supported.
Analysis
DEC did not effectively monitor its child care subsidy program vendor to ensure
that proper eligibility determinations were made, subsidy payments were proper
and supported, and contract performance measures were met. In addition, we
found instances in which the vendor had not retained required documentation to
support eligibility determinations and subsidy payments. During fiscal year 2017,
the vendor was paid $5.4 million for administering the program on behalf of
approximately 14,000 children on average.
DEC Lacked Sufficient Procedures to Ensure the Propriety of Eligibility
Determinations
There was not a sufficiently comprehensive process in place to ensure that proper
eligibility determinations were made by the vendor. Although the DEC contract
with the vendor required the vendor, for quality assurance purposes, to review
three transactions per month for each of its staff members responsible for
determining eligibility, those reviews were not necessarily comprehensive or of
sufficient quantity and DEC did not monitor the results of the reviews. For
example, in December 2017, the vendor’s supervisory personnel performed 31
quality control reviews, which represented only 2.3 percent of the transactions
processed by its 10 eligibility staff. In addition, the vendor was not required to
expand testing when errors were identified. In this regard, our test of these 31
quality control reviews disclosed that 6 reviews (or 19 percent) identified errors
made by 5 eligibility staff employees that required correction. For example, one
review noted that income was not calculated correctly and a second review noted
that CCATS did not accurately reflect the information on supporting documents.
In addition, our test of 15 other eligibility determinations processed by the vendor
for individuals who received child care subsidies during the audit period,
disclosed that documentation supporting the propriety of 3 eligibility
determinations and the related subsidy amount was not retained. Further, we
noted that the vendor generally did not obtain comprehensive income verification
information from an available State agency database, even though this step was
included as a requirement in the associated contract. Instead, the vendor obtained
paystubs and tax returns from the applicants, which may not reflect all of an
applicant’s income.
12

--- Page 15 ---
Finally, DEC did not monitor the results of the monthly quality assurance reviews
or assess the comprehensiveness of the process. Since this review is the primary
basis for ensuring the propriety of eligibility determinations, we believe the
vendor should conduct a larger number of reviews, which should be monitored by
DEC for completeness, error trends, and vendor corrective action, as appropriate.
DEC Lacked Sufficient Procedures to Ensure the Propriety of Child Care
Subsidies Paid
DEC did not ensure the vendor obtained and reviewed support for the hours
invoiced by the facilities for child care subsidies. In accordance with the contract,
the vendor was to randomly obtain attendance records signed by the parents for
all children enrolled from 29 facilities every two weeks to verify the propriety of
the subsidies invoiced. DEC did not attempt to confirm, on a test basis, that the
vendor performed the verifications. In this regard, we reviewed 26 facility
invoices that the vendor asserted had been verified during calendar year 2017 and
noted that, for 6 invoices covering 15 children, the vendor did not have the
attendance records to support a verification. As a result, there was a lack of
assurance that the subsidy payments were proper and the vendor was in
compliance with this contract requirement.
DEC did Not Ensure the Vendor Met Critical Performance Measures
DEC did not have a process to ensure the vendor met critical contract
performance measures including the timely processing of subsidy applications
and redeterminations, and timely and proper payment processing. The vendor’s
monthly reports to DEC generally showed that the performance measures were
met; however, DEC accepted the reported performance without verifying that the
information reported was accurate. For example, DEC did not compare the
application processing dates on the vendor’s internal database with the
performance information reported by the vendor to confirm the applications were
processed timely as reported.
Recommendation 3
We recommend that DEC
a. require the vendor to conduct a sufficient number of supervisory reviews
of eligibility determinations, maintain documentation of compliance with
key eligibility requirements, expand its reviews when errors are
identified, and take appropriate corrective action;
b. review the results of the vendor’s quality assurance reviews of eligibility
determinations, at least on a test basis, or implement its own quality
assurance process to ensure that documented and proper determinations
are made by vendor employees;
13

--- Page 16 ---
c. ensure that the vendor reviews the support for, and conducts the required
monthly verifications of, facility invoices for child care subsidies; and
d. establish a process to verify the propriety of reported performance
measures, at least on a test basis.
Information Systems Security and Control
Finding 4
DEC lacked assurance that CCATS was sufficiently protected against
operational and security risks.
Analysis
DEC lacked assurance that CCATS was sufficiently protected against operational
and security risks. DEC personnel advised us that CCATS’ primary service
provider had not obtained required independent security reviews of CCATS and,
independent security review reports for a critical CCATS hosting subcontractor
had not been requested.
The State of Maryland contract and the MSDE agreement with CCATS’ primary
service provider, covering the period from July 2014 to July 2019, required
annual System and Organization Controls reviews (SOC 2 Type 2) be performed
for the primary service provider and all subcontractors performing material
services. As of April 2018, after our inquiries, DEC determined that the CCATS
primary service provider had not had the required SOC 2 Type 2 review
performed. After our inquiry, DEC did obtain a SOC 2 Type 2 report for the
CCATS hosting subcontractor (hosting is a significant service) from the primary
service provider. The report was dated December 8, 2017 and covered the period
from November 1, 2016 to October 31, 2017. We reviewed this report and found
that no control weaknesses were cited. As a result of these conditions, significant
CCATS operational and security risks could exist and remain undetected,
resulting in increased vulnerability of the system and data to compromise or loss.
The American Institute of Certified Public Accountants has issued guidance
concerning examinations of service organizations. Based on this guidance,
service organizations (like the aforementioned service providers) may contract for
an independent review of controls and the resultant independent auditor’s report is
referred to as a SOC report. There are several types of SOC reports, with varying
scope and levels of review and auditor testing. One type of report, referred to as a
SOC 2 Type 2 report, includes the results of the auditor’s review of controls
placed in operation; tests of operating effectiveness for the period under review;
14

--- Page 17 ---
and could include an evaluation of system security, availability, processing
integrity, confidentiality, and privacy.
Recommendation 4
We recommend that DEC
a. enforce the provisions of the CCATS contract and agreement, by
requiring that independent SOC 2 Type 2 security reviews be performed
annually for the CCATS primary service provider and all subcontractors
providing material services; and
b. obtain and review copies of these independent reports and ensure that the
independent security reviews and related reports on CCATS address all
relevant and critical security controls and further ensure that the service
providers implement all critical recommendations made in these reports.
15

--- Page 18 ---
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the Division of Early Childhood
(DEC) of the Maryland State Department of Education (MSDE) for the period
beginning July 1, 2014 and ending December 31, 2017. The audit was conducted
in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards. Those
standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient,
appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and
conclusions based on our audit objectives. We believe that the evidence obtained
provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit
objectives.
As prescribed by the State Government Article, Section 2-1221 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, the objectives of this audit were to examine DEC’s financial
transactions, records, and internal control, and to evaluate its compliance with
applicable State laws, rules, and regulations.
In planning and conducting our audit, we focused on the major financial-related
areas of operations based on assessments of significance and risk. The areas
addressed by the audit included licensing and monitoring of child care facilities,
criminal background checks and alerts of child care providers, the child care
subsidy program, and information systems security and control. We also
determined the status of two findings included in our preceding audit report of
MSDE.
Our audit did not include support services provided to DEC by MSDE. These
support services (including payroll processing, purchasing, maintenance of
accounting records, federal fund recoveries, and related fiscal functions) are
included within the scope of our audits of MSDE.
To accomplish our audit objectives, our audit procedures included inquiries of
appropriate personnel, inspections of documents and records, observations of
DEC’s operations, and tests of transactions. Generally, transactions were selected
for testing based on auditor judgment, which primarily considers risk. Unless
otherwise specifically indicated, neither statistical nor non-statistical audit
sampling was used to select the transactions tested. Therefore, the results of the
tests cannot be used to project those results to the entire population from which
the test items were selected.
We also performed various data extracts of pertinent information from the State’s
Financial Management Information System (such as revenue and expenditure
data) and the State’s Central Payroll Bureau (payroll data). The extracts are
16

--- Page 19 ---
performed as part of ongoing internal processes established by the Office of
Legislative Audits and were subject to various tests to determine data reliability.
We determined that the data extracted from these sources were sufficiently
reliable for the purposes the data were used during this audit. We also extracted
data from DEC’s Child Care Administrative Tracking System (CCATS) for the
purpose of testing childcare facilities, providers, childcare subsidies, and user
access. We performed various tests of the relevant data and determined that the
data were sufficiently reliable for the purposes the data were used during the
audit. Finally, we performed other auditing procedures that we considered
necessary to achieve our audit objectives. The reliability of data used in this
report for background or informational purposes was not assessed.
DEC’s management is responsible for establishing and maintaining effective
internal control. Internal control is a process designed to provide reasonable
assurance that objectives pertaining to the reliability of financial records;
effectiveness and efficiency of operations, including safeguarding of assets; and
compliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations are achieved.
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate.
Our reports are designed to assist the Maryland General Assembly in exercising
its legislative oversight function and to provide constructive recommendations for
improving State operations. As a result, our reports generally do not address
activities we reviewed that are functioning properly.
This report includes findings relating to conditions that we consider to be
significant deficiencies in the design or operation of internal control that could
adversely affect DEC’s ability to maintain reliable financial records, operate
effectively and efficiently, and/or comply with applicable laws, rules, and
regulations. Our report also includes findings regarding significant instances of
noncompliance with applicable laws, rules, or regulations. Other less significant
findings were communicated to DEC that did not warrant inclusion in this report.
MSDE’s response, on behalf of DEC, to our findings and recommendations is
included as an appendix to this report. As prescribed in the State Government
Article, Section 2-1224 of the Annotated Code of Maryland, we will advise
MSDE regarding the results of our review of its response.
17

--- Page 21 ---
Maryland State Department of Education
Division of Early Childhood
Agency Response Form
Criminal Background Checks
Finding 1
DEC headquarters did not provide sufficient oversight to ensure that the regional offices
were effectively monitoring child care facility compliance with CBC and CPS clearance
check requirements. Our tests disclosed numerous instances in which employees had not
obtained required CBCs or CPS clearances, and in which alerts of subsequent criminal
activity were not subject to sufficient follow-up.
We recommend that DEC headquarters establish adequate oversight procedures to ensure
that the regional offices are effectively monitoring child care facility compliance with CBC
and CPS requirements. Specifically, we recommend that DEC
a. require regional offices to maintain a log of new employees reported by the child care
facilities for monitoring purposes;
b. periodically review these logs to ensure that all child care facility employees are
properly recorded in CCATS, and that all employees have obtained complete and
timely CBC and CPS clearances, including those identified above (repeat);
c. record all CJIS alerts in its centralized monitoring log, including those identified above;
and
d. take appropriate follow-up action to ensure regional offices sufficiently investigate and
resolve all recorded alerts (repeat).
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide 1. The Licensing Branch respectfully disagrees with the portion of the
additional comments as Analysis which states that “DEC Procedures were Not Sufficient to
deemed necessary.
Track Child Care Facility Employees and Ensure All Required CBCs
and CPS Clearances Were Obtained’. Specifically, Maryland COMAR
Regulations require child care facilities to provide a complete list of
facility personnel via Form OCC 1203 to their Regional Licensing
Office, prior to being licensed. Subsequently, child care providers are
required to report, via Form OCC 1203, to their Regional Office any
change in staff within five business days of the change. Licensing
Specialists enter staffing information into the Division of Early
Childhood’s (DEC) Child Care Administration Tracking System
(CCATS) as the Form OCC 1203 is received by the Regional Licensing
office. In addition, during annual unannounced inspections, Licensing
Specialists are required to verify child care staff as of the date of the
Page 1 of 20

--- Page 22 ---
Maryland State Department of Education
Division of Early Childhood
Agency Response Form
inspection to that contained in CCATS. Any difference is recorded on
Form OCC1203A and is input in CCATS.
Auditor’s Comment: MSDE disagrees with the factual accuracy of our analysis because
procedures exist to obtain information on child care workers and conduct the related
background checks. However, our review is focused on the lack of DEC controls to
ensure its employees are complying with State regulations and existing DEC policies and
procedures. In addition, as highlighted in the finding, our related test results, which show
non-compliance with the procedures, corroborate the need for such controls.
2. Respectfully, the number of cases where CBCs and/or CPS-
clearances were not obtained should be 8 rather than 12. OLA’s support
for the four cited non-compliant cases was that the appropriate ‘CPS
Clearance Finding’ box on the four CPS- Release of Information forms
identifying the results of the clearance verification was not checked.
However, the initials of the Licensing Staff and the date on each of the
four Release of Information forms signified that the CPS-clearance
forms were received, reviewed and there were no exclusionary findings
identified. Standard Operating procedures have been developed and
provided to Licensing Staff to ensure proper documentation of the
clearance findings on the Release of Information Form. The ‘Guidance
for Completing Release of Information Forms’ explicitly instructs the
Licensing Staff to check the appropriate box that corresponds with the
clearance findings.
Auditor’s Comment: MSDE’s response maintains that 4 of the 12 cases were not
exceptions because the forms were signed by the licensing staff. However, as we have
explained in numerous meetings with both MSDE and DEC officials, one of these 4
forms was not signed by licensing staff and none of the 4 forms noted the conclusions
reached by the licensing specialists. As a result, the forms did not document that the
child care providers were eligible to be employed.
Page 2 of 20

--- Page 23 ---
Maryland State Department of Education
Division of Early Childhood
Agency Response Form
3. The Licensing Branch respectfully disagrees with the portion of the
Analysis which states that ‘DEC Did Not Have Sufficient Procedures to
Track CBC-related Alerts from the Criminal Justice Investigation
System (CJIS) and ensure They Were Properly Investigated.’ DEC’s
procedure ‘Suitability for Employment Process’ guidance outlines the
process by which the Regional Licensing Offices are required to follow
up with CBC alerts. DEC Headquarters verified and provided
documentation during the OLA Audit period that the 10 alerts identified
by OLA were followed up with by Regional Licensing Offices Staff,
who receive alert information on a daily basis.
Auditor’s Comment: MSDE’s response does not address the substance of the finding.
As noted in our earlier auditor’s comment, our finding was focused on the lack of DEC
controls to ensure employees are complying with State regulations and DEC policies and
procedures, and the related test results demonstrating instances of non-compliance,
corroborating the need for such controls.
4. Respectfully, the number of Alerts which were not adequately
investigated by the Regional Licensing Offices should be 2 rather than
26. DEC respectfully disagrees that adequate follow-up was not
performed by the Regional Licensing Offices for 24 of the 26 non-
compliant cases identified by OLA. Upon review of the 26 non-
compliant cases, it was determined that 17 of the non-compliant cases
were for individuals and/or entities who were not under the jurisdiction
of the Office of Child Care (OCC). Per Family Law 5-554 (e) OCC is
prohibited from re-disseminating alert information. Furthermore, these
17 entities should have already received the alert directly from CJIS and
should have performed their investigation. In addition, seven of the non-
compliant cases were for individuals who were ‘end dated’ in the
(CCATS) system, meaning they were reported by their Child Care
director/owner, as no longer working at their child care facility. In line
with the Licensing Branch’s ‘Suitability for Employment Process
Guidance’, if an alert is received for an individual who is no longer
employed with any child care facility no further action is required by the
Licensing Branch. Consequently and respectfully, the number of Alerts
which were not adequately investigated by the Regional Licensing
Offices should be 2 rather than 26.
Page 3 of 20

--- Page 24 ---
Maryland State Department of Education
Division of Early Childhood
Agency Response Form
Auditor’s Comment: MSDE disagrees with our finding for two reasons. First, MSDE
disagrees because 17 of the employees were not listed in CCATS and therefore were not
under the jurisdiction of DEC. However, the 17 alerts were for 7 schools, 5 staffing
agencies, and 5 providers of childcare-related services. We believe that all of these
scenarios could result in individuals being in unsupervised situations with children and,
therefore, should require some due diligence on the part of DEC to either directly
investigate the alert or ensure the appropriate regulatory entity has been notified of the
alert. Second, 7 individuals were reported as no longer working at the child care facility
and therefore no further action was required. However, we believe DEC should obtain
payroll records for these individuals consistent with the requirement for other individuals
with alerts who are not end-dated in CCATS.
Recommendation 1a Choose an item DisagreeEstimated Completion Date: 9/1/2019
Please provide details of The Licensing Branch respectfully disagrees with the
corrective action or Recommendation that Headquarters require Regional Licensing Offices
explain disagreement. to maintain a log of new employees reported by child care facilities as it
believes satisfactory controls and procedures already exist to record
employees reported by child care facilities. The creation of a log
reflecting new employees would not add value, would be redundant and
inefficient as the logs would be developed from information contained
on Forms OCC 1203 and 1203A which as discussed above is required to
be entered into CCATS upon receipt from child care facilities.
Furthermore, the perceived control weakness of not entering all staffing
information reported on Forms OCC 1203 and 1203A into the CCATS
system would be inherent in the recapturing of staffing information from
the Form OCC 1203 and 1203A forms onto the manual log. Finally, the
Licensing Office has developed additional controls whose objective is to
ensure the accuracy of Child Care Provider Staffing information in the
CCATS system such as requiring a complete and current OCC 1203
Form from the Provider during annual visits and a biennial supervisory
review of documentation contained in Child Care Provider case files.
These controls will be distributed to staff by August 31, 2019.
Auditor’s Comment: As noted in our test results, DEC’s procedures failed to ensure the
required background checks were performed, demonstrating the need for the
recommended controls. MSDE’s response does not address controls to ensure that its
procedures are operating as intended. The additional controls referenced in the response
Page 4 of 20

--- Page 25 ---
Maryland State Department of Education
Division of Early Childhood
Agency Response Form
will continue to be insufficient to ensure child care facility employees are recorded timely
in CCATS.
Recommendation 1b Choose an item See Below for Estimated Completion
9/30/2020
discussion. Date:
Please provide details of The following discussion indicates MSDE’s agreement or
corrective action or disagreement for each of the three recommended areas for improvement.
explain disagreement.
Auditor’s Comment: The procedures listed below do not address controls to ensure all
child care providers are recorded in CCATS and, therefore, that all required CBCs and
CPS clearances are obtained.
1) Maintain a log of new employees.
The Licensing Branch respectfully disagrees with the portion of the
Recommendation related to the creation of logs of new employees at
Regional Licensing Offices for reasons stated in its response to Finding
1 Recommendation a.
2) Timely CBC and CPS clearance be obtained for all employees.
The Licensing Branch agrees that complete Criminal Background
Check (CBC) and CPS clearance information needs to be obtained for all
child care employees who have frequent access to children. In this
regard, activities related to changes in Federal regulations and also
completed and in progress modifications to the CCATS system will
greatly assist in achieving this objective. Specifically:
A. It is expected, that as a result of modifications to State and Federal
regulations individuals associated with child care programs will be re-
fingerprinted by March 31, 2020. Therefore, this process will assist
DEC with ensuring all child care providers and individuals associated
with them are printed as required.
B. The CCATS system was enhanced on June 18, 2018 to allow the
tracking and monitoring of CBC and CPS clearance information.
C. A Criminal Background Check Clearance Report is being
configured in the CCATS system which will identify individuals
Page 5 of 20

--- Page 26 ---
Maryland State Department of Education
Division of Early Childhood
Agency Response Form
associated with child care programs, whose CBC and CPS Clearance
information is not contained in CCATS. All activities associated with
coding the report and uploading CBC data for individuals hired prior to
June 18, 2018 into CCATS is expected to be completed by December
30, 2019. Effective June 18, 2018, Licensing staff have manually
entered CBC information in CCATS for all new individuals associated
with child care programs. It is expected that all CPS Clearance data will
be entered into CCATS by September 30, 2020. The report will be
produced and reviewed on a monthly basis effective December 31, 2019.
Any individuals who do not have a CPS clearance or CBC information
in CCATS will be followed-up with and the missing information will be
tracked until it is obtained and documented in the system.
D. Two new positons, Deputy Licensing Branch Chief, to be filled by
January 31, 2020 and a CBC Coordinator filled on April 30, 2019 have
been designated to join DEC’s Headquarters Licensing Staff. These two
positions or a central office designee will be responsible for monitoring
that CBC and CPS clearances have been received for all individuals
reported who are associated with child care programs by using the
Criminal Background Check Clearance Report.
E. The Licensing Branch will modify any existing or create new
procedures on a timely basis regarding the implementation of the prior
mentioned activities.
3) Obtain CBC and CPS Clearances for the 12 non-compliant cases.
As explained in the comments to the Analysis Section, the Licensing
Branch respectfully disagrees that CPS Clearances were not completed
for the 4 staff persons identified. Therefore, the number of non-
compliant cases identified should be 8. The missing documentation for
five of the remaining eight non-compliant cases has subsequently been
obtained and is on file. The missing CPS Clearance documentation for
the remaining three non-compliant cases could not be obtained as these
employees are no longer employed in a child care program and the CPS
Clearance form requires their signature.
Page 6 of 20

--- Page 27 ---
Maryland State Department of Education
Division of Early Childhood
Agency Response Form
Recommendation 1c Choose an item Agree Estimated Completion Date: 3/31/2020
Please provide details of The Licensing Branch agrees with the Recommendation that all
corrective action or CJIS criminal background check alerts should be recorded in the weekly
explain disagreement. Headquarters Alert Log. Consequently, as of November 1, 2018,
Headquarters no longer removed duplicate alerts prior to forwarding the
weekly Headquarters Alert Log to the Regional Licensing Offices. DEC
Headquarters verified and provided documentation during the OLA
Audit period that the 10 alerts cited by OLA were followed up with by
Regional Licensing Office Staff, who receive alert information on a
daily basis. On May 17, 2019, OLA provided a file containing necessary
detail regarding the cited 1,400 alerts which will allow the Licensing
Branch to perform an analysis and document the results of this review.
This process is expected to be completed by March 31, 2020, at which
time the additional 1,400 alerts and related analysis results will be posted
to a centralized monitoring log for Headquarters to track.
Auditor’s Comment: In its response, MSDE continues to refer to the omitted alerts as
“duplicate alerts”; however, each alert represents a unique incident which needs to be
investigated to ensure the individual is not disqualified from working at a child care
facility.
Recommendation 1d Choose an item Agree Estimated Completion Date: Various
Please provide details of The Licensing Branch agrees with the Recommendation. The
corrective action or
Licensing Branch-Headquarters has enhanced its procedures as follows:
explain disagreement.
1. During April 2019, the Licensing Branch Chief commenced review-
ing the Headquarters Alert Log on a monthly basis. These reviews indi-
cated that the Regional Licensing Offices are reviewing new alerts to
determine if the individuals are able to be employed in a child care
program.
2. The position of Criminal Background Check Coordinator (CBCC--a
Headquarters (HQ) position) was filled on April 30, 2019 and this
position or HQ Designee is responsible for following up and ensuring
that open alerts on the Headquarters Alert Log dated during the
Page 7 of 20

--- Page 28 ---
Maryland State Department of Education
Division of Early Childhood
Agency Response Form
January 1, 2018 to April 30, 2019 period have been adequately followed
up and comprehensive details regarding that follow up are documented.
This review is expected to be completed by June 30, 2020.
3. The Regional Licensing Offices will be responsible for following up
and closing all alerts on the Headquarters Alert Log issued after April
30, 2019, and will have on file documentation supporting these
activities. To ensure all alerts, over which the Licensing Branch has
jurisdiction, are documented appropriately, the Criminal Background
Check Coordinator (CBCC) or HQ designee will begin performing
monthly reviews of the Headquarters Alert Log beginning September 1,
2019. The CBCC or HQ Designee will contact the Regional Licensing
Offices regarding any new alerts that are not properly documented to
ensure alert documentation is added to the Headquarters Alert Log as
needed. Also, the Licensing Branch’s current procedure ‘Suitability for
Employment Process’ will be modified by August 31, 2019, to reflect
that Regional Managers and Supervisors will be required to obtain the
necessary information to complete the review of the alerts on the
Headquarters Alert Log by sending an original request and if necessary
follow up requests for the necessary information at 90 and 180 day
intervals. If the information needed to close the alert still has not been
received the request will be sent to the CBCC at Headquarters who will
send an additional request for the information at 270 days. At 365 days,
a decision will be made to determine the next course of action.
Auditor’s Comment: While agreeing with the recommendation, MSDE’s response
indicates that it will follow up with facilities that do not respond to the alert requests, but
will not determine the next course of action for up to a year. Given the sensitivity of this
subject matter and the potential vulnerability of the children under care, we believe that
definitive corrective action (such as license suspensions) should be taken in a timely
manner.
Page 8 of 20

--- Page 29 ---
Maryland State Department of Education
Division of Early Childhood
Agency Response Form
4. The Licensing Branch will be hiring a Deputy Licensing Branch
Chief (a HQ position) by January 30, 2020, whose responsibilities will
include auditing the thoroughness of investigations for alerts on the
Headquarters Alert Log performed by the Regional Licensing Offices. In
this regard, on an annual basis, this position will select and review a
sample of Alerts for each of the thirteen Regional Licensing Offices and
determine whether they were sufficiently investigated and that all issues
were satisfactorily resolved.
5. The CCATS system is being modified to house and track alert
information. These CCATS enhancements are expected to be in place
by August 31, 2020.
Page 9 of 20

--- Page 30 ---
Maryland State Department of Education
Division of Early Childhood
Agency Response Form
Child Care Facility Inspections
Finding 2
DEC headquarters did not ensure that regional offices conducted comprehensive annual
inspections of child care facilities, followed up with facilities regarding the correction of
deficiencies, and took appropriate administrative action when facilities did not correct
deficiencies.
We recommend that DEC headquarters establish appropriate procedures to
a. monitor the annual child care facility inspections conducted by regional office
personnel to ensure the inspections are comprehensive, including verifications that all
employees were entered into CCATS, that facilities were adequately supervising any
volunteers, and that all alerts are investigated for employees hired before October 2005;
and
b. ensure regional offices follow up on deficiencies noted during inspections and initiate
administrative actions, as deemed appropriate, for facilities with continued non-
compliance.
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide 1. The Licensing Branch respectfully believes the following sentence
additional comments as under bullet one which states, “Our test of the most recent inspections
deemed necessary. for 14 facilities (in 11 regions) that employed 105 child care workers
disclosed that 6 of the 14 employees at one facility inspected in March
2017 had not been recorded in CCATS as of February 2018”, should
state that 5 (not 6) of the 14 employees were not recorded in CCATS.
Specifically, the CCATS Associated Party History page shows, for test
case #2, that the individual was employed from 1/1/17- 6/30/17 and also
from 11/13/17-12/1/17 and therefore was recorded in CCATS when the
review was performed.
Auditor’s Comment: MSDE states that one of the six employees identified by our test
as not being recorded in CCATS had, in fact, been recorded at the time of our review.
However, this is inconsistent with our audit results and was not previously mentioned by
DEC during numerous conversations during and subsequent to the audit.
Page 10 of 20

--- Page 31 ---
Maryland State Department of Education
Division of Early Childhood
Agency Response Form
2. The Licensing Branch respectfully disagrees with the comment,
“that the regional licensing staff was not required to document whether
volunteers working at child care facilities were supervised,” under the
second bullet point. Specifically, a Manual exists for each of the four
types of Child Care Programs which provides specific assessment
method criteria which a Licensing Specialist uses during an inspection of
a child care provider to determine compliance with provisions of the
Child Care subtitles (15-18) of COMAR Title 13A, which includes
monitoring of volunteers. The procedures require that during each
inspection licensing staff identify which staff are present and verifies
that qualified personnel are in the classrooms.
Auditor’s Comment: MSDE’s response disagrees that regional licensing staff were not
required to document that volunteers were supervised at the facilities. MSDE asserts that
a generic comment that child care specialists should ensure compliance with COMAR is
sufficient to ensure that numerous critical child care criteria are specifically considered
and addressed. MSDE also maintains that its procedures require child care workers to
ensure that qualified personnel are in the classroom. However, such generic procedures
are insufficient to ensure that inspections are comprehensive and that volunteers are
adequately supervised.
3. The Licensing Branch respectfully disagrees with bullet point three.
Please see the response in Finding 2, Recommendation 2a.
Auditor’s Comment: See auditor comment under Recommendation 2a below.
4. The Licensing Branch respectfully believes that the statement ‘that
regional office staff need to document the follow up efforts in CCATS’
in the fourth bullet point is inaccurate. Prior to December 8, 2016, staff
could manually enter dates for follow-up inspections. No additional
information regarding the inspection was added to the CCATS system.
After December 8, 2016, the system began to electronically import the
inspection report dates from the Electronic Licensing Inspection system.
In addition, the reference to ‘the procedure that requires the regional
offices to document the follow-ups efforts in CCATS’ was an incorrect
Page 11 of 20

--- Page 32 ---
Maryland State Department of Education
Division of Early Childhood
Agency Response Form
reference. The procedure referenced was the guidance for Conducting
“Initial” Inspections. This procedure does not reference the other
inspection types and does not require licensing staff to document follow-
up efforts in CCATS.
Auditor’s Comment: The procedures referred to and used to support our analysis were
not limited to the initial inspections as indicated in the response. In addition, we believe
that documenting the follow-up efforts in CCATS is a critical control regardless of
whether it is specified in the procedures.
Recommendation 2a Choose an item Disagree Estimated Completion Date: Not
applicable
Please provide details of The Licensing Branch respectfully disagrees with the
corrective action or Recommendation. It does not believe that its Headquarters organization
explain disagreement. needs to establish appropriate procedures which require it to monitor the
three stated functions performed by regional office personnel during
inspections as it believes procedures are already in place for these
functions. The basis for disagreement for each function is discussed
below.
1) The Licensing Branch respectfully disagrees that its Headquarters
office needs to establish appropriate procedures to require it to monitor
and verify that all employees are entered into CCATS because these
controls are already currently in place. As discussed in the response to
Finding 1 Recommendation a., satisfactory procedures and controls
currently exist which ensure that CCATS contains all individuals
working at a child care facility who have frequent access to children.
Also, the basis for this Recommendation is related solely to one child
care provider and it has been determined it resulted not from a lack of
procedures but from a prior Licensing Specialist’s non-compliance with
the procedures.
Auditor’s Comment: As previously explained in the auditor comment for
recommendation 1a, DEC’s existing procedures are insufficient to ensure all child care
employees are entered into CCATS. Furthermore, MSDE’s response does not address
Page 12 of 20

--- Page 33 ---
Maryland State Department of Education
Division of Early Childhood
Agency Response Form
the recommendation that inspections ensure that all facility employees were entered into
CCATS.
2) The Licensing Branch respectfully disagrees that its Headquarters
office needs to establish appropriate procedures to require it to monitor
that regional office personnel during annual inspections verified that
facilities were adequately supervising volunteers because satisfactory
procedures and controls are already in place. As discussed in the
Analysis section, Licensing procedures require that if volunteers are
present during the inspection, the Licensing Specialist observes each
volunteer to determine how they are monitored by center staff. If
volunteers are not present, the director and other staff are interviewed to
determine their monitoring level and procedures. The inspection report
will reflect a “C”(Compliant) or ‘N’ Non-Compliant) in the box
associated with the ‘volunteer’ regulation on the inspection summary
report if volunteers are or are not under close supervision of a cleared
staff member whenever the volunteer is in contact with unrelated
children in care. Licensing procedures have been established and are
utilized by Licensing Specialists which require volunteers to be observed
during inspections to ensure that adequate supervision is in place.
Auditor’s Comment: MSDE believes that its inspection summary report that includes a
list of individual COMAR regulations with a corresponding notation for compliance (c)
or noncompliance (n) is sufficient documentation that volunteers were adequately
supervised. MSDE did not address the specific attributes included in the finding that are
necessary to determine the adequacy of supervision – the number of volunteers, work
schedule of volunteers, and whether volunteers were sighted during the inspection.
Finally, MSDE referenced certain detailed procedures; however, no such procedures were
provided to us during the audit and there was no evidence that these procedures were
performed.
3) The Licensing Branch respectfully disagrees that its Headquarters
office needs to establish appropriate procedures to require it to monitor
that Regional Licensing Office personnel investigate alerts for
employees hired before October 2005 during annual inspections because
at that time only the child care facility received these alerts. Per MD
Statute, center child care providers were not able to disclose this
Page 13 of 20

--- Page 34 ---
Maryland State Department of Education
Division of Early Childhood
Agency Response Form
information to the Licensing Branch. Subsequently, DEC was not able to
receive CBC information until October 1, 2005 when House Bill 163
(MD Statue 5-554) required that Criminal Background Information be
sent to the Licensing Office. Furthermore, all staff who were printed
prior to 2005 have been or will be fingerprinted for the Licensing Branch
by March 31, 2020, as part of the Rap Back Program. To date, over
200,000 individuals associated with child care programs have been re-
printed as part of the RAP Back program. Regional Licensing Office
Staff will review the Criminal Background Check reports as they are
received and will take appropriate action if any disqualifying charges are
noted. In addition, alerts for those individuals will be received and
reviewed by Licensing and followed up with appropriate action. Such
individuals will be monitored through the Headquarters Alert Log and
through future CCATS enhancements.
Auditor’s Comment: MSDE disagrees that it needs to establish inspection procedures
to ensure that child care facilities investigated alerts for employees hired before October
2005. This disagreement relies, in part, on federal legislation, effective March 2020,
which will require all child care facility staff to be fingerprinted and results reported to
DEC. Prior to this federal legislation, MSDE asserts that it could not legally have access
to criminal alerts received by the facilities for these employees, but did not provide any
formal legal advice to support this assertion.
Recommendation 2b Choose an item Agrees Estimated Completion Date: 6/4/2019
Please provide details of The Licensing Branch agrees with the Recommendation. Existing
corrective action or procedures, ‘Guidance for Removing Open Summary of Findings
explain disagreement. (SOF’s) in the Electronic Licensing System’ associated with correcting
deficiencies noted during inspections were modified and implemented
on June 4, 2019 to require Licensing Staff to use a report available from
the Child Care Information System (CCIS) which lists all open
“Summary of Findings” (deficiencies) identified during inspections. The
revisions also require Licensing Staff to follow-up on and document the
status of the child care provider’s implementation of corrective action
from onset to closure of deficiencies. In addition, the revised procedure
‘Guidance for Removing Open Summary of Findings (SOF’s) in the
Electronic Licensing System’ associated with taking available
administrative (enforcement) action for facilities with continued non-
compliance was modified in March, 2019 to include a provision whereby
Page 14 of 20

--- Page 35 ---
Maryland State Department of Education
Division of Early Childhood
Agency Response Form
any deficiency which has not been ‘closed’ within 90 days of the
Licensing Specialist’s signature date on the inspection form will be
referred to the Regional Licensing Office Manager or Supervisor to
make a determination of the next course of action including possible
administrative (enforcement) action. The administrative (enforcement)
actions, if any, to be taken will be documented.
Page 15 of 20

--- Page 36 ---
Maryland State Department of Education
Division of Early Childhood
Agency Response Form
Child Care Subsidy Program
Finding 3
DEC lacked sufficient procedures to effectively monitor subsidy program eligibility
determinations and the related payments made by its vendor, certain of which could not be
supported.
We recommend that DEC
a. require the vendor to conduct a sufficient number of supervisory reviews of eligibility
determinations, maintain documentation of compliance with key eligibility
requirements, expand its reviews when errors are identified, and take appropriate
corrective action;
b. review the results of the vendor’s quality assurance reviews of eligibility
determinations, at least on a test basis, or implement its own quality assurance process
to ensure that documented and proper determinations are made by vendor employees;
c. ensure that the vendor reviews the support for, and conducts the required monthly
verifications of, facility invoices for child care subsidies; and
d. establish a process to verify the propriety of reported performance measures, at least on
a test basis.
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide 1. The Subsidy Branch wants to clarify for report readers the expanse
additional comments as of the services provided by the vendor for the Child Care Subsidy
deemed necessary. program by stating that ‘During fiscal year 2017, the vendor was paid
$5.4 million for administering the program on behalf of approximately
an average of 14,000 children per month and for completing 1,094,914
Case Management, Customer Service and Payment & Mail Processing
transactions.’
2. The Subsidy Branch wants to clarify that the statement ‘For
example, in December 2017, the vendor performed supervisory reviews
for 1.3 percent of the 2,450 transactions processed by its eligibility staff’
needs to be modified to ‘For example, in December 2017, the vendor
performed supervisory reviews for 2.24 percent of the 1,381 transac-
tions processed by its eligibility staff’ as the 2,450 transactions used in
the calculation of the 1.3 percent included other transactions processed
by the vendor which were not related to eligibility determination.
Page 16 of 20

--- Page 37 ---
Maryland State Department of Education
Division of Early Childhood
Agency Response Form
Auditor’s Comment: We subsequently revised our report to reflect the information
provided in MSDE’s above response. The revisions were communicated to MSDE. The
finding regarding the lack of sufficient procedures to effectively monitor subsidy
program eligibility determinations is still valid.
Recommendation 3a Choose an item Agree Estimated Completion Date: 12/1/2019
Please provide details of The Subsidy Branch agrees with the Recommendation. The current
corrective action or contract requires the vendor’s management to perform 3 mandatory
explain disagreement. supervisory reviews of eligibility determinations per case manager per
month. Effective December 1, 2019, Subsidy Branch personnel will also
test the propriety of the vendor’s eligibility determination by reviewing 7
cases per case manager and reviewing an additional 5 cases records per
month for each case manager with an identified error. During this
review, the Subsidy Branch will test that the vendor maintained
documentation for key eligibility requirements. Adequate documentation
regarding the aforementioned reviews will be created and maintained
and the results of these reviews will be discussed with the vendor for any
appropriate corrective action. The Subsidy Branch will continue this
process throughout the duration of the current vendor’s contract.
Recommendation 3b Choose an item Agree Estimated Completion Date: 12/1/2019
Please provide details of The Subsidy Branch agrees with the Recommendation. Effective
corrective action or December 1, 2019, the Subsidy Branch will implement the Corrective
explain disagreement. Action Plan for testing the propriety of the vendor’s eligibility
determinations, as outlined in Recommendation a.
Also, COMAR provides a listing of acceptable documents which can
be used to verify the applicant’s monthly income including paystubs and
the vendor complied with COMAR as it used these prescribed sources in
verifying applicant’s monthly income. Effective April 1, 2019, a
supplementary verification of monthly income was implemented
whereby the vendor verifies the reported income on the customer’s
subsidy application to income contained in the Maryland Automated
Benefits System (MABS) for the most recent quarter. Any legitimate
difference(s) are investigated and resolved.
Recommendation 3c Choose an item Agree Estimated Completion Date: 1/31/2020
Please provide details of The Subsidy Branch agrees with the Recommendation. Regarding
corrective action or the six non-compliant cases, two providers subsequently provided
explain disagreement. attendance records to support payments made to them. The remaining
four non-compliant cases were caused by a system weakness which is
Page 17 of 20

--- Page 38 ---
Maryland State Department of Education
Division of Early Childhood
Agency Response Form
expected to be corrected by January 31, 2020. In the interim, during
February 2019 a manual process was developed and implemented to
address the system weakness. Recovery has been obtained for three of
the remaining four non-compliant cases and the remaining case has been
forwarded to the CCU (Central Collection Unit).
The vendor will be required to continue their verification of invoices
as required by the contract (selection of 29 invoices per two week
service period) and the vendor will be required to provide a report of the
results of their bi-weekly verifications to the Subsidy Branch for review.
In addition, procedures will be developed and implemented by
November 30, 2019 which will require current Subsidy Staff to review
10% of the invoices reviewed by the vendor. Any error(s) will be
discussed with the vendor to address technical assistance and/or training
needs.
Recommendation 3d Choose an item Agree Estimated Completion Date: 2/28/2020
Please provide details of The Subsidy Branch agrees with the Recommendation. Procedures
corrective action or are currently being developed to test the propriety of reported
explain disagreement. performance measures. Effective November 30, 2019, these
procedures will be utilized on an on-going basis and will be employed to
test the propriety of reported performance measures retroactively
to January 2017 and where appropriate liquidated damages will be
assessed. The retroactive review is expected to be completed by
February 28, 2020.
Page 18 of 20

--- Page 39 ---
Maryland State Department of Education
Division of Early Childhood
Agency Response Form
Information Systems Security and Control
Finding 4
DEC lacked assurance that CCATS was sufficiently protected against operational and
security risks.
We recommend that DEC
a. enforce the provisions of the CCATS contract and agreement, by requiring that
independent SOC 2 Type 2 security reviews be performed annually for the CCATS
primary service provider and all subcontractors providing material services; and
b. obtain and review copies of these independent reports and ensure that the independent
security reviews and related reports on CCATS address all relevant and critical
security controls and further ensure that the service providers implement all critical
recommendations made in these reports.
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide Based on discussion with OLA and DoIT personnel, an ISO 27001
additional comments as certification is an adequate substitute for a SOC 2 Type 2 review.
deemed necessary. Furthermore, the ISO 27001 certified hosting service provider is
required to have an annual IT security review performed by the external
body which certified them.
Recommendation 4a Choose an item Agree Estimated Completion Date: 8/14/2019
Please provide details of The Licensing Branch agrees with the Recommendation. Following
corrective action or the OLA Audit the CCATS primary hosting service provider came into
explain disagreement. compliance with the contractual requirement to obtain an independent
security review. MSDE’s CCATS Task Manager has received
documentation which reflects that the ISO 27001 certification process
was completed April 10, 2019. In addition, during the OLA Audit
period, OLA was provided verification that the subcontractor for the
CCATS hosting service provider received a SOC 2 Type 2 review,
which covered the period from November 1, 2016 to October 31, 2017.
This review showed that there were no control weaknesses cited.
MSDE’s CCATS Task Manager will monitor and retain annual
documentation to reflect that the contractor and all subcontractors have
maintained compliance with the requirement to obtain annual
independent security reviews.
Page 19 of 20

--- Page 40 ---
Maryland State Department of Education
Division of Early Childhood
Agency Response Form
Recommendation 4b Choose an item Agree Estimated Completion Date: 8/14/2019
Please provide details of The Licensing Branch agrees with the Recommendation. As of this
corrective action or time, there is only one subcontractor who provides material services to
explain disagreement. the primary service provider. A copy of this subcontractor’s SOC 2 Type
2 report, covering the period November 1, 2016 to October 31, 2017 was
obtained during the audit and is on file with MSDE’s CCATS Task
Manager. OLA and DEC’s CCATS Task Manager reviewed the
aforementioned SOC 2 Type 2 report and determined that no control
weaknesses were cited. MSDE’s CCATS Task Manager also obtained
and reviewed a copy of the subcontractor’s most recent SOC 2 Type 2
report covering the period November 1, 2017- October 31, 2018, and
determined that no control weaknesses were cited. In the future,
MSDE’s CCATS Task Manager will obtain and review, on an annual
basis, copies of SOC 2 Type 2 security reports for any subcontractor
who provides material services to the primary service provider. During
this review process, the CCATS Task Manager will determine whether
the IT security controls tested during the SOC 2 Type 2 audit included
the seven security controls mentioned in the Analysis section of OLA’s
ISA #1. The CCATS Task Manager will also follow up and obtain
documentation of any action taken to determine that the vendor(s) have
satisfactorily corrected any security concern(s) identified in section 4
(Tests of Operating Effectiveness and Results of tests) of the SOC 2
Type 2 Security Reviews.
The primary service provider was ISO 27001 certified on April 10,
2019 and is required to have an annual IT security review performed by
the certifying entity. The CCATS Task Manager will request a copy of
these annual reviews and will utilize a similar review process as
described above for the SOC 2 Type reports.
Page 20 of 20

--- Page 41 ---
A T
UDIT EAM
Heather A Warriner, CPA
Audit Manager
Richard L. Carter, CISA
Information Systems Audit Manager
Nathan H. Suffin, CPA
Senior Auditor
Edwin L. Paul, CPA, CISA
Information Systems Senior Auditor
John B. Wachter, CFE
Staff Auditor
Robert H. Dean
Information Systems Staff Auditor