Title: Maryland Department of Labor - Division of Occupational and Professional Licensing
Date: 03/11/2022
Type: Fiscal Compliance
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=622f4fd2a1ce5810dc92fbc7
Extracted: 2025-06-20T00:15:17.980758
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Audit Report
Maryland Department of Labor
Division of Occupational and Professional Licensing
March 2022
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Senator Clarence K. Lam, M.D. (Senate Chair) Delegate Carol L. Krimm (House Chair)
Senator Malcolm L. Augustine Delegate Steven J. Arentz
Senator Adelaide C. Eckardt Delegate Mark S. Chang
Senator George C. Edwards Delegate Nicholas P. Charles II
Senator Katie Fry Hester Delegate Andrea Fletcher Harrison
Senator Cheryl C. Kagan Delegate Trent M. Kittleman
Senator Benjamin F. Kramer Delegate David Moon
Senator Cory V. McCray Delegate Julie Palakovich Carr
Senator Justin D. Ready Delegate Elizabeth G. Proctor
Senator Craig J. Zucker Delegate Geraldine Valentino-Smith
To Obtain Further Information
Office of Legislative Audits
The Warehouse at Camden Yards
351 West Camden Street, Suite 400
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Phone: 410-946-5900
Maryland Relay: 711
TTY: 410-946-5401 ꞏ 301-970-5401
E-mail: OLAWebmaster@ola.state.md.us
Website: www.ola.state.md.us
To Report Fraud
The Office of Legislative Audits operates a Fraud Hotline to report fraud, waste, or abuse involving State
of Maryland government resources. Reports of fraud, waste, or abuse may be communicated anonymously
by a toll-free call to 1-877-FRAUD-11, by mail to the Fraud Hotline, c/o Office of Legislative Audits, or
through the Office’s website.
Nondiscrimination Statement
The Department of Legislative Services does not discriminate on the basis of age, ancestry, color, creed,
marital status, national origin, race, religion, gender, gender identity, sexual orientation, or disability in the
admission or access to its programs, services, or activities. The Department’s Information Officer has been
designated to coordinate compliance with the nondiscrimination requirements contained in Section 35.107
of the United States Department of Justice Regulations. Requests for assistance should be directed to the
Information Officer at 410-946-5400 or 410-970-5400.

--- Page 3 ---
March 11, 2022
Senator Clarence K. Lam, M.D., Senate Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Delegate Carol L. Krimm, House Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Members of Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Annapolis, Maryland
Ladies and Gentlemen:
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the Maryland Department of
Labor (MDL) – Division of Occupational and Professional Licensing (DOPL) for
the period beginning January 30, 2017 and ending March 31, 2021. DOPL
licenses, regulates, and monitors 25 business occupations and professions in
concert with the applicable boards and commissions whose members are
appointed by the Governor. Each of these boards and commissions is funded
either by general funds or by license and exam fees from the specific professional
or trade group regulated.
Our audit disclosed that DOPL did not take sufficient steps to ensure that
occupational and professional licenses were issued only to applicants who met all
education and experience requirements stipulated in State law. In addition, we
found that collection procedures in place at three of four boards and commissions
we examined were not sufficient to ensure that all collections were deposited, and
collections were not always deposited promptly. Furthermore, certain employees
with access to cash receipts could also modify license accounts.
Our audit also disclosed that DOPL did not reconcile cash control accounts for the
Home Improvement and Real Estate Guaranty Funds to the State’s accounting
records and, consequently, DOPL was unable to ensure that all Fund activity had
been properly accounted for and recorded.
Finally, our audit included a review to determine the status of the three findings
contained in our preceding audit report. We determined that DOPL satisfactorily

--- Page 4 ---
addressed one of these findings. The remaining two findings are repeated in this
report.
MDL’s response to this audit, on behalf of DOPL, is included as an appendix to
this report. We reviewed the response and noted agreement to our findings and
related recommendations, and while there are other aspects of MDL’s response
which will require further clarification, we do not anticipate that these will require
the Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee’s attention to resolve. In accordance
with our policy, we have edited certain vendor names or products mentioned in
MDL’s response.
We wish to acknowledge the cooperation extended to us during the audit by
DOPL. We also wish to acknowledge MDL’s and DOPL’s willingness to address
the audit issues and implement appropriate corrective actions.
Respectfully submitted,
Gregory A. Hook, CPA
Legislative Auditor
2

--- Page 5 ---
Table of Contents
Background Information 4
Agency Responsibilities 4
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report 4
Findings and Recommendations 5
Licensing
* Finding 1 – The Division of Occupational and Professional Licensing 5
(DOPL) did not have sufficient procedures to ensure that individuals
who were issued occupational and professional licenses had met all
required qualifications.
Cash Receipts
Finding 2 – DOPL’s collection procedures did not ensure that all 7
collections were properly recorded and deposited.
Guaranty Funds
* Finding 3 – DOPL did not reconcile its record of the Home Improvement 8
and Real Estate Guaranty Funds to the State’s accounting records
to ensure that all related cash transactions were properly accounted for
and recorded.
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology 10
Agency Response Appendix
* Denotes item repeated in full or part from preceding audit report
3

--- Page 6 ---
Background Information
Agency Responsibilities
The Division of Occupational and Professional Licensing (DOPL) of the
Maryland Department of Labor (MDL)1 licenses, regulates, and monitors 25
business occupations and professions in concert with the applicable boards and
commissions whose members are appointed by the Governor. According to MDL
records, as of June 30, 2020, DOPL regulated more than 262,000 licensees.
Furthermore, according to the State’s records, DOPL’s expenditures for fiscal
year 2020 totaled approximately $9.5 million. These expenditures were funded
by general funds, as well as licensing and exam fees.
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report
Our audit included a review to determine the status of the three findings contained
in our preceding audit report dated November 28, 2017. As disclosed in Figure 1
below, we determined that DOPL satisfactorily addressed one of these findings.
The remaining two findings are repeated in this report, although the Division did
take limited corrective action with certain elements of those two prior findings.
Figure 1
Status of Preceding Findings
Preceding Implementation
Finding Description
Finding Status
DOPL did not have sufficient procedures to
ensure that real estate broker and salesperson
Repeated
Finding 1
licenses, and home improvement contractor (Current Finding 1)
licenses were issued only to individuals who
had met all required qualifications.
DOPL did not have adequate processes in
Finding 2 Not repeated
place to ensure that certain collections were
deposited.
DOPL had not established cash control
accounts for the Home Improvement and the Repeated
Finding 3
Real Estate Guaranty Funds, and did not (Current Finding 3)
reconcile cash transactions to the State’s
records.
1 Chapter 91, Laws of Maryland 2019 renamed the Department of Labor, Licensing, and
Regulation to be the Maryland Department of Labor
4

--- Page 7 ---
Findings and Recommendations
Licensing
Finding 1
The Division of Occupational and Professional Licensing (DOPL) did not
have sufficient procedures to ensure that individuals who were issued
occupational and professional licenses had met all required qualifications.
Analysis
DOPL did not have sufficient procedures to ensure that individuals issued
occupational and professional licenses had met all required qualifications
stipulated in the law. The Maryland Department of Labor (MDL), on behalf of
DOPL, contracted with a vendor to administer examinations required for
licensure. The vendor was responsible for ensuring that applicants met the
educational and work experience requirements prior to administering the
examinations. We reviewed the vendor’s contracts associated with the following
eight boards and commissions:
1. Maryland Real Estate Commission
2. Maryland Home Improvement Commission
3. Maryland Board of Plumbing
4. Maryland State Board of Electricians
5. Maryland Board of Stationary Engineers
6. Maryland Elevator Safety Review Board
7. Maryland Board of Heating, Ventilation, Air Conditioning and
Refrigeration Contractors
8. Maryland Commission of Real Estate Appraisers, Appraisal Management
Companies, and Home Inspectors
Our review disclosed that DOPL did not have a Division-wide policy or process
requiring each board or commission to ensure that the vendor was performing
these pre-examination educational and work requirement verifications required by
each of the contracts. For example, for seven of the eight licensure bodies listed
above, neither DOPL nor the licensure body could provide documentation that
independent reviews, as permitted by the contracts, had been conducted to ensure
that the vendor adequately verified the experience qualifications of applicants
(such as the 3,750 hours of training under the direction of a master plumber
required for a master plumber license). DOPL advised us that for the Elevator
Safety Review Board, Board of Stationary Engineers, and Board of Electricians
certain application reviews are performed by a separate internal application
committee. However, no documentation was available to support verification of
5

--- Page 8 ---
qualification requirements by either the vendor or a separate committee for these
Boards.
A similar condition was commented upon in our preceding audit report regarding
the Maryland Real Estate Commission (MREC) and Maryland Home
Improvement Commission (MHIC). Our current review disclosed that MREC
established a process to verify that individuals took the required real estate course
before taking the licensing exams, but did not have a process to verify attainment
of the required work experience. Similarly, MHIC did not have a process to
verify work experience requirements for licensure.
State law requires applicants for occupational and professional licenses from
certain boards and commissions to meet certain education and/or work experience
requirements. For example, applicants for a broker’s license must have at least
three years of brokerage service experience (affiliated with a licensed real estate
broker). According to DOPL records, there were 134,040 individuals in
Maryland who held active licenses from the aforementioned eight boards and
commissions as of June 30, 2020. These eight boards and commissions issued
15,662 new licenses during fiscal year 2020.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that, for all boards and commissions that use a licensing
exam services vendor to screen applicants, as well as those that may use a
separate internal application committee, DOPL establish procedures to
ensure that applicants have met all required qualifications in accordance
with State law. Specifically, we recommend that DOPL
a. when using vendor services, inspect at least on a test basis the vendor’s
records to ensure that applicants met the education and experience
requirements for licensure (repeat);
b. similarly, when using an internal application committee, ensure that
education and experience requirements have been verified prior to
approval for taking the applicable exam; and
c. maintain documentation of the results of these inspections and
verifications for future reference (repeat).
Cash Receipts
Background
DOPL receives cash receipts for licensing fees, guaranty fund fees, application
fees, and fines which it collects on behalf of the 25 business occupations and
professions that DOPL oversees. Collections are received through MDL’s online
6

--- Page 9 ---
licensing system, a bank lockbox account, and mail-in/walk-in collections
received at DOPL. During fiscal year 2020, online collections totaled
approximately $9.2 million, lockbox collections totaled approximately $1.6
million, and mail-in/walk-in collections totaled approximately $1.4 million. Our
audit focused on mail-in/walk-in receipts since collections received online and
through the bank lockbox are processed by MDL – Office of the Secretary and are
included in the scope of that audit.
Finding 2
DOPL’s collection procedures did not ensure that all collections were
properly recorded and deposited.
Analysis
DOPL’s collection procedures did not ensure that all collections were properly
recorded and deposited. Checks received by DOPL were initially recorded at a
central location. Copies of the checks, along with the related documentation,
were then transferred to the applicable units (boards and commissions) to identify
the proper revenue accounts. The documentation was then returned to the central
location for use in recording the revenue in the licensing system and for
subsequent deposit processing. Each unit was responsible for performing a
validated deposit verification for its collections. According to its records, DOPL
collected approximately $1.4 million during fiscal year 2020 for its boards and
commissions. Our review disclosed the following:
 Four employees who processed collections in the central location had
access to modify license accounts, to record collections, and release
licenses for issuance in DOPL’s licensing management system, without
subsequent review and approval of the modified transactions. As a result,
these employees could alter the licensing accounts and misappropriate
funds without detection. We were advised by DOPL management that
these employees did not need this access for their routine jobs, but access
was given to the employees due to staff on leave and personnel shortages.
 Our test of 28 collections totaling $378,688 received by four boards and
commissions disclosed there was no documentation that a deposit
verification had been performed for 10 of the collections received by three
of these units. These 10 collections totaled $23,151, and were included in
deposits totaling $24,061.
 Deposits for 16 of the 28 collections tested totaling $135,756 were not
made until 4 to 13 business days after receipt of the funds.
7

--- Page 10 ---
The Comptroller of Maryland’s Accounting Procedures Manual requires the
establishment of sufficient internal controls over collections, including an
adequate separation of cash receipt and accounts receivable processing duties,
prompt deposit of cash receipts (ideally the day of receipt and preferably by the
next business day, but at least weekly), and independent verification of collections
to deposit, which should be performed from the record of checks received.
Recommendation 2
We recommend that DOPL
a. ensure that employees involved in the cash receipts function do not have
the capability to modify license accounts in the automated system,
b. ensure that all boards and commissions perform documented deposit
verifications, and
c. deposit all collections in a prompt manner.
Guaranty Funds
Finding 3
DOPL did not reconcile its record of the Home Improvement and Real Estate
Guaranty Funds to the State’s accounting records to ensure that all related
cash transactions were properly accounted for and recorded.
Analysis
DOPL did not reconcile its Home Improvement and Real Estate Guaranty Funds
cash control accounts to the corresponding amounts in the State's accounting
records to ensure that all related cash transactions were properly accounted for
and recorded. The two Guaranty Funds were established by State law to
compensate individuals who are financially injured because of faulty work
performed by a licensed home improvement contractor or because of the wrongful
acts of a licensed real estate broker or salesperson. The Funds receive a portion of
all licensing fees, and according to the State’s records, as of June 30, 2020, the
cash balances in the Home Improvement Guaranty Fund and the Real Estate
Guaranty Fund totaled approximately $3.7 million and $1.1 million, respectively.
In response to our preceding audit report, DOPL established a cash control
account for both the Home Improvement and Real Estate Guaranty Funds.
Although DOPL compared its control account balances to the State’s records,
variances were not investigated and no corrective action was taken.
Subsequent to our inquiries, DOPL prepared and provided us with monthly
reconciliations for both funds for fiscal year 2021, which indicated only minor
8

--- Page 11 ---
differences. However, since these reconciliations were provided subsequent to
completion of our fieldwork, we did not verify their accuracy. The lack of
periodic reconciliations for the Guaranty Funds was commented upon in our
preceding audit report.
Recommendation 3
We recommend that DOPL
a. periodically reconcile its records of Guaranty Fund balances with the
respective balances recorded in the State’s accounting records,
investigate any significant variances, and take the necessary action to
resolve such variances (repeat); and
b. ensure that the reconciliations and any subsequent action required are
reviewed and approved by supervisory personnel.
9

--- Page 12 ---
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the Maryland Department of
Labor (MDL) – Division of Occupational and Professional Licensing (DOPL) for
the period beginning January 30, 2017 and ending March 31, 2021. The audit
was conducted in accordance with generally accepted government auditing
standards. Those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain
sufficient, appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and
conclusions based on our audit objectives. We believe that the evidence obtained
provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit
objectives.
As prescribed by the State Government Article, Section 2-1221 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, the objectives of this audit were to examine DOPL’s financial
transactions, records, and internal control, and to evaluate its compliance with
applicable State laws, rules, and regulations.
In planning and conducting our audit, we focused on the major financial-related
areas of operations based on assessments of significance and risk. The areas
addressed by the audit included cash receipts, licensing, and guaranty funds. We
also determined the status of the findings contained in our preceding audit report.
Our audit did not include certain support services provided by the MDL – Office
of the Secretary. These support services (such as payroll, purchasing, data
processing, maintenance of accounting records, and related fiscal functions
including cash receipts processed through MDL’s online licensing system and
certain bank lockbox account transactions) are included within the scope of our
audits of the Office of the Secretary.
Our assessment of internal controls was based on agency procedures and controls
in place at the time of our fieldwork. Our tests of transactions and other auditing
procedures were generally focused on the transactions occurring during our audit
period of January 31, 2017 to March 31, 2021, but may include transactions
before or after this period as we considered necessary to achieve our audit
objectives.
To accomplish our audit objectives, our audit procedures included inquiries of
appropriate personnel, inspections of documents and records, tests of transactions,
and to the extent practicable, observations of DOPL’s operations. Generally,
transactions were selected for testing based on auditor judgment, which primarily
considers risk, the timing or dollar amount of the transaction, or the significance
of the transaction to the area of operation reviewed. As a matter of course, we do
10

--- Page 13 ---
not normally use sampling in our tests, so unless otherwise specifically indicated,
neither statistical nor non-statistical audit sampling was used to select the
transactions tested. Therefore, unless sampling is specifically indicated in a
finding, the results from any tests conducted or disclosed by us cannot be used to
project those results to the entire population from which the test items were
selected.
We also performed various data extracts of pertinent information from the State’s
Financial Management Information System (such as revenue and expenditure
data). The extracts are performed as part of ongoing internal processes
established by the Office of Legislative Audits and were subject to various tests to
determine data reliability. We determined that the data extracted from these
sources were sufficiently reliable for the purposes the data were used during this
audit.
We also extracted data from DOPL’s automated licensing system for the purpose
of testing cash receipts, licensing, and guaranty funds. We performed various
tests of the relevant data and determined that the data were sufficiently reliable for
the purposes the data were used during the audit. Finally, we performed other
auditing procedures that we considered necessary to achieve our audit objectives.
The reliability of data used in this report for background or informational
purposes was not assessed.
DOPL’s management is responsible for establishing and maintaining effective
internal control. Internal control is a process designed to provide reasonable
assurance that objectives pertaining to the reliability of financial records;
effectiveness and efficiency of operations, including safeguarding of assets; and
compliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations are achieved. As
provided in Government Auditing Standards, there are five components of
internal control: control environment, risk assessment, control activities,
information and communication, and monitoring. Each of the five components,
when significant to the audit objectives, and as applicable to DOPL, were
considered by us during the course of this audit.
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate.
Our reports are designed to assist the Maryland General Assembly in exercising
its legislative oversight function and to provide constructive recommendations for
11

--- Page 14 ---
improving State operations. As a result, our reports generally do not address
activities we reviewed that are functioning properly.
This report includes findings relating to conditions that we consider to be
significant deficiencies in the design or operation of internal control that could
adversely affect DOPL’s ability to maintain reliable financial records, operate
effectively and efficiently, and/or comply with applicable laws, rules, and
regulations. Our report also includes findings regarding significant instances of
noncompliance with applicable laws, rules, or regulations. Other less significant
findings were communicated to DOPL that did not warrant inclusion in this
report.
The response from MDL, on behalf of DOPL, to our findings and
recommendations is included as an appendix to this report. As prescribed in the
State Government Article, Section 2-1224 of the Annotated Code of Maryland,
we will advise the MDL regarding the results of our review of its response.
12

--- Page 15 ---
APPENDIX

--- Page 16 ---
Maryland Department of Labor
Division of Occupational and Professional Licensing
Agency Response Form
Licensing
Finding 1
The Division of Occupational and Professional Licensing (DOPL) did not have sufficient
procedures to ensure that individuals who were issued occupational and professional
licenses had met all required qualifications.
We recommend that, for all boards and commissions that use a licensing exam services
vendor to screen applicants, as well as those that may use a separate internal application
committee, DOPL establish procedures to ensure that applicants have met all required
qualifications in accordance with State law. Specifically, we recommend that DOPL
a. when using vendor services, inspect at least on a test basis the vendor’s records to
ensure that applicants met the education and experience requirements for licensure
(repeat);
b. similarly, when using an internal application committee, ensure that education and
experience requirements have been verified prior to approval for taking the applicable
exam; and
c. maintain documentation of the results of these inspections and verifications for future
reference (repeat).
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide Currently all boards are following different procedures to ensure that the
additional comments as Licensing Exam Service Vendors are following the guidelines for the
deemed necessary. candidates’ licensing requirements. However, the goal is to make it a
uniformed process for all the boards. This will be an intense process as
each board works differently and may require more time than indicated
below to implement.
Recommendation 1a Agree Estimated Completion Date: 06/30/2022
Please provide details of
corrective action or Each Board’s Executive Director or the assigned staff would be required
explain disagreement. to review at least 5 applications per quarter randomly selected from the
vendor noted or from other vendors (if applicable). The Board will then
review the applications for the required education and experience for the
applicant to qualify for exam. If additional information or clarification
is required, the staff would complete the follow up steps. If there are
frequent discrepancies in the applications sent by the vendor for any
requirements, the number of applications reviews would increase.
Page 1 of 5

--- Page 17 ---
Maryland Department of Labor
Division of Occupational and Professional Licensing
Agency Response Form
Recommendation 1b Agree Estimated Completion Date: 06/30/2022
Please provide details of The test audit review of the applicant’s education and experience will be
corrective action or completed before it goes to the Board for approval.
explain disagreement.
Recommendation 1c Agree Estimated Completion Date: 06/30/2022
Please provide details of Each Board will maintain all related inspection and verification
corrective action or documents for future reference.
explain disagreement.
Page 2 of 5

--- Page 18 ---
Maryland Department of Labor
Division of Occupational and Professional Licensing
Agency Response Form
Cash Receipts
Finding 2
DOPL’s collection procedures did not ensure that all collections were properly recorded
and deposited.
We recommend that DOPL
a. ensure that employees involved in the cash receipts function do not have the capability
to modify license accounts in the automated system,
b. ensure that all boards and commissions perform documented deposit verifications, and
c. deposit all collections in a prompt manner.
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 2a Agree Estimated Completion Date: 11/1/2021
Please provide details of Due to the pandemic, employees in the Customer Service Center were
corrective action or granted special accommodations which limited their time in the office.
explain disagreement. The 4 employees were granted access to complete the processing of over
25 licensing board applications. As of November 1, 2021, the 4
employees’ access have been reversed to what it was before the
pandemic. Please see attached new report. The name of the Report is
“Cash Access Report Finding 2a”.
Recommendation 2b Agree Estimated Completion Date: 06/30/2022
Please provide details of In the new procedure, which is being drafted, the bank report would be
corrective action or attached with the licensing applications and will be sent to the boards for
explain disagreement. the application approvals. Copy of the Draft of this procedure is
attached under “Draft Revised Check Processing Guidelines”. This
procedure is currently being reviewed by the payment supervisor for
further clarification.
Recommendation 2c Agree Estimated Completion Date: 6/30/2022
Please provide details of The procedure is being drafted where when the mail comes to be sorted,
corrective action or the payments would be separated from the applications, scanned in the
explain disagreement. bank the same day, and deposit released in the system when applications
are approved by the boards. Copy of the Draft of this procedure is
attached under “Draft Revised Check Processing Guidelines”. This
Page 3 of 5

--- Page 19 ---
Maryland Department of Labor
Division of Occupational and Professional Licensing
Agency Response Form
procedure is currently being reviewed by the payment supervisor for
further clarification.
Guaranty Funds
Finding 3
DOPL did not reconcile its record of the Home Improvement and Real Estate Guaranty
Funds to the State’s accounting records to ensure that all related cash transactions were
properly accounted for and recorded.
We recommend that DOPL
a. periodically reconcile its records of Guaranty Fund balances with the respective
balances recorded in the State’s accounting records, investigate any significant
variances, and take the necessary action to resolve such variances (repeat); and
b. ensure that the reconciliations and any subsequent action required are reviewed and
approved by supervisory personnel.
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 3a Agree Estimated Completion Date: 06/30/2021
Please provide details of DOPL has implemented a periodic reconciliation plan for the Guarantee
corrective action or Funds. DOPL has identified the key components of the guarantee funds
explain disagreement. and the source of each transaction. The periodic reconciliation plan
identifies a certain database management process and ties it to DOPL’s
Internal reports and the State’s Financial Management Information
System. The Components will be reviewed each month within 10
calendar days of receipt of the Guaranty Fund Balance Report from the
Chief of Accounting, Office of Administration (OOA). When variances
Page 4 of 5

--- Page 20 ---
Maryland Department of Labor
Division of Occupational and Professional Licensing
Agency Response Form
are noted during the review process, the Administrator 1 will report
these to the Deputy Commissioner and submit adjusting journal entry
requests to the Fiscal Supervisor, Office of the Administration and
contact the MHIC and MREC staff to correct any errors noted in the
database. By implementing this plan, the internal control over the
Guaranty Funds will be maintained. Procedure is drafted and attached
with the response under “Procedures for GF Reconciliation”.
Recommendation 3b Agree Estimated Completion Date: 06/30/2021
Please provide details of The Deputy Commissioner is reviewing the MHIC and MREC
corrective action or reconciliations for the Guaranty Fund Balance on a monthly basis.
explain disagreement. During the Monthly review, the Deputy Commissioner will ensure that
the periodic reconciliations for Guaranty Funds are complete, and any
variances are addressed.
Page 5 of 5

--- Page 21 ---
A T
UDIT EAM
Catherine M. Clarke, CPA, CIA, CFE
Robert A. Wells Jr., CPA
Audit Managers
Abdullah I. Adam, CFE
Senior Auditor
Dorian A. Fournier
Benjamin H. Straube
Staff Auditors