Title: State Lottery and Gaming Control Agency
Date: 03/15/2022
Type: Fiscal Compliance
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=6230ab4aa1ce5803c4991a18
Extracted: 2025-06-20T00:15:54.024749
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Audit Report
State Lottery and Gaming Control Agency
May 2025
Public Notice
In compliance with the requirements of the State Government Article Section
2-1224(i), of the Annotated Code of Maryland, the Office of Legislative Audits
has redacted cybersecurity findings and related auditee responses
from this public report.
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Senator Shelly L. Hettleman (Senate Chair) Delegate Jared Solomon (House Chair)
Senator Joanne C. Benson Delegate Steven J. Arentz
Senator Benjamin T. Brooks, Sr. Delegate Andrea Fletcher Harrison
Senator Paul D. Corderman Delegate Steven C. Johnson
Senator Katie Fry Hester Delegate Mary A. Lehman
Senator Cheryl C. Kagan Delegate David H. Moon
Senator Clarence K. Lam, M.D. Delegate Julie Palakovich Carr
Senator Cory V. McCray Delegate Emily K. Shetty
Senator Justin D. Ready Delegate Stephanie M. Smith
Senator Bryan W. Simonaire Delegate M. Courtney Watson
To Obtain Further Information
Office of Legislative Audits
The Warehouse at Camden Yards
351 West Camden Street, Suite 400
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Phone: 410-946-5900
Maryland Relay: 711
TTY: 410-946-5401 ꞏ 301-970-5401
E-mail: OLAWebmaster@ola.state.md.us
Website: www.ola.state.md.us
To Report Fraud
The Office of Legislative Audits operates a Fraud Hotline to report fraud, waste, or abuse involving State
of Maryland government resources. Reports of fraud, waste, or abuse may be communicated anonymously
by a toll-free call to 1-877-FRAUD-11, by mail to the Fraud Hotline, c/o Office of Legislative Audits, or
through the Office’s website.
Nondiscrimination Statement
The Department of Legislative Services does not discriminate on the basis of age, ancestry, color, creed,
marital status, national origin, race, religion, gender, gender identity, sexual orientation, or disability in the
admission or access to its programs, services, or activities. The Department’s Information Officer has been
designated to coordinate compliance with the nondiscrimination requirements contained in Section 35.107
of the United States Department of Justice Regulations. Requests for assistance should be directed to the
Information Officer at 410-946-5400 or 410-970-5400.

--- Page 3 ---
May 13, 2025
Senator Shelly L. Hettleman, Senate Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Delegate Jared Solomon, House Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Members of Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Annapolis, Maryland
Ladies and Gentlemen:
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the State Lottery and Gaming
Control Agency (SLGCA) for the period beginning October 16, 2020 and ending
January 31, 2024. SLGCA generates revenue primarily for the State’s General
Fund and the Education Trust Fund through various lottery games, casino-
operated video lottery terminals and table games, and sports wagering.
Approximately $1.6 billion of its revenue for fiscal year 2023 was credited to
various State funds or agencies as prescribed by law.
Our audit disclosed that State casinos did not intercept prize money for amounts
due to the State because State law only provides for such recoveries from lottery
winnings. Our analysis of three casinos identified $9.2 million in prize money
awarded to patrons that could have been withheld.
Our audit also disclosed that SLGCA did not always follow State procurement
regulations. Specifically, our review of four contracts totaling $82.2 million
noted SLGCA was not able to provide critical procurement documentation for
two procurements totaling $55.4 million such as the best and final offer for the
losing bidders precluding us from readily determining the propriety of these
awards. In addition, SLGCA did not always publish contract solicitations and
awards on eMaryland Marketplace Advantage (eMMA), as required, a condition
noted but not corrected from our preceding report.
Furthermore, our audit disclosed cybersecurity-related findings. However, in
accordance with the State Government Article, Section 2-1224(i) of the
Annotated Code of Maryland, we have redacted the findings from this audit
report. Specifically, State law requires the Office of Legislative Audits to redact
cybersecurity findings in a manner consistent with auditing best practices before

--- Page 4 ---
the report is made available to the public. The term “cybersecurity” is defined in
the State Finance and Procurement Article, Section 3.5-301(b), and using our
professional judgment we have determined that the redacted findings fall under
the referenced definition. The specifics of the cybersecurity findings were
previously communicated to those parties responsible for acting on our
recommendations.
SLGCA’s response to this audit is included as an appendix to this report.
Consistent with State law, we have redacted the elements of SLGCA’s response
related to the cybersecurity audit findings. We reviewed the response to our
findings and related recommendations, and have concluded that the corrective
actions identified are sufficient to address all audit issues.
We wish to acknowledge the cooperation extended to us during the audit by
SLGCA.
Respectfully submitted,
Brian S. Tanen
Brian S. Tanen, CPA, CFE
Legislative Auditor
2

--- Page 5 ---
Table of Contents
Background Information 4
Agency Responsibilities 4
Financial Information 6
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Reports 7
Findings and Recommendations 9
Intercepting Casino Prize Winnings
Finding 1 (Policy Issue) – State casinos do not intercept prize money 9
for amounts due to the State because State law only provides for
such recoveries from lottery winnings. We identified $9.2 million
disbursed to patrons that could have been potentially intercepted to
recover debts owed to the State.
Contracts
* Finding 2 – The State Lottery and Gaming Control Agency (SLGCA) 10
did not always maintain critical procurement documentation and
publish contract solicitations and awards as required by State
procurement regulations.
Information Systems Security and Control
Finding 3 – Redacted cybersecurity-related finding. 11
Finding 4 – Redacted cybersecurity-related finding. 11
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology 12
Agency Response Appendix
* Denotes item repeated in full or part from preceding audit report
3

--- Page 6 ---
Background Information
Agency Responsibilities
The State Lottery and Gaming Control Agency (SLGCA) oversees the State’s
various lottery games, casinos, sports wagering, and fantasy gaming competitions.
This activity generates revenue for the State’s General Fund, the Education Trust
Fund, the Maryland Stadium Authority, the Blueprint for Maryland’s Future Fund
(BMFF), and certain other governmental funds and agencies. The State Lottery
and Gaming Control Commission (SLGCC) consists of seven members appointed
by the Governor with the advice and consent of the State Senate. SLGCC has
oversight responsibilities for SLGCA’s operations and, in conjunction with
SLGCA, is responsible for regulating the operations of the State’s video lottery
terminals (VLT), table games, and sports wagering.
Lottery Games
SLGCA administers and operates various lottery games. According to SLGCA
audited financial statements, during fiscal year 2023, 4,359 lottery retail agents
sold instant tickets, and tickets for draw games and monitor games.
 Instant Tickets (scratch-offs).
 Fast Play (terminal generated instant win games).
 Draw games include traditional games, such as Pick 3/Pick 4/Pick 5, and
multistate games, such as Mega Millions and Power Ball.
 Monitor games include Keno and Racetrax.
SLGCA’s responsibilities for the operation of these specific games require
continuous oversight and marketing of lottery gaming operations and the
development of new games. SLGCA has entered into an agreement with a
gaming contractor to help fulfill these responsibilities, as well as to perform the
daily operation and maintenance of the Lottery Gaming System.
Casinos
SLGCA is responsible for regulating and creating standard rules for table games
at the State’s six authorized casinos, including accounting for and distributing
table game revenue. SLGCA is also responsible for administering the VLT
program within the State’s casinos, including accounting for and distributing VLT
revenue, managing the program’s central system, and regulating and licensing
operators. SLGCA has entered into an agreement with a second contractor to
assist SLGCA in meeting these responsibilities.
The State’s first casino opened in Cecil County in September 2010 and its most
recent casino opened in Prince George’s County in December 2016. The four
4

--- Page 7 ---
other casinos are located in Worcester, Anne Arundel, and Allegany Counties,
and Baltimore City. According to SLGCA fiscal year 2023 audited financial
statements, as of June 2023, these six casinos operated 9,733 VLTs and 565 table
games.
Sports Wagering1
Chapter 492, Laws of Maryland 2020 authorized sports wagering, subject to voter
referendum, which Maryland voters approved in the November 2020 general
election. Following approval, legislation was required to establish an operational
and regulatory framework for the State’s sports wagering program. Chapter 356,
Laws of Maryland 2021, established such a framework.
The SLGCA is required to regulate sports wagering and the conduct of sports
wagering to the same extent that it regulates the operation of VLTs and table
games in the State. The law established the Sports Wagering Application Review
Commission (SWARC). SWARC reviews licensure applications for sports
wagering facilities, including casinos and retail locations,2 and mobile sports
wagering licensure. Based upon SWARC’s recommendation’s, SLGCA issues
licenses for sports wagering. As of July 2024, SWARC has approved 35 licenses.
In December 2021, the first five retail sportsbooks3 opened to the public and in
November 2022, the first seven mobile sportsbooks launched. As of December
31, 2023, sports wagering was operational at five casinos, eight retail locations,
and twelve mobile operators.
Sports wagering licensees retain 85 percent of proceeds from sports wagering.
The remaining 15 percent must be transferred monthly to the State Lottery Fund
and, in turn distributed monthly to the BMFF. As of June 30, 2023, sports
wagering taxable wins totaled $168.4 million,4 including $25.3 million that was
transferred to the State.
1 Chapter 356, Laws of Maryland 2021, also established SLGCA’s regulatory oversight of
operators of fantasy competitions. Each operator with at least $1 million in annual revenue must
register with SLGCA and pay 15 percent of its revenue into the BMFF. According to the State’s
records, during fiscal year 2023, approximately $1.2 million in revenue was received from
fantasy operators.
2 Retail locations are brick and mortar locations including the State’s six approved casinos that
allow for in-person sport wagering.
3 A sportsbook is a venue where a gambler can wager on various sports competitions.
4 Taxable revenue is gross gaming revenue (handle minus total win) minus various payouts (e.g.
promotional credits, excise taxes, and vendor fees).
5

--- Page 8 ---
Financial Information
According to SLGCA’s audited financial statements for the fiscal year ended June
30, 2023, gross revenue totaled approximately $5 billion, and was disbursed as
detailed below:
 $1.7 billion was disbursed for prize claims;
 $1.6 billion was disbursed for lottery retailer commissions, casino, sports
wagering, and fantasy operator shares and claims fees;
 $122 million was used to pay SLGCA’s operating expenses;
 $652 million was credited to the State’s General Fund;
 $623 million was credited to the Education Trust Fund;
 $35 million was transferred to the Maryland Stadium Authority; and
 $295 million was credited to other governmental funds and agencies.
SLGCA engages an independent accounting firm to perform an annual audit of its
financial statements and monthly audits of special-purpose financial statements,
and to provide assistance in technical matters. In the related audit reports for the
fiscal years ended June 30, 2021, 2022, and 2023, the firm stated that SLGCA’s
financial statements presented fairly, in all material respects, its financial position,
and the respective changes in its financial position and cash flows, for the years
then ended in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the
United States of America. According to the State’s records, during fiscal year
2024, SLGCA’s expenditures totaled approximately $125 million (see Figure 1).
6

--- Page 9 ---
Figure 1
SLGCA Positions, Expenditures, and Funding Sources
Full-Time Equivalent Positions as of June 30, 2024
Positions
Filled 334
Vacant 29
Total 363
Fiscal Year 2024 Expenditures
Expenditures
Salaries, Wages, and Fringe Benefits $ 36,475,147
Technical and Special Fees 275,078
Operating Expenses 88,212,454
Total $124,962,679
Fiscal Year 2024 Funding Sources
Funding
General Fund $ 9,998,894
Special Fund 114,963,785
Total $ 124,962,679
Source: State financial and personnel records
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report
Our audit included a review to determine the status of the seven findings
contained in our preceding audit report dated March 15, 2022. See Figure 2 for
the results of our review.
7

--- Page 10 ---
Figure 2
Status of Preceding Findings
Preceding Implementation
Finding Description
Finding Status
SLGCA did not investigate individuals who won
multiple high-dollar lottery prizes to identify patterns
Finding 1 Not Repeated
of potential collusion between players and lottery-
related vendors or officials.
SLGCA did not conduct periodic reviews of critical
user access to the Lottery Gaming System to ensure
Status Redacted5
Finding 2 that all access was necessary and proper, and had no
procedures to verify that transactions processed on the
System by vendor employees were proper.
Monthly testing of video lottery terminals (VLT) was
either not conducted or was not sufficiently
Finding 3 Not Repeated
comprehensive to ensure VLTs were operating
properly and player activity was accurately reported.
Specific working relationships between family
members that existed during our audit period, including
Finding 4 the processing and approval of certain SLGCA related Not Repeated
personnel and payroll transactions, may have violated
State ethics law.
SLGCA did not always follow State procurement
Repeated
Finding 5 regulations and did not adequately monitor certain
(Current Finding 2)
contracts.
SLGCA lacked assurance that adequate information
technology security and operational controls existed
Finding 6 over its VLT computing system at the State’s casinos Status Redacted5
that a primary service provider hosted, operated, and
maintained.
Remote access to the internal SLGCA network by
employees and authorized contractors used a single
Finding 7 Status Redacted5
authentication measure rather than the more secure
multi-factor authentication.
5 Specific information on the current status of this cybersecurity-related finding has been redacted
from this publicly available report in accordance with State Government Article, Section 2-
1224(i) of the Annotated Code of Maryland.
8

--- Page 11 ---
Findings and Recommendations
Intercepting Casino Prize Winnings
Background
State law allows the State Lottery and Gaming Control Agency (SLGCA) to
intercept lottery prize winnings over $600 to offset certain liabilities owed by
patrons. These liabilities include outstanding child support collected by the
Department of Human Services – Child Support Administration, delinquent court-
ordered restitution from criminal defendants and other debt owed to the State
collected by the Department of Budget and Management’s (DBM) – Central
Collection Unit (CCU).
Finding 1 (Policy Issue)
State casinos do not intercept prize money for amounts due to the State
because State law only provides for such recoveries from lottery winnings
paid out by SLGCA. We identified $9.2 million disbursed to patrons that
could have been potentially intercepted to recover debts owed to the State.
Analysis
State casinos do not intercept prize money for amounts due to the State because
State law only provides for such recoveries from lottery winnings paid out by
SLGCA. While State law provides for the State casinos to intercept prize money
for outstanding child support obligations and delinquent court-ordered restitution,
it does not provide for intercepting outstanding debts owed to the State.
Our Data Analytics Unit (DAU) obtained a listing of individuals with outstanding
amounts due to the State and compared it to prize winnings awarded by three of
the six casinos6 for the period of September 30, 2021 through January 31, 2024.
Our analysis of this data identified approximately $9.2 million in amounts due to
the State that was awarded to patrons by the casinos that could have been
potentially withheld had State law included this activity.
6 We selected these three casinos based primarily on assessed risk and size of activity.
Specifically, our selection included two casinos that utilized a manual process instead of an
automated process for determining if a patron’s winnings should be intercepted. In addition,
these three casinos accounted for approximately $1.7 billion of the $2.1 billion in revenue
generated by the casinos in fiscal year 2023.
9

--- Page 12 ---
Recommendation 1
We recommend that SLGCA consider pursuing legislation to enable casinos
to intercept amounts due to the State.
Contracts
Finding 2
SLGCA did not always maintain critical procurement documentation and
publish contract solicitations and awards as required by State procurement
regulations.
Analysis
SLGCA did not always maintain critical procurement documentation and publish
contract solicitations and awards as required by State procurement regulations.
We reviewed four contracts7 totaling approximately $82.2 million (each of which
exceeded $50,000) that were awarded between April 2021 and December 2023
and noted the following conditions.
 SLGCA was not able to provide certain critical procurement documentation
for two procurements totaling $55.4 million. For example, SLGCA could not
provide the best and final offer for the losing bidders and could not provide
the individual bid evaluations prepared by the five bid evaluation committee
members. As a result, we could not readily determine the propriety of these
awards.
 SLGCA did not publish contract solicitations and awards on eMaryland
Marketplace Advantage (eMMA),8 as required. Specifically, as of March
2024, SLGCA had not published the solicitation for one contract totaling
$28.5 million and had not published the contract award for any of the four
contracts reviewed as required.
State regulations require critical procurement documentation be maintained in the
procurement file. State regulations also require State agencies to publish on
eMMA all competitive solicitations and awards of contracts expected to exceed
$50,000. Awards must be published no more than 30 days after the execution and
approval of the contract. Publishing solicitation and awards help provide
transparency over the procurements including notice of a State contract
7 Contract selection was based on materiality, potential risk, and procurement method.
8 eMaryland Marketplace Advantage (eMMA) is an internet-based, interactive procurement system
managed by the Department of General Services (DGS).
10

--- Page 13 ---
opportunity, information about winning bidders and the amount of the related
awards.
A similar condition regarding not publishing contract awards on eMMA was
commented upon in our preceding audit report. In response to that report SLGCA
stated that it had implemented procedures to ensure notices are published,
however during our current audit SLGCA had not implemented any new
procedures to ensure contracts would be published as required. SLGCA was not
able to explain why the awards reviewed in our current audit were not published.
Recommendation 2
We recommend that SLGCA
a. retain critical procurement documentation as required,
b. attempt to obtain the documentation to support the propriety of the
aforementioned contracts and take appropriate corrective action for any
contract awards that were not supported, and
c. ensure that all applicable contract awards and solicitations are published
as required by State regulations (repeat).
Information Systems Security and Control
We determined that the Information Systems Security and Control section,
including Findings 3 and 4 related to “cybersecurity,” as defined by the State
Finance and Procurement Article, Section 3.5-301(b) of the Annotated Code of
Maryland, and therefore are subject to redaction from the publicly available audit
report in accordance with the State Government Article 2-1224(i). Consequently,
the specifics of the following findings, including the analysis, related
recommendations, along with SLGCA’s responses, have been redacted from this
report copy.
Finding 3
Redacted cybersecurity-related finding.
Finding 4
Redacted cybersecurity-related finding.
11

--- Page 14 ---
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the State Lottery and Gaming
Control Agency (SLGCA) for the period beginning October 16, 2020 through
January 31, 2024. The audit was conducted in accordance with generally
accepted government auditing standards. Those standards require that we plan
and perform the audit to obtain sufficient, appropriate evidence to provide a
reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives.
We believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings
and conclusions based on our audit objectives.
As prescribed by the State Government Article, Section 2-1221 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, the objectives of this audit were to examine SLGCA’s
financial transactions, records, and internal control, and to evaluate its compliance
with applicable State laws, rules, and regulations.
In planning and conducting our audit, we focused on the major financial-related
areas of operations based on assessments of significance and risk. The areas
addressed by the audit included the operation of lottery games, video lottery
terminals, table games and sports wagering, including accountability over
proceeds and payouts. In addition, the audit addressed purchases, disbursements,
payroll, and information systems security and control. We also determined the
status of the findings contained in our preceding audit.
Our assessment of internal controls was based on agency procedures and controls
in place at the time of our fieldwork. Our tests of transactions and other auditing
procedures were generally focused on the transactions occurring during our audit
period of October 16, 2020 to January 31, 2024, but may include transactions
before or after this period as we considered necessary to achieve our audit
objectives.
To accomplish our audit objectives, our audit procedures included inquiries of
appropriate personnel, inspections of documents and records, test of transactions,
and to the extent practicable, observations of SLGCA’s operations. Generally,
transactions were selected for testing based on auditor judgement, which
primarily considers risk, the timing or dollar amount of the transaction, or the
significance of the transaction to the area of operation reviewed. As a matter of
course, we do not normally use sampling in our tests, so unless otherwise
specifically indicated, neither statistical nor non-statistical audit sampling was
used to select the transactions tested. Therefore, unless sampling is specifically
indicated in a finding, the results from any tests conducted or disclosed by us
12

--- Page 15 ---
cannot be used to project those results to the entire population from which the test
items were selected.
We also performed various data extracts of pertinent information from the State’s
Financial Management Information System (such as revenue and expenditure
data) and the State’s Central Payroll Bureau (payroll data), as well as from the
contractor administering the State’s Corporate Purchasing Card Program (credit
card activity). The extracts are performed as part of ongoing internal processes
established by the Office of Legislative Audits and were subject to various tests to
determine data reliability. We determined that the data extracted from these
sources were sufficiently reliable for the purposes the data were used during this
audit.
We also extracted data from SLGCA’s automated records for the purpose of
testing casino and lottery financial activity. Furthermore, we were provided data
extracts from various casinos, as well as State debt from the Department of
Budget and Management - Central Collection Unit and child support arrearage
records from the Child Support Administration for the purposes of analyzing
intercepted winnings. We performed various tests of the relevant data and
determined that the data were sufficiently reliable for the purposes they were used
during the audit. Finally, we performed other auditing procedures that we
considered necessary to achieve our objectives. The reliability of data used in this
report for background or informational purposes was not assessed.
SLGCA’s management is responsible for establishing and maintaining effective
internal control. Internal control is a process designed to provide reasonable
assurance that objectives pertaining to the reliability of financial records;
effectiveness and efficiency of operations including safeguarding of assets; and
compliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations are achieved. As
provided in Government Auditing Standards, there are five components of
internal control: control environment, risk assessment, control activities,
information and communication, and monitoring. Each of the five components,
when significant to the audit objectives, and as applicable to SLGCA, were
considered by us during the course of this audit.
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate.
Our reports are designed to assist the Maryland General Assembly in exercising
its legislative oversight function and to provide constructive recommendations for
13

--- Page 16 ---
improving State operations. As a result, our reports generally do not address
activities we reviewed that are functioning properly.
This report includes findings relating to conditions that we consider to be
significant deficiencies in the design or operation of internal control that could
adversely affect SLGCA’s ability to maintain reliable financial records, operate
effectively and efficiently, and/or comply with applicable laws, rules, and
regulations. Our report also includes findings regarding significant instances of
noncompliance with applicable laws, rules, or regulations.
In addition, this report includes a finding which is identified as a “Policy Issue”.
Such findings represent significant operation or financial issues for which formal
criteria may not necessarily exist, and for which management has significant
discretion in addressing, but the recommendation represents prudent and or
practical actions, which we believe should be implemented by the agency to
improve outcomes. Other less significant findings were communicated to
SLGCA that did not warrant inclusion in this report.
State Government Article Section 2-1224(i) requires that we redact in a manner
consistent with auditing best practices any cybersecurity findings before the report
is made available to the public. This results in the issuance of two different
versions of an audit report that contain cybersecurity findings – a redacted version
for the public and an unredacted version for government officials responsible for
action on our recommendations.
The State Finance and Procurement Article, Section 3.5-301(b), states that
cybersecurity is defined as “processes or capabilities wherein systems,
communications, and information are protected and defended against damage,
unauthorized use or modification, and exploitation”. Based on that definition, and
in our professional judgment, we concluded that certain findings in this report fall
under that definition. Consequently, for the publicly available audit report all
specifics as to the nature of the cybersecurity findings and required corrective
actions have been redacted. We have determined that such aforementioned
practices, and government auditing standards, support the redaction of this
information from the public audit report. The specifics of the cybersecurity
findings have been communicated to SLGCA and those parties responsible for
acting on our recommendations in an unredacted audit report.
The response from SLGCA to our finding and recommendation is included as an
appendix to this report. Depending on the version of the audit report, responses to
any cybersecurity findings may be redacted in accordance with State law. As
prescribed in the State Government Article, Section 2-1224 of the Annotated
14

--- Page 17 ---
Code of Maryland, we will advise SLGCA regarding the results of our review of
its response.
15

--- Page 18 ---
APPENDIX
Maryland Lottery and Gaming Control Agency
Wes Moore, Governor • John Martin, Director
Montgomery Park Business Center Tel: 410-230-8800
1800 Washington Blvd., Ste. 330 TTY users use Maryland Relay
Baltimore, Maryland 21230 www.mdlottery.com
May 9, 2025
Brian 5. Tanen, CPA, CFE
Legislative Auditor
Office of Legislative Audits
351 West Camden Street, Suite 400
Baltimore, MD 21291
Re: Fiscal Compliance Audit of State Lottery and Gaming Control Agency
Dear Mr. Tanen,
The Maryland Lottery and Gaming Control Agency (MLGCA) has received the fiscal compliance audit submitted by
the Department of Legislative Services, Office of Legislative Audits, for the period beginning October 16, 2020 and
ending January 31, 2024.
MLGCA would like to extend sincere appreciation for the thorough and professional work performed by your staff
during this recent audit. Please find enclosed our formal response, which addresses the findings and
recommendations outlined in the audit report.
Sincerely,
�IJ{CC
Director, Maryland Lottery and Gaming Control Agency

--- Page 19 ---
State Lottery and Gaming Control Agency
Agency Response Form
Intercepting Casino Prize Winnings
Finding 1 (Policy Issue)
State casinos do not intercept prize money for amounts due to the State
because State law only provides for such recoveries from lottery winnings
paid out by SLGCA. We identified $9.2 million disbursed to patrons that
could have been potentially intercepted to recover debts owed to the State.
We recommend that SLGCA consider pursuing legislation to enable casinos
to intercept amounts due to the State.
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 1 Agree Estimated Completion Date: Completed
Please provide details of Our Agency marked this as complete because Lottery OAGs have
corrective action or already been in contact with CCU Counsel on the matter. They worked
explain disagreement. together to identify where the law should be changed and what language
would be needed to effectuate the expansion of authority for casinos to
collect state debts. DBM will have to take the lead on moving this
forward as a legislative action because the law requiring changes is
under their statutory authority.
Page 1 of 3

--- Page 20 ---
State Lottery and Gaming Control Agency
Agency Response Form
Contracts
Finding 2
SLGCA did not always maintain critical procurement documentation and
publish contract solicitations and awards as required by State procurement
regulations.
We recommend that SLGCA
a. retain critical procurement documentation as required,
b. attempt to obtain the documentation to support the propriety of the
aforementioned contracts and take appropriate corrective action for any
contract awards that were not supported, and
c. ensure that all applicable contract awards and solicitations are published
as required by State regulations (repeat).
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide Certain documents were misplaced during transition to a new
additional comments as Procurement Director. We have developed procedures to retain
deemed necessary. electronic copies to prevent this from occurring in the future.
Recommendation 2a Agree Estimated Completion Date: Completed
Please provide details of We have developed procedures to retain electronic copies of
corrective action or procurement documents to prevent this from occurring in the future.
explain disagreement.
Recommendation 2b Agree Estimated Completion Date: Completed
Please provide details of We have located copies of the Best and Final financial proposals. While
corrective action or certain other documents may not be in our file, the procurements were
explain disagreement. conducted in accordance with established norms and were reviewed and
approved at multiple levels: staff, the Lottery Director, the Lottery
Commission, the Department of General Services, and the Board of
Public Works.
Recommendation 2c Agree Estimated Completion Date: Completed
Please provide details of We have implemented a different process to ensure proper publication of
corrective action or awards.
explain disagreement.
Page 2 of 3

--- Page 21 ---
State Lottery and Gaming Control Agency
Agency Response Form
Information Systems Security and Control
The Office of Legislative Audits (OLA) has determined that the Information
Systems Security and Control section, including Findings 3 and 4 related to
“cybersecurity,” as defined by the State Finance and Procurement Article, Section
3.5-301(b) of the Annotated Code of Maryland, and therefore are subject to
redaction from the publicly available audit report in accordance with the State
Government Article 2-1224(i). Although the specifics of the following findings,
including the analysis, related recommendations, along with SLGCA’s responses,
have been redacted from this report copy, SLGCA’s responses indicated
agreement with the findings and related recommendations.
Finding 3
Redacted cybersecurity-related finding.
Agency Response has been redacted by OLA.
Finding 4
Redacted cybersecurity-related finding.
Agency Response has been redacted by OLA.
Page 3 of 3

--- Page 22 ---
A T
UDIT EAM
Robert A. Wells Jr., CPA
Audit Manager
R. Brendan Coffey, CPA, CISA
Edwin L. Paul, CPA, CISA
Information Systems Audit Managers
David R. Fahnestock, CPA
Data Analytics Manager
Mindy R. Garrett
Senior Auditor
Edward O. Kendall, CISA
Matthew D. Walbert, CISA
Information Systems Senior Auditors
Ian T. Pontius
Data Analytics Senior Auditor
Tari J. Covington
Hilary B. Gugig
Staff Auditors
Charles O. Price
Neha S. Tirkey
Information Systems Staff Auditors
Jason D. Schuler
Data Analytics Staff Auditor