Title: Maryland Department of Transportation - Maryland Port Administration
Date: 03/24/2022
Type: Fiscal Compliance
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=6243071da1ce5811640c2690
Extracted: 2025-06-20T00:16:23.557864
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Audit Report
Maryland Department of Transportation
Maryland Port Administration
March 2022
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Senator Clarence K. Lam, M.D. (Senate Chair) Delegate Carol L. Krimm (House Chair)
Senator Malcolm L. Augustine Delegate Steven J. Arentz
Senator Adelaide C. Eckardt Delegate Mark S. Chang
Senator George C. Edwards Delegate Nicholas P. Charles II
Senator Katie Fry Hester Delegate Andrea Fletcher Harrison
Senator Cheryl C. Kagan Delegate Trent M. Kittleman
Senator Benjamin F. Kramer Delegate David Moon
Senator Cory V. McCray Delegate Julie Palakovich Carr
Senator Justin D. Ready Delegate Elizabeth G. Proctor
Senator Craig J. Zucker Delegate Geraldine Valentino-Smith
To Obtain Further Information
Office of Legislative Audits
The Warehouse at Camden Yards
351 West Camden Street, Suite 400
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Phone: 410-946-5900
Maryland Relay: 711
TTY: 410-946-5401 ꞏ 301-970-5401
E-mail: OLAWebmaster@ola.state.md.us
Website: www.ola.state.md.us
To Report Fraud
The Office of Legislative Audits operates a Fraud Hotline to report fraud, waste, or abuse involving State
of Maryland government resources. Reports of fraud, waste, or abuse may be communicated anonymously
by a toll-free call to 1-877-FRAUD-11, by mail to the Fraud Hotline, c/o Office of Legislative Audits, or
through the Office’s website.
Nondiscrimination Statement
The Department of Legislative Services does not discriminate on the basis of age, ancestry, color, creed,
marital status, national origin, race, religion, gender, gender identity, sexual orientation, or disability in the
admission or access to its programs, services, or activities. The Department’s Information Officer has been
designated to coordinate compliance with the nondiscrimination requirements contained in Section 35.107
of the United States Department of Justice Regulations. Requests for assistance should be directed to the
Information Officer at 410-946-5400 or 410-970-5400.

--- Page 3 ---
March 24, 2022
Senator Clarence K. Lam, M.D., Senate Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Delegate Carol L. Krimm, House Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Members of Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Annapolis, Maryland
Ladies and Gentlemen:
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the Maryland Department of
Transportation (MDOT) – Maryland Port Administration (MPA) for the period
beginning February 21, 2017 and ending May 31, 2021. MPA operates State-
owned port facilities and promotes the economic well-being of Maryland’s ports.
Specifically, MPA is responsible for managing the State’s investment in port
facilities, developing trade by promoting maritime business, and coordinating the
delivery of services, such as dredging and navigational aids, to the maritime
community.
Our audit disclosed that MPA’s review of invoices to ensure the accuracy of
amounts billed for construction and maintenance services provided by the
Maryland Environmental Services (MES) was not adequately documented.
Specifically, while MPA advised us that it performed a review of MES invoices to
ensure MES labor charges (including fringe benefits and overhead) were proper,
this review was not documented. In addition, after January 2020, a review of
subcontractor charges included on MES invoices for propriety was not performed.
According to the MPA records, it paid MES $218 million during the period
February 28, 2017 through February 2, 2021.
Our audit included a review to determine the status of the finding contained in our
preceding audit report. We also determined the status of the two findings
contained in a special report on an allegation received through our fraud, waste,
and abuse hotline. We call your attention to our determination that MPA
satisfactorily addressed the three aforementioned findings.

--- Page 4 ---
MDOT’s response to this audit, on behalf of MPA, is included as an appendix to
this report. We reviewed the response to our finding and related
recommendations, and have concluded that the corrective actions identified are
sufficient to address all audit issues.
We wish to acknowledge the cooperation extended to us during the audit by
MPA. We also wish to acknowledge MDOT’s and MPA’s willingness to address
the audit issues and implement appropriate corrective actions.
Respectfully submitted,
Gregory A. Hook, CPA
Legislative Auditor
2

--- Page 5 ---
Background Information
Agency Responsibilities
The Maryland Port Administration (MPA), a transportation business unit of the
Maryland Department of Transportation, operates State-owned port facilities and
promotes the economic well-being of Maryland’s ports. MPA is responsible for
managing the State’s investment in port facilities; developing trade by promoting
maritime business; and coordinating the delivery of services, such as dredging and
navigational aids, to the maritime community. MPA also owns and operates a
number of facilities including Baltimore’s World Trade Center building.
According to the State’s records, during fiscal year 2020, MPA’s operating and
capital expenditures totaled approximately $146 million. According to MPA’s
records, approximately 13.4 million tons of cargo were shipped through its port
facilities during fiscal year 2020, and overall port revenues totaled approximately
$54.7 million, the majority of which related to terminal activity, including fees for
the use of MPA’s piers, wharfs, and equipment.
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Reports
Our audit included a review to determine the status of the one finding contained in
our preceding audit report dated January 4, 2018. Additionally, we determined
the status of the two findings contained in our June 26, 2019 special report on an
allegation received through our fraud, waste, and abuse hotline pertaining to an
employee directing the use of specific vendors as subcontractors and questionable
Corporate Purchasing Card (CPC) activity. We determined that MPA
satisfactorily addressed the three findings contained in the two reports.
3

--- Page 6 ---
Findings and Recommendations
Disbursements
Finding 1
Maryland Port Administration’s (MPA) review of invoices for construction
and maintenance services provided by the Maryland Environmental Services
(MES) was not documented to ensure the accuracy of amounts billed.
Analysis
MPA’s review of invoices for construction and maintenance services provided by
Maryland Environmental Services (MES)1 was not documented to ensure the
accuracy of amounts billed. MPA enters into contracts with MES primarily for
construction and maintenance services for projects related to dredging of the
Chesapeake Bay. According to MPA records, MES provided services for 19
active projects during fiscal year 2021, and most projects spanned multiple years.
For example, MPA entered into various contracts totaling approximately $196
million for one project during the period April 2015 through June 2025 to provide
containment services for dredged material.
MPA works with MES to develop proposals for various projects and MES solicits
and evaluates bids for vendors to complete the projects. MPA reviews vendor
bids and approves the MES procurements and the budgets for each project. MES
submits project status reports, and monthly invoices which are primarily for labor,
fringe benefits, overhead, and subcontractor billings to MPA for payment.
According to the MPA records, it paid MES $218 million during the period
February 28, 2017 through February 2, 2021.
 MPA did not perform a documented review of MES invoices to ensure labor
charges (including fringe benefits and overhead) were proper. Although MPA
obtained sufficient documentation from MES to support the invoices, and
advised that it reviewed and verified the invoices before approving them for
payment, this critical review process was not documented. Consequently,
there was a lack of assurance that billed labor hours agreed to MES time
records, hourly rates were in accordance with the agreement, and fringe
benefits and overhead charges were accurate. We reviewed the
documentation MPA had to support its payment of six invoices totaling
approximately $4.3 million for three projects, made during the period June
1 MES was created as an instrumentality of the State and a public corporation, and as such MPA is
exempt from procurement regulations for contracts entered into with MES.
4

--- Page 7 ---
2018 through July 2020. Our review did not disclose any unsupported or
improper invoiced amounts.
 Subsequent to January 2020, MPA did not obtain copies of MES
subcontractors’ invoices to ensure that those billed charges (for example labor
rates and construction costs) were proper2. We tested subcontractor charges
totaling $5.3 million for the period January 2020 through May 2020 that were
included on eight invoices for one project. As a result of our request, MES
obtained copies of these subcontractor invoices and our review disclosed that
all charges were supported by subcontractor invoices.
The Comptroller of Maryland’s Accounting Procedures Manual requires the
establishment of sufficient internal controls over disbursements including the
verification of invoice documentation to procurement documents to ensure the
propriety of the billings.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that MPA perform a documented review of MES and related
subcontractor invoices, at least on a test basis, to ensure the accuracy of
labor, fringe benefits, overhead, and subcontractor charges.
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the Maryland Department of
Transportation – Maryland Port Administration (MPA) for the period beginning
February 21, 2017 and ending May 31, 2021. The audit was conducted in
accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards. Those
standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient,
appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and
conclusions based on our audit objectives. We believe that the evidence obtained
provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit
objectives.
As prescribed by the State Government Article, Section 2-1221 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, the objectives of this audit were to examine MPA’s financial
transactions, records, and internal control, and to evaluate its compliance with
applicable State laws, rules, and regulations.
2 Prior to January 2020, MPA obtained copies of subcontractor billings, on a test basis, for MES
invoices to support amounts billed. MPA advised us that it discontinued this procedure due to
staffing issues and difficulties transitioning to a remote work environment due to the COVID-19
health pandemic.
5

--- Page 8 ---
In planning and conducting our audit, we focused on the major financial-related
areas of operations based on assessments of significance and risk. The areas
addressed by the audit included cash receipts, procurements and disbursements,
accounts receivable, and certain other transactions specifically associated with
port activities, such as lease agreements for the use of port facilities. We also
determined the status of the findings contained in our preceding audit reports.
Our audit did not include certain payroll support services (such as processing of
personnel transactions and maintenance of employee leave records) provided by
MDOT – The Secretary’s Office to MPA. These support services are included
within the scope of our audit of MDOT. Our audit also did not include an
evaluation of internal controls over compliance with federal laws and regulations
for federal financial assistance programs and an assessment of MPA’s compliance
with those laws and regulations because the State of Maryland engages an
independent accounting firm to annually audit such programs administered by
State agencies, including MPA.
Our assessment of internal controls was based on agency procedures and controls
in place at the time of our fieldwork. Our tests of transactions and other auditing
procedures were generally focused on the transactions occurring during our audit
period of February 21, 2017 to May 31, 2021, but may include transactions before
or after this period as we considered necessary to achieve our audit objectives.
To accomplish our audit objectives, our audit procedures included inquiries of
appropriate personnel, inspections of documents and records, tests of transactions,
and to the extent practicable, observations of MPA operations. Generally,
transactions were selected for testing based on auditor judgment, which primarily
considers risk, the timing or dollar amount of the transaction, or the significance
of the transaction to the area of operation reviewed. As a matter of course, we do
not normally use sampling in our tests, so unless otherwise specifically indicated,
neither statistical nor non-statistical audit sampling was used to select the
transactions tested. Therefore, unless sampling is specifically indicated in a
finding, the results from any tests conducted or disclosed by us cannot be used to
project those results to the entire population from which the test items were
selected.
We also performed various data extracts of pertinent information from the State’s
Financial Management Information System and the Maryland Department of
Transportation’s Financial Management Information System (such as revenue and
expenditure data) and the State’s Central Payroll Bureau (payroll data), as well as
from the contractor administering the State’s Corporate Purchasing Card Program
(credit card activity). The extracts are performed as part of ongoing internal
6

--- Page 9 ---
processes established by the Office of Legislative Audits and were subject to
various tests to determine data reliability. We determined that the data extracted
from these various sources were sufficiently reliable for the purposes the data
were used during this audit.
We also extracted data from MPA’s billing and reporting system for the purpose
of testing billings and accounts receivable. We performed various tests of the
relevant data and determined that the data were sufficiently reliable for the
purposes the data were used during the audit. Finally, we performed other
auditing procedures that we considered necessary to achieve our audit objectives.
The reliability of data used in this report for background or informational
purposes was not assessed.
MPA’s management is responsible for establishing and maintaining effective
internal control. Internal control is a process designed to provide reasonable
assurance that objectives pertaining to the reliability of financial records;
effectiveness and efficiency of operations including safeguarding of assets; and
compliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations are achieved. As
provided in Government Auditing Standards, there are five components of
internal control: control environment, risk assessment, control activities,
information and communication, and monitoring. Each of the five components,
when significant to the audit objectives, and as applicable to MPA, were
considered by us during the course of this audit.
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate.
Our reports are designed to assist the Maryland General Assembly in exercising
its legislative oversight function and to provide constructive recommendations for
improving State operations. As a result, our reports generally do not address
activities we reviewed that are functioning properly.
This report includes a finding relating to a condition that we consider to be a
significant deficiency in the design or operation of internal control that could
adversely affect MPA’s ability to maintain reliable financial records, operate
effectively and efficiently, and/or comply with applicable laws, rules, and
regulations. Our audit did not disclose any significant instances of
noncompliance with laws, rules, or regulations. Other less significant findings
were communicated to MPA that did not warrant inclusion in this report.
7

--- Page 10 ---
The response from MDOT, on behalf of MPA, to our finding and
recommendations is included as an appendix to this report. As prescribed in State
Government Article, Section 2-1224 of the Annotated Code of Maryland, we will
advise MDOT regarding the results of our review of its response.
8

--- Page 11 ---
APPENDIX

--- Page 12 ---
Maryland Department of Transportation
Maryland Port Administration
Agency Response Form
Disbursements
Finding 1
Maryland Port Administration’s (MPA) review of invoices for construction and
maintenance services provided by the Maryland Environmental Services (MES) was not
documented to ensure the accuracy of amounts billed.
We recommend that MPA perform a documented review of MES and related
subcontractor invoices, at least on a test basis, to ensure the accuracy of labor, fringe
benefits, overhead, and subcontractor charges.
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide None.
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 1 Agree Estimated Completion Date: 11/1/2021
Please provide details of MPA has a long-standing, comprehensive and successful process for
corrective action or reviewing and approving invoices submitted by the Maryland
explain disagreement. Environmental Service (MES), which is now clearly documented, and
for auditing MES’ sub-contractor invoices monthly, on a test basis.
However, the process for auditing MES’ sub-contractor invoices was
temporarily paused due to staffing issues and difficulties transitioning to
a remote work environment due to the COVID-19 health pandemic.
MPA reinstated and enhanced the sub-contractor audit process to ensure
all MES invoice labor charges (including fringe benefits and overhead)
and similar information related to subcontractor charges are proper and
properly documented for audit verification.
Page 1 of 1

--- Page 13 ---
A T
UDIT EAM
Mark S. Hagenbuch, CPA
Audit Manager
Menachem Katz, CPA
Senior Auditor
Tyshawna J. Ford
Dorian A. Fournier
Staff Auditors