Title: Maryland Department of Transportation - State Highway Administration
Date: 03/29/2022
Type: Fiscal Compliance
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=62432e1aa1ce5811640cade6
Extracted: 2025-06-20T00:16:47.278064
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Audit Report
Maryland Department of Transportation
State Highway Administration
January 2019
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
For further information concerning this report contact:
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
301 West Preston Street, Room 1202
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Phone: 410-946-5900 ꞏ 301-970-5900
Toll Free in Maryland: 1-877-486-9964
Maryland Relay: 711
TTY: 410-946-5401 ꞏ 301-970-5401
E-mail: OLAWebmaster@ola.state.md.us
Website: www.ola.state.md.us
The Office of Legislative Audits operates a Fraud Hotline to report fraud, waste, or abuse
involving State of Maryland government resources. Reports of fraud, waste, or abuse
may be communicated anonymously by a toll-free call to 1-877-FRAUD-11, by mail to the
Fraud Hotline, c/o Office of Legislative Audits, or through the Office’s website.
The Department of Legislative Services does not discriminate on the basis of age, ancestry, color,
creed, marital status, national origin, race, religion, gender, gender identity, sexual orientation,
or disability in the admission or access to its programs, services, or activities. The Department’s
Information Officer has been designated to coordinate compliance with the nondiscrimination
requirements contained in Section 35.107 of the Department of Justice Regulations. Requests for
assistance should be directed to the Information Officer at 410-946-5400 or 410-970-5400.

--- Page 5 ---
Table of Contents
Background Information 5
Agency Responsibilities 5
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report 5
Findings and Recommendations 6
Accident Billing
Finding 1 – State Highway Administration (SHA) procedures to 6
identify State property damaged by traffic accidents using Maryland
Department of State Police (MSP) records and to invoice for these
damages were not comprehensive. We identified more than 8,700
accidents during our audit period from MSP records that may have
caused damage to State property and could be subject to recovery by
the State.
Maryland SafeZones Program
Finding 2 – SHA did not have adequate procedures in place to ensure 8
the SafeZones program vendor complied with all contract requirements.
Contractual Services
Finding 3 – SHA did not always follow established procedures at the one 10
SHA district office we examined to ensure the propriety of payments
to vendors for snow and ice removal services.
* Finding 4 – SHA did not comply with certain procurement-related 11
reporting and publication requirements for contract awards totaling
$77.1 million.
Federal Funds
* Finding 5 – SHA did not have comprehensive written procedures to 12
resolve, in a timely manner, certain highway construction-related
expenditures that had been suspended from the federal reimbursement
process, and related follow-up efforts were not always documented.
* Denotes item repeated in full or part from preceding audit report
3

--- Page 6 ---
District Office Property
Finding 6 (Policy Issue) – SHA had not completed a comprehensive 14
review of physical security practices in place at its district offices to
ensure that equipment and supplies were adequately protected from
loss or misappropriation.
Corporate Purchasing Cards
Finding 7 – SHA lacked proper internal controls over corporate 16
purchasing cards to prevent or detect unauthorized purchases.
Information Systems Security and Control
Finding 8 – Certain outdated software and security-related settings on 17
SHA computers were not sufficient to provide SHA with adequate
assurance that its computers were properly protected.
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology 19
Agency Response Appendix
4

--- Page 7 ---
Background Information
Agency Responsibilities
The Transportation Article, Section 8-201, of the Annotated Code of Maryland
establishes the State Highway Administration (SHA) in the Maryland Department
of Transportation. SHA is responsible for the planning, construction,
improvement, maintenance, and operations of the State highway system. SHA
operates numerous facilities throughout the State, including a headquarters in
Baltimore City and seven district offices. According to the State’s accounting
records, SHA’s fiscal year 2017 expenditures totaled approximately $1.9 billion.
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report
Our audit included a review to determine the status of the two findings contained
in our preceding audit report on SHA dated April 20, 2016. We determined that
SHA did not satisfactorily address these two findings, both of which are repeated
in this report.
5

--- Page 8 ---
Findings and Recommendations
Accident Billing
Finding 1
State Highway Administration (SHA) procedures to identify State property
damaged by traffic accidents using Maryland Department of State Police
(MSP) records and to invoice for these damages were not comprehensive.
We identified more than 8,700 accidents during our audit period from MSP
records that may have caused damage to State property and could be subject
to recovery by the State.
Analysis
SHA did not have comprehensive procedures to ensure it identified all traffic
accidents that may have caused damage to SHA-maintained State property, and to
seek recovery from responsible parties for the cost to repair such damages.
According to State law, any person who drives or moves any vehicle on any State
highway is liable for all damages that the highway sustains as a result of any
illegal driving or vehicle movements. During our audit period, SHA billed 2,221
responsible parties for damage to State property totaling approximately $6.6
million.
 SHA identified accidents to be reviewed primarily by accessing automated
records maintained by MSP through monthly queries, but the queries used
were not comprehensive since they did not identify all accidents that
potentially caused damage to SHA-maintained property. SHA identified
approximately 16,000 accidents for review during our audit period. However,
we requested more comprehensive queries of MSP records that included all
accident reports and then filtered these records by using data fields associated
with SHA property damage. We identified an additional 8,719 accidents
beyond those previously identified by SHA during its monthly queries that
may have caused damage to SHA-maintained property during this period. For
example, SHA did not identify all accidents that potentially caused damage to
SHA-maintained traffic signal structures and bridges.
 SHA did not account for the disposition of all accidents it identified to ensure
that all were reviewed, and that the responsible parties were invoiced if
applicable. Once accidents were identified through the monthly queries, SHA
requested written reports of accidents from MSP and forwarded them to
appropriate district office employees who were responsible for determining if
damage occurred to SHA property, the cost to repair the damage, and the
responsible party (typically the vehicle owner). SHA headquarters employees
6

--- Page 9 ---
used information obtained from the district employees to submit bills to the
responsible parties. However, we found numerous instances in which SHA
lacked documentation of a final determination and any action taken for
accidents identified.
Specifically, we tested 30 accidents that occurred during the period from
August 2014 through May 2017 which SHA had identified for district office
review. Our test determined that SHA had satisfactorily addressed 6 of these
accidents (that is, billed the responsible parties for the cost of damages, or
documented that billings were unnecessary), which resulted in 5 billings
totaling $14,595. SHA had not satisfactorily addressed the remaining 24
accidents as of March 2018, including 10 accidents that occurred more than
three years prior to March 2018. Since State law requires SHA to bill the
responsible party within three years from the date of the accident, any billable
costs associated with these accidents can no longer be recovered.
We also reviewed 50 of the additional 8,719 accidents that we identified from
our review of MSP records. We determined that SHA had not taken any
action to address 39 of these accidents. We noted that SHA had billed for 11
of these accidents or determined that billings were unnecessary. In these 11
instances, SHA had become aware of these accidents through other parties.
We were not readily able to determine the actual number of the 8,719
accidents not otherwise known to SHA nor the amount of potential cost
recovery since SHA had not yet determined the disposition of each accident.
The lack of adequate procedures for identifying all motor vehicle accidents
involving SHA-maintained State property, determining liability for repairs, and,
when appropriate, billing for related damages was caused, in part, by SHA’s lack
of a comprehensive policy. For example, SHA’s written policydid not reflect
SHA’s current practice of accessing MSP accident records in order to request
related MSP reports. In addition, the policy did not require the responsible SHA
staff to formally account for the disposition of all MSP accident reports obtained
and distributed to district office employees for review.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that SHA establish and implement a comprehensive policy
and related procedures for identifying traffic accidents that caused damage
to State property and obtaining recovery for the related repair costs, in
accordance with State law. The policy should include steps for identifying
and reviewing all such accidents, taking the required action (including billing
the responsible party or documenting why billing was not warranted), and
accounting for and documenting the disposition of all identified accidents.
7

--- Page 10 ---
We also recommend that SHA review the aforementioned accidents not
satisfactorily addressed that occurred within the three-year recovery period
allowed by law, and take appropriate action.
Maryland SafeZones Program
Maryland SafeZones is an SHA program in which Automated Speed Enforcement
(ASE) vehicles with mounted speed cameras are deployed in highway work zones
to help ensure compliance with posted speed limits and to reduce the potential for
accidents involving motorists and construction workers. SHA contracted with a
vendor to provide speed camera equipment, data collection, and violation
processing in designated construction zones. The vendor is responsible for
issuing citations after review of digital photos by a sworn police officer, and for
collecting and remitting related payments to the State. Revenues from citations
are first used to cover costs incurred by SHA and MSP in administering the
SafeZones program, and any remaining revenue is distributed to MSP to fund
additional enforcement activities. SHA contracted with this vendor for the period
from January 1, 2016 through December 31, 2020 for an amount not-to-exceed
$28.6 million. The contract also provides for two additional one-year renewal
periods which, if executed, would bring the total cost to approximately $40.3
million.
Finding 2
SHA did not have adequate procedures in place to ensure the SafeZones
program vendor complied with all contract requirements.
Analysis
SHA did not adequately monitor the Maryland SafeZones program vendor to
ensure that the program was properly administered in compliance with all contract
requirements. The contract contains certain vendor requirements, most of which
are intended to ensure program compliance in accordance with State law and are
necessary for the valid issuance of a citation when a speeding violation is
detected. There were 18 enforcement work zones active at various times during
the period between January 2017 and June 2017.
 SHA had not taken adequate steps to ensure that the vendor complied with all
contractual requirements prior to the start of each enforcement session
(typically a day or a shift). These requirements included the mandatory
presence of a trained operator in the ASE vehicle during enforcement
sessions, road signage indicating photo enforcement in use, and the
verification and documentation by the vendor of work zone site compliance
8

--- Page 11 ---
before each enforcement session. Although the vendor was required to verify
and document its compliance with these requirements prior to the start of each
session and submit this documentation to SHA, SHA did not ensure the
submission of nor review the related documents.
In addition to a lack of review of vendor site compliance documentation,
SHA’s own on-site reviews were inadequate. An SHA employee was to
conduct periodic site inspections of the enforcement work zones to monitor
the vendor’s compliance; however, SHA had not established formal
procedures stating the expected timing, frequency, methodology, and
documentation of these inspections, and there was no requirement for
supervisory review of the inspection results. We found that, for the 18
enforcement work zones active between January 2017 and June 2017, there
was no documentation of SHA inspections at 10 of these sites during this
period, even though SHA advised us that all 18 sites had been inspected.
Although certain documentation existed that each of the remaining 8 sites had
been inspected at least once during this period, the documentation consisted
only of the inspector’s notes that the inspection occurred, without regard to
vendor compliance with the aforementioned specific site requirements.
Finally, there was no evidence of supervisory review of the available
inspection documentation.
 We also found that SHA did not obtain documentation from the SafeZones
program vendor to ensure that the vendor performed the required reviews of
driver’s license records for its employees assigned to the program. The
contract required the vendor to perform an annual review to ensure that its
employees assigned to enforcement work zones have a valid driver’s license
with no more than four points accumulated. Based on our request, SHA
obtained documentation from the vendor, which showed that, as of November
2017, the vendor had not performed a review of driver’s license records for 13
employees for periods ranging from 14 to 21 months. During this period, 21
employees should have been subject to driver’s license reviews.
SHA paid the vendor approximately $6.8 million for the period January 1, 2016
through June 30, 2017. According to vendor reports, during this period
approximately 354,000 citations were issued, while collections from paid citations
totaled $12.5 million.
9

--- Page 12 ---
Recommendation 2
We recommend that SHA establish appropriate monitoring procedures to
ensure that the vendor complies with the requirements of the SafeZones
program. Specifically, we recommend that SHA
a. periodically review required vendor inspection documentation from the
vendor to support work zone site compliance;
b. establish comprehensive procedures regarding the timing, frequency,
methodology, and required documentation for its own independent
inspections of enforcement work zones, including supervisory review; and
c. obtain documentation from the SafeZones program vendor to ensure that
an annual review of the driver’s license records for all its employees is
performed, as required under the contract.
Contractual Services
Finding 3
SHA did not always follow established procedures at the one SHA district
office we examined to ensure the propriety of payments to vendors for snow
and ice removal services.
Analysis
Procedures for verifying vendor billings for snow and ice removal services were
not consistently followed at the one SHA district office we examined. Our review
of one district with snow and ice removal service expenditures totaling $32
million for the audit period disclosed numerous instances in which SHA did not
verify the propriety of vendors’ billings in accordance with its established
procedures. According to SHA’s records, payments to all vendors for snow and
ice removal services Statewide totaled approximately $106 million during our
audit period.
SHA contracts with various vendors to provide snow and ice removal services for
State-maintained roads. Vendors are paid hourly rates based on the type of
equipment deployed as stated in their contracts (such as dump trucks, graders, and
loaders). SHA’s established procedures require that documentation (such as the
vendor hours worked and the type of equipment used) be verified and SHA
supervisory approval be documented prior to the payment of related vendor
invoices.
We tested 10 invoices paid during the period January 2015 through March 2017
(comprising the deployment of 156 pieces of equipment) processed by three of the
five maintenance shops within this district, totaling $2.3 million, and noted that
10

--- Page 13 ---
SHA did not ensure that snow and ice removal services were provided for all
hours billed. Although each of the 10 invoices tested was approved by
supervisory personnel, our test disclosed that certain required documentation to
support the vendor billings was absent. For example, there was no documentation
to support the hourly charges for 57 of the 156 equipment items billed. In
addition, our test disclosed that SHA could not document the type of equipment
deployed for 127 items related to 9 of the invoices tested, and, accordingly, was
not in position to verify that it was properly billed for the related payments
totaling approximately $1.6 million.
Recommendation 3
We recommend that SHA ensure that existing procedures to verify vendor
invoices for snow and ice removal are complied with by district offices.
Specifically, we recommend that SHA
a. obtain and review documentation for each invoice that supports the
services provided, including the hours worked and type of equipment
used, by the snow and ice removal vendors; and
b. retain the aforementioned documentation, along with the required
supervisory approval of the billing documents.
Finding 4
SHA did not comply with certain State procurement-related reporting and
publication requirements for contract awards totaling $77.1 million.
Analysis
SHA did not follow State procurement-related reporting or publication
requirements for certain contract awards totaling $77.1 million.
 SHA did not report 85 contracts procured for snow and ice removal services
valued at approximately $6.5 million for fiscal years 2016 and 2017 to the
Board of Public Works (BPW) as required. State law requires SHA to submit
an annual report to BPW disclosing the number and value of contracts
awarded for snow and ice removal services for the fiscal year, as well as
certain other contract information. While SHA annually submitted such a
report, we determined that the method SHA used to compile the reported
information was not comprehensive, resulting in certain procurements of such
services to be omitted. According to SHA records, 1,678 snow and ice
removal contracts totaling $145.9 million were awarded during fiscal years
2016 and 2017.
11

--- Page 14 ---
 Our test of five service contact awards made by SHA during the period from
May 2015 through June 2017, totaling $86.3 million, disclosed that SHA did
not comply with State regulations with respect to the posting of three of these
awards, valued at $70.6 million, on eMaryland Marketplace (eMM). As of
April 2018, SHA had not published its January 2016 contract award for the
administration of the Maryland SafeZones program, valued at $28.6 million,
on eMM. Two additional contract awards for software development and real
estate services, totaling $42 million, were not published within 30 days of
contract award, as required. Rather, these were published 70 and 92 days,
respectively, after the contract awards.
eMM is an Internet-based, interactive procurement system managed by the
Department of General Services. State laws and regulations generally provide
that eMM is to be used by State agencies to publish awards greater than
$25,000 within 30 days of the contract award. Publishing awards on eMM
provides transparency over State procurements including information about
winning bidders and the amount of the related awards. A similar condition
was commented upon in our preceding audit report with respect to
maintenance and construction contract awards.
Recommendation 4
We recommend that SHA
a. use appropriate methods to ensure that all contracts procured for snow
and ice removal services are reported to BPW, as required; and
b. comply with State laws and procurement regulations by publishing
contract awards on eMM within 30 days of the contract award (repeat).
Federal Funds
Finding 5
SHA did not have comprehensive written procedures to resolve, in a timely
manner, certain highway construction-related expenditures that had been
suspended from the federal reimbursement process, and related follow-up
efforts were not always documented.
Analysis
SHA did not have comprehensive written procedures to resolve, in a timely
manner, certain highway construction-related expenditures that had been
suspended from the federal reimbursement process in order to identify an
allowable federal grant to which these expenditures could be charged.
Additionally, SHA did not always document its investigative efforts and work
12

--- Page 15 ---
performed in order to resolve these items. According to SHA’s records, as of
June 2017, expenditures in this suspense account totaled approximately $7.7
million. Federal reimbursements totaled $548.6 million during fiscal year 2017.
Highway construction-related expenditures were initially charged to the
Transportation Trust Fund, which was later reimbursed, in part, from the Federal
Highway Administration. SHA recorded these expenditures in the Maryland
Department of Transportation’s Financial Management Information System
(MDOT FMIS) and requested weekly federal reimbursement for the appropriate
percentage of these expenditures, which varied depending on the type of work
performed. In certain instances, such as when the initially identified grant budget
was exceeded, these expenditures were recorded in a suspense account pending
review by SHA personnel.
Using MDOT FMIS summary reports, SHA employees subsequently reviewed
these expenditures to identify other available federal grants under which these
expenditures were permissible, so that reimbursement could be requested.
However, SHA had not established formal procedures for investigating all items
on the summary reports that considered timeliness and significance, and for
documenting their disposition and the related investigative efforts for resolving
these items. As a result, certain expenditures remained unreimbursed in the
suspense account for extended periods, and there was a lack of assurance that all
such expenditures were ultimately investigated and resolved.
We reviewed three projects from the summary report dated June 26, 2017, with
unreimbursed expenditures totaling approximately $1.2 million. We noted that
SHA did not document its efforts, such as with written notes, to resolve and
obtain federal reimbursement for one of the projects. This project’s unreimbursed
expenditures had grown from $50,000 as of August 2016 to $695,000 as of June
2017. We did note that, as of March 2018, the project’s unreimbursed
expenditures had been reduced to $415,000, according to a later summary report.
Due to the nature of highway construction projects, expenditures and federal
reimbursements may occur over a number of years following the initial obligation
of funds for a project. Nevertheless, efforts should be made to obtain
reimbursements as soon as practical, and adequate records should be maintained
to ensure all reimbursable expenses placed in a suspense account are reimbursed.
A similar condition was commented upon in our preceding audit report.
13

--- Page 16 ---
Recommendation 5
We recommend that SHA
a. establish and implement comprehensive written procedures that consider
timeliness and significance for reviewing expenditures that were
suspended from the federal fund reimbursement process (repeat), and
b. document the investigation and disposition of suspended expenditures
(repeat).
District Office Property
Background
SHA maintains equipment and supply items at its central headquarters location
and at its seven district offices, each of which includes a central office and various
field locations or maintenance shops (34 in total). According to its records, the
value of SHA’s equipment assigned to the district offices as of June 30, 2017
totaled approximately $78 million. The district offices also maintained numerous
supplies. Equipment and supplies included snow plows, vehicles, landscaping
tools, and computer components.
Finding 6 (Policy Issue)
SHA had not completed a comprehensive review of physical security
practices in place at its district offices to ensure that equipment and supplies
were adequately protected from loss or misappropriation.
Analysis
SHA had not completed a comprehensive review of security over equipment and
supplies located at its numerous district offices, including field locations, to
ensure these items were adequately protected from loss or misappropriation.
Certain enhanced security measures were taken after numerous snow plows were
found to be missing in June 2015; however, these measures were not
comprehensive. According to its records, SHA reported to the Maryland
Department of General Services (DGS) that 351 equipment items totaling
approximately $745,000 were identified as missing or stolen from all district
locations during the period from July 2014 through December 2017. In addition,
SHA reported the following equipment and supply items totaling $171,000 to the
Maryland Department of State Police as stolen.
14

--- Page 17 ---
Missing or Stolen Equipment Reported to the
Maryland Department of State Police
(June 2015 through October 2017)
Equipment Approximate
Date Location
Description Value
June 2015 Glen Burnie 22 Snow Plows $97,000
18 Computer
December 2016 Hunt Valley 39,000
Components
October 2017 Glen Burnie 24 Truck Tires 9,000
76 Power and
October 2017 Fairland 26,000
Landscaping Tools
Total $171,000
Source: SHA Records
Missing or stolen equipment or supplies are generally identified through periodic
physical inventories or employee observation. After identifying the
aforementioned missing snow plows in June 2015, SHA conducted a complete
physical inventory in July 2015 of snow plows at all SHA locations and identified
an additional 197 plows valued at $524,000 that were missing throughout the
State.
SHA subsequently took certain corrective measures, such as enhancing the
documentation requirements associated with its written inventory procedures, and
implementing an electronic lock system at the one district location from which the
22 snow plows were reported stolen. However, SHA has not conducted a
comprehensive review of the physical security over equipment and supplies at all
SHA district offices and maintenance shops. For example, such a comprehensive
review could include, at a minimum, consideration and evaluation of physical
security measures currently in place (such as employee access, security
monitoring systems); prior security breaches; and the type, value, and location of
equipment being stored. Due to the decentralized nature of its operations and the
types of equipment and supply items it maintains, and given the losses that have
occurred to date, we believe that such a review is warranted at all locations.
15

--- Page 18 ---
Recommendation 6
We recommend that SHA strongly consider completing a documented
comprehensive review of security over equipment at all district office
locations, and implement appropriate corrective actions as deemed necessary
to safeguard the State assets under its control.
Corporate Purchasing Cards
Finding 7
SHA lacked proper internal controls over corporate purchasing cards to
prevent or detect unauthorized purchases.
Analysis
SHA lacked proper internal controls over corporate purchasing cards (CPC).
According to the issuing bank’s records, corporate purchasing cards had been
issued to 132 SHA cardholders as of June 30, 2017, and the related expenditures
during fiscal year 2017 totaled approximately $14.5 million. Our review
disclosed certain control deficiencies regarding system access to SHA’s internal
purchasing card system and the monitoring of purchasing activity.
 SHA did not perform a periodic review to ensure that access to its automated
purchasing card system was properly restricted. We determined that,
according to SHA’s records, six individuals had improper “system
administrator” access that allowed them to log in as an existing cardholder,
and edit data on any cardholder log (such as item descriptions, unit prices, and
transaction amounts), create new transactions, and delete existing transactions.
Four of these individuals had left SHA’s employment 5 to 45 months prior to
our testing in August 2017, and two individuals still employed at SHA did not
require the access for their job duties. One of these two employees had also
been appropriately assigned the CPC program administrator role. However,
this role also included system access capabilities that essentially mimicked the
“system administrator” capabilities, which were inconsistent with the CPC
program administrator responsibilities.
 SHA’s CPC expenditure review procedures did not include the use of
available Level-3 purchasing data from the issuing bank to help determine the
propriety of CPC transactions. This level of data, when reported by
merchants, provides detailed purchasing information, including invoice-level
line item details (such as item descriptions and item quantities). The
Comptroller of Maryland’s Corporate Purchasing Card Program Policy and
Procedures Manual requires the use of Level-3 data during monthly reviews
16

--- Page 19 ---
of cardholder logs to ensure that each item purchased as reported on the logs
is the same item listed under the item description in the Level-3 data. We
determined that Level-3 data was available for SHA CPC purchases totaling
$6.3 million during fiscal year 2017.
Recommendation 7
We recommend that SHA
a. perform periodic reviews to ensure that critical automated purchasing
card system access is provided only to employees who require it for their
job duties, and in a manner that ensures a proper segregation of duties;
b. delete system administrator access for the aforementioned six individuals
who either no longer work at SHA or do not need the access;
c. revise the user role for the CPC administrator to prevent access similar to
system administrator capabilities; and
d. ensure compliance with the Manual by incorporating the use of Level-3
data, when available, as a part of the monthly supervisory review to aid
in the assessment of the propriety of CPC purchases.
Information Systems Security and Control
Background
The SHA Office of Information Technology supports employee use of numerous
information technology applications which operate on the MDOT datacenter
mainframe and various server platforms. Certain of SHA’s systems are either
web-based or cloud hosted applications which employees can access from remote
locations. As of December 2017, SHA had over 4,200 computers in operation.
Finding 8
Certain outdated software and security-related settings on SHA computers
were not sufficient to provide SHA with adequate assurance that its
computers were properly protected.
Analysis
SHA computers tested were not always sufficiently protected from malware,
certain software vulnerabilities, and untrusted network traffic. Our December
2017 to January 2018 testing of 12 randomly selected computers disclosed the
following;
 Of the 12 computers tested, 11 had outdated versions of the malware
protection software installed, with software release dates that ranged from
August 2016 to March 2017. At the time of our test, the most recent version
17

--- Page 20 ---
of the software was released in July of 2017. Using a separate management
console, MDOT – Office of Transportation Technology Services (OTTS)
manages the malware protection software installed on SHA computers.
 Certain of computers tested had not been updated with the latest releases for
software products that are known to have significant security-related software
vulnerabilities. Although the vendors for these software products frequently
provide software patches to address these vulnerabilities, SHA had not
updated all of its computers for these patches. For example, of 12 computers
tested for one of these software products, 4 computers were identified as
running older versions of this software that had not been updated for periods
ranging from 4 to 7 months.
 Four of the 12 computers tested were laptops and the host-based firewalls
were not enabled on any of these computers. Therefore, if and when these
laptops were used outside of the SHA network they would be susceptible to
attack from untrusted traffic.
The State of Maryland Information Security Policy, states that agencies, at a
minimum, must protect against malicious code (viruses, worms, Trojan horses) by
implementing protections (anti-virus, anti-malware) that, to the extent possible,
include a capability for automatic updates.
Recommendation 8
We recommend that SHA
a. in conjunction with MDOT – OTTS, ensure that all computers are
running current versions of their malware protection software;
b. promptly install all critical security-related software updates on its
computers; and
c. ensure that all laptop computers are protected by an enabled and
properly configured host-based firewall.
18

--- Page 21 ---
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the Maryland Department of
Transportation (MDOT) – State Highway Administration (SHA) for the period
beginning August 7, 2014 and ending June 30, 2017. The audit was conducted in
accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards. Those
standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient,
appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and
conclusions based on our audit objectives. We believe that the evidence obtained
provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit
objectives.
As prescribed by the State Government Article, Section 2-1221 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, the objectives of this audit were to examine SHA’s financial
transactions, records and internal control, and to evaluate its compliance with
applicable State laws, rules, and regulations.
In planning and conducting our audit, we focused on the major financial-related
areas of operations based on assessments of significance and risk. The areas
addressed by the audit included procurement and disbursements for highway
design and construction and SHA’s operating expenditures, federal funds, speed
enforcement, equipment, and information systems. We also determined the status
of the findings contained in our preceding audit report.
Our audit did not include certain payroll support services (such as processing of
personnel transactions and maintenance of employee leave records) provided by
MDOT – Secretary’s Office to SHA subsequent to November 9, 2016 when the
Secretary’s Office began performing these payroll support services. In addition,
our audit did not include an evaluation of internal controls over compliance with
federal laws and regulations for federal financial assistance programs and an
assessment of SHA’s compliance with those laws and regulations because the
State of Maryland engages an independent accounting firm to annually audit such
programs administered by State agencies, including SHA.
To accomplish our audit objectives, our audit procedures included inquiries of
appropriate personnel, inspections of documents and records, observations of
SHA’s operations, and tests of transactions. Generally, transactions were selected
for testing based on auditor judgment, which primarily considers risk. Unless
otherwise specifically indicated, neither statistical nor non-statistical audit
sampling was used to select the transactions tested. Therefore, the results of the
tests cannot be used to project those results to the entire population from which
the test items were selected.
19

--- Page 22 ---
We also performed various data extracts of pertinent information from the State’s
Financial Management Information System, MDOT’s Financial Management
Information System (such as revenue and expenditure data), and the State’s
Central Payroll Bureau (payroll data), as well as from the contractor administering
the State’s Corporate Purchasing Card Program (credit card activity). The
extracts are performed as part of ongoing internal processes established by the
Office of Legislative Audits and were subject to various tests to determine data
reliability. We determined that the data extracted from these sources were
sufficiently reliable for the purposes the data were used during this audit.
We also extracted data from SHA’s construction management information
system, the SafeZones system, SHA’s equipment system, SHA’s corporate
purchasing card system, and SHA’s automated crash recording system for the
purpose of selecting test items. We performed various tests of the relevant data
and determined that the data were sufficiently reliable for the purposes the data
were used during this audit. Finally, we performed other auditing procedures that
we considered necessary to achieve our audit objectives. The reliability of data
used in this report for background or informational purposes was not assessed.
SHA’s management is responsible for establishing and maintaining effective
internal control. Internal control is a process designed to provide reasonable
assurance that objectives pertaining to the reliability of financial records;
effectiveness and efficiency of operations, including safeguarding of assets; and
compliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations are achieved.
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate.
Our reports are designed to assist the Maryland General Assembly in exercising
its legislative oversight function and to provide constructive recommendations for
improving State operations. As a result, our reports generally do not address
activities we reviewed that are functioning properly.
This report includes findings relating to conditions that we consider to be
significant deficiencies in the design or operation of internal control that could
adversely affect SHA’s ability to maintain reliable financial records, operate
effectively and efficiently, and/or comply with applicable laws, rules, and
regulations. Our report also include findings regarding significant instances of
noncompliance with applicable laws, rules, or regulations. Other less significant
findings were communicated to SHA that did not warrant inclusion in this report.
20

--- Page 23 ---
The response from MDOT, on behalf of SHA, to our findings and
recommendations is included as an appendix to this report. As prescribed in the
State Government Article, Section 2-1224 of the Annotated Code of Maryland,
we will advise MDOT regarding the results of our review of its response.
21

--- Page 26 ---
Maryland Department of Transportation
State Highway Administration
Audit Responses
Period August 7, 2014 to June 30, 2017
Accident Billing
Finding 1
State Highway Administration (SHA) procedures to identify State property damaged by
traffic accidents using Maryland Department of State Police (MSP) records and to invoice
for these damages were not comprehensive. We identified more than 8,700 accidents
during our audit period from MSP records that may have caused damage to State property
and could be subject to recovery by the State.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that SHA establish and implement a comprehensive policy and related
procedures for identifying traffic accidents that caused damage to State property and
obtaining recovery for the related repair costs, in accordance with State law. The policy
should include steps for identifying and reviewing all such accidents, taking the required
action (including billing the responsible party or documenting why billing was not
warranted), and accounting for and documenting the disposition of all identified accidents.
We also recommend that SHA review the aforementioned accidents not satisfactorily
addressed that occurred within the three-year recovery period allowed by law, and take
appropriate action.
Response:
MDOT SHA concurs with the recommendation. A comprehensive policy will be established by
June 30, 2019. Procedures to identify all accidents that are potentially reimbursable will be
developed by MDOT SHA’s Office of Finance as part of a team that consists of MDOT SHA’s
Offices of Traffic and Safety, Information Technology, and Maintenance, as well as with the
Maryland State Police (MSP). Using data captured in MSP’s Automated Crash Reporting
System, MDOT SHA captures accident data from across the State and identifies accidents with
MDOT SHA property damage. MDOT SHA will continue to work with MSP to improve the
information that is included in police reports so that MDOT SHA has the information it needs to
identify accidents causing damage to State property and pursuing recovery where possible.
Where necessary, MDOT SHA will follow-up with MSP to obtain actual accident reports and
additional information (additional comments, photos, etc.) to facilitate billings where possible.
MDOT SHA will implement these procedures no later than June 30, 2019.
1

--- Page 27 ---
Regarding the aforementioned accidents not satisfactorily addressed, MDOT SHA will continue
to bill all responsible parties for damage to MDOT SHA property, including the instances noted
above, or maintain documentation for the reason billing was not necessary. With respect to the
five instances noted in the analysis, MDOT SHA billed $21,589.29 and collected $15,334.25 on
four of the accidents. The remaining incident could not be billed as the driver was found not at
fault during a requested hearing. Finally, MDOT SHA’s Office of Finance, in conjunction with
MDOT SHA’s Office of Information Technology, launched a workflow application on
January 1, 2019, to better track and manage accident reports and their related billings. This
application identifies MSP Accident Reports containing information that may require accident
billing. The process has already resulted in significant time savings in identifying and obtaining
copies of potential billable accidents.
Maryland SafeZones Program
Finding 2
SHA did not have adequate procedures in place to ensure the SafeZones program vendor
complied with all contract requirements.
Recommendation 2
We recommend that SHA establish appropriate monitoring procedures to ensure that the
vendor complies with the requirements of the SafeZones program. Specifically, we
recommend that SHA
a. periodically review required vendor inspection documentation from the vendor to
support work zone site compliance;
b. establish comprehensive procedures regarding the timing, frequency, methodology, and
required documentation for its own independent inspections of enforcement work
zones, including supervisory review; and
c. obtain documentation from the SafeZones program vendor to ensure that an annual
review of the driver’s license records for all its employees is performed, as required
under the contract.
Response:
a. MDOT SHA concurs with the recommendation. The comprehensive written procedures
include detailed frequency of site inspections, the methodology to verify and document
contract compliance, and supervisory approval of the documented inspection results. MDOT
SHA implemented these procedures effective October 1, 2018.
b. MDOT SHA concurs with the recommendation. The MDOT SHA initiated a new field
inspection form in November 2017 requiring specific criteria be inspected and documented,
as well as a supervisor approval signature line. The criteria include SafeZone Program field
requirements per law, COMAR, and MDOT SHA policy. Additionally, MDOT SHA
implemented a standard operating procedure (SOP) for completion of the form by field
inspectors, as well as a standard for timing and frequency of the inspections.
2

--- Page 28 ---
Once approved by a supervisor, the inspections are retained in a MDOT SHA shared drive.
MDOT SHA implemented this process effective October 1, 2018.
c. MDOT SHA concurs with the recommendation. At the time of the audit, some of the driver
license record reviews for vendor employees were not available; however, these records have
been reviewed for all current vendor personnel. Effective October 1, 2018, the MDOT SHA
has initiated a requirement that the vendor supply an employee roster at each monthly
Stakeholder Meeting. The vendor employee roster must include vendor employee’s name,
hire date, the date of security/background clearance, driver’s license check date, and training
completion dates for MDOT SHA and Vitronic Training. The MDOT SHA will review the
roster at each monthly Stakeholder Meeting to document the annual driver license
requirement is being consistently met.
Contractual Services
Finding 3
SHA did not always follow established procedures at the one SHA district office we
examined to ensure the propriety of payments to vendors for snow and ice removal
services.
Recommendation 3
We recommend that SHA ensure that existing procedures to verify vendor invoices for
snow and ice removal are complied with by district offices. Specifically, we recommend
that SHA
a. obtain and review documentation for each invoice that supports the services provided,
including the hours worked and type of equipment used, by the snow and ice removal
vendors; and
b. retain the aforementioned documentation, along with the required supervisory
approval of the billing documents.
Response:
a. MDOT SHA concurs with the recommendation. To facilitate this process, MDOT SHA
implemented a uniform Hired Contractor Check-in Sheet (HCCS) that is utilized by all
MDOT SHA maintenance shops during winter storm events. The HCCS documents the
process of signing-in contractors, verifying equipment items and rates, documentation of
other contract information, and signing-out contractors at the end of each winter storm event.
The HCCS is then used to support the processing of invoices when presented by hired
contractors. MDOT SHA implemented this procedure on November 1, 2018.
b. MDOT SHA concurs with the recommendation. This approval is documented on each
invoice presented for payment. In addition, supervisory approvals are documented
electronically when invoices are processed and approved for payment in MDOT FMIS.
When processing invoices for payment, MDOT SHA requires that all support documents
(including the HCCS) relevant to the invoice be retained to justify and support the invoice
payment.
3

--- Page 29 ---
Finding 4
SHA did not comply with certain State procurement-related reporting and publication
requirements for contract awards totaling $77.1 million.
Recommendation 4
We recommend that SHA
a. use appropriate methods to ensure that all contracts procured for snow and ice removal
services are reported to BPW, as required; and
b. comply with State laws and procurement regulations by publishing contract awards on
eMM within 30 days of the contract award (repeat).
Response:
a. MDOT SHA concurs with the recommendation. While the snow and ice removal contracts
procured under the special emergency procurement regulations were properly reported to the
BPW, normal emergency procurements awarded during significant winter storms were not.
The $6.5 million in purchase orders that were awarded under normal emergency procurement
procedures should have been reported to the BPW, in accordance with current BPW
advisories. These purchase orders were missed because they were incorrectly coded in
MDOT FMIS as “M” for “maintenance” procurements instead of “EM” for “emergency”
procurements. MDOT SHA will remedy this finding by taking two actions. First, MDOT
SHA Office of Procurement and Contract Management and Office of Finance will provide
guidance/training to the Office of Maintenance and the Districts shops, instructing them on
how to properly code emergency purchase orders for snow operations. This action will occur
by July 31, 2019, in time for the fiscal year 2020 snow season. Second, MDOT SHA will
perform queries against discrete accounting distribution data elements that will identify
purchase orders that are created for specific emergency winter events versus blanket purchase
orders that represent the contractual relationships MDOT SHA has with vendors for season-
long snow and ice removal. This will allow MDOT SHA to identify and report both blanket
purchase orders and purchase orders that represent emergency procurements for snow and ice
removal. These procedures will commence no later than June 30, 2019.
b. MDOT SHA concurs with the recommendation. A reminder of this regulation will be issued
by MDOT SHA’s Office of Procurement and Contract Management to all MDOT SHA
procurement staff. Additionally, prior to activating blanket purchase orders in MDOT FMIS,
the Office of Procurement and Contract Management and the Office of Finance will require a
copy of the relevant eMM screen to confirm that the award was posted. This requirement
will become part of the MDOT FMIS blanket purchase order Activation Checklist. In
addition, to ensure that all blanket purchase orders are posted to eMM as required, a report
will be generated from MDOT FMIS twice a month to identify those blanket purchase orders
that were eligible for eMM posting during the period. Verification that the eMM posting
occurred for those blanket purchase orders will be performed by MDOT SHA’s Office of
Procurement and Contract Management, with verification results stored on the MDOT SHA
shared drive. MDOT SHA plans to implement this procedure no later than June 30, 2019.
4

--- Page 30 ---
Federal Funds
Finding 5
SHA did not have comprehensive written procedures to resolve, in a timely manner,
certain highway construction-related expenditures that had been suspended from the
federal reimbursement process, and related follow-up efforts were not always documented.
Recommendation 5
We recommend that SHA
a. establish and implement comprehensive written procedures that consider timeliness
and significance for reviewing expenditures that were suspended from the federal fund
reimbursement process (repeat), and
b. document the investigation and disposition of suspended expenditures (repeat).
Response:
a. MDOT SHA concurs with the recommendation. While informal documented procedures and
work aids existed at the time of the examination, the Office of Finance has now formally
documented the process. Additionally, by March 31, 2019, MDOT SHA will discuss the
possibility of developing an aging report for suspended amounts with the MDOT FMIS
Support Team at MDOT TSO.
b. MDOT SHA concurs with the recommendation. The Director of Finance will continue to
meet with key staff from the Office of Finance Capital Programming Division on a bi-weekly
basis to discuss the Preview – Federal Aid Billing Summary Progress Report (Preview). This
report is a “preview” of MDOT SHA’s weekly federal bill that is presented to the Federal
Highway Administration (FHWA). In addition to considering the billed amount, items
discussed include Code A’s, Code B’s, and the resolution of specific suspended amounts;
especially those amounts that are complex or have aged on the Preview. Suspended amounts
are documented on the “Preview Overrun Analysis”. This analysis represents a
chronological history and detailed documentation of each suspended item’s follow-up
activity. Finally, meeting minutes including a list of meeting attendees and specific overrun
action items discussed are kept and memorialized by the Office of Finance. This formal
investigation process commenced in June 2018.
5

--- Page 31 ---
District Office Property
Finding 6 (Policy Issue)
SHA had not completed a comprehensive review of physical security practices in place at
its district offices to ensure that equipment and supplies were adequately protected from
loss or misappropriation.
Recommendation 6
We recommend that SHA strongly consider completing a documented comprehensive
review of security over equipment at all district office locations, and implement
appropriate corrective actions as deemed necessary to safeguard the State assets under its
control.
Response:
MDOT SHA concurs with the recommendation. In October 2017, MDOT SHA created a
Security team responsible for conducting security reviews at all MDOT SHA locations. The team
has completed reviews at fifteen MDOT SHA facilities to date, giving priority to district offices
and shops with inventory supply rooms. Actionable items from the reviews resulted in
additional security measures being implemented at three sites and the remaining sites are
underway or awaiting vendor proposals. The security measures that will be implemented include
cameras, additional access door controls, gate controls, and video intercoms for visitor access.
The team has begun conducting reviews on the second-phase of sites. The team will continue to
conduct surveys at all remaining facilities to complete the cycle of surveys, which will result in
actionable recommendations to improve security. Reviews are projected to be completed by
December 2019. As recommended improvements are completed, the Security team has also
begun conducting follow-up security inspections of facilities across the State to verify the
changes are still adequate, systems are operational, and they are being used as intended. The
follow-up is projected to be completed by July 2019.
Corporate Purchasing Cards
Finding 7
SHA lacked proper internal controls over corporate purchasing cards to prevent or detect
unauthorized purchases.
Recommendation 7
We recommend that SHA
a. perform periodic reviews to ensure that critical automated purchasing card system
access is provided only to employees who require it for their job duties, and in a
manner that ensures a proper segregation of duties;
b. delete system administrator access for the aforementioned six individuals who either no
longer work at SHA or do not need the access;
6

--- Page 32 ---
c. revise the user role for the CPC administrator to prevent access similar to system
administrator capabilities; and
d. ensure compliance with the Manual by incorporating the use of Level-3 data, when
available, as a part of the monthly supervisory review to aid in the assessment of the
propriety of CPC purchases.
Response:
a. MDOT SHA concurs with the recommendation. The System Administrator will be
responsible for the periodic review. This review will be documented and maintained by the
System Administrator. MDOT SHA will implement this process no later than June 30, 2019.
b. MDOT SHA concurs with the recommendation; however, deletion of former employees
would adversely impact transaction history. Instead, at this time all system access for
individuals who no longer work at MDOT SHA has been inactivated.
c. MDOT SHA concurs with the recommendation. The Office of Finance will take the
following actions to improve user security in the Corporate Purchasing Card System’s
(CPCS) security module:
 Assign the System Administrator role to an Office of Finance employee who works
in another unit within the Office of Finance, but not in the Credit Card Section. This
will place the responsibility for creation and inactivation of users in CPCS outside
the Credit Card Section thereby allowing the removal of system administration
duties from everyone in the Credit Card Section. System Administrators are
precluded from holding a credit card. MDOT SHA will accomplish this action no
later than June 30, 2019.
 Re-evaluate the duties and capabilities assigned to all roles within CPCS to avoid
internal control conflicts when specific roles are assigned to specific employees.
MDOT SHA will accomplish this action no later than June 30, 2019.
d. MDOT SHA concurs with the recommendation. Level-3 data reports are received from the
credit card issuing bank and contain transactions flagged by the General Accounting Division
(GAD), which are shared with cardholders and their respective approvers. These reports flag
purchases that appear to be personal items or gifts. The Office of Finance requires
cardholders and approvers to review these transactions and supply documentation to support
why they are a proper business expense. The Office of Finance collects and retains the
submitted documentation. The Office of Finance will discuss the Level-3 data reports with
GAD to determine if all needed filters are being used to produce those transactions that
should be investigated further. In our discussions with GAD, we will determine if additional
use of the Level-3 data is required. MDOT SHA will meet and discuss this issue with GAD
no later than June 30, 2019.
7

--- Page 33 ---
Information Systems Security and Control
Finding 8
Certain outdated software and security-related settings on SHA computers were not
sufficient to provide SHA with adequate assurance that its computers were properly
protected.
Recommendation 8
We recommend that SHA
a. in conjunction with MDOT – OTTS, ensure that all computers are running current
versions of their malware protection software;
b. promptly install all critical security-related software updates on its computers; and
c. ensure that all laptop computers are protected by an enabled and properly configured
host-based firewall.
Response:
a. MDOT SHA concurs with the recommendation. In April 2018, MDOT SHA implemented
weekly security scan reports to ensure all computers are running current version of malware
protection software. MDOT SHA continues to push malware/anti-virus updates to all
devices and mitigates endpoints out of compliance weekly.
b. MDOT SHA concurs with the recommendation. In April 2018, MDOT SHA deployed a
network access control solution, providing near real-time status and notification of endpoints
out of compliance for all critical security-related updates on its computers. Full vulnerability
scans are performed monthly and MDOT SHA continues to meet with
MDOT security weekly to review the vulnerability list and prioritize resolution.
c. MDOT SHA concurs with the recommendation. In April 2018, MDOT SHA ensured all
MDOT SHA laptops are protected via group policies that defines security at the computer
level. The host-based firewall is enabled and properly configured automatically using the
group policy.
8

--- Page 34 ---
A T
UDIT EAM
Mark S. Hagenbuch, CPA
Audit Manager
Richard L. Carter, CISA
Information Systems Audit Manager
Nicholas J. Caronna, CPA
Marissa L. Riddle, CPA
Senior Auditors
Matthew D. Walbert, CISA
Information Systems Senior Auditor
Anthony V. Calcagno
Patrick J. Cavanaugh
Thea A. Chimento
Mindy R. Garrett
Charles H. Hinds, IV, CPA
Marc E. Merius
Ian T. Pontius
Staff Auditors
Joseph R. Clayton
Information Systems Staff Auditor