Title: Department of Human Services - Local Department Operations
Date: 03/30/2022
Type: Fiscal Compliance
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=62446b93a1ce580ebcb549f8
Extracted: 2025-06-20T00:17:00.199172
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Audit Report
Department of Human Services
Local Department Operations
April 2025
Public Notice
In compliance with the requirements of the State Government Article Section
2-1224(i), of the Annotated Code of Maryland, the Office of Legislative
Audits has redacted cybersecurity findings and related auditee responses
from this public report.
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Senator Shelly L. Hettleman (Senate Chair) Delegate Jared Solomon (House Chair)
Senator Joanne C. Benson Delegate Steven J. Arentz
Senator Benjamin T. Brooks, Sr. Delegate Andrea Fletcher Harrison
Senator Paul D. Corderman Delegate Steven C. Johnson
Senator Katie Fry Hester Delegate Mary A. Lehman
Senator Cheryl C. Kagan Delegate David H. Moon
Senator Clarence K. Lam, M.D. Delegate Julie Palakovich Carr
Senator Cory V. McCray Delegate Emily K. Shetty
Senator Justin D. Ready Delegate Stephanie M. Smith
Senator Bryan W. Simonaire Delegate M. Courtney Watson
To Obtain Further Information
Office of Legislative Audits
The Warehouse at Camden Yards
351 West Camden Street, Suite 400
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Phone: 410-946-5900
Maryland Relay: 711
TTY: 410-946-5401 · 301-970-5401
E-mail: webmaster@ola.state.md.us
Website: www.ola.state.md.us
To Report Fraud
The Office of Legislative Audits operates a Fraud Hotline to report fraud, waste, or abuse involving State
of Maryland government resources. Reports of fraud, waste, or abuse may be communicated anonymously
by a toll-free call to 1-877-FRAUD-11, by mail to the Fraud Hotline, c/o Office of Legislative Audits, or
through the Office’s website.
Nondiscrimination Statement
The Department of Legislative Services does not discriminate on the basis of age, ancestry, color, creed,
marital status, national origin, race, religion, gender, gender identity, sexual orientation, or disability in the
admission or access to its programs, services, or activities. The Department’s Information Officer has been
designated to coordinate compliance with the nondiscrimination requirements contained in Section 35.107
of the United States Department of Justice Regulations. Requests for assistance should be directed to the
Information Officer at 410-946-5400 or 410-970-5400.

--- Page 3 ---
April 11, 2025
Senator Shelly L. Hettleman, Senate Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Delegate Jared Solomon, House Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Members of Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Annapolis, Maryland
Ladies and Gentlemen:
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the Department of Human
Services (DHS) – Local Department Operations (LDO) for the period beginning
February 19, 2021 and ending February 29, 2024. LDO is a separate budgetary
unit consisting of the funds appropriated to operate the State’s 24 local
departments of social services (LDSS) and to support the various assistance
activities they administer (including the Supplemental Nutrition Assistance
Program and Temporary Cash Assistance, but excluding child support
enforcement). Generally, the executive director of each LDSS reports to the DHS
Secretary.
DHS primarily relied on statutorily required audits of each LDSS conducted by
the Office of the Inspector General (OIG) to monitor LDSS compliance. Our
audit disclosed that these audits were generally sufficiently comprehensive and
therefore we relied on them for the coverage of the LDSS. Accordingly, the
findings in this report are based on the results of the OIG’s audit reports.
Our review of the OIG’s audit reports for 11 LDSSs completed during our audit
period and the audits of the remaining 13 LDSSs completed during our prior audit
period disclosed that the reports collectively included 221 audit findings,
including 70 the OIG deemed to be repeat findings. The OIG audit findings were
related to deficiencies in controls over critical areas of LDSS operations, such as
fiscal management activities. In addition, the OIG reported on deficiencies in the
administration of certain public assistance and social service programs, such as
the investigation of potential payment or recipient eligibility errors, controls over
electronic benefits transfer (EBT) cards, and the timely completion of adult and
child protective services investigations.

--- Page 4 ---
Furthermore, our audit disclosed a cybersecurity-related finding. However, in
accordance with the State Government Article, Section 2-1224(i) of the
Annotated Code of Maryland, we have redacted the finding from this audit report.
Specifically, State law requires the Office of Legislative Audits to redact
cybersecurity findings in a manner consistent with auditing best practices before
the report is made available to the public. The term “cybersecurity” is defined in
the State Finance and Procurement Article, Section 3.5-301(b), and using our
professional judgment we have determined that the redacted finding falls under
the referenced definition. The specifics of the cybersecurity finding were
previously communicated to those parties responsible for acting on our
recommendations.
DHS’ response to this audit, on behalf of LDO, is included as an appendix to this
report. Consistent with State law, we have redacted the elements of DHS’
response related to the cybersecurity audit finding. We reviewed the response to
our findings and related recommendations, and have concluded that the corrective
actions identified are sufficient to address all audit issues. We wish to
acknowledge the cooperation extended to us during the audit by DHS and the
OIG.
Respectfully submitted,
Brian S. Tanen
Brian S. Tanen, CPA, CFE
Legislative Auditor
2

--- Page 5 ---
Table of Contents
Background Information 4
Agency Responsibilities 4
Audit Approach 6
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report 6
Findings and Recommendations 8
Office of the Inspector General Audit Findings on LDSSs
* Finding 1 – DHS’ Office of the Inspector General (OIG) reported 8
numerous instances in which LDSS controls over fiscal management
activities were inadequate, including bank accounts, procurements,
and contract monitoring.
* Finding 2 – The OIG reported numerous LDSS deficiencies related to 10
critical Family Investment Administration policies, such as those
intended to ensure the propriety of recipient eligibility for public
assistance and food benefits.
* Finding 3 – The OIG reported numerous LDSS deficiencies related to 11
critical Social Services Administration policies, including adult and
child protective services and the out-of-home placement program.
Finding 4 – Redacted cybersecurity-related finding. 13
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology 14
Exhibit 1 – Summary of OIG Audit Findings on LDSSs 18
Exhibit 2 – Listing of Most Recent Office of Legislative Audits Fiscal 19
Compliance Audits of Maryland Department of Human Services Units
as of February 2025
Agency Response Appendix
* Denotes item repeated in full or part from preceding audit report
3

--- Page 6 ---
Background Information
Agency Responsibilities
Local Department Operations (LDO) is one of seven budgetary units of the
Department of Human Services (DHS). It consists of the funds appropriated for
operating the State’s 24 local departments of social services (LDSS) and
supporting the various assistance activities they administer.1 These activities
primarily involve the various DHS public assistance programs, such as the
Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program and Temporary Cash Assistance,
which are administered by the LDSSs under policies promulgated by other units
within DHS.
According to the State’s records, the LDO’s fiscal year 2024 expenditures totaled
approximately $2.9 billion, which included $2.2 billion in public assistance
program expenditures and $680 million in operating expenditures (primarily
employee salaries and benefits), see Figure 1 on the following page. As of June
30, 2024, approximately 7 percent of the total 5,125 positions were vacant.
1 There is no LDSS in Montgomery County. In accordance with its agreement with DHS, the
Montgomery County Department of Health and Human Services performs the functions of an
LDSS. The State provides annual funding to Montgomery County and the Office of the
Inspector General (OIG) performs audits of these operations consistent with the 23 LDSSs. For
this report, unless otherwise stated, references to the LDSSs include Montgomery County
operations.
4

--- Page 7 ---
Figure 1
DHS – Local Department Operations
Positions, Expenditures, and Funding Sources
Full-Time Equivalent Positions as of June 30, 2024
Positions Percent
Filled 4,750 92.6%
Vacant 375 7.4%
Total 5,125
Fiscal Year 2024 Expenditures
Expenditures Percent
Salaries, Wages, and Fringe Benefits $ 490,258,532 17.1%
Technical and Special Fees 3,554,807 0.1%
Operating Expenses 2,379,330,653 82.8%
Total $2,873,143,992
Fiscal Year 2024 Funding Sources
Funding Percent
General Fund $ 644,868,462 22.4%
Special Fund 27,087,926 0.9%
Federal Fund 2,200,537,754 76.5%
Reimbursable Fund 649,850 0.1%
Total $2,873,143,992
Source: State financial and personnel records
The remaining units of DHS are audited and reported upon separately by our
office. Specifically, the units of Child Support Administration, Family
Investment Administration (FIA), and Social Services Administration (SSA) are
audited separately. The Office of the Secretary, the Office of Technology for
Human Services, and the Operations Office are consolidated in one audit.
Generally, these six units direct or support the activities (including public
assistance programs) that are administered statewide by the 24 LDSSs, with the
executive director of each LDSS reporting to the DHS Secretary.
5

--- Page 8 ---
Audit Approach
Section 3-602 of the Human Services Article of the Annotated Code of Maryland
requires DHS to conduct, or contract for, a financial and compliance audit of each
LDSS at least once every three years. To comply with State law, the DHS Office
of the Inspector General (OIG) has been tasked with auditing the 24 LDSSs. To
avoid duplication of work, we performed audit procedures necessary to determine
whether we could rely on the audit work of DHS’s OIG to accomplish our audit
objectives. Our audit procedures were generally limited to obtaining a sufficient
basis for that reliance. Specifically, we reviewed the audit reports and the related
working papers of certain OIG audits performed during our audit period.
Based on this review, we concluded that the OIG’s audit coverage of the LDSSs
generally provided a sufficient basis for reliance on its work. As discussed below,
we also performed a limited review of LDSS procurements and disbursements for
the purpose of assessing the status of a finding contained in our preceding audit
report.2
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report
Our audit included a review to determine the status of the six findings contained
in our preceding audit report dated March 30, 2022. See Figure 2 on the next
page for the results of our review. It should be noted that these findings represent
compiled outcomes from 24 separate agencies (LDSSs); meaning that even if one
or more of the LDSSs were to take corrective action on an issue, if the condition
were to exist at other LDSSs the finding would be repeated. In addition, certain
findings contained and repeated in this LDO report and the OIG reports might
also be included in our own Social Services Administration or Family Investment
Administration audit reports (see Exhibit 2).
2 Our prior audit identified deficiencies in the OIG coverage of procurements and disbursements
which required us to perform a review of this activity.
6

--- Page 9 ---
Figure 2
Status of Preceding Findings
Preceding Implementation
Finding Description
Finding Status
DHS did not have an effective process to ensure
Finding 1 that the LDSSs complied with State law, Not repeated
regulations, and DHS policies.
The OIG reported numerous instances in which
LDSS controls over fiscal management activities Repeated
Finding 2
were inadequate, including bank accounts, (Current Finding 1)
procurements, and gift cards.
The OIG reported numerous LDSS deficiencies
related to critical FIA policies, such as those Repeated
Finding 3
intended to ensure the propriety of recipient (Current Finding 2)
eligibility for public assistance and food benefits.
The OIG reported numerous LDSS deficiencies
related to critical SSA policies, including child Repeated
Finding 4
protective services and the out-of-home placement (Current Finding 3)
program.
The OIG reported numerous deficiencies related to
Finding 5 Status Redacted3
LDSS user access to critical computer systems.
LDSS contracts were not adequately monitored and
Finding 6 sole source procurements were not adequately Not repeated
justified.
3 Specific information on the current status of this cybersecurity–related finding has been redacted
from the publicly available report in accordance with State Government Article, Section 2-
1224(i) of the Annotated Code of Maryland.
7

--- Page 10 ---
Findings and Recommendations
Office of the Inspector General Audit Findings on LDSSs
Background
The Department of Human Services (DHS) Office of the Inspector General (OIG)
classifies the findings from its audits of the 24 local departments of social services
(LDSSs) into several functional areas. These areas generally equate to each
LDSS’s major operational responsibilities, which include implementing policies
established by the Family Investment Administration (FIA) and the Social
Services Administration (SSA) in accordance with State law, and adhering to
fiscal and information system regulations and controls. A summary of all OIG
audit findings for the most recent audit of each LDSS can be found in Exhibit 1 of
this report. Using the results of the OIG’s audits of the 24 LDSSs, we
summarized some of the more significant findings in certain functional areas as
they appeared in selected reports.
Finding 1
The OIG reported numerous instances in which LDSS controls over fiscal
management activities were inadequate, including bank accounts,
procurements, and contract monitoring.
Analysis
The OIG reported numerous instances in which LDSS controls over fiscal
management activities were inadequate. Specifically, our review of the most
recent OIG audit report for each of the 24 LDSSs disclosed 67 findings from 17
LDSSs related to fiscal management areas such as bank accounts, procurements,
and contract monitoring (see Exhibit 1). Of these 67 findings, 28 were also
specifically included in our preceding LDO audit report.4 Our review of these
OIG audit reports disclosed the following findings related to fiscal operations:
• LDSSs frequently lacked adequate controls over bank accounts, which were
maintained to pay certain administrative and program-related expenditures.
For example, the OIG reports disclosed instances in which bank account
reconciliations were not performed timely or reviewed by management, and
that outstanding checks were not adequately monitored. Consequently, there
4 The findings summarized and presented in Exhibit 1 for 13 LDSSs were also included in the
comparable exhibit in our prior LDO audit report dated March 30, 2022 because, at the time of
our current audit, DHS – OIG had not issued subsequent audit reports for these 13 LDSSs.
OIG’s delay in starting and completing audits necessitated this approach.
8

--- Page 11 ---
is the potential that unauthorized payments could be processed without prompt
detection.
• State procurement regulations were not always followed. For example, the
OIG reports disclosed that bids were not always solicited as required, bid
documentation was not always retained, and solicitations were not always
posted on eMaryland Marketplace Advantage (eMMA).5 Consequently,
assurance was lacking that the related procurements were in the best interest
of the State.
• LDSSs did not always adequately monitor contracts. For example, the OIG
reports disclosed instances where LDSSs did not document their monitoring
efforts and the vendors’ compliance with contract requirements. Thus,
assurance was lacking that the State received all deliverables and that
performance measures were met.
• LDSSs did not always comply with State and DHS policies for procurements
and disbursements. For example, the OIG reports disclosed that the LDSSs
did not always establish written contracts or purchase orders as required by
State regulation. In addition, invoices were not always approved before
payment, stamped paid, or paid timely. As a result, improper payments could
be processed or duplicate payments could occur.
Similar deficiencies regarding controls over bank accounts and procurement
regulations among the LDSSs were included in prior OIG reports and were
consequently commented upon in our four preceding audit reports dating back to
May 2012.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that DHS establish appropriate accountability and control
over fiscal operations. For example, DHS should ensure that the LDSSs
a. establish adequate controls over bank accounts (repeat),
b. comply with State procurement regulations (repeat),
c. adequately monitor contracts, and
d. establish controls over disbursements in compliance with applicable State
and DHS policies and procedures.
5 eMaryland Marketplace Advantage (eMMA) is an internet-based, interactive procurement system
managed by the Department of General Services (DGS).
9

--- Page 12 ---
Finding 2
The OIG reported numerous LDSS deficiencies related to critical FIA
policies, such as those intended to ensure the propriety of recipient eligibility
for public assistance and food benefits.
Analysis
The OIG reported that numerous LDSS deficiencies related to critical FIA
policies. Specifically, our review of the most recent OIG audit report for each of
the 24 LDSSs disclosed 32 findings from 14 LDSSs related to deficiencies related
to FIA policies for public assistance programs, including the Temporary Cash
Assistance (TCA) program and the federal Supplemental Nutrition Assistance
Program (SNAP) (see Exhibit 1). Of these 32 findings, 16 were also specifically
included in our preceding LDO audit report.
TCA provides cash assistance to needy families with dependent children when
available resources do not fully address the family’s needs and while preparing
program participants for independence through work, and SNAP helps low-
income households purchase food. Recipients access TCA and SNAP benefits
through the Electronic Benefits Transfer (EBT) system; the associated EBT card
functions as a debit card.
Our review of the OIG audit reports disclosed the following selected findings
related to FIA programs:
• Controls over EBT cards were not sufficient. For example, certain counts of
EBT cards on hand were conducted by an employee who also had access to
the EBT card inventory and consequently, the counts were therefore not
independent. In addition, the transfer of EBT cards between the custodian of
the cards and other employees was not always documented. As a result, there
is a potential risk that cards could be misplaced or misappropriated,
improperly activated, and used without prompt detection. Effective controls
are needed to ensure that EBT cards are only issued to, and used by, the
intended recipients.
• All potential payment or recipient eligibility errors disclosed by periodic FIA
computer matches either were not pursued or were not pursued timely. For
example, the LDSSs did not always perform timely follow up for recipients
with missing or invalid social security numbers. The lack of timely computer
match follow up could result in improper assistance payments not being
detected timely and ongoing improper payments to these recipients.
Similar deficiencies regarding controls over EBT cards and the resolution of
10

--- Page 13 ---
errors identified by computer matches among the LDSSs were included in prior
OIG reports and consequently were commented upon in our four preceding audit
reports dating back to May 2012. According to DHS records, during fiscal year
2023, SNAP disbursements, which are entirely federally funded, totaled
approximately $1.8 billion, and TCA disbursements, which are funded by both
State and federal funds, totaled $174 million.
Recommendation 2
We recommend that DHS ensure that the LDSSs comply with all FIA
program requirements. For example, DHS should ensure that the LDSSs
a. establish appropriate controls over the EBT card inventories (repeat),
and
b. perform timely follow up on all potential payment or eligibility errors
identified through computer matches (repeat).
Finding 3
The OIG reported numerous LDSS deficiencies related to critical SSA
policies, including adult and child protective services, and the out-of-home
placement program.
Analysis
The OIG reported numerous LDSS deficiencies related to critical SSA policies.
Specifically, our review of the most recent OIG audit report for each of the 24
LDSS disclosed 98 findings from 23 LDSSs related to SSA activities, including
adult and child protective services, and the out-of-home placement program (see
Exhibit 1). Of these 98 findings, 41 were also specifically included in our
preceding LDO audit report.
SSA’s Adult Services unit serves persons aged 18 or over who lack the physical
or mental capacity to provide for their daily needs and the Child Protective
Services unit provides services to assist children believed to be neglected or
abused by parents or other adults with parental responsibilities. The out-of-home
placement program is a temporary service that provides short-term care and
support services to children who are unable to live at home because of child abuse
or neglect. Generally, these children are temporarily placed in either kinship care
(with a relative) or a foster care setting (a fee-based individual foster home or
group care environment).
Our review of the OIG audit reports disclosed the following selected findings
related to SSA programs:
11

--- Page 14 ---
• Adult and child protective services investigations were frequently not
completed in accordance with State regulations that require completion within
60 days from receipt of the allegations. In addition, the LDSSs did not always
notify appropriate law enforcement of child protective services investigations,
as required. These investigations help protect the welfare of vulnerable adults
and children.
• Out-of-home placement case files did not always contain documentation that a
caseworker had conducted a monthly visit with the child, as required by State
regulations. Furthermore, caseworkers frequently did not record their visits
with children in DHS records on a timely basis. Consequently, there was a
lack of assurance that children in out-of-home placements were receiving vital
services necessary for their emotional, physical, and educational well-being.
• Foster care trust accounts were not adequately maintained. For example,
instances were noted in which trust accounts remained open for former foster
care children, and accounts were not always established when children had the
necessary funds. Therefore, there was an increased risk that children may be
deprived of personal funds for their benefit and care.
• Foster care providers were not properly monitored. For example, annual
reconsiderations to determine compliance with home regulations for foster
care providers were not performed timely, and documentation of criminal
background clearances and children’s medical records were missing. These
requirements help protect the welfare of the foster care children and ensure
they are receiving the vital services necessary for their well-being.
Similar deficiencies regarding child protective services investigations, out-of-
home placement case files, and foster care trust accounts were commented upon
in our preceding audit report. In addition, deficiencies regarding a lack of
compliance with requirements of the Child Protective Services program, and
missing documentation of compliance with certain critical requirements for
children in out-of-home placements were included in prior OIG reports and
consequently were commented upon in our three preceding audit reports on SSA
dating back to November 20, 2017.
According to DHS records, there were 3,919 children in the out-of-home
placement program as of June 30, 2023. The related fiscal year 2023
expenditures totaled approximately $342 million. In addition, 9,457 child
protective services and 17,358 adult protective services investigations were
completed during the year ending June 30, 2023.
12

--- Page 15 ---
Recommendation 3
We recommend that DHS ensure that the LDSSs comply with all SSA
program requirements. For example, DHS should ensure that the LDSSs
a. complete child protective service investigations (repeat) and adult
protective service investigations timely, and notify appropriate law
enforcement, as required;
b. document all monthly visits between the caseworker and the out-of-home
placement child, and record these visits in DHS records in a timely
manner (repeat);
c. adequately maintain foster care trust accounts (repeat); and
d. ensure foster care providers are properly monitored, including
performing annual reconsiderations and maintaining documentation of
criminal background clearances and children's medical records.
We determined that Finding 4 related to “cybersecurity,” as defined by the State
Finance and Procurement Article, Section 3.5-301(b) of the Annotated Code of
Maryland, and therefore is subject to redaction from the publicly available audit
report in accordance with the State Government Article 2-1224(i). Consequently,
the specifics of the following finding, including the analysis, related
recommendation(s), along with DHS’ responses, have been redacted from this
report copy.
Finding 4
Redacted cybersecurity-related finding.
13

--- Page 16 ---
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the Department of Human
Services (DHS) – Local Department Operations (LDO) for the period beginning
February 19, 2021 and ending February 29, 2024. The audit was conducted in
accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards. Those
standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient,
appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and
conclusions based on our audit objectives. We believe that the evidence obtained
provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit
objectives.
As prescribed by the State Government Article, Section 2-1221 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, the objectives of this audit were to examine LDO’s financial
transactions, records and internal control, and to evaluate its compliance with
applicable State laws, rules, and regulations.
In planning and conducting our audit, we focused on the major financial-related
areas of operations based on assessments of significance and risk. The areas
addressed by the audit included DHS Office of Inspector General (OIG) audits,
and certain procurement and disbursement activity at certain local departments of
social services. We also determined the status of the six findings contained in our
preceding audit report.
Our audit did not include certain support services provided to LDO by the DHS
Office of the Secretary. These support services (such as payroll, maintenance of
certain accounting records, and related fiscal functions) are included within the
scope of our audit of the DHS Office of the Secretary. In addition, our audit did
not include an evaluation of internal controls over compliance with federal laws
and regulations for federal financial assistance programs (such as the
Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program) and an assessment of LDO’s
compliance with those laws and regulations because the State of Maryland
engages an independent accounting firm to annually audit such programs
administered by State agencies, including LDO.
Section 3-602 of the Human Services Article of the Annotated Code of Maryland
requires DHS to conduct, or contract for, a financial and compliance audit of each
LDSS at least once every three years. As previously noted in this report, although
OIG did not conduct audits of all 24 local departments of social services (LDSS)
during our audit period, based on our assessment of the OIG’s audit coverage of
the LDSSs, we performed audit procedures necessary to determine whether we
could rely on the audit work of DHS’ OIG to accomplish our audit objectives
14

--- Page 17 ---
pertaining to LDO’s major financial-related areas of operations based on
significance and risk. These areas addressed by the OIG audits included the
LDSS responsibilities to implement various DHS assistance programs as well as
their financial processes. Our audit procedures were generally limited to
obtaining a sufficient basis for that reliance.
We reviewed the audit reports and the related working papers of certain OIG
audits performed during our audit period and reviewed certain aspects of OIG’s
audit operations, including those related to our prior audit report findings. Based
on this review, we concluded that the OIG’s audit coverage of the LDSSs
generally provided a sufficient basis for reliance on its work. While we did not
conduct audits of the LDSSs, our audit procedures did include reviewing certain
critical procurement and disbursement processes at selected LDSSs to address a
prior audit finding. The findings in this report are primarily based on the results
reported by the OIG for the 11 LDSSs it audited during our audit period and the
remaining 13 LDSSs it audited during our prior audit period.
Our assessment of internal controls was based on agency procedures and controls
in place at the time of our fieldwork. Our tests of transactions and other auditing
procedures were generally focused on the transactions occurring during our audit
period of February 19, 2021 to February 29, 2024, but may include transactions
before or after this period as we considered necessary to achieve our audit
objectives.
To accomplish our audit objectives, our audit procedures included inquiries of
appropriate personnel, inspections of documents and records, tests of transactions,
and to the extent practicable, observations of LDO’s operations. Generally,
transactions were selected for testing based on auditor judgment, which primarily
considers risk, the timing or dollar amount of the transaction, or the significance
of the transaction to the area of operation reviewed. As a matter of course, we do
not normally use sampling in our tests, so unless otherwise specifically indicated,
neither statistical nor non-statistical audit sampling was used to select the
transactions tested. Therefore, unless sampling is specifically indicated in a
finding, the results from any tests conducted or disclosed by us cannot be used to
project those results to the entire population from which the test items were
selected.
We also performed various data extracts of pertinent information from the State’s
Financial Management Information System (such as revenue and expenditure
data). The extracts are performed as part of ongoing internal processes
established by the Office of Legislative Audits and were subject to various tests to
determine data reliability. We determined that the data extracted from this source
15

--- Page 18 ---
were sufficiently reliable for the purposes the data were used during this audit.
Finally, we performed other auditing procedures that we considered necessary to
achieve our objectives. The reliability of data used in this report for background
or informational purposes was not assessed.
LDO’s management is responsible for establishing and maintaining effective
internal control. Internal control is a process designed to provide reasonable
assurance that objectives pertaining to the reliability of financial records;
effectiveness and efficiency of operations, including safeguarding of assets; and
compliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations are achieved. As
provided in Government Auditing Standards, there are five components of
internal control: control environment, risk assessment, control activities,
information and communication, and monitoring. Each of the five components,
when significant to the audit objectives, and as applicable to LDO, were
considered by us during the course of this audit.
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate.
Our reports are designed to assist the Maryland General Assembly in exercising
its legislative oversight function and to provide constructive recommendations for
improving State operations. As a result, our reports generally do not address
activities we reviewed that are functioning properly.
This report includes findings relating to conditions that we consider to be
significant deficiencies in the design or operation of internal control that could
adversely affect LDO’s ability to maintain reliable financial records, operate
effectively and efficiently, and/or comply with applicable laws, rules, and
regulations. Our report also includes findings regarding significant instances of
noncompliance with applicable laws, rules, or regulations. Other less significant
findings were communicated to LDO that did not warrant inclusion in this report.
State Government Article Section 2-1224(i) requires that we redact in a manner
consistent with auditing best practices any cybersecurity findings before a report
is made available to the public. This results in the issuance of two different
versions of an audit report that contains cybersecurity findings – a redacted
version for the public and an unredacted version for government officials
responsible for acting on our audit recommendations.
16

--- Page 19 ---
The State Finance and Procurement Article, Section 3.5-301(b), states that
cybersecurity is defined as “processes or capabilities wherein systems,
communications, and information are protected and defended against damage,
unauthorized use or modification, and exploitation.” Based on that definition, and
in our professional judgment, we concluded that that a finding in this report falls
under that definition. Consequently, for the publicly available audit report all
specifics as to the nature of the cybersecurity finding and required corrective
actions have been redacted. We have determined that such aforementioned
practices, and government auditing standards, support the redaction of this
information from the public audit report. The specifics of this cybersecurity
finding have been communicated to LDO and those parties responsible for acting
on our recommendations in an unredacted audit report.
The response from DHS, on behalf of LDO, to our findings and recommendations
is included as an appendix to this report. Depending on the version of the audit
report, responses to any cybersecurity findings may be redacted in accordance
with State law. As prescribed in the State Government Article, Section 2-1224 of
the Annotated Code of Maryland, we will advise DHS regarding the results of our
review of its response.
17

--- Page 20 ---
Exhibit 1
Summary of All Audit Findings on LDSSs
Reported by DHS Office of the Inspector General (OIG)
Most Recent Audit of Each of the 24 Local Departments of Social
Services as of February 2024
Number of OIG Reportable Findings by Area
Number Percentage
Local Department of Total Fiscal Year
of Repeat of Repeat
Social Services OIG 2023
OIG OIG
(LDSS) Social Fiscal Family Findings Findings Findings Expenditures
Services Investment Other
Management
Admin. Admin.
Allegany County 4 2 0 0 6 1 17% $76,692,963
Anne Arundel
6 2 1 2 11 1 9% 199,186,009
County*
Baltimore City 10 10 4 3 27 18 67% 798,459,011
Baltimore County 5 4 1 2 12 5 42% 422,525,555
Calvert County* 3 0 0 0 3 0 0% 36,056,109
Caroline County* 2 2 0 0 4 0 0% 30,487,075
Carroll County* 2 0 1 0 3 2 67% 46,811,200
Cecil County 7 8 4 2 21 2 10% 66,712,158
Charles County* 6 4 2 3 15 8 53% 70,101,853
Dorchester County* 0 0 0 1 1 0 0% 37,212,597
Frederick County 2 5 3 0 10 1 10% 83,819,595
Garrett County* 3 4 1 0 8 1 13% 24,301,744
Harford County* 2 5 2 1 10 3 30% 114,302,598
Howard County* 4 3 6 1 14 7 50% 84,035,027
Kent County 2 0 0 0 2 0 0% 15,738,479
Montgomery
5 3 2 1 11 8 73% 277,447,632
County*
Prince George’s
7 5 1 3 16 7 44% 440,180,185
County
Queen Anne’s
4 0 0 0 4 0 0% 16,976,013
County
Somerset County 4 1 0 1 6 3 50% 31,376,488
St. Mary’s County* 4 1 0 0 5 2 40% 55,493,394
Talbot County* 3 4 0 0 7 1 14% 22,501,808
Washington County 7 4 3 2 16 0 0% 114,181,268
Wicomico County* 1 0 1 2 4 0 0% 84,357,035
Worcester County 5 0 0 0 5 0 0% 31,585,633
TOTAL 98 67 32 24 221 70 32% $3,180,541,429
Source: DHS - OIG Audit Reports and DHS financial records
*The specific findings summarized and presented in this exhibit for this LDSS (13 in total) were also included in the comparable exhibit found in
our preceding LDO audit report dated March 30, 2022. Our presentation of past audit data was necessary because, at the time of our current audit,
DHS – OIG had not issued subsequent audit reports for these 13 LDSSs.
18

--- Page 21 ---
Exhibit 2
Listing of Most Recent Office of Legislative Audits Fiscal
Compliance Audits of Department of Human Services Units
As of February 2025
Most Recent Number of Repeat
Name of Audit Total Findings
Report Date Findings
Department of Human Resources
1 Office of the Secretary and 2/28/2025 9 1
Related Units
Family Investment
2 10/21/2022 10 5
Administration
3 Social Security Administration U 6/3/2021 8 7
4 Child Support Administration 5/13/2021 2 0
Total 29 12
U - This audit had an unsatisfactory rating.
19

--- Page 22 ---
APPENDIX
Wes Moore, Governor • Aruna Miller, Lt. Governor • Rafael López, Secretary
April 10, 2025
Mr. Brian S. Tanen, CPA, CFE
Legislative Auditor
Office of Legislative Audits
The Warehouse at Camden Yards,
351 West Camden Street, Suite 400
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Dear Mr. Tanen:
Enclosed is the Department of Human Services’ (DHS) response to the draft Legislative
Audit Report on the Department of Human Services – Local Department Operations
(LDO) for the period beginning February 19, 2021 and ending February 29, 2024.
The Department takes audit findings seriously and is committed to resolving the findings
identified in the audit report.
We are happy to answer any questions. Please contact Marva Sutherland, Inspector General,
at Marva.Sutherland@maryland.gov if you would like to continue the conversation.
In service,
Carnitra White
Principal Deputy Secretary
Enclosures:
cc: Rafael López, Secretary of Human Services
Gloria Brown Burnett, Deputy Secretary for Operations
Daniel Wait, Deputy Secretary for Talent & Customer Service
Webster Ye, Chief of Staff
Alger Studstill, Executive Director, SSA
Augustin Ntabaganyimana, Executive Director, FIA
Dave Sloan, Chief Information Officer, OTHS
Jessica Smith, Acting Chief Financial Officer
Monica Hariri, Acting Procurement Director
Marva Sutherland, Inspector General
Shelly-Ann Dyer, Assistant Inspector General for Audits
25 S. Charles Street, Baltimore, MD 21201-3500
Tel: 1-800-332-6347 | TTY: 1-800-735-2258 | www.dhs.maryland.gov

--- Page 23 ---
Department of Human Services
Local Department Operations
Agency Response Form
Office of the Inspector General Audit Findings on LDSSs
Finding 1
The OIG reported numerous instances in which LDSS controls over fiscal
management activities were inadequate, including bank accounts,
procurements, and contract monitoring.
We recommend that DHS establish appropriate accountability and control
over fiscal operations. For example, DHS should ensure that the LDSSs
a. establish adequate controls over bank accounts (repeat),
b. comply with State procurement regulations (repeat),
c. adequately monitor contracts, and
d. establish controls over disbursements in compliance with applicable State
and DHS policies and procedures.
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 1a Agree Estimated Completion Date: 6/30/2025
Please provide details of DHS is updating the department’s fiscal manual to address the adequacy
corrective action or of controls over bank accounts. Section 4 of such manual provides
explain disagreement. detailed guidance and instructions for Bank, Trust, and Cash
Accounts. The manual outlines the different types of bank accounts and
related cash receipt activities monitored by local departments. It also
outlines which bank accounts are to be used in the receipt and
disbursement of certain transactions.
The Office of Budget and Finance (OBF) will perform periodic reviews
including quarterly reconciliations to ensure that the locals are adhering
to the guidelines governing bank accounts.
Recommendation 1b Agree Estimated Completion Date: On-going
Please provide details of DHS agrees with the recommendation and will ensure the LDSSs’
corrective action or compliance with State procurement laws and regulations.
explain disagreement.
The Central Procurement Unit has issued an email template for soliciting
for category I and II procurements which was posted on Knowledge
Page 1 of 9

--- Page 24 ---
Department of Human Services
Local Department Operations
Agency Response Form
Base and provided a training Overview of Small Procurements that was
provided during a Procurement Advisory Committee (PAC) meeting in
November 2024. There is also a checklist provided noting the
documentation to be included in the Small Procurement file which is
available on Knowledge Base to aid in ensuring compliance.
There are PAC meetings once a month to discuss various training topics.
The Central Procurement Unit will continue to provide on-going training
opportunities and refreshers to staff on matters related to retention of bid
documentation, solicitation on eMMA, and other topics that ensure
compliance with procurement regulations.
Recommendation 1c Agree Estimated Completion Date: 11/30/2025
Please provide details of DHS agrees with the recommendation and will ensure LDSSs begin to
corrective action or adequately monitor contracts. In February 2022, the Central
explain disagreement. Procurement Unit established the Contract Monitoring Advisory
Committee (CMAC) to support all DHS contract monitoring staff
including those at the local level. In these meetings, guidance and tools
(i.e. templates) were created to assist contract monitors. Guidance
included but was not limited to ensuring adequate documentation of
monitoring efforts as well as ensuring vendors’ compliance with contract
requirements.
The Contract Monitoring tool is being used when administrations/locals
are submitting their procurements; however, it has been found that it is
not being used to document contract performance or tracking, as it was
intended.
Moving forward, the Central Procurement Unit will re-enforce adequate
usage of the Contract Monitoring Tool currently on Knowledge Base
and require quarterly reporting to Central which will be reviewed for
outstanding issues and compliance.
These guidelines will be established during the upcoming CMAC
meeting scheduled in May 2025, with the first quarterly report due in
October.
There are CMAC meetings held bi-monthly to go over different training
topics. The DHS Central Procurement Unit will continue to provide on-
going training opportunities and refreshers to staff as well as continue to
discuss the importance of vendor compliance with contract requirements.
Page 2 of 9

--- Page 25 ---
Department of Human Services
Local Department Operations
Agency Response Form
Recommendation 1d Agree Estimated Completion Date: 6/30/2025
Please provide details of As part of the newly updated fiscal manual, Section D - Invoice
corrective action or Verification, Section E - Invoice Approvals, Section F - Invoice
explain disagreement. Processing and Payment, and Section G - Invoice Timeliness provide
information and instructions to ensure the processing of invoices and
disbursements are seamless and in compliance throughout DHS. The
OBF will be conducting training and periodic reviews to ensure that the
locals are adhering to the updated guidance.
Page 3 of 9

--- Page 26 ---
Department of Human Services
Local Department Operations
Agency Response Form
Finding 2
The OIG reported numerous LDSS deficiencies related to critical FIA
policies, such as those intended to ensure the propriety of recipient eligibility
for public assistance and food benefits.
We recommend that DHS ensure that the LDSSs comply with all FIA
program requirements. For example, DHS should ensure that the LDSSs
a. establish appropriate controls over the EBT card inventories (repeat),
and
b. perform timely follow up on all potential payment or eligibility errors
identified through computer matches (repeat).
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 2a Agree Estimated Completion Date: On-going
Please provide details of To ensure appropriate controls over the EBT card inventories are
corrective action or established by the LDSSs, DHS FIA has taken the following steps:
explain disagreement. Updated and disseminated EBT Card inventory management
o
procedures.
Provided ongoing training to EBT Trainers and Case Managers
o
to ensure that they understand each other's role in the issuance
and management of over-the-counter EBT cards.
Incorporated the EBT Card inventory management in the
o
monitoring reviews (also known as “management evaluation”).
Management Evaluations are conducted once a year for large
jurisdictions and every other year for medium and small
jurisdictions to evaluate compliance with program
requirements.
Provides ongoing reminders about EBT card management
o
procedures during quarterly all-staff meetings.
Recommendation 2b Agree Estimated Completion Date: On-going
Please provide details of DHS will ensure that the LDSSs continue to perform timely follow-up
corrective action or on all potential payment or eligibility errors identified through computer
explain disagreement. matches in accordance with the recent guidance provided by the U.S.
Department of Agriculture Food and Nutrition Service
Page 4 of 9

--- Page 27 ---
Department of Human Services
Local Department Operations
Agency Response Form
(FNS). Specifically, FNS clarified that computer matches are to be
reviewed at application or recertification.
Previous guidance from FIA Central to local office staff to address
computer matches throughout a household’s certification period was not
in accordance with the aforementioned federal regulations.
As a result, an updated FIA Action Transmittal 25-03 (AT) addressing
how to properly handle computer matches in accordance with FNS was
developed and issued on November 13, 2024.
Computer matches are included in the Supplemental Nutrition
Assistance Program (SNAP) Management Evaluations (ME) review
process to ensure appropriate follow-up action is taken.
Page 5 of 9

--- Page 28 ---
Department of Human Services
Local Department Operations
Agency Response Form
Finding 3
The OIG reported numerous LDSS deficiencies related to critical SSA
policies, including adult and child protective services, and the out-of-home
placement program.
We recommend that DHS ensure that the LDSSs comply with all SSA
program requirements. For example, DHS should ensure that the LDSSs
a. complete child protective service investigations (repeat) and adult
protective service investigations timely, and notify appropriate law
enforcement, as required;
b. document all monthly visits between the caseworker and the out-of-home
placement child, and record these visits in DHS records in a timely
manner (repeat);
c. adequately maintain foster care trust accounts (repeat); and
d. ensure foster care providers are properly monitored, including
performing annual reconsiderations and maintaining documentation of
criminal background clearances and children's medical records.
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 3a Agree Estimated Completion Date: 04/30/2026
Please provide details of DHS agrees that investigations for child and adult protective
corrective action or investigations should be completed within the appropriate timeframes as
explain disagreement. well as ensuring that the appropriate law enforcement notifications are
made.
DHS SSA will work to reduce the administrative burden of caseworkers
by working to complete CJAMS enhancement to allow for the law
enforcement (State Attorney’s Office) notification to be automated at
case closure as well as a field added to justify the reason why the
investigation has remained open past the allotted days.
DHS SSA will also review the current policy that dictates case closure
timeline to remove any redundancies and streamline case closure
expectations for varying types of cases (e.g. investigation, alternative
response, family preservation, and in-home).
Page 6 of 9

--- Page 29 ---
Department of Human Services
Local Department Operations
Agency Response Form
DHS SSA will ensure that COMAR is updated to reflect the statutory
change allowing for APS cases to be closed within 60 days.
Recommendation 3b Agree Estimated Completion Date: 12/31/2025
Please provide details of DHS agrees with the finding; however, the State of Maryland has
corrective action or consistently met the federal standard related to the performance of
explain disagreement. monthly visits as established by the Children’s Bureau. Specifically, the
state target for monthly visits is 95%. For calendar year 2023, the state
average was 98.54% and for calendar year 2024 the state average was
98.52%, which is well above the goal.
In referencing data for 2024, while some LDSS did not meet the 95%
goal every month, the yearly performance for each LDSS was above the
target with the lowest being 94.6%. These standards were shared with
the auditors.
While record shows that the visits are being conducted monthly in
accordance with the federal standards, we acknowledge that the
aforementioned visits are not always recorded in the system of record in
a timely manner, as required. As such, DHS SSA will be working on
developing an annual refresher training that will be required for all staff
to ensure timeframes are maintained. Documentation of efforts will also
be discussed during regular ACQI sessions with Local Departments.
SSA will continue to ensure this performance is sustained through
weekly and monthly ACQI monitoring.
Recommendation 3c Agree Estimated Completion Date: 10/31/2025
Please provide details of DHS agrees that foster care trust accounts should be maintained
corrective action or adequately. SSA released a policy in 2019 regarding foster care trust
explain disagreement. accounts (19-06).
DHS SSA Executive Director will convene a small taskforce of LDSS
leaders, frontline staff and attorneys to review current policy, practice
barriers and challenges, and develop actionable items for practice change
by June 30, 2025. Training with local staff on new practices will occur
July-September 2025 with a planned go-live date by October 1, 2025.
Recommendation 3d Agree Estimated Completion Date: 03/31/2026
Page 7 of 9

--- Page 30 ---
Department of Human Services
Local Department Operations
Agency Response Form
Please provide details of DHS agrees with this recommendation.
corrective action or
explain disagreement. DHS SSA has revised the Resource Homes Licensing Policy that is
currently under review by the U.S. Department of Health and Human
Services Children’s Bureau which will clearly provide guidance to
LDSS on the requirements for annual reconsiderations, background
criminal checks and medical records. This policy, once released, will
also include a checklist that LDSS can use when completing annual
reconsiderations.
DHS SSA will work with MDTHINK to determine how a report can be
developed that tracks annual reconsiderations to reduce the manual
tracking of this by individual case workers. Long-term there may be a
procurement option to assist in the management of licensing and
monitoring of public foster homes.
DHS SSA in partnership with MDTHINK is currently working on a
procurement for an electronic health passport solution and once
implemented every caregiver across Maryland (kinship or resource
home) will have a caregiver portal that will ensure all relevant health
information is available in real time to the caregiver. This information
will be secured and once a child changes placement, previous
caregiver(s) will no longer have access to this information.
Page 8 of 9

--- Page 31 ---
Department of Human Services
Local Department Operations
Agency Response Form
The Office of Legislative Audits (OLA) has determined that Finding 4 related to
“cybersecurity,” as defined by the State Finance and Procurement Article, Section
3.5-301(b) of the Annotated Code of Maryland, and therefore is subject to
redaction from the publicly available audit report in accordance with the State
Government Article 2-1224(i). Although the specifics of the finding, including
the analysis, related recommendation(s), along with DHS’ responses, have been
redacted from this report copy, DHS’ responses indicated agreement with the
finding and related recommendations.
Finding 4
Redacted cybersecurity-related finding.
Agency Response has been redacted by OLA.
Page 9 of 9

--- Page 32 ---
AUDIT TEAM
James J. Podhorniak, CPA, CFE
Audit Manager
Matusala Y. Abishe
Joel E. Kleiman, CPA
Senior Auditors
Ali A. Dayya
Jillian A. Novak, CPA
Zoe D. Smith
Staff Auditors