Title: Maryland State Library Agency


NOTE: Effective July 1, 2017, the MSLA was established as an independent unit of State government. MSLA’s activites were previously subject to audit as part of the Maryland State Department of Education.
Date: 04/04/2022
Type: Fiscal Compliance
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=624ee13aa1ce580d3cb02eac
Extracted: 2025-06-20T00:17:28.106315
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Audit Report
Maryland State Library Agency
April 2022
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Senator Clarence K. Lam, M.D. (Senate Chair) Delegate Carol L. Krimm (House Chair)
Senator Malcolm L. Augustine Delegate Steven J. Arentz
Senator Adelaide C. Eckardt Delegate Mark S. Chang
Senator George C. Edwards Delegate Nicholas P. Charles II
Senator Katie Fry Hester Delegate Andrea Fletcher Harrison
Senator Cheryl C. Kagan Delegate Trent M. Kittleman
Senator Benjamin F. Kramer Delegate David Moon
Senator Cory V. McCray Delegate Julie Palakovich Carr
Senator Justin D. Ready Delegate Elizabeth G. Proctor
Senator Craig J. Zucker Delegate Geraldine Valentino-Smith
To Obtain Further Information
Office of Legislative Audits
The Warehouse at Camden Yards
351 West Camden Street, Suite 400
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Phone: 410-946-5900
Maryland Relay: 711
TTY: 410-946-5401 ꞏ 301-970-5401
E-mail: OLAWebmaster@ola.state.md.us
Website: www.ola.state.md.us
To Report Fraud
The Office of Legislative Audits operates a Fraud Hotline to report fraud, waste, or abuse involving State
of Maryland government resources. Reports of fraud, waste, or abuse may be communicated anonymously
by a toll-free call to 1-877-FRAUD-11, by mail to the Fraud Hotline, c/o Office of Legislative Audits, or
through the Office’s website.
Nondiscrimination Statement
The Department of Legislative Services does not discriminate on the basis of age, ancestry, color, creed,
marital status, national origin, race, religion, gender, gender identity, sexual orientation, or disability in the
admission or access to its programs, services, or activities. The Department’s Information Officer has been
designated to coordinate compliance with the nondiscrimination requirements contained in Section 35.107
of the United States Department of Justice Regulations. Requests for assistance should be directed to the
Information Officer at 410-946-5400 or 410-970-5400.

--- Page 3 ---
April 4, 2022
Senator Clarence K. Lam, M.D., Senate Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Delegate Carol L. Krimm, House Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Members of Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Annapolis, Maryland
Ladies and Gentlemen:
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the Maryland State Library
Agency (MSLA) for the period beginning July 1, 2017 and ending November 7,
2021. MSLA is responsible for overseeing the Maryland State Library for the
Blind and Print Disabled (LBPD), Maryland public libraries, the State Library
Network, local library capital grants programs, and the Deaf Culture Digital
Library. MSLA also administers State and federal programs to improve library
services, operates the LBPD, coordinates the online electronic information
network that provides free internet access to Maryland residents, and oversees the
State Library Network where residents can obtain materials and services not
available at their local libraries.
Our audit disclosed that MSLA did not have a formal written agreement to
establish roles and responsibilities with a tax exempt charitable organization since
certain factors present the perception that the organization is affiliated with
LBPD, which is operated by MSLA. For example, the organization uses the name
of LBPD to raise funds, and publicly asserts it will use these funds primarily to
support LBPD.
MSLA’s response to this audit is included as an appendix to this report. We
reviewed the response to our finding and related recommendations, and have
concluded that the corrective actions identified are sufficient to address all audit
issues.

--- Page 4 ---
We wish to acknowledge the cooperation extended to us during the audit by
MSLA and its willingness to address the audit issues and implement appropriate
corrective actions.
Respectfully submitted,
Gregory A. Hook, CPA
Legislative Auditor
2

--- Page 5 ---
Background Information
Agency Creation and Responsibilities
Effective July 1, 2017, Chapters 337 and 338, Laws of Maryland 2017 established
the Maryland State Library Agency (MSLA) as an independent unit of State
government under the direction of a 12-member governing board (Maryland State
Library Board). Prior to this law, MSLA existed under the direction of the
Maryland State Department of Education (MSDE) and MSLA’s activities were
subject to audit during our Office’s audit of MSDE. MSDE continued to provide
support services for certain fiscal activities, such as recordation of expenditures in
the State’s Financial Management Information System until fiscal year 2019,
when MSLA fully assumed its fiscal activities.
MSLA is responsible for overseeing the Maryland State Library for the Blind and
Print Disabled (LBPD), Maryland public libraries, the State Library Network,
local library capital grants programs, and the Deaf Culture Digital Library.
MSLA administers State and federal programs to improve library services,
operates the LBPD, approves plans for the State Library and the Regional
Resource Centers, coordinates the online electronic information network that
provides free internet access to Maryland residents, and oversees the State Library
Network where residents can obtain materials and services not available at their
local libraries.
According to the State’s records, during fiscal year 2021, MSLA’s operating
expenditures totaled approximately $90.8 million. These expenditures were
funded by State general funds totaling approximately $87.0 million and federal
funds totaling approximately $3.8 million.
In addition, MSLA authorized disbursement of funds under the public library
capital grant program. According to the Department of Budget and
Management’s fiscal year 2022 Capital Budget White Book, MSLA had
authorized capital improvement projects with budgeted funds totaling
approximately $24.8 million during the period from July 2018 to June 2021
related to the public library capital grant program. These funds were to provide
grants for acquiring land, design, construct, and equip public library facilities.
MSLA also authorized capital improvement projects with budgeted funds totaling
approximately $4.8 million during fiscal year 2018 to complete renovations and
equip the Central Branch of Baltimore City’s Enoch Pratt Free Library System.
According to the State’s records, during fiscal year 2021, capital expenditures
totaled approximately $5.7 million.
3

--- Page 6 ---
Findings and Recommendations
Friends of Maryland Library for the Blind and Print Disabled
Finding 1
The Maryland State Library Agency (MSLA) did not have an agreement
with the Friends of the Maryland Library for the Blind and Print Disabled to
address each entity’s role and responsibilities.
Analysis
MSLA did not have a memorandum of agreement (MOA) with the Friends of the
Maryland Library for the Blind and Print Disabled (Friends) to address each
entity’s role and responsibilities. Friends is a tax exempt charitable organization
under Section 501(c) of the Internal Revenue Service (IRS) Code that was created
in 1988 and according to filings with the IRS and its website, its purpose is to
support Maryland State Library for the Blind and Print Disabled (LBPD) and
promote public awareness. In addition, the president of Friends is also a member
of the governing board of MSLA. According to filings with the IRS, as of
December 31, 2020 the Friends’ assets (cash and investments) totaled $1,064,619,
and during calendar year 2020 the Friends provided cash and equipment totaling
$12,363 to MSLA.
There is no formal legal connection between the Friends and MSLA despite its
use of “Library for the Blind and Print Disabled” in its name, its public assertions
that it will fund LBPD with donated funds, and its president’s position on the
MSLA Board. Under the circumstances, an MOA is warranted as these factors
present at least the perception that Friends is affiliated with LBPD and the MSLA.
The MOA should specify the roles and responsibilities of each entity, including
the following:
 the Friends’ solicitation, collection, administration and investment of funds;
 the Friends’ procurement policies for purchases donated to MSLA;
 the Friends’ submission of an annual audited report to MSLA;
 the Friends’ conflict of interest policy for board members and employees;
 MSLA sharing of priorities, projects and resource requirements, including the
sharing of any non-private data to assist the Friends’ effort; and
 MSLA providing of any in-kind support functions and the use of its facilities.
As of January 2022, Friends had 14 board members who were collectively
responsible for managing the Friends’ business and fiscal affairs, and approving
expenditures to support its mission.
4

--- Page 7 ---
Recommendation 1
We recommend that the MSLA enter into an MOA with Friends to, at a
minimum, detail the roles and responsibilities for each entity in critical areas
such as solicitation, investment, and procurement policies.
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the Maryland State Library
Agency (MSLA) for the period beginning July 1, 2017 and ending November 7,
2021. The audit was conducted in accordance with generally accepted
government auditing standards. Those standards require that we plan and perform
the audit to obtain sufficient, appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis
for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives. We believe that
the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and
conclusions based on our audit objectives.
As prescribed by the State Government Article, Section 2-1221 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, the objectives of this audit were to examine MSLA’s financial
transactions, records, and internal control, and to evaluate its compliance with
applicable State laws, rules, and regulations.
In planning and conducting our audit, we focused on the major financial-related
areas of operations based on assessments of significance and risk. The areas
addressed by the audit included operating and capital grant programs, and
oversight of the Maryland State Library for the Blind and Print Disabled.
Our audit did not include certain support services provided to MSLA by the
Maryland State Department of Education (MSDE), during fiscal year 2018, such
as recordation of expenditures in the State’s Financial Management Information
System (FMIS). These support services are included within the scope of our audit
of MSDE.
Our assessment of internal controls was based on agency procedures and controls
in place at the time of our fieldwork. Our tests of transactions and other auditing
procedures were generally focused on the transactions occurring during our audit
period of July 1, 2017 to November 7, 2021, but may include transactions after
this period as we considered necessary to achieve our audit objectives.
To accomplish our audit objectives, our audit procedures included inquiries of
appropriate personnel, inspections of documents and records, tests of transactions,
and to the extent practicable, observations of MSLA’s operations. Generally,
5

--- Page 8 ---
transactions were selected for testing based on auditor judgment, which primarily
considers risk, the timing or dollar amount of the transaction, or the significance
of the transaction to the area of operation reviewed. As a matter of course, we do
not normally use sampling in our tests, so unless otherwise specifically indicated,
neither statistical nor non-statistical audit sampling was used to select the
transactions tested. Therefore, unless sampling is specifically indicated in a
finding, the results from any tests conducted or disclosed by us cannot be used to
project those results to the entire population from which the test items were
selected.
We also performed various data extracts of pertinent information from FMIS
(such as revenue and expenditure data) and the State’s Central Payroll Bureau
(payroll data), as well as from the contractor administering the State’s Corporate
Purchasing Card Program (credit card activity). The extracts are performed as
part of ongoing internal processes established by the Office of Legislative Audits
and were subject to various tests to determine data reliability. We determined that
the data extracted from these sources were sufficiently reliable for the purposes
the data were used during this audit. Finally, we performed other auditing
procedures that we considered necessary to achieve our audit objectives. The
reliability of data used in this report for background or informational purposes
was not assessed.
MSLA’s management is responsible for establishing and maintaining effective
internal control. Internal control is a process designed to provide reasonable
assurance that objectives pertaining to the reliability of financial records;
effectiveness and efficiency of operations, including safeguarding of assets; and
compliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations are achieved. As
provided in Government Auditing Standards, there are five components of
internal control: control environment, risk assessment, control activities,
information and communication, and monitoring. Each of the five components,
when significant to the audit objectives, and as applicable to MSLA, were
considered by us during the course of this audit.
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate.
Our reports are designed to assist the Maryland General Assembly in exercising
its legislative oversight function and to provide constructive recommendations for
improving State operations. As a result, our reports generally do not address
activities we reviewed that are functioning properly.
6

--- Page 9 ---
This report includes a finding relating to a condition that we consider to be a
significant deficiency in the design or operation of internal control that could
adversely affect MSLA’s ability to maintain reliable financial records, operate
effectively and efficiently, and/or comply with applicable laws, rules, and
regulations. Our audit did not disclose any significant instances of
noncompliance with laws, rules, or regulations.
MSLA’s to our finding and recommendations is included as an appendix to this
report. As prescribed in the State Government Article, Section 2-1224 of the
Annotated Code of Maryland, we will advise MSLA regarding the results of our
review of its response.
7

--- Page 10 ---
APPENDIX
Irene M. Padilla
Maryland State Librarian
25 S. Charles Street, Suite 1310 • Baltimore, Maryland 21201 • 667-219-4800
March 31, 2022
Mr. Gregory A. Hook, CPA
Legislative Auditor
Office of Legislative Audits
State Office Building, Room 1202
301 West Preston Street
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Dear Mr. Hook:
We are providing this letter in connection with your fiscal compliance audit of the Maryland State
Library Agency (MSLA) for the period beginning July 1, 2017 and ending November 7, 2021 for the
purpose of examining the MSLA’s financial transactions, records and internal controls, and evaluating
its compliance with applicable State laws, rules and regulations.
MSLA is in agreement with the finding regarding the need for an agreement with the Friends of
Maryland Library for the Blind and Print Disabled to address each entities roles and responsibilities.
Please see the attached Agency Response Form with details of the corrective action MSLA will take
and a specific implementation date for the recommendation.
Please let me know if you have any questions or require any further information.
Sincerely,
Irene M. Padilla
Irene M. Padilla
c: Sharan D. Marshall, Chair, Maryland State Library Board
Donna Liberto, Chief Financial Officer, MSLA

--- Page 11 ---
Maryland State Library Agency
Agency Response Form
Friends of the Maryland Library for the Blind and Print Disabled
Finding 1
The Maryland State Library Agency (MSLA) did not have an agreement with the Friends
of the Maryland Library for the Blind and Print Disabled to address each entity’s role and
responsibilities.
We recommend that the MSLA enter into an MOA with the Friends of the Maryland
Library for the Blind and Print Disabled to, at a minimum, detail the roles and
responsibilities for each entity in critical areas such as solicitation, investment, and
procurement policies.
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 1 Agree Estimated Completion Date: October 1,
2022
Please provide details of MSLA agrees with the Finding and Recommendation to enter into an
corrective action or MOA with Friends to, at a minimum, detail the roles and responsibilities
explain disagreement.
for each entity in critical areas such as solicitation, investment, and
procurement policies.
To ensure that the roles and responsibilities for MSLA and the Friends
of the Library for the Blind and Print Disabled in critical areas such as
solicitation, investment, and procurement policies, MSLA will develop
an MOA specifying the roles and responsibilities of each entity,
including the following:
 the Friends’ solicitation, collection, administration and investment of
funds,
 the Friends’ procurement policies for purchases donated to MSLA,
 the Friends’ submission of an annual audited report to MSLA,
 the Friends’ conflict of interest policy for board members and
employees,
 MSLA sharing of priorities, projects and resource requirements,
including the sharing of any non-private data to assist the Friends’
effort; and
Page 1 of 2

--- Page 12 ---
Maryland State Library Agency
Agency Response Form
 MSLA providing of any in-kind support functions and the use of its
facilities.
This MOA will be developed by October 1, 2022.
Page 2 of 2

--- Page 13 ---
A T
UDIT EAM
Mark S. Hagenbuch, CPA
Audit Manager
Joshua A. Naylor
Senior Auditor