Title: Review of the Actions Taken by the Comptroller of Maryland's Revenue Administration Division and Information Technology Division, University System of Maryland - Frostburg State University, and Baltimore County Public Schools to Resolve Repeat Cybersecurity Findings in Response to the April 2021 Joint Chairmen's Report
Date: 04/27/2022
Type: Special Reports and Letters
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=62702cd6a1ce581d00fa2faa
Extracted: 2025-06-20T00:18:07.870019
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
April 27, 2022
Senator Guy J. Guzzone, Chair
Senate Budget and Taxation Committee
Miller Senate Office Building, 3 West Wing
11 Bladen Street
Annapolis, Maryland 21401
Delegate Benjamin S. Barnes, Chair
House Appropriations Committee
Lowe House Office Building, Room 151
6 Bladen Street
Annapolis, Maryland 21401
Senator Clarence K. Lam, M.D., Senate Chair
Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Miller Senate Office Building, Room 420
11 Bladen Street
Annapolis, Maryland 21401
Delegate Carol L. Krimm, House Chair
Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Lowe House Office Building, Room 422
6 Bladen Street
Annapolis, Maryland 21401
Ladies and Gentlemen:
The Office of Legislative Audits (OLA) has reviewed the actions taken by
the Comptroller of Maryland’s Revenue Administration Division (RAD) and
Information Technology Division (ITD), University System of Maryland -
Frostburg State University (FSU), and the Baltimore County Public Schools

--- Page 2 ---
Senator Guy J. Guzzone, Chair -2- April 27, 2022
Delegate Benjamin S. Barnes, Chair
Senator Clarence K. Lam, M.D., Senate Chair
Delegate Carol L. Krimm, House Chair
(BCPS) to resolve the repeat cybersecurity findings in our respective 2020 audit
reports. This review was conducted in accordance with a requirement contained
in the April 2021 Joint Chairmen’s Report (JCR), pages 255 and 256.
The JCR required that, prior to the release of $100,000 of each agencies’
administrative appropriation for fiscal year 2022, RAD, ITD, and FSU must have
met with the State Chief Information Security Officer (SCISO) concerning their
repeat cybersecurity findings. Furthermore, the meeting was to identify and
document a path for resolution of any outstanding issues and to confirm that the
agencies have taken corrective action with respect to their cybersecurity audit
findings, including articulating any ongoing associated costs and a timeline for
resolution if the corrective action is not complete. In addition, the JCR required
the SCISO to submit a report to OLA by February 1, 2022 addressing corrective
actions taken to remediate these cybersecurity audit findings, a path and timeline
for resolution of any outstanding issues, and any ongoing costs associated with
corrective actions. The JCR language further provided that OLA submit a report
by May 1, 2022 to the budget committees and the Joint Audit and Evaluation
Committee listing each repeat audit finding, along with information that
demonstrates the agencies’ commitment to correct each repeat audit finding. The
JCR also stated that it was the intent of the General Assembly that the Baltimore
County local school system should also complete the aforementioned process
based on having had several repeat cybersecurity audit findings in its calendar
2020 compliance audit report.
In accordance with the April 2021 JCR requirement, the SCISO provided
a report, dated January 3, 2022, detailing the corrective actions that RAD and ITD
had taken with respect to the repeat audit findings. The SCISO provided a report
addendum, dated February 18, 2022, detailing the corrective actions that FSU and
BCPS had taken with respect to the repeat audit findings. Both the original
January 3, 2022 report and the February 18, 2022 addendum can be found in
Exhibit 1. The SCISO status report indicated that RAD, ITD, and FSU had taken
corrective actions to address their respective repeat cybersecurity findings. The
SCISO status report indicated that BCPS had taken corrective actions to address
one of its three repeat cybersecurity findings, and, was making “meaningful”
progress to address the two remaining repeat cybersecurity findings. Regarding
FSU’s and BCPS’ status, the SCISO’s report addendum contained some
extraneous information and detailed sensitive information that OLA deemed
necessary to redact from publication in this letter.

--- Page 3 ---
Senator Guy J. Guzzone, Chair -3- April 27, 2022
Delegate Benjamin S. Barnes, Chair
Senator Clarence K. Lam, M.D., Senate Chair
Delegate Carol L. Krimm, House Chair
We reviewed the SCISO status report and related documentation and held
discussions with the SCISO as necessary to assess the implementation status of
the related recommendations. Based on our review of the actions described in the
reports, it is our opinion that Finding 6 from the RAD report, Findings 2 and 4
from the ITD report, Finding 3 from the FSU report, and Finding 8 from the
BCPS report related to cybersecurity have been resolved. In addition, we found
that the actions taken by BCPS regarding the repeat audit report condition in
Finding 9 (that is, recommendation 9a), in fact indicated the repeat finding had
been satisfactorily resolved rather than BCPS making “meaningful” progress,
since the SCISO report stated the servers involved in the finding were now
protected in a security zone (a DMZ). Finally, we agree that BCPS has made
progress and the remedial actions described in the status report demonstrated a
commitment to correct repeat cybersecurity Finding 6 from “its calendar 2020
compliance audit report” (Exhibit 2 includes a summary of our review’s
conclusions).
We advised RAD, ITD, FSU, and BCPS of the results of our review. We
wish to acknowledge the cooperation extended by RAD, ITD, FSU, BCPS, and
the SCISO during this review and their willingness to address the cybersecurity
audit issues and implement appropriate corrective actions.
We trust our response satisfactorily addresses the JCR requirement.
Please contact me if you need additional information.
Sincerely,
Gregory A. Hook, CPA
Legislative Auditor
cc: Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee Members and Staff
Senator William C. Ferguson IV, President of the Senate
Delegate Adrienne A. Jones, Speaker of the House of Delegates
Governor Lawrence J. Hogan, Jr.

--- Page 4 ---
Senator Guy J. Guzzone, Chair -4- April 27, 2022
Delegate Benjamin S. Barnes, Chair
Senator Clarence K. Lam, M.D., Senate Chair
Delegate Carol L. Krimm, House Chair
Comptroller Peter V.R. Franchot
Treasurer Dereck E. Davis
Attorney General Brian E. Frosh
Honorable David R. Brinkley, Secretary, Department of Budget and
Management
John Hiter, Director, Information Technology Division, Comptroller of
Maryland
Wayne P. Green, Director, Revenue Administration Division,
Comptroller of Maryland
Mohammed Choudhury, State Superintendent of Schools, Maryland State
Department of Education
Jay A. Perman, M.D., Chancellor, University System of Maryland
Linda R. Gooden, Chair, Board of Regents, University System of Maryland
Ronald H. Nowaczyk, Ph.D., President, Frostburg State University
Robert L. Page, Associate Vice Chancellor, Financial Affairs, University
System of Maryland
David Mosca, Director, Office of Internal Audit, University System of
Maryland
Julie C. Henn, Chair, Baltimore County Board of Education
Darryl L. Williams, Ed.D., Superintendent, Baltimore County Public
Schools
Charles I. Stewart IV, State Chief Information Security Officer, Department
of Information Technology
Victoria L. Gruber, Executive Director, Department of Legislative Services
Morgan T. Smith, Policy Analyst, Department of Legislative Services
Sara J. Baker, Policy Analyst, Department of Legislative Services
Hiram L. Burch, Manager, Policy Analyst, Department of Legislative
Services

--- Page 5 ---
Exhibit 1 to April 27, 2022 Letter to Joint Chairmen and Joint Audit
And Evaluation Committee

--- Page 14 ---
The SCISO’s Addendum contained extraneous information and detailed sensitive
information that OLA redacted from inclusion in this public document.

--- Page 25 ---
Exhibit 2
Status of Repeat Cybersecurity Findings in OLA’s 2020 Audit Reports of the
Comptroller of Maryland’s Revenue Administration Division and
Information Technology Division, University System of Maryland – Frostburg
State University, and the Baltimore County Public Schools
Status Based on
Prior Recommendations Pertaining to Repeat Findings
OLA Review
Revenue Administration Division
Finding 6 – We recommend that RAD implement appropriate
database monitoring controls over the aforementioned
critical tax systems. Specifically, we recommend that
RAD Resolved
b. ensure that reviews of the propriety of the critical
security systems software reports include a review of
recently developed detail change reports (repeat)
c. log all critical database security and audit events
(repeat) Resolved
Information Technology Division
Finding 2 – We recommend that ITD
a. restrict access to critical operating and system
Resolved
software files to only those individuals requiring such
access and log all such accesses (repeat)
b. ensure that the review of security software violation
logs includes activity for all time periods and for all
Resolved
users (repeat)
Finding 4 – We recommend that ITD restrict IT contractors’
network-level access within the Comptroller network to
only those servers and workstations necessary for them Resolved
to perform their duties (repeat)
Frostburg State University
Finding 3 – We recommend that FSU ensure that user access
capabilities in its financial management systems are Resolved
adequately restricted to prevent improper transactions.
Specifically, we recommend that FSU

--- Page 26 ---
a. use its annual review of user access capabilities to
ensure that system access to perform critical functions
is restricted to those employees who require such
access for their job duties, and in a manner that
ensures a proper segregation of duties and
independent review and approval of critical
transactions (repeat)
Baltimore County Public Schools
Finding 6 – We recommend that BCPS
a. periodically review employee access capabilities to
In Progress
ensure all access is appropriate and incompatible
duties are segregated (repeat)
Finding 8 – We recommend that BCPS implement appropriate
database monitoring controls over the aforementioned
critical systems. Specifically, we recommend that BCPS
a. log all significant database security, audit related
event, and processing activities, included direct Resolved
changes to critical database tables, and generate
reports that include this related database activity
(repeat)
b. ensure that individuals perform regular, independent
documented reviews of the aforementioned reports
and retain the information for reference purposes Resolved
(repeat)
c. restrict assignment of critical database administration
roles to only those personnel requiring such access for
Resolved
their job responsibilities (repeat)
Finding 9 – We recommend that BCPS
a. relocate all publicly accessible servers to a separate
protected network zone to limit security exposures to Resolved
the internal network segment (repeat)