Title: Maryland Department of Health - Office of the Chief Medical Examiner
Date: 05/12/2022
Type: Fiscal Compliance
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=627d2e80a1ce5813342ff67f
Extracted: 2025-06-20T00:18:58.038635
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Audit Report
Maryland Department of Health
Office of the Chief Medical Examiner
April 2018
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
For further information concerning this report contact:
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
301 West Preston Street, Room 1202
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Phone: 410-946-5900 · 301-970-5900
Toll Free in Maryland: 1-877-486-9964
Maryland Relay: 711
TTY: 410-946-5401 · 301-970-5401
E-mail: OLAWebmaster@ola.state.md.us
Website: www.ola.state.md.us
The Office of Legislative Audits operates a Fraud Hotline to report fraud, waste, or abuse
involving State of Maryland government resources. Reports of fraud, waste, or abuse
may be communicated anonymously by a toll-free call to 1-877-FRAUD-11, by mail to the
Fraud Hotline, c/o Office of Legislative Audits, or through the Office’s website.
The Department of Legislative Services does not discriminate on the basis of age, ancestry, color,
creed, marital status, national origin, race, religion, gender, gender identity, sexual orientation,
or disability in the admission or access to its programs, services, or activities. The Department’s
Information Officer has been designated to coordinate compliance with the nondiscrimination
requirements contained in Section 35.107 of the Department of Justice Regulations. Requests for
assistance should be directed to the Information Officer at 410-946-5400 or 410-970-5400.

--- Page 4 ---
2

--- Page 5 ---
Table of Contents
Background Information 4
Agency Responsibilities 4
Status of Finding From Preceding Audit Report 4
Findings and Recommendations 5
Purchases and Disbursements
* Finding 1 – The Office of the Chief Medical Examiner’s (OCME) 5
purchases of certain medical supplies were not made in accordance
with State procurement laws and regulations.
Finding 2 – OCME did not independently verify mileage calculations 6
used to compensate vendors transporting deceased individuals, and
our tests disclosed overpayments totaling $3,096.
System Access
Finding 3 – OCME did not periodically review employee access 7
capabilities on its computer system, did not appropriately restrict
certain administrative capabilities, and did not routinely generate
reports of the related activity for review.
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology 9
Agency Response Appendix
* Denotes item repeated in full or part from preceding audit report
3

--- Page 6 ---
Background Information
Agency Responsibilities
The Office of the Chief Medical Examiner (OCME), which is a budgetary unit
within the Maryland Department of Health, investigates violent and suspicious
deaths and those deaths unattended by a physician. OCME also keeps reports of
all investigated deaths and performs autopsies, when necessary, to determine the
cause and manner of death, and makes these records available to the courts,
family members, and others. Furthermore, OCME furnishes the State’s Attorneys
with records relating to deaths for which, in the judgment of the Medical
Examiner, further investigation is deemed advisable.
According to OCME’s records, during fiscal year 2017, OCME investigated
14,592 deaths and performed 5,613 autopsies; OCME expenditures totaled
approximately $12.9 million.
Status of Finding From Preceding Audit Report
Our audit included a review to determine the status of the finding contained in our
preceding audit report dated August 11, 2014. We determined that OCME did not
satisfactorily address this finding; therefore, it is repeated in this report.
4

--- Page 7 ---
Findings and Recommendations
Purchases and Disbursements
Finding 1
The Office of the Chief Medical Examiner’s (OCME) purchases of certain
medical supplies were not made in accordance with State procurement laws
and regulations.
Analysis
OCME purchased certain medical supplies without complying with State
procurement laws and regulations. According to OCME records, medical
supplies expenditures totaled $1.9 million during the period from May 2014
through June 2017.
 Our review of corporate purchasing card transactions made during the period
from May 2014 through June 2017 disclosed repeated purchases of medical
supplies from two vendors, totaling $419,000 ($252,000 and $167,000,
respectively), for which OCME did not obtain competitive bids and did not
have written contracts as required by State regulations. Consequently, there is
a lack of assurance that the State obtained these items at the lowest cost. State
procurement regulations generally require a formal written competitive
procurement and publication of the solicitation and related awards on
eMaryland Marketplace for procurements exceeding $15,000 as well as Board
of Public Works and/or control agency approval for larger procurements. A
similar condition was commented upon in our two preceding audit reports.
 OCME did not determine that it was in the best interest of the State prior to
participating in Intergovernmental Cooperative Purchasing Agreements
(ICPAs), as required by State law. ICPAs are procured by one or more
federal, state, or local government agency and consolidate the procurement of
specified goods and services on behalf of multiple users. Our review
determined that OCME did not document that it was in the State’s best
interest to participate in any of the 11 ICPAs in which it participated during
fiscal years 2016 and 2017. These ICPAs were used to procure goods,
primarily medical supplies, valued at $238,000. State law defines an ICPA as
a contract that is intended to promote efficiency and savings. In order to use
an ICPA, State law requires agencies to prepare a written determination that
there is evidence that it will provide cost benefits to the State or will promote
administrative efficiencies or intergovernmental cooperation.
5

--- Page 8 ---
Recommendation 1
We recommend that OCME
a. comply with State procurement regulations by soliciting competitive bids
and executing written contracts, where applicable (repeat); and
b. ensure that written determinations of the benefits of ICPAs are prepared,
as required by State law.
Finding 2
OCME did not independently verify mileage calculations used to compensate
vendors transporting deceased individuals, and our tests disclosed
overpayments totaling $3,096.
Analysis
OCME did not independently verify mileage calculations used as the basis to
compensate vendors transporting deceased individuals, and our tests disclosed
overpayments totaling $3,096. According to OCME’s records, during fiscal year
2016, these vendors were paid $696,000 for 4,342 transports. Payments for
transports are OCME’s single largest operating expense other than its payroll
costs.
Local forensic investigators proceed to the scene of the death, prepare a transport
permit for the deceased individual, and identify a vendor to transport the deceased
individual to OCME’s Office. For each transport, OCME investigators
determined the distance, in miles, between the location of death and OCME’s
office and entered this information into OCME’s computer system. This
information was then used by the system to generate vendor invoices using the
rates established by State regulations ($3.30 per mile, with a minimum of $100
per transport). However, the transport mileage recorded in OCME’s computer
system by its investigators was not independently reviewed for accuracy.
Based on auditor judgment, we tested 43 payments totaling $17,459 for transports
between October 2014 and June 2017. Our tests disclosed 17 overpayments
totaling $3,096 that occurred because the number of miles recorded in OCME’s
computer system was inaccurate. For example, based on our calculations of one
transport in March 2017, the vendor traveled 43 miles and should have been paid
$142; however, OCME inaccurately recorded 162 miles for the transport and paid
the vendor $535, resulting in an overpayment of $393. Our tests also disclosed
three underpayments totaling $23.
6

--- Page 9 ---
Recommendation 2
We recommend that OCME
a. establish an independent supervisory review of the number of miles
calculated and recorded in OCME’s computer system;
b. perform a comprehensive review of payments made to the transport
vendors to identify any errors in the mileage calculations; and
c. pursue any payment discrepancies, including the aforementioned $3,096.
System Access
Finding 3
OCME did not periodically review employee access capabilities on its
computer system, did not appropriately restrict certain administrative
capabilities, and did not routinely generate reports of the related activity for
review.
Analysis
OCME did not periodically review employee access capabilities on its computer
system used to create new investigation cases, authorize local vendors to
investigate deaths and transport deceased bodies, and approve related payments.
OCME also did not appropriately restrict administrative access to the system or
routinely generate reports of related activity for review. According to OCME
records, during fiscal year 2016, payments for investigations and transports
totaled $1,145,000.
Specifically, of the 35 employees who had access to critical screens in the system,
4 had administrative capabilities that were not necessary for their job duties which
allowed them to initiate cases, assign vendors, and approve related payments.
While two of these employees needed access to approve vendor payments as part
of their regular job duties, none required access to initiate new cases. In addition,
transaction reports were not routinely generated and reviewed by OCME to verify
the propriety of these payments, nor did the reports identify the employees who
initiated and approved each transaction.
According to the State of Maryland Information Security Policy, agencies shall
continuously (at least annually) monitor the security controls within their
information systems to ensure that the controls are operating as intended.
7

--- Page 10 ---
Recommendation 3
We recommend that OCME
a. perform documented reviews, at least annually, of employee access
capabilities for its internal OCME system;
b. ensure that administrative capabilities are only granted when necessary
for the employee’s job duties; and
c. generate and review transaction reports that identify the employees who
initiated and approved each transaction to ensure the propriety of
payments processed.
8

--- Page 11 ---
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the Office of the Chief Medical
Examiner (OCME), a unit of the Maryland Department of Health, for the period
beginning March 31, 2014 and ending September 6, 2017. The audit was
conducted in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards.
Those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient,
appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and
conclusions based on our audit objectives. We believe that the evidence obtained
provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit
objectives.
As prescribed by the State Government Article, Section 2-1221 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, the objectives of this audit were to examine OCME’s financial
transactions, records, and internal control, and to evaluate its compliance with
applicable State laws, rules, and regulations.
In planning and conducting our audit, we focused on the major financial-related
areas of operations based on assessments of significance and risk. The areas
addressed by the audit included procurements, disbursements, and corporate
purchasing cards. We also determined the status of the finding contained in our
preceding audit report.
Our audit did not include certain support services provided to OCME by the
Department. These support services (such as payroll, maintenance of accounting
records, and related fiscal functions) are included within the scope of our audit of
the Department’s Office of the Secretary and Other Units.
To accomplish our objectives, our audit procedures included inquiries of
appropriate personnel, inspections of documents and records, observations of
OCME’s operations, and tests of transactions. Generally, transactions were
selected for testing based on auditor judgment, which primarily considers risk.
Unless otherwise specifically indicated, neither statistical nor non-statistical audit
sampling was used to select the transactions tested. Therefore, the results of the
tests cannot be used to project those results to the entire population from which
the test items were selected.
We also performed various data extracts of pertinent information from the State’s
Financial Management Information System (such as expenditure data) and from
the contractor administering the State’s Corporate Purchasing Card Program
(credit card activity). The extracts are performed as part of ongoing internal
processes established by the Office of Legislative Audits and were subject to
9

--- Page 12 ---
various tests to determine data reliability. We determined that the data extracted
from these various sources were sufficiently reliable for the purposes the data
were used during this audit. We also extracted data from OCME’s internal
computer system for the purpose of testing disbursements. We performed various
tests of the relevant data and determined that the data were sufficiently reliable for
the purposes the data were used during the audit. Finally, we performed other
auditing procedures that we considered necessary to achieve our objectives. The
reliability of data used in this report for background or informational purposes
was not assessed.
OCME’s management is responsible for establishing and maintaining effective
internal control. Internal control is a process designed to provide reasonable
assurance that objectives pertaining to the reliability of financial records,
effectiveness and efficiency of operations including safeguarding of assets, and
compliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations are achieved.
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate.
Our reports are designed to assist the Maryland General Assembly in exercising
its legislative oversight function and to provide constructive recommendations for
improving State operations. As a result, our reports generally do not address
activities we reviewed that are functioning properly.
This report includes findings relating to conditions that we consider to be
significant deficiencies in the design or operation of internal control that could
adversely affect OCME’s ability to maintain reliable financial records, operate
effectively and efficiently, and/or comply with applicable laws, rules, and
regulations. Our report also includes findings regarding significant instances of
noncompliance with applicable laws, rules, or regulations. Another less
significant finding was communicated to OCME that that did not warrant
inclusion in this report.
The Department’s response, on behalf of OCME, to our findings and
recommendations is included as an appendix to this report. As prescribed in the
State Government Article, Section 2-1224 of the Annotated Code of Maryland,
we will advise the Department regarding the results of our review of its response.
10

--- Page 14 ---
Office of the Chief Medical Examiner
Audit Responses
Findings and Recommendations
Purchases and Disbursements
Finding 1
The Office of the Chief Medical Examiner’s (OCME) purchases of certain
medical supplies were not made in accordance with State procurement laws
and regulations.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that OCME
a. comply with State procurement regulations by soliciting competitive bids
and executing written contracts, where applicable (repeat); and
b. ensure that written determinations of the benefits of ICPAs are prepared,
as required by State law.
OCME’s Response
a. The OCME concurs with the finding and recommendation. OCME currently
conducts a comprehensive review of items not currently under contract or
items that need to be rebid to ensure that OCME complies with State
procurement regulations by soliciting competitive bids and executing written
contracts, where applicable. We currently have contracts on all known
services and obtain 3 bids for commodities and corporate purchasing card
purchases.
b. The OCME concurs with the finding and recommendation. As of February
2018, OCME began implementing a procedure to document and prepare
written determinations of the benefits of ICPAs, as required by State law.

--- Page 15 ---
Finding 2
OCME did not independently verify mileage calculations used to compensate
vendors transporting deceased individuals, and our tests disclosed
overpayments totaling $3,096.
Recommendation 2
We recommend that OCME
a. establish an independent supervisory review of the number of miles
calculated and recorded in OCME’s computer system;
b. perform a comprehensive review of payments made to the transport
vendors to identify any errors in the mileage calculations; and
c. pursue any payment discrepancies, including the aforementioned $3,096.
OCME’s Response
a. The OCME concurs with the finding and recommendation. As of January
2018, an independent supervisory review of the number of miles calculated
and recorded is being performed and documented monthly by the OCME
administrator.
b. The OCME concurs with the finding and recommendation. A comprehensive
review was performed in October 2017. As of January 2018, OCME began
performing a monthly comprehensive review to identify any errors in the
mileage calculations and to ensure accuracy of vendor payments.
c. The OCME concurs with the finding and recommendation. The process of
pursing payment discrepancies for those vendors noted in this audit report
began in December 2017. OCME will continue to work towards recovering
overpayments when applicable.

--- Page 16 ---
System Access
Finding 3
OCME did not periodically review employee access capabilities on its
computer system, did not appropriately restrict certain administrative
capabilities, and did not routinely generate reports of the related activity for
review.
Recommendation 3
We recommend that OCME
a. perform documented reviews, at least annually, of employee access
capabilities for its internal OCME system;
b. ensure that administrative capabilities are only granted when necessary
for the employee’s job duties; and
c. generate and review transaction reports that identify the employees who
initiated and approved each transaction to ensure the propriety of
payments processed.
OCME’s Response
a. The OCME concurs with the finding and recommendation. As of January
2018, a quarterly documented review has been established to evaluate
employees’ access capabilities for the internal OCME system; and access
capabilities are adjusted as necessary.
b. The OCME concurs with the finding and recommendation. As of January
2018, the administrative capabilities have been restricted by employee’s
necessary job duty. The OCME has currently implemented procedures in
which the IT department is notified of all new hires, job changes or separation
of employment at which time the administrative capabilities are determined
and adjusted accordingly.
c. The OCME concurs with the finding and recommendation. As of September
2017, OCME has implemented a payment transaction review procedure to
track final approve payments. Effective April 2018, a monthly transaction
report will be generated and reviewed that identifies the employees who
initiate and approve each transaction; and verifies that payments are accurate.

--- Page 17 ---
A T
UDIT EAM
Joshua S. Adler, CPA, CFE
Audit Manager
Tu N. Vuong
Senior Auditor