Title: Office of the Register of Wills - Washington County
Date: 05/11/2022
Type: Fiscal Compliance
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=627d0b3ba1ce5813342fe0e5
Extracted: 2025-06-20T00:18:36.591241
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Audit Report
Office of the Register of Wills
Washington County, Maryland
July 2014
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
 This report and any related follow-up correspondence are available to the public through the
Office of Legislative Audits at 301 West Preston Street, Room 1202, Baltimore, Maryland
21201. The Office may be contacted by telephone at 410-946-5900, 301-970-5900, or 1-877-
486-9964.
 Electronic copies of our audit reports can be viewed or downloaded from our website at
http://www.ola.state.md.us.
 Alternate formats may be requested through the Maryland Relay Service at 1-800-735-2258.
 The Department of Legislative Services – Office of the Executive Director, 90 State Circle,
Annapolis, Maryland 21401 can also assist you in obtaining copies of our reports and related
correspondence. The Department may be contacted by telephone at 410-946-5400 or 301-
970-5400.

--- Page 4 ---
2

--- Page 5 ---
Background Information
Agency Responsibilities and Financial Information
The Office of the Register of Wills is a public office established under the
Constitution of Maryland. An office is established in each of the 24 Maryland
subdivisions. These offices oversee the administration of decedents’ estates
within their jurisdictions and provide assistance (such as providing the proper
forms) to individuals administering estates. The offices collect inheritance taxes
and other fees as provided by law.
Inheritance tax collections (less the commissions earned by an office on those
collections) are remitted to the State’s General Fund. The fees collected and
commissions earned by an office are first used to finance the operating expenses it
is responsible for paying directly. Generally, the remaining balance of fees and
commissions is periodically remitted to the Comptroller of Maryland to finance
other operating expenses (such as payroll) that the Comptroller pays on behalf of
the offices. On a collective basis, the offices’ fees and commissions that exceed
their operating expenses are credited to the General Fund.
According to the records of the Office of the Register of Wills for Washington
County, its fiscal year 2013 gross receipts totaled $1,847,569, which consisted of
inheritance tax collections (net of commissions) of $1,212,691 and fees and
commissions of $634,878. The Office’s fiscal year 2013 operating expenses
totaled $505,767.
3

--- Page 6 ---
Findings and Recommendations
Collections and Disbursements
Finding 1
The Office had not established adequate controls over its collections and
disbursements.
Analysis
Adequate controls had not been established over collections and disbursements.
The Office maintained a bank account for depositing all daily cash receipts and
for making all related disbursements. Because of control deficiencies, assurance
was lacking that all collections and disbursements were properly processed and
accounted for.
Specifically, two employees who processed or had access to collections could
record adjustments, including voiding transactions, in the Office’s automated
accounting system. In addition, although the bank reconciliations were prepared
and approved by separate employees, both employees were authorized check
signers and had access to the blank check stock. Finally, all six Office employees
had access to the safe that contained collections prior to deposit.
According to the Office’s records, during fiscal year 2013, the Office processed
collections totaling approximately $1.8 million, all of which were subsequently
disbursed for operating expenses or remitted to the State’s General Fund. The
Comptroller of Maryland’s Accounting Procedures Manual provides for the
proper separation of duties.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that
a. employees with access to collections be denied the capability to record
adjustments in the Office’s automated accounting system,
b. the employees who sign checks and prepare or approve the bank
reconciliations be denied access to the blank check stock, and
c. access to the safe be restricted to those who need access based on job
responsibilities.
We advised the Office on accomplishing the necessary separation of duties
using existing personnel.
4

--- Page 7 ---
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We have audited the Office of the Register of Wills for Washington County,
Maryland for the period beginning March 28, 2011 and ending March 23, 2014.
The audit was conducted in accordance with generally accepted government
auditing standards. Those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to
obtain sufficient, appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our
findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives. We believe that the
evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions
based on our audit objectives.
As prescribed by the State Government Article, Section 2-1221 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, the objectives of this audit were to examine the Office’s
financial transactions, records and internal control, and to evaluate its compliance
with applicable State laws, rules, and regulations.
In planning and conducting our audit, we focused on the major financial-related
areas of operations based on assessments of significance and risk. The areas
addressed by the audit included cash receipts, cash disbursements, bank accounts,
and administration of estates. Our audit procedures included inquiries of
appropriate personnel, inspections of documents and records, and observations of
the Office’s operations. We also tested transactions and performed other auditing
procedures that we considered necessary to achieve our objectives. The reliability
of data used in this report for background or informational purposes was not
assessed.
Our audit did not include a review of certain support services provided to the
Office by the Comptroller of Maryland – Office of the Comptroller. These
support services (such as payroll, maintenance of accounting records, and related
fiscal functions) are included within the scope of our audits of the Office of the
Comptroller.
The Office’s management is responsible for establishing and maintaining
effective internal control. Internal control is a process designed to provide
reasonable assurance that objectives pertaining to the reliability of financial
records, effectiveness and efficiency of operations including safeguarding of
assets, and compliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations are achieved.
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate.
5

--- Page 8 ---
Our reports are designed to assist the Maryland General Assembly in exercising
its legislative oversight function and to provide constructive recommendations for
improving State operations. As a result, our reports generally do not address
activities we reviewed that are functioning properly.
This report includes conditions that we consider to be significant deficiencies in
the design or operation of internal control that could adversely affect the Office’s
ability to maintain reliable financial records, operate effectively and efficiently,
and/or comply with applicable laws, rules, and regulations. These conditions also
represent significant instances of noncompliance with applicable laws, rules, or
regulations. A less significant finding was communicated to the Office that did
not warrant inclusion in this report.
The Office’s response to our finding and recommendation is included as an
appendix to this report. As prescribed in the State Government Article, Section 2-
1224 of the Annotated Code of Maryland, we will advise the Office regarding the
results of our review of its response.
6

--- Page 11 ---
A T
UDIT EAM
Matthew L. Streett, CPA, CFE
Audit Manager
Brian S. Han, CPA
Senior Auditor