Title: Office of the Secretary of State
Date: 06/01/2022
Type: Fiscal Compliance
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=62977767a1ce581634251da8
Extracted: 2025-06-20T00:19:52.938412
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Audit Report
Office of the Secretary of State
January 2015
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
 This report and any related follow-up correspondence are available to the public through the
Office of Legislative Audits at 301 W. Preston Street, Room 1202, Baltimore, Maryland
21201. The Office may be contacted by telephone at 410-946-5900, 301-970-5900, or 1-877-
486-9964.
 Electronic copies of our audit reports can be viewed or downloaded from our website at
http://www.ola.state.md.us.
 Alternate formats may be requested through the Maryland Relay Service at 1-800-735-2258.
 The Department of Legislative Services – Office of the Executive Director, 90 State Circle,
Annapolis, Maryland 21401 can also assist you in obtaining copies of our reports and related
correspondence. The Department may be contacted by telephone at 410-946-5400 or 301-
970-5400.

--- Page 4 ---
2

--- Page 5 ---
Table of Contents
Background Information 4
Agency Responsibilities 4
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report 4
Findings and Recommendations 5
Charitable Organizations
* Finding 1 – Procedures and Controls for Processing and Monitoring 5
Information From Charitable Organizations Were Not Sufficient
Cash Receipts
* Finding 2 – The Office Had Not Established Adequate Controls Over 6
Cash Receipts
Payments to Charitable Organizations
Finding 3 – Agreements for Funds Provided to Charitable Organization 8
Were Not Prepared and Accounting for the Use of Funds Was Not
Obtained
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology 9
Agency Response Appendix
* Denotes item repeated in full or part from preceding audit report
3

--- Page 6 ---
Background Information
Agency Responsibilities
The Office of the Secretary of State attests to the Governor’s signature on all
public papers and documents, and is the repository for the Governor’s Executive
Orders. The Office’s Charities and Legal Services Division registers, regulates,
and informs the public about charitable organizations (including foundations
affiliated with State agencies) and professional solicitors. The Division also
administers the Notary Public laws and issues Notary Public commissions,
registers trademarks, prepares and processes extraditions and requisitions issued
by the Governor, and registers public offering statements for condominiums and
timeshares. The Office’s Division of State Documents compiles and publishes all
of the State’s administrative regulations in the Maryland Register and the Code of
Maryland Regulations. According to the State’s records, the Office’s operating
expenditures during fiscal year 2014 totaled approximately $2.3 million.
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report
Our audit included a review to determine the status of the five findings contained
in our preceding audit report dated October 20, 2011. We determined that the
Office satisfactorily addressed three of these findings. The remaining two
findings are repeated in this report.
4

--- Page 7 ---
Findings and Recommendations
Charitable Organizations
Finding 1
Procedures and controls were not sufficient to ensure that charitable
organizations complied with annual reporting requirements, that
registrations were processed timely, and that critical data were accurately
recorded.
Analysis
The Office lacked sufficient procedures and controls to ensure that charitable
organizations complied with annual reporting requirements, that registrations
were timely processed and that related information received from charitable
organizations was accurately recorded. State law requires charitable
organizations to register with the State and, thereafter, file certain annual reports
within six months after the organization’s fiscal year end, unless they meet the
criteria for exemption. Exempt organizations include, for example, religious
organizations and organizations with less than $25,000 in annual contributions
from the public. Charitable organizations claiming exemption must submit
evidence of exemption to the State. As of June 17, 2014, the Office’s records
showed 13,385 active charitable organizations of which 3,983 were classified as
exempt and 2,205 were classified as delinquent due to the failure to submit annual
reports.
 Our test of 15 delinquent charitable organizations disclosed that the Office
had not performed any follow-up activity on 8 of these 15 organizations. As
of June 2014, these 8 organizations had been delinquent for periods ranging
from 8 to 12 months. We noted that the Office had properly reported that
these 15 charities were not in compliance on its website.
 Our test of 15 additional charitable organizations designated in the Office’s
database as exempt from registration disclosed that 5 of these organizations
did not meet the requirements for exempt status based upon annual
contribution amounts reported. These 5 organizations were designated as
exempt on the basis of receiving less than $25,000 in annual contributions;
however, the most recent annual reports submitted by these organizations
indicated that they received between $118,500 and $298,445 in contributions.
The failure to properly designate the status on the system may preclude
effective monitoring of these organizations to ensure compliance with the
additional registration and reporting requirements for organizations receiving
$25,000 or more in charitable contributions.
5

--- Page 8 ---
 Independent verifications were not performed to ensure that the information
reported by charitable organizations, including annual contributions, was
accurately recorded in the Office’s charitable organizations database. Since
the database automatically interfaces with the Office’s public website and can
affect the organization’s status as exempt or not exempt, it is critical that these
data be accurate. Our review of information recorded for the aforementioned
15 exempt charitable organizations disclosed 5 for which the annual
contribution amounts did not agree with supporting documentation submitted
by the organizations. For example, the amount reported by one organization
($194,000) exceeded the amount recorded in the Office’s database ($143,000)
by approximately $51,000.
 As of July 16, 2014, the Office had 3,839 unprocessed new and renewal
registration forms that had been outstanding since May 2, 2014. State law
requires that charities be notified of any registration deficiency, such as
missing documents, within 10 days of receipt; otherwise, the charity is
automatically considered registered with the State regardless of any such
deficiency. We were advised by the Office that the backlog occurred due to a
lack of resources and outdated software.
Similar conditions were commented upon in our preceding audit report.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that the Office
a. ensure that timely follow-up is performed to obtain annual reports from
delinquent organizations (repeat),
b. ensure that organizations designated as exempt meet the required
exemption criteria (repeat),
c. perform independent verifications to ensure that information reported by
charitable organizations is accurately recorded in the Office’s database
(repeat), and
d. process applications on a timely basis.
Cash Receipts
Finding 2
Adequate controls were not established over cash receipts.
Analysis
The Office had not established adequate controls over cash receipts. During fiscal
year 2014, the Office collected approximately $2.4 million. These collections
6

--- Page 9 ---
included charity registration fees, notary commission fees, and sales from
publications.
 Checks received were not restrictively endorsed immediately upon receipt, but
instead were held and endorsed at the end of the day. Furthermore, checks
received in person rather than through the mail were stored in an unlocked
desk drawer that was accessible to a number of employees throughout the day.
 The supervisory employee who approved voided transactions did not ensure
the propriety of the voids by reviewing supporting documentation.
Furthermore, this employee was not independent because the employee helped
process collections.
 Collections were not verified to deposit by an employee independent of the
cash receipts functions. The employee who performed the deposit verification
duties also prepared the deposit, recorded collections in the State’s accounting
records, and initially received collections, in a back-up capacity, when the
employee primarily responsible for this duty was unavailable. Furthermore,
the Office had no procedure to verify that credit card receipts, which totaled
approximately $204,000 during fiscal year 2013, were properly credited to its
account.
The Comptroller of Maryland's Accounting Procedures Manual requires that
checks be restrictively endorsed upon receipt and safeguarded until deposited.
The Manual also requires that the reconciliation of the initial record of collections
to the amount deposited be performed by an employee independent of the cash
receipts function.
Similar conditions regarding the immediate restrictive endorsement and
verification of recorded collections to deposit were commented upon in our
preceding audit report.
Recommendation 2
We recommend that the Office
a. ensure that checks are restrictively endorsed immediately upon receipt
(repeat) and adequately safeguarded prior to deposit;
b. ensure that a supervisory employee independent of the cash receipts
process verifies the propriety of voided transactions; and
c. ensure that an employee independent of the cash receipts function verifies
that all collections, including credit card transactions, are subsequently
deposited and credited to its account (repeat),
We advised the Office on accomplishing the necessary separation of duties
using existing personnel.
7

--- Page 10 ---
Payments to Charitable Organizations
Finding 3
Agreements were not prepared for funds provided to certain charitable
organizations and accountings for the use of funds were not obtained.
Analysis
During the period from June 2011 to April 2014, the Office made seven payments
totaling $43,900 to two organizations included in the Office’s database of
charitable organizations, without establishing agreements to identify the allowable
use of those funds as required by law. In addition, the Office did not obtain an
accounting of how the funds were used. The Office confirmed that the payments
were made as donations or contributions in support of the Maryland Sister States
Program which, according to the Office’s records, serves as the conduit for
Maryland’s ten sister state relationships by overseeing an array of international
exchanges, promoting a balance of business, educational and cultural interests.
State law requires social organizations, including charitable organizations, to
establish an agreement with State agencies providing State aid. The agreement
must define the purpose and terms of the aid and require that the organization
submit a report that itemizes and accounts for how the aid was spent. The agency
is to use the report to determine if the funds were properly expended. However,
no such agreement was established with the aforementioned entities.
Furthermore, it does not appear that the payments were properly reflected in the
State’s records. While $10,000 of the $43,900 paid to these two organizations
was recorded as grant expenditures, the remaining amounts of $28,900 and $5,000
were classified on the Office’s records as contractual services and materials and
supplies expenditures, respectively.
Recommendation 3
We recommend that the Office
a. establish required agreements with social organizations to which State
support is provided, and obtain reports required by such agreements to
ensure that the aid provided is properly expended;
b. verify that the aforementioned $43,900 was properly expended; and
c. ensure that such expenditures are properly recorded in its records.
8

--- Page 11 ---
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the Office of the Secretary of
State for the period beginning March 2, 2011 and ending June 3, 2014. The audit
was conducted in accordance with generally accepted government auditing
standards. Those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain
sufficient, appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and
conclusions based on our audit objectives. We believe that the evidence obtained
provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit
objectives.
As prescribed by the State Government Article, Section 2-1221 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, the objectives of this audit were to examine the Office’s
financial transactions, records and internal control, and to evaluate its compliance
with applicable State laws, rules, and regulations.
In planning and conducting our audit, we focused on the major financial-related
areas of operations based on assessments of significance and risk. The areas
addressed by the audit included cash receipts, charitable organizations, affiliated
foundations, and equipment. We also determined the status of the findings
included in our preceding audit report.
To accomplish our audit objectives, our audit procedures included inquiries of
appropriate personnel, inspections of documents and records, observations of the
Office’s operations, and tests of transactions. We also performed various data
extracts of pertinent information from the State’s Financial Management
Information System (such as revenue and expenditure data). The extracts are
performed as part of ongoing internal processes established by the Office of
Legislative Audits and were subject to various tests to determine data reliability.
We determined that the data extracted from this source were sufficiently reliable
for the purposes the data were used during this audit. Finally, we performed other
auditing procedures that we considered necessary to achieve our audit objectives.
The reliability of data used in this report for background or informational
purposes was not assessed.
Our audit did not include certain support services provided to the Office by the
Executive Department – Governor. These support services (for example,
maintenance of accounting records and related fiscal functions) are included
within the scope of our audits of the Executive Department – Governor.
The Office’s management is responsible for establishing and maintaining
effective internal control. Internal control is a process designed to provide
reasonable assurance that objectives pertaining to the reliability of financial
9

--- Page 12 ---
records, effectiveness and efficiency of operations including safeguarding of
assets, and compliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations are achieved.
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate.
Our reports are designed to assist the Maryland General Assembly in exercising
its legislative oversight function and to provide constructive recommendations for
improving State operations. As a result, our reports generally do not address
activities we reviewed that are functioning properly.
This report includes findings related to conditions that we consider to be
significant deficiencies in the design or operation of internal control that could
adversely affect the Office’s ability to maintain reliable financial records, operate
effectively and efficiently, and/or comply with applicable laws, rules, and
regulations. Our report also includes findings regarding significant instances of
noncompliance with applicable laws, rules, or regulations. Other less significant
findings were communicated to the Office that did not warrant inclusion in this
report.
The Office’s response to our findings and recommendations is included as an
appendix to this report. As prescribed in the State Government Article, Section 2-
1224 of the Annotated Code of Maryland, we will advise the Office regarding the
results of our review of its response.
10

--- Page 16 ---
A
UDIT
T
EAM
Bekana Edossa, CPA, CFE
Audit Manager
Catherine M. Clarke, CPA, CIA, CFE
Senior Auditor
Daniel P. Nuccio
Staff Auditor