Title: Baltimore Police Department - Surveillance Equipment
Date: 06/17/2022
Type: Performance
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=62b1e85aa1ce581ac0649d3e
Extracted: 2025-06-20T00:20:20.019965
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Performance Audit Report
Baltimore Police Department
Surveillance Equipment
June 2022
Public Notice
In compliance with the requirements of the State Government Article Section
2-1224(i), of the Annotated Code of Maryland the Office of Legislative Audits
has redacted a cybersecurity finding and related auditee response from this
public report.
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Senator Clarence K. Lam, M.D. (Senate Chair) Delegate Carol L. Krimm (House Chair)
Senator Malcolm L. Augustine Delegate Steven J. Arentz
Senator Adelaide C. Eckardt Delegate Mark S. Chang
Senator George C. Edwards Delegate Nicholas P. Charles II
Senator Katie Fry Hester Delegate Andrea Fletcher Harrison
Senator Cheryl C. Kagan Delegate Trent M. Kittleman
Senator Benjamin F. Kramer Delegate David Moon
Senator Cory V. McCray Delegate Julie Palakovich Carr
Senator Justin D. Ready Delegate Elizabeth G. Proctor
Senator Craig J. Zucker Delegate Geraldine Valentino-Smith
To Obtain Further Information
Office of Legislative Audits
The Warehouse at Camden Yards
351 West Camden Street, Suite 400
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Phone: 410-946-5900
Maryland Relay: 711
TTY: 410-946-5401 ꞏ 301-970-5401
E-mail: OLAWebmaster@ola.state.md.us
Website: www.ola.state.md.us
To Report Fraud
The Office of Legislative Audits operates a Fraud Hotline to report fraud, waste, or abuse involving State
of Maryland government resources. Reports of fraud, waste, or abuse may be communicated anonymously
by a toll-free call to 1-877-FRAUD-11, by mail to the Fraud Hotline, c/o Office of Legislative Audits, or
through the Office’s website.
Nondiscrimination Statement
The Department of Legislative Services does not discriminate on the basis of age, ancestry, color, creed,
marital status, national origin, race, religion, gender, gender identity, sexual orientation, or disability in the
admission or access to its programs, services, or activities. The Department’s Information Officer has been
designated to coordinate compliance with the nondiscrimination requirements contained in Section 35.107
of the United States Department of Justice Regulations. Requests for assistance should be directed to the
Information Officer at 410-946-5400 or 410-970-5400.

--- Page 3 ---
June 17, 2022
Senator Clarence K. Lam, M.D., Senate Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Delegate Carol L. Krimm, House Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Members of Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Annapolis, Maryland
Ladies and Gentlemen:
We have conducted a performance audit to evaluate the effectiveness and
efficiency of certain management practices of the Baltimore Police Department
(BPD) as required by State Government Article, Section 2-1220 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland. This is the third of four planned audits during the first six-
year audit cycle of BPD. The scope of this audit focused on an evaluation of
BPD’s policies and procedures for certain surveillance equipment, specifically
BPD’s use of camera equipment including body-worn cameras (BWC), fixed-
cameras located throughout Baltimore City (City) under the CitiWatch Program,
and prisoner transport wagon (PTW) cameras. Our audit focused on activity for
the period beginning July 1, 2014 and ending February 28, 2021.
Generally, surveillance equipment serves as an important law enforcement tool
for both fighting crime and fostering trust between residents of the City and BPD.
A BWC is a small audio and video recording device that is affixed to an officer’s
uniform with the capability of capturing, recording, and storing information for
later viewing. BWC video footage can be used as evidence documentation in
both criminal and administrative cases and can be beneficial to officers,
prosecutors, and defendants. According to BPD’s records, as of May 19, 2021,
there were 2,267 officers assigned BWCs, and approximately one million videos
were recorded in calendar year 2020. In addition, the CitiWatch Program utilizes
a network of both City-managed and privately-owned cameras fixed to structures
strategically located throughout the City. CitiWatch fixed-cameras provide real-
time surveillance footage of public spaces that are actively monitored in an effort
to prevent, and quickly respond to, criminal activity. As of May 2021, there were

--- Page 4 ---
830 City-managed cameras. Additionally, based on records prepared by
CitiWatch, as of February 2021 there were 663 privately-owned cameras.
Furthermore, PTWs are outfitted with a camera system that monitors the interior
of all holding areas to allow for observation of persons in police custody
throughout the duration of the transport. As of September 20, 2021 there were 18
PTWs assigned to the various police districts.
Our audit disclosed that certain officers were not always in compliance with BWC
Policy requirements relating to uploading, categorizing, and titling videos. For
example, using available data analysis tools, we identified 73 officers who had
uploaded 8,014 videos in calendar year 2020 between 2 and 166 days after the
day the videos were created. In addition, between calendar years 2017 and 2020,
BPD conducted BWC compliance audits of 894 officers and found that
approximately ten percent of the officers audited were not in full compliance with
the BWC Policy. Untimely uploads and improperly titled videos can result in
required evidentiary video footage not being readily available or identifiable for
review and investigative purposes.
In addition, we found that BPD did not have policies and procedures governing
the scope and methodology of BWC compliance audits and did not use available
BWC data or a risk-based audit approach to focus audit efforts and maximize its
audit coverage. Furthermore, BPD did not conduct a sufficient number of BWC
compliance audits, did not maintain adequate documentation to support audits
performed, and did not always take appropriate action when noncompliance was
identified. Compliance audits are critical to BPD’s oversight of the BWC
Program since they provide an independent assessment and evaluation of officer
compliance with BWC Policy. Furthermore, BPD did not require annual
refresher training on BWC usage and protocols consistent with best practices.
We also noted that for the CitiWatch Program, CitiWatch did not have a formal or
comprehensive policy and procedures manual, and did not always maintain
executed agreements with other entities administering the CitiWatch Program. In
addition, CitiWatch did not track camera uptime (time cameras were functioning
properly) and did not have procedures to ensure broken cameras were repaired
timely. Our review of CitiWatch data as of July 23, 2021, disclosed that
approximately 12 percent of the cameras in the CitiWatch Program were not
functional.
Finally, we found certain risks existed within BPD’s BWC video management
system. However, in accordance with the State Government Article, Section 2-
1224(i) of the Annotated Code of Maryland, we have redacted that finding from
this report. Specifically, State law requires that Office of Legislative Audits to
2

--- Page 5 ---
redact cybersecurity findings in a manner consistent with best practices before the
report is made available to the public. The term “cybersecurity” is defined in the
State Finance and Procurement Article, Section 3A-301(b), and using our
professional judgement we have determined that the redacted finding falls under
the referenced definition. The specifics of the cybersecurity finding was
previously communicated to BPD and those parties responsible for acting on our
recommendations.
BPD’s response to this audit is included as an appendix to this report. We
reviewed the response to our findings and related recommendations, and have
concluded that the corrective actions identified are sufficient to address all audit
issues. However, consistent with the requirements of State law, we have redacted
the elements of BPD’s response related to the cybersecurity audit finding.
We wish to acknowledge the cooperation extended to us during the audit by BPD
and other Baltimore City government employees. We also wish to acknowledge
BPD’s willingness to address the audit issues and implement appropriate
corrective actions.
Respectfully submitted,
Gregory A. Hook, CPA
Legislative Auditor
3

--- Page 6 ---
4

--- Page 7 ---
Table of Contents
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology 7
Audit Scope 7
Objectives and Methodology 8
Fieldwork and Agency Response 10
Background Information 11
Agency Responsibilities 11
Findings and Recommendations 12
Objective 1 – Body-Worn Cameras
Background 12
Objective and Methodology 15
Conclusion 18
Findings
Finding 1 – Our analyses and review of Baltimore Police Department 19
(BPD) audits disclosed that certain officers were not always in
compliance with Body-Worn Camera (BWC) Policy requirements
relating to uploading, categorizing, and titling videos.
Finding 2 – BPD did not have policies and procedures governing the 21
scope and methodology of BWC compliance audits and did not use
available BWC data or a risk-based audit approach to focus audit
efforts and maximize its audit coverage.
Finding 3 – BPD did not conduct a sufficient number of BWC compliance 23
audits, did not maintain adequate documentation to support audits
performed, and did not always take appropriate action when
noncompliance was identified.
Finding 4 – Redacted cybersecurity-related finding
Finding 5 – BPD did not require annual refresher training on BWC usage 24
and protocols consistent with best practices.
5

--- Page 8 ---
Objective 2 – CitiWatch Program
Background 26
Objective and Methodology 30
Conclusion 31
Findings
Finding 6 – CitiWatch did not have a formal or comprehensive policies 32
and procedures manual and did not always maintain executed
agreements with other entities administering the CitiWatch Program.
Finding 7 – CitiWatch did not track camera uptime (the time cameras were 33
functioning properly) and did not have procedures to ensure broken
cameras were repaired timely. As of July 23, 2021, approximately 12
percent of the cameras were not functional.
Objective 3 – Prisoner Transport Wagon Cameras
Background 35
Objective and Methodology 37
Conclusion 38
Exhibit 1 – Maryland Police Training Standards Commission Policy 39
Police Executive Research Forum Recommendations
Agency Response Appendix
6

--- Page 9 ---
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
Audit Scope
Chapter 535 of the Laws of Maryland, 2020, effective July 1, 2020, requires the
Office of Legislative Audits (OLA), at least once every six years, to conduct an
audit or audits of the Baltimore Police Department (BPD) to evaluate the
effectiveness and efficiency of the financial management practices of BPD. The
law also states the scope and objectives of the audit or audits shall be determined
by the Legislative Auditor.
OLA identified four separate audits to be conducted during the first audit cycle of
BPD (in the following order).
1. Evaluation of Purchasing and Disbursement Controls and Transactions,
2. Asset Forfeiture and Property Control,
3. Surveillance Equipment, and
4. Human Resource Activities and Overtime.
The scope of this audit focused on an evaluation of BPD’s policies and
procedures for certain surveillance equipment, specifically BPD’s use of camera
equipment including body-worn cameras (BWC), fixed-cameras located
throughout Baltimore City (City) under the CitiWatch Program, and prisoner
transport wagon cameras. Our audit focused on activity for the period beginning
July 1, 2014 and ending February 28, 2021. The audit evaluated the adequacy of
BPD policies and procedures for the use of camera equipment as compared to
applicable State laws and best practices, and whether camera equipment was
subject to adequate controls and used in accordance with these policies and
procedures.
Our audit was performed in accordance with generally accepted government
auditing standards. Those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to
obtain sufficient, appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our
findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives. We believe that the
evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions
based on our audit objectives.
7

--- Page 10 ---
Objectives and Methodology
Our audit included the following objectives:
1. Evaluate the adequacy of BPD written policies for the use of BWCs, and
determine, based on this evaluation and related testing, whether BWCs
were subject to adequate controls and used in accordance with these
policies.
2. Evaluate the adequacy of BPD policies and procedures for the use of
fixed-cameras under the CitiWatch Program, and determine whether
fixed-cameras were subject to adequate controls and BPD complied with
its policies and procedures.
3. Evaluate the adequacy of BPD policies and procedures for the use of
prisoner transport wagon (PTW) cameras, and determine whether PTW
cameras were subject to adequate controls and BPD complied with its
policies and procedures.
To accomplish our objectives, we reviewed applicable State laws, best practices,
and standard operating procedures and policies established by BPD regarding the
use of camera surveillance equipment. Additionally, we compared BPD’s
policies to State laws and best practices to evaluate the adequacy of BPD’s
policies.
In addition, we conducted interviews of BPD, Mayor’s Office of Neighborhood
Safety and Engagement (MONSE), and Baltimore City Office of Information and
Technology (BCIT) personnel; inspected documents and records; observed certain
procedures and operations; and performed tests of transactions and controls.
We obtained data files of BPD and MONSE’s general ledger activity from the
City’s financial system for the period of July 1, 2014 to June 30, 2021. We also
obtained several reports and extracts from BPD’s video management systems
such as uploaded videos, deleted videos, audit trails, and user access reports for
selected periods of time within our audit period. We performed various tests of
the relevant data and determined these data files and reports were sufficiently
reliable for the purposes used during the audit.
Our assessment was based on the policies and procedures in place at the time of
our fieldwork and compliance with these policies and procedures. Our tests of
transactions and other auditing procedures were generally focused on the
transactions occurring during our audit period of July 1, 2014 to February 28,
2021, but may include transactions before or after this period as we considered
necessary to achieve our audit objectives.
8

--- Page 11 ---
Generally, transactions were selected for testing based on auditor judgment,
which primarily considers risk, the timing or dollar amount of the transaction, or
the significance of the transaction to the area of operation reviewed. As a matter
of course, we do not normally use sampling in our tests, so unless otherwise
specifically indicated, neither statistical nor non-statistical audit sampling was
used to select the transactions tested. Therefore, unless sampling is specifically
indicated in a finding, the results from any tests conducted or disclosed by us
cannot be used to project those results to the entire population from which the test
items were selected.
The reliability of BPD, MONSE, and BCIT data used in this report for
background or informational purposes was not assessed. In addition to the
conditions included in this report, other findings were communicated to BPD that
were not deemed significant and, consequently, did not warrant inclusion in this
report.
More detailed descriptions of the specific objectives and related methodologies,
including the time period covered by our test work, are discussed in the Findings
and Recommendations section of this report.
State Government Article Section 2-1224(i) of the Annotated Code of Maryland
requires that we redact in a manner consistent with auditing best practices any
cybersecurity findings before a report is made available to the public. This results
in the issuance of two different versions of an audit report that contains
cybersecurity findings – a redacted version for the public and an unredacted
version for government officials responsible for acting on our audit
recommendations.
The State Finance and Procurement Article, Section 3A-301(b), states that
cybersecurity is defined as “means processes or capabilities wherein systems,
communications, and information are protected and defended against damage,
unauthorized use or modification, and exploitation”. Based on our professional
judgement, we concluded that a finding in this report meets that definition.
Consequently, for the publicly available audit report all specifics as to the nature
of that cybersecurity finding and required corrective actions have been redacted.
We have determined that best practices and government auditing standards
support the redaction of this information from the public audit report. The
specifics of the cybersecurity finding have been communicated to BPD and those
parties responsible for acting on our recommendations in an unredacted audit
report.
9

--- Page 12 ---
Fieldwork and Agency Response
We conducted our fieldwork from March 1, 2021 to October 13, 2021. A copy of
the draft report was provided to BPD. The responses to our findings and
recommendations from BPD appear as an appendix to this audit report.
Depending on the version of the audit report, responses to any cybersecurity
findings may be redacted in accordance with State law. As prescribed in the State
Government Article, Section 2-1224 of the Annotated Code of Maryland, we will
advise BPD regarding the results of our review of its response.
10

--- Page 13 ---
Background Information
Agency Responsibilities
The Baltimore Police Department (BPD) is an agency and instrumentality of the
State, established under Article 4 ‐ Section 16 of the Code of Public Local Laws
of Maryland. BPD safeguards the lives and properties of persons within the areas
under the control of Baltimore City (City), and assists in securing protection
under the law for all persons. Authority to appoint the Police Commissioner was
transferred from the Governor to the Mayor of Baltimore, effective July 1, 1978.
The Police Commissioner has the full authority and responsibility for directing
and supervising the operations and affairs of BPD.
BPD either administers or participates in three programs where camera equipment
is actively utilized: Body-Worn Camera Program, CitiWatch Program (fixed-
cameras), and Prisoner Transport Wagons.
Body-Worn Camera (BWC) Program – The BWC Program was implemented
in 2016, and requires every sworn officer below the rank of Captain to wear a
camera. A BWC is a small audio and video recording device that is affixed to an
officer’s uniform (generally mounted on the chest area) with the capability of
capturing, recording, and storing information for later viewing. According to
BPD records, as of May 19, 2021, 2,267 officers were assigned BWCs.
CitiWatch Program – The CitiWatch Program was implemented in 2005, and
consists of a network of City and privately owned cameras fixed to structures
(such as light poles) strategically located throughout the City. CitiWatch fixed-
cameras provide real-time surveillance footage of public spaces that are actively
monitored in an effort to prevent and quickly respond to criminal activity. As of
May 14, 2021, CitiWatch managed a total of 830 fixed-cameras.
Prisoner Transport Wagon (PTW) – A PTW is a passenger van that has been
customized in order to transport one or more persons in police custody. The rear
portion of the van is separated from the driver’s compartment by a barrier and
then organized into one or two areas depending on the needs for that particular
vehicle. In May 2016, each PTW was equipped with a prisoner transport camera
system that allows BPD to monitor and record the entire transport process in and
around the PTW. As of August 31, 2021, there were 18 PTWs in service.
11

--- Page 14 ---
Findings and Recommendations
Objective 1 – Body-Worn Cameras
Background
In October 2014, the Baltimore City Mayor’s Office created the Baltimore City
Working Group (Working Group) on the Use and Implementation of Body-Worn
Cameras (BWC). As depicted in Figure 1, a BWC is a small audio and video
recording device that is affixed to an officer’s uniform (generally mounted on the
chest area) with the capability of capturing, recording, and storing information for
later viewing. Once the BWC is turned “On”, the camera is placed into a mode
where it records video on a continuous one-minute loop. When the BWC is
“Activated”, the camera begins to record and retains both video and audio,
including the looped footage one minute prior to activation.
Figure 1
Example of a Body-Worn Camera
Source: Baltimore Police Department Training Material
The Working Group was responsible for studying and making recommendations
on the potential benefits and limitations of implementing a BWC Program within
the Baltimore Police Department (BPD), as well as to analyze community
perspectives, privacy and legal concerns, and police operations and policy. In
April 2015, the Working Group issued its final report which ultimately concluded
that BWCs can be an important law enforcement tool for both fighting crime and
fostering trust between residents of Baltimore City and BPD, and recommended
the BWC Program be implemented. This report also included operational
recommendations such as conducting a pilot program, staggered rollout of the
program, camera functionality, protocols and policy, and training.
12

--- Page 15 ---
According to the Working Group’s final report (excerpt below), BWC video
footage can be used as evidence documentation in both criminal and
administrative cases, and can be beneficial to officers, prosecutors, and
defendants.
______________________________________________________
As part of law enforcement duties, it is incumbent upon officers to gather
and document evidence for criminal prosecution. Camera footage may
yield invaluable evidence and support for prosecutors. The decision
making of both juries and judges may be greatly facilitated by the ability
to view footage recorded by body-worn cameras. Likewise, defendants
and defense attorneys may benefit by the evidence recorded. Moreover,
the availability of such evidence may increase judicial economy by
facilitating plea negotiations or lessening the need for trials. Also, the
availability of recorded evidence may have similar effects in the
prosecution of officers for alleged misconduct. Footage may provide
irrefutable evidence of misconduct or it may exonerate an officer from a
meritless claim of violation.
On March 16, 2016, after a competitive procurement, BPD and Baltimore City
entered into a contract with a vendor to provide BWC equipment and video
management system (VMS) services. As of November 2021, there have been six
contract modifications and renewal options extending the contract period through
June 30, 2026 for an amount not to exceed $35.2 million1. On May 26, 2016,
BPD launched the BWC Program, and through a two-year staggered roll-out,
every sworn officer below the rank of Captain was trained and issued a BWC.
According to BPD records, as of May 19, 2021, there were 2,267 officers
assigned BWCs. Since BWC Program implementation, approximately one
million BWC videos have been recorded annually, accounting for between
190,000 and 250,000 hours of video footage between calendar years 2017 and
2020 as depicted in Figure 2 on the following page.
1 We conducted a separate performance audit of BPD procurement and disbursement activity. The
scope of the performance audit included the procurement of the BWC contract, related payments,
and monitoring processes. The related audit report was dated October 19, 2021.
13

--- Page 16 ---
Figure 2
BPD BWC Videos Recorded
(Calendar Years 2017 to 2020)
1,200,000
1,000,000
800,000
600,000
400,000
200,000
0
2017 2018 2019 2020
Number of Videos Recorded 973,640 1,091,148 1,100,645 988,642
Hours of Video Recorded 189,930 248,276 250,123 237,070
Source: BWC VMS records
The BWC Program operates under the BPD Body-Worn Camera Policy (BWC
Policy) which provides guidance on the proper use of BWCs in order to promote
safety, professionalism, transparency, and accountability. The BWC Policy
includes critical operational and use requirements to be followed by officers with
issued cameras, as well as administrative and oversight requirements as depicted
in Figure 3.
Figure 3
Critical BWC Policy Requirement Areas
Operation and Use Administration and Oversight
Issuance and utilization VMS capabilities
Wearing the BWC Reporting requirements
Mandatory recording Review of recordings
Exceptions to recording Audits and inspections
Notice of recording Deletion of recordings
Ending a recording Public information requests
Uploading, categorizing, and Security, retention, and disclosure of
titling BWC data BWC data
Maintenance and battery life BWC coordinator
Source: BPD BWC Policy
14

--- Page 17 ---
BPD’s Body-Worn Camera Unit (BWC Unit) is under the Compliance Bureau,
which is independent from the BWC using officer’s chain of command, and is
ultimately responsible for the administration and compliance of the BWC
Program. In this regard, the BWC Unit performs critical compliance and
oversight activities such as conducting monthly BWC compliance audits, and
preparing case files to independently evaluate whether officers were in
compliance with BWC Policy requirements.
Other units within BPD also rely on
BWC videos as part of their routine Figure 4
job duties and refer BWC Policy Source of BWC Violations
violations (noncompliance) when Referred to PIB
identified to the Public Integrity (Calendar Years 2017 to 2020)
Bureau (PIB). For example, the Calendar BWC Other Total
Year Unit BPD Units Referrals
Special Investigation Response Team
2017 460 31 491
is responsible for investigating
2018 463 129 592
instances where an officer’s high
2019 314 129 443
level use of force was reported and
2020 71 67 138
may detect BWC violations during its
Total 1,308 356 1,664
review. Violations identified by the
Source: BPD Records
BWC Unit or any other BPD unit are
referred to the PIB for further investigation and disciplinary action if warranted
(see Figure 4).
The BWC Unit also performs critical administrative functions such as the
collection and dissemination of BWC video footage for cases (such as crime
investigations) and public information requests, and in conjunction with BPD’s
information technology unit, administration of the VMS. According to BPD
records, the BWC Unit created 20,130 case files and responded to 2,357 public
information act requests in calendar year 2020.2
Objective and Methodology
Our objective for BWCs was to evaluate the adequacy of BPD written policies for
the use of BWCs, and to determine, based on this evaluation and related testing,
whether BWCs were subject to adequate controls and used in accordance with
these policies.
2 Multiple BWC videos can be placed into a case file making it easier for interested persons, such
as the Baltimore City State’s Attorney’s Office and Special Investigation Response Team to find
evidence related to a specific incident/investigation.
15

--- Page 18 ---
To accomplish our objective to evaluate the adequacy of BPD written policies we
reviewed the following critical documents and compared them to BPD’s BWC
policies and procedures.
 Maryland Police Training and Standards Commission (MPTSC) – Body-worn
Camera Policy. The Policy was established in accordance with State law and
includes the minimum standards that must be met by a Maryland law
enforcement agency to implement a BWC Program (See Exhibit 1 Part 1 for a
complete list of these standards).
 Police Executive Research Forum (PERF)3 and the United States Department
of Justice (DOJ) 2014 report on Implementing a Body-Worn Camera
Program: Recommendations and Lessons Learned. This report was based on
surveys of 500 law enforcement agencies nationwide, interviews with over 40
police executives, and a conference in which over 200 police chiefs and other
experts from across the country gathered to discuss the use of body-worn
cameras. The report provided 33 BWC Policy recommendations which we
considered to be best practices for purposes of our audit (See Exhibit 1 Part 2
for a complete list of these recommendations).
 2017 Consent Decree between the DOJ and BPD which mandated that BPD’s
BWC Policy, at a minimum, address seven areas including the use of cameras,
retention of videos, access and privacy issues, and the use of recordings as
evidence.
In addition, to accomplish our objective to determine whether BWCs were subject
to adequate controls and used in accordance with these policies, we performed the
following procedures.
 Interviewed BPD staff to help us determine and evaluate processes actually in
place for the general administration and use of BWCs, monitoring and
oversight activities, maintaining system security, developing and updating the
BWC Policy, training (audit staff also attended a training session), physical
security over inventory, and key usage requirements such as when BWCs
must be worn and activated.
 Evaluated BPD procedures for BWC compliance audits, use of force reviews,
and referrals when BWC violations are identified.
3 PERF is an independent non-profit police research and policy organization that focuses on
critical issues in policing and strives to advance professionalism in policing and to improve the
delivery of police services through the exercise of strong national leadership, public debate of
police and criminal justice issues, and research and policy development.
16

--- Page 19 ---
 Evaluated procedures for safeguarding video footage, automated system
controls, video deletion, video retention periods, and user access. For
example, to evaluate the sufficiency of BWC compliance audits and video
retention periods, we compared BPD policies to policies in place at other
police jurisdictions.
 Reviewed pertinent sections (best practices) of the State of Maryland
Information Technology Security Manual to evaluate controls over user
access.
 Obtained several reports from the VMS such as uploaded videos, deleted
videos, audit trails, and user access reports for selected periods of time within
our audit period.
 Obtained a listing of current employees from BPD’s human resources and
payroll system to evaluate the propriety of VMS user access.
 Tested 20 compliance audits performed by BPD to evaluate the sufficiency of
audits performed.
 Analyzed the approximately one million videos uploaded to VMS in calendar
year 2020 to determine whether timeliness and titling requirements for
uploading videos were met.
 Tested 16 use of force reviews to ensure appropriate personnel reviewed the
videos, as required.
 Analyzed and tested users with access to VMS to ensure access was necessary
and appropriate. Specifically, we tested 340 users with questionable and/or
critical access to VMS as of March 2021, reviewed administrative user
transactions for the month of June 2021, and determined the status of user
access for certain suspended and/or terminated officers.
In addition, we performed various tests of the relevant data, and we determined
that the data were sufficiently reliable for the purposes used during the audit. Our
testing was based on a review of available electronic and hardcopy records and
data within VMS, and interviews with key personnel involved in the related BWC
process.
17

--- Page 20 ---
Conclusion
Overall, we determined that BPD’s BWC Policy (in conjunction with other BPD
policies and procedures) was sufficiently comprehensive, and adequately
addressed, and routinely exceeded, requirements for all but one best practice
included in the MPTSC Policy, PERF recommendations4, and the Consent
Decree. Specifically, BPD did not require annual refresher training on BWC
usage and protocols (Finding 5).
Our analyses and review of BPD audits disclosed that certain officers were not
always in compliance with key BWC Policy requirements relating to uploading,
categorizing, and titling videos (Finding 1). In addition, BPD did not have a
formal written audit policy for conducting BWC compliance audits, and its audit
approach in use did not include adequate analysis of the available data or the use
of a risk-based approach (Finding 2). Furthermore, BPD conducted only 13 BWC
compliance audits in calendar year 2020, far short of the number of audits
required by its BWC Policy, did not maintain sufficient documentation to support
audits performed, and did not always refer noncompliance identified in the audits
for investigation as required (Finding 3). Finally, we had a cybersecurity related
finding related to the BWC video management system (Finding 4).
Other system security processes reviewed such as safeguarding video footage,
automated system controls, video deletion, and video retention periods appeared
to be appropriate and in accordance with BWC Policy and related best practices.
4 Our comparison noted that certain PERF recommendations were not applicable, for example
recommendation 2 (see Exhibit 1): ‘If an agency assigns cameras to officers on a voluntary
basis, policies should stipulate any specific conditions under which an officer might be required
to wear one’. BPD mandates that all officers of a rank lower than Captain wear a BWC and
therefore is not on a voluntary basis.
18

--- Page 21 ---
Findings
Finding 1
Our analyses and review of BPD audits disclosed that certain officers were
not always in compliance with BWC Policy requirements relating to
uploading, categorizing, and titling videos.
Analysis
Our analyses and review of BPD audits disclosed that certain officers were not
always in compliance with BWC Policy requirements relating to uploading,
categorizing, and titling videos.
Videos Were Not Always Uploaded Timely
Officers did not always upload videos timely as required by BWC Policy which
requires that officers upload BWC video data by the conclusion of their tour of
duty. Untimely uploads can result in required evidentiary video footage not being
readily available for review. We analyzed the approximately one million videos
uploaded in VMS during calendar year 2020 and identified 1,352 officers that
uploaded 100 or more videos (approximately 962,000 videos).5
Using available data analysis tools, we identified 73 officers who had uploaded
8,014 videos into VMS between 2 and 166 Figure 5
days after the day the videos were created,
Officers with Untimely Uploads
including 640 videos that were uploaded at
Calendar Year 2020
least one month late. These officers did not
Total
upload more than 10 percent of their videos Noncompliance Number of Videos Untimely
Percentage Officers Uploaded Uploads
timely as depicted in Figure 5. The remainder
More than 50 9 2,758 1.873
of the 1,352 officers uploaded 90 percent or
26 to 49 17 6,493 2,491
more of their videos in a timely manner. 11 to 25 47 22,742 3,650
Total 73 31,993 8,014
Source: BPD’s VMS
The video upload process is automated and is
activated when the BWC is being charged via a docking station. BPD did not
have a process to readily identify and investigate videos that were not uploaded
timely, including conditions such as failure to dock the BWC periodically or
upload communication errors.
Videos Were Not Properly Titled
Officers did not always properly title their videos in accordance with BWC
Policy. The Policy requires the title of the video shall contain any related
5 The remaining videos related to administrative and training footage not relevant to this review,
and officer’s with less than 100 videos in calendar year 2020.
19

--- Page 22 ---
location, central complaint number, citation, warrant, contact receipt, or other
report numbers for each video. In addition, training also recommended, but did
not require, that officers include additional information, such as the incident type,
which we found was being done in a number of videos reviewed. Properly titling
videos is important because it allows for authorized reviewers and investigators to
readily identify the contents of the video.
A review of titling data in VMS for videos uploaded by the aforementioned 1,352
officers, disclosed 42,248 of the 145,447 videos uploaded by 259 officers were
not titled by the officers as required by
Figure 6
BWC Policy (see Figure 6). As a result,
Officers with Non-Titled
VMS records the date of upload as the
Uploads
title, which would impair the ability to
readily identify videos for investigative Calendar Year 2020
purposes. Furthermore, although the Noncompliance Number Total Non-Titled
of Videos Uploads
remaining officers titled their videos 90 Percentage
Officers Uploaded
percent or more of the time, we found More than 50 34 15,048 10,629
26 to 49 83 51,612 18,980
that the titles frequently omitted
11 to 25 142 78,787 12,639
required data. Specifically, we
Total 259 145,447 42,248
reviewed 500 videos that were titled by Source: BPD’s VMS
10 officers (approximately 50 videos
per officer) and noted that 8 officers improperly excluded either one or more of
required title components (such as location) on more than 10 percent of their
videos. For 2 of these 8 officers, more than 50 percent of the videos uploaded
were not titled properly.
Similar deficiencies with improperly titled videos were noted in BWC compliance
audits of officers. Between calendar years 2017 and 2020, BPD conducted
compliance audits of 894 officers and found that approximately 10 percent of the
officers audited were not in full compliance with the BWC Policy. Violations
identified through these compliance audits are referred to the Public Integrity
Bureau (PIB) for further investigation and corrective action such as counseling
and reprimands.6 The vast majority of violations identified through the
compliance audits related to categorizing and titling. For example, in calendar
year 2019, BPD reviewed 3,750 videos uploaded by 239 officers and identified
234 violations (some videos had more than one violation) of which 211 related to
the categorizing and titling of videos, and the remaining 23 related to the start and
stop timing of a BWC recording.
6 Between calendar years 2017 and 2020, PIB issued a total of 1,629 corrective action plans for
cases that involved BWC violations including referrals of violations identified through
compliance audits.
20

--- Page 23 ---
Recommendation 1
We recommend that BPD
a. take steps to ensure that all officers comply with all requirements of the
BWC Policy, including implementation of the recommendations made
elsewhere in this report regarding BWC compliance audits, the effective
use of available BWC data, and training (Findings 2 and 5); and
b. develop and implement appropriate corrective action plans with regard
to the instances of noncompliance identified in this finding.
Finding 2
BPD did not have policies and procedures governing the scope and
methodology of BWC compliance audits and did not use available BWC data
or a risk-based audit approach to focus audit efforts and maximize its audit
coverage.
Analysis
BPD did not have policies and procedures governing the scope and methodology
of BWC compliance audits and did not use available BWC data or a risk-based
audit approach to focus audit efforts and maximize its audit coverage.
Compliance audits are critical to BPD’s oversight of the BWC Program since they
provide an independent assessment and evaluation of officer compliance with
BWC Policy. Between calendar years 2017 and 2020, BPD performed 894
compliance audits.
 BPD did not have policies and procedures governing the scope and
methodology of BWC compliance audits. Specifically, BWC Policy only
requires that audits be conducted but does not include details about the scope
and methodology such as critical BWC requirements to be examined, audit
documentation to be maintained, action required when policy violations are
identified, overall reporting requirements, and inclusion of a risk-based
approach. We believe that this condition contributed to the deficiencies we
noted with the audits conducted that are included in Finding 3.
 BPD did not use available data analysis procedures to better direct its audit
resources and enhance its oversight of the BWC Program. Currently, BWC
compliance audits are conducted on a monthly basis, and as of June 2020, the
scope of these audits is limited to 3 days of activity for 30 randomly selected
officers each month. We determined that these audits account for less than
one percent of total monthly program activity, and this selection methodology
does not necessarily direct audit resources in the most efficient and effective
manner. We believe that by applying certain data analysis procedures to
21

--- Page 24 ---
reports generated from VMS, BPD could evaluate data over a specified period
of time to identify noncompliance with specific BWC Policy requirements,
such as timely uploading of videos and proper titling of videos, on a much
broader scale than using the current audit process alone, as noted in Finding 1.
 BPD did not use a risk-based audit approach when conducting audits. A risk-
based approach provides for focusing audit resources on those areas and
individuals for which there is a higher probability of detecting noncompliance
and other audit exceptions. For example:
 Officers with prior BWC violations.
 Officers with previous sustained allegations of misconduct and
excessive force.
 Districts with high rates of misconduct / excess force allegations.
 Incident types that have high rates of BWC violation.
 Expanded testing if significant issues identified.
Recommendation 2
We recommend that BPD
a. develop a formal BWC compliance audit policy and plan to uniformly
address all critical components of the audit process, including BWC
Policy requirements to be examined, documentation to be maintained, the
reporting of results, and any action required when violations are
identified; and
b. include in that policy a provision for the use of available data analysis
procedures and a risk-based audit approach to more effectively and
efficiently audit BWC Program activity.
22

--- Page 25 ---
Finding 3
BPD did not conduct a sufficient number of BWC compliance audits, did not
maintain adequate documentation to support audits performed, and did not
always take appropriate action when noncompliance was identified.
Analysis
BPD did not conduct a sufficient number of BWC compliance audits, did not
maintain adequate documentation to support audits performed, and did not always
take appropriate action when Figure 7
noncompliance was identified. As BWC Compliance Audits
depicted in Figure 7, the number of Calendar Audits Percent
compliance audits conducted has been on Year Conducted Decrease
the decline, and for calendar year 2020, 2017 386 n/a
2018 256 -34%
only 13 audits were conducted of the
2019 239 -7%
more than 2,000 officers assigned a
2020 13 -95%
BWC. Effective June 2020, BWC Policy
Source: BPD compliance audit records
required 30 compliance audits each
month (a total of 360 over the course of a year). Prior to that time, BWC policy
required the performance of random audits each month, but did not specify a
quantity. According to BPD management, there were several contributing factors
for the low number of audits conducted in calendar year 2020,7 primarily the
impact of COVID, staffing shortages, and a reorganization of the unit responsible
for conducting audits. We were advised by BPD management that it plans to
retroactively conduct the required number of audits for calendar year 2020.
BPD also did not adequately document the audits that were performed or take
appropriate follow-up action on noncompliance noted. Specifically, our test of 20
BWC compliance audits conducted between December 2018 and October 2019
disclosed 17 for which sufficient documentation, such as summaries of
procedures conducted and evidence of system generated reports used, was not
maintained to support the work performed. In addition, three of the nine audits
that identified officer noncompliance with BWC Policy were not referred to PIB
for review as required by BWC Policy.
BPD management advised us that they did not refer these audits because the
noncompliance identified was determined to be not significant enough to warrant
referral for investigation. However, that decision was not documented and there
is no written policy establishing exemptions from the referral requirement.
7 Based on the June 2020 policy becoming effective in July 2020, the minimum number of
required audits would have been 180 for calendar year 2020.
23

--- Page 26 ---
Recommendation 3
We recommend that BPD
a. conduct at least the minimum required number of audits each month;
b. maintain sufficient documentation to support the audit work performed;
c. refer non-compliant officers for further investigation as required; and
d. clarify in its formal audit policy the criteria and circumstances under
which a decision to not refer noncompliance to PIB may be warranted, as
well as the documentation required.
We determined that Finding 4 related to “cybersecurity”, as defined by the State
Finance and Procurement Article, Section 3A-301(b) of the Annotated Code of
Maryland, and therefore is subject to redaction from the publicly available audit
report in accordance with the State Government Article 2-1224(i). Consequently,
the specifics of the following finding, including the analysis, related
recommendation(s), along with BPD’s responses, have been redacted from this
report copy.
Finding 4
Redacted cybersecurity-related finding.
Finding 5
BPD did not require annual refresher training on BWC usage and protocols
consistent with best practices.
Analysis
BPD did not require annual refresher training on BWC usage and protocols
consistent with best practices as stated in the PERF report Implementing a Body-
Worn Camera Program: Recommendations and Lessons Learned. That report
recommends that agencies require refresher courses on BWC usage and protocols
at least annually.
Our review disclosed that BPD had developed refresher training in August 2019
and made it available on its learning management system, but the training was not
part of regular in-service training and was not required unless as a part of a
corrective action plan for compliance violations, or because of revisions to the
BWC Policy. For example, BPD-wide training was required in calendar years
2019 and 2020, but only because of updates to the BWC Policy. No updates were
made in calendar year 2021, and according to BPD’s records, 174 officers took
refresher training that year, out of 2,267 officers who were assigned BWCs as of
May 2021.
24

--- Page 27 ---
Recommendation 5
We recommend that BPD, consistent with best practices, require refresher
training on BWC usage and protocols for all applicable officers at least
annually.
25

--- Page 28 ---
Objective 2 – CitiWatch Program
Background
In 2005, the CitiWatch Program was implemented by the Baltimore City (City)
Mayor’s Office as a cost-effective way to proactively fight crime and create safer
neighborhoods based on a similar program that had been operating in London,
England. CitiWatch manages a network of both City-owned and privately-owned
cameras fixed to structures (such as light poles) strategically located throughout
the City. CitiWatch fixed-cameras provide real-time surveillance footage of
public spaces that are actively monitored in an effort to prevent and quickly
respond to criminal activity. As depicted in Figure 8, the number of fixed-
cameras managed by CitiWatch has grown from 50 to 830 between fiscal years
2005 and 2020.
Figure 8
Fixed-Cameras Managed by CitiWatch
Examples of CitiWatch Cameras FF ii xx ee dd -- CC aa mmeerraass MMaannaaggeedd
((FFiissccaall YYeeaarrss 22000055 ttoo 22002200))
990000
883300
880000 775500
770000
660000
550099
550000
440000
330000
220000
110000
5500
00
11 22 33 44
Sources: CitiWatch records and Baltimore City Budget Books
As presented in Figure 9, CitiWatch operates through a collaborative partnership
between three City agencies: the Mayor’s Office of Neighborhood Safety and
Engagement, the Baltimore Police Department, and the Baltimore City Office of
Information and Technology. Management personnel from these three agencies
also serve on the CitiWatch Management and Oversight Committee, which makes
strategic and operational decisions pertaining to CitiWatch. Critical operations
are supported by three key contracts for video management, camera monitoring
services, and camera maintenance services. According to BPD records,
26

--- Page 29 ---
expenditures for these services totaled approximately $3.1 million in fiscal year
2021.
Figure 9
CitiWatch Program Structure
Mayor’s Office
of Neighborhood
Safety and
Engagement
Baltimore City
Management
Baltimore Police Office of
and Oversight
Department Information and
Committee
Technology
Video Camera Camera
Management Monitoring Maintenance
System Vendor Vendor Vendor
Source: CitiWatch records
Mayor’s Office of Neighborhood Safety and Engagement (MONSE) –
MONSE is responsible for the fiscal activity, oversight, and strategic direction of
CitiWatch. MONSE’s specific roles and responsibilities include
 Overall CitiWatch oversight;
 Management and allocation of funds and expenditures;
 Final approval of all camera projects including installation, removal, and
upgrades;
 Reporting to senior City staff and external stakeholders;
 Execution of agreements with third parties; and
 Management of third party relationships.
Baltimore Police Department (BPD) – BPD is responsible for the day to day
operations of CitiWatch, which primarily involves providing 24/7 monitoring of
fixed-cameras. BPD’s specific roles and responsibilities include
 Day to day operations of the CitiWatch Center including monitoring of
fixed-cameras and review of footage;
27

--- Page 30 ---
 Management, oversight, and deployment of all staff, including staff from
the Camera Monitoring Vendor;
 Communication to BPD officers and command regarding criminal
activity, dispatching officers, and criminal investigations;
 Collection and analysis of crime data; and
 Recommendations to MONSE regarding the installation, removal,
maintenance, and upgrade of cameras.
Baltimore City Office of Information and Technology (BCIT) – BCIT
provides technology support to CitiWatch by installing and maintaining the
functionality of the City-owned and certain privately owned fixed-cameras.
BCIT’s specific roles and responsibilities include:
 Physical maintenance, repair, upgrade, installation, and connection of
fixed-cameras, software, and related infrastructure;
 Day-to-day management of contractual relationships related to technical
services including the Camera Maintenance Vendor; and
 Tracking, collecting, and analyzing technical services costs.
The CitiWatch Program’s fixed-cameras provide live video feeds to a video
management system (VMS) that is actively monitored 24 hours a day by BPD and
Camera Monitoring Vendor personnel (who are mostly retired police officers)
located in the CitiWatch Center. The VMS records video footage for 28 days, and
allows users to control fixed-camera actions such as zooming in or changing
direction.
When criminal activity is suspected or in
progress, CitiWatch notifies BPD
Figure 10
dispatch, and continues to provide
Number of Arrests Initiated
logistic and strategic support as BPD
and/or Assisted by CitiWatch
responds to the incident on location.
(Fiscal Years 2015 to 2020)
CitiWatch responds to requests from 800 745
700
BPD for assistance to support its
600
policing efforts, such as locating persons 530
500
of interest. CitiWatch also provides
400
recorded video footage as evidence to 315 323 308
300
BPD and the Baltimore City State’s
200 174
Attorney’s Office for investigations and
100
cases (our audit scope was limited to
0
related CitiWatch and BPD activities). 1 2 3 4 5 6
In calendar year 2020, CitiWatch Sources: CitiWatch records and Baltimore City Budget
Books
provided a total of 8,512 videos to BPD
28

--- Page 31 ---
as evidence to support numerous cases and investigations. As depicted in Figure
10, these efforts have led to approximately 2,400 arrests initiated or assisted by
CitiWatch between fiscal years 2015 and 2020.
According to CitiWatch management, the downward trend of arrests between
fiscal years 2015 and 2018 was primarily due to Senate Bill 517 of the 2015
General Assembly Session which decriminalized the possession of marijuana
paraphernalia. We were advised by CitiWatch management that since that time,
the CitiWatch Program shifted its focus to other types of criminal behavior, such
as more violent crimes including robberies, assaults, and illegal gun possession.
CitiWatch also provides additional services to the City pertaining to non-criminal
activity, including real-time situational awareness on special events, traffic
accidents, water main breaks, and snow removal.
According to CitiWatch records, as of May 14, 2021, CitiWatch managed 830
fixed-cameras. These cameras are actively monitored by the CitiWatch Center as
described above. As depicted in Figure 11 on the following page, which
represents all managed cameras as of May 14, 2021, cameras are strategically
located in different BPD districts of the City based on certain factors; primarily
the associated risk of the area and current criminal activity trends, the adequacy of
existing surveillance coverage, and available infrastructure.
In addition, the Community Partnership Camera Program was established under
CitiWatch where City residents and small businesses can register privately owned
cameras and make available their camera footage upon request. CitiWatch does
not manage these cameras, and does not have real-time access to video footage.
Rather, CitiWatch maintains a contact list for those cameras used to identify
privately owned cameras in the area where a crime was committed. This
information is referred to BPD for coordination and review of the available video
footage. As of February 23, 2021, 663 privately owned cameras were registered
under the Community Partnership Camera Program, and are primarily located in
the Southern and Southeastern districts of Baltimore City as shown in Figure 11.
29

--- Page 32 ---
Figure 11
CitiWatch Partnership Camera Distribution by BPD District
City Managed Cameras Privately Owned Cameras
(as of 5/14/2021) (as of 2/23/2021)
49 38 21 13 31 30
190 132 5 18
118 77
44
10
88
290
189
148
830 City Managed Cameras 663 Privately Owned Cameras
Key:
Central District (190,77) Northwest District (49,13)
Southeast District (88,290) Western District (118,5)
Eastern District (132,18) Southwest District (44,10)
Northeast District (21,30) Southern District (148,189)
Northern District (38, 31)
Note: There were an additional two City Managed Cameras located outside of Baltimore City
Source: CitiWatch records
Objective and Methodology
Our objective for the fixed-cameras, administered under the CitiWatch Program
was to evaluate the adequacy of CitiWatch’s written policies and procedures for
the use of fixed-cameras, and determine whether fixed-cameras were subject to
adequate controls and were used in accordance with these policies and
procedures.
30

--- Page 33 ---
To accomplish our objective, we
 Reviewed the Video Quality in Public Safety Policy Considerations for the
Use of Video in Public Safety report published by the United States
Department of Homeland Security in June 2016.
 Reviewed BPD’s Homeland Security standard operating procedures (SOP)
and CitiWatch’s Closed Caption Television Monitoring System policies and
procedures manual.
 Interviewed CitiWatch Program staff, which was comprised of personnel from
BPD, MONSE, and BCIT, to determine processes over general administration
and use of fixed-cameras, monitoring and oversight activities, and system
security.
 Reviewed agreements between the CitiWatch Program and other City
agencies and entities for the use and maintenance of fixed-cameras.
 Evaluated processes for monitoring fixed-camera feeds through VMS,
personnel response and reporting on events, camera maintenance, and invoice
approval.
 Evaluated procedures for oversight of vendor staff used to monitor the fixed-
cameras.
 Evaluated procedures over system security controls to properly safeguard
video footage, video deletion and retention periods, and user access.
 Evaluated the adequacy of the procedures and controls by comparing these
procedures to the aforementioned BPD SOP and CitiWatch Closed Caption
Television Monitoring System policies and procedures manual.
 Viewed live, fixed-camera feeds, and obtained several reports from VMS such
as audit trails, camera operation status, and user access reports in real-time
while conducting our audit work.
 Reviewed seven agreements with other Baltimore City agencies and entities to
ensure the agreements were sufficiently comprehensive and finalized.
 Tested 10 days of monitoring to evaluate the sufficiency of supervisory
oversight activities, staffing levels, and compliance with reporting
requirements.
 Tested 10 invoice payments to the monitoring vendor totaling $733,000 to
ensure that invoices were properly supported, approved, and in accordance
with contract terms.
Our testing was based on a review of available electronic and hardcopy records
and data maintained by the CitiWatch Program, and interviews with key
personnel involved in the CitiWatch Program.
Conclusion
We determined that CitiWatch did not have a comprehensive policy and
procedure manual, and did not always maintain executed agreements with entities
31

--- Page 34 ---
administering the CitiWatch Program (Finding 6). In addition, CitiWatch did not
track camera uptime or the time it took to fix cameras that required maintenance
to ensure CitiWatch was continuously operating effectively and efficiently
(Finding 7).
Other processes reviewed such as monitoring fixed-camera feeds, supervisory
oversight, and system security controls appeared to be adequate. In addition, our
testing disclosed that monitoring processes and invoice payments appeared
proper.
Findings
Finding 6
CitiWatch did not have a formal or comprehensive policies and procedures
manual and did not always maintain executed agreements with other entities
administering the CitiWatch Program.
Analysis
CitiWatch did not have a formal or comprehensive policies and procedures
manual and did not always maintain executed agreements with other entities
administering the CitiWatch Program.
 As of September 2021, CitiWatch did not have a formal policies and
procedures manual, but was operating under a 2009 draft version of its Closed
Caption Television Monitoring System policies and procedures manual. In
addition, our review of the draft manual disclosed that it was not
comprehensive, as certain critical administrative operations, such as vendor
invoice verification and approval processes, and managing VMS user access,
were either not sufficiently detailed in the draft policies and procedures
manual or not included at all. Having a formal, comprehensive, and currently
maintained manual is important to establish accountability, consistency, and
transfer of knowledge.
 CitiWatch could not provide written agreements for 15 of the 22 agreements
management advised that CitiWatch had with other City agencies and entities
relating to information sharing, the use of fixed-cameras, and administration
of CitiWatch. Our review of the 7 agreements that were provided, disclosed
that 5 were either not signed by all related parties and otherwise finalized, or
had expired at the time of our review. For example, the formal agreement
between the three agencies (BPD, MONSE, and BCIT) responsible for
administering the CitiWatch Program was never finalized, as it was not signed
32

--- Page 35 ---
by all parties and there were certain sections such as effective date, terms of
agreement, and dispute resolution that were blank.
Recommendation 6
We recommend that BPD
a. formalize and update its Citiwatch Closed Caption Television Monitoring
System policies and procedures manual to include more comprehensive
and up-to-date information pertaining to administering its program; and
b. maintain current and fully executed Citiwatch agreements with other
City agencies and entities, including those noted above.
Finding 7
CitiWatch did not track camera uptime (the time cameras were functioning
properly) and did not have procedures to ensure broken cameras were
repaired timely. As of July 23, 2021, approximately 12 percent of the
cameras were not functional.
Analysis
CitiWatch did not track camera uptime (time cameras were functioning properly)
and did not have procedures to ensure broken cameras were repaired timely. As a
result, CitiWatch could not provide us with any statistics on camera downtime.
Our review of CitiWatch data as of July 23, 2021, disclosed that approximately 12
percent of the cameras in CitiWatch were not functional. Maintaining fully
functional fixed-cameras is critical to CitiWatch’s operations and serving its
mission.
Although CitiWatch reviewed the functionality status of cameras daily, it did not
maintain statistics of camera uptime. According to CitiWatch management, it did
not track the uptime of cameras because the data had not been required to be
reported to Baltimore City since fiscal year 2016. Prior to this date, camera
uptime was a performance measure reported in the budget books. The most
recent camera uptime reported in the budget books, for the period from fiscal
years 2012 and 2016, reported that camera uptime ranged from 90 to 97 percent.
CitiWatch management advised that this reporting will be resumed for fiscal year
2022 as the performance measure was added with a target goal of 96 percent
camera uptime.
CitiWatch also did not use an automated ticketing system or other mechanism to
ensure broken cameras were being repaired timely. Such a system should track
and readily provide key maintenance performance data such as the number of
maintenance requests opened and closed for a specified period of time, and
33

--- Page 36 ---
turnaround time for the completion of repairs. CitiWatch management advised us
that they transitioned to a new camera maintenance vendor effective July 1, 2021
that does have a ticketing system that captures maintenance case information such
as creation, status, location, and update notes. However, this system does not
have the capability to generate summary reports to readily capture maintenance
data for a period of time or aging schedules.
According to the new ticketing system, 34 maintenance tickets were opened in
August 2021. As of September 21, 2021, 6 of these tickets were closed and 28
were still open. According to CitiWatch management, the average turnaround
time for repairing cameras is generally one or two days; however, for more
complicated or structural fixes (such as a downed light pole), repairs could take
weeks. As previously noted, BPD did not maintain statistics of the length of time
individual cameras are not operational prior to repair.
Recommendation 7
We recommend that BPD ensure that CitiWatch develops
a. procedures for routinely tracking camera uptime (and conversely,
individual camera downtime); and
b. a mechanism that continually tracks and readily reports key maintenance
information such as the number of opened and closed tickets for a
specified period of time, turnaround times for closed tickets, and aging of
open tickets.
34

--- Page 37 ---
Objective 3 – Prisoner Transport Wagon Cameras
Background
Baltimore Police Department (BPD) prisoners are generally transported from the
scene of arrest by a Prisoner Transport Wagon (PTW) to the Central Booking and
Intake Facility for processing. A PTW is a passenger van customized in order to
transport one or more persons in police custody. The rear portion of the PTW is
separated from the driver’s compartment by a barrier and then organized into one
or two areas depending on the needs for that particular PTW. As of August 31,
2021 there were 18 PTWs assigned to the various police districts, as well as the
Anti-Crime Section and Warrant Apprehension Task Force.
Figure 12
Examples of BPD Prisoner Transport Wagons
Source: Photos taken by the Office of Legislative Audits at BPD’s Northern District
Each PTW is equipped with a Transport Vehicle Camera (TVC) System that
monitors the interior of all holding areas. The TVC system displays a live video
to officers located in the driver’s section of the PTW to allow for observation of
persons in police custody in real-time throughout the duration of the transport.
The TVC system records video data from three or more cameras, as shown in
Figure 13, that capture the entire transport process from when a person in police
custody is placed in the PTW until the individual is removed from the PTW. All
video footage is preserved for future viewing.
35

--- Page 38 ---
Figure 13
Prisoner Transport Wagon and Transport Vehicle
Camera System
Rear View of PTW and Camera View of Main Holding Area and Camera
View of Side Holding Area and Camera View of TVC Live Video Monitor
Source: Photos taken by the Office of Legislative Audits at BPD’s Northern District
Inspections and Audits – BPD policy requires daily physical inspections of each
PTW and a weekly inspection at each district to ensure proper functionality of the
PTWs and equipment, including the TVC system. Specifically, PTWs are to be
inspected daily by the officer assigned to the vehicle for functionality of all
equipment prior to every tour of duty. Weekly inspections are to be performed by
District personnel to evaluate the overall condition of the vehicle both inside and
36

--- Page 39 ---
out, and by the Information Technology Unit to ensure that the TVC system is
functioning properly, has sufficient storage, and cameras are properly positioned.
In addition, on a monthly basis, the BPD Performance Standards Division audits
transports to evaluate whether transports conformed to BPD’s policies. For PTW
transports, these audits include reviewing video footage from the TVC system and
body-worn cameras to evaluate 41 different transport requirements, of which 5
relate to the TVC system, to determine overall compliance. The Division also
performs random and unannounced spot checks to inspect the operation of the
TVC system on a quarterly basis. According to BPD’s records, in calendar year
2020, BPD conducted 140 audits and 72 spot checks of PTW transports.
Objective and Methodology
Our objective for PTW cameras was to evaluate the adequacy of written policies
over the use of PTW cameras, and determine whether PTW cameras were subject
to adequate controls and BPD’s procedures were followed in accordance with
these policies.
To accomplish our objective, we reviewed the Transportation of Persons in
Custody section of the Federal Consent Decree that mandated requirements that
must be met and established in BPD’s policies and procedures. In addition, we
reviewed three separate BPD policies:
1. Transport Vehicle Camera System
2. Persons in Custody Policy
3. Vehicle Inspections and Maintenance
We then compared BPD’s policies to corresponding requirements established by
the Consent Decree pertaining to the use of PTW cameras to evaluate the
sufficiency of BPD’s policies. In addition, we interviewed BPD staff to
determine processes over general administration and use of PTW cameras,
monitoring and oversight activities, and system security. Specifically, we
evaluated processes for daily use, inspection and maintenance, and hard drive
(physical unit for storing video data) access.
We also reviewed procedures for conducting monthly and spot check audits, and
video management processes including upload, storage, and access. We
evaluated the adequacy of the related procedures and controls by comparing these
procedures to the aforementioned BPD policies and tested all monthly and spot
check audits performed in calendar year 2020 to evaluate the sufficiency of the
audits performed. Finally, we witnessed inspections and hard drive maintenance
performed for 10 of BPD’s 18 PTWs.
37

--- Page 40 ---
Conclusion
Overall, we determined that BPD’s policies pertaining to PTW cameras were
sufficiently comprehensive, and procedures were consistent with BPD’s policies.
In addition, our review of inspections and test of audits and spot checks
performed in calendar year 2020 disclosed that they appeared to be sufficient and
performed in accordance with BPD policies.
38

--- Page 41 ---
Exhibit 1
Part I
Maryland Police Training Standards Commission Policy
Item Standards (An agency’s policy must address)
1 Testing of body-worn cameras to ensure adequate functioning
Procedure for the law enforcement officer to follow if the camera fails
2 to properly operate at the beginning of or during the law enforcement
officer’s shift
3 When recording is mandatory
4 When recording is prohibited
5 When recording is discretionary
6 When recording may require consent of a subject being recorded
7 When a recording may be ended
8 Providing a notice of recording
9 Access to and confidentiality of recordings
10 Secure storage of data from a body-worn camera
11 Review and use of recordings
12 Retention of recordings
13 Dissemination and release of recordings
14 Consequences for violations of the agency’s body-worn camera policy
Notification requirements when another individual becomes a party to
15
the communication following the initial notification
Specific protections for individuals when there is an expectation of
16
privacy in private or public places
Any additional issues determined to be relevant in the implementation
17
and use of body-worn cameras by law enforcement officers
Part II
Police Executive Research Forum (PERF) Recommendations
Item Recommendation
Policies should clearly state which personnel are assigned or permitted
1
to wear body-worn cameras and under which circumstances.
If an agency assigns cameras to officers on a voluntary basis, policies
2 should stipulate any specific conditions under which an officer might
be required to wear one.
Agencies should not permit personnel to use privately-owned body
3
worn cameras while on duty.
Policies should specify the location on the body on which cameras
4
should be worn.
39

--- Page 42 ---
Part II
Police Executive Research Forum Recommendations
(Continued)
Item Recommendation
Officers who activate the body-worn camera while on duty should be
5 required to note the existence of the recording in the official incident
report.
Officers who wear body-worn cameras should be required to articulate
6 on camera or in writing their reasoning if they fail to record an activity
that is required by department policy to be recorded.
Officers should be required to activate their body-worn cameras when
responding to all calls for service and during all law enforcement-
related encounters and activities that occur while the officer is on
7
duty. Exceptions include recommendations 10 and 11 below or other
situations in which activating cameras would be unsafe, impossible, or
impractical.
Policies and training materials should clearly define what is included
7a in the description “law enforcement-related encounters and activities
that occur while the officer is on duty.”
Officers should also be required to activate the camera during the
7b course of any encounter with the public that becomes adversarial after
the initial contact.
Officers should be required to inform subjects when they are being
8
recorded unless doing so would be unsafe, impractical, or impossible.
Once activated, the body-worn camera should remain in recording
mode until the conclusion of an incident/encounter, the officer has left
9
the scene, or a supervisor has authorized (on camera) that a recording
may cease.
Officers should be required to obtain consent prior to recording
10
interviews with crime victims.
Officers should have the discretion to keep their cameras turned off
during conversations with crime witnesses and members of the
11
community who wish to report or discuss criminal activity in their
neighborhood.
When determining whether to record interviews with witnesses and
members of the community who wish to share information, officers
should always consider both the evidentiary value of recording and the
subject’s comfort with speaking on camera. To better capture
11a evidence, PERF recommends that officers record statements made by
witnesses and people sharing information. However, if a person will
not talk unless the camera is turned off, officers may decide that
obtaining the information is more important than recording. PERF
recommends allowing officers that discretion.
40

--- Page 43 ---
Part II
Police Executive Research Forum Recommendations
(Continued)
Item Recommendation
Policies should provide clear guidance regarding the circumstances
under which officers will be allowed to exercise discretion to record,
11b
the factors that officers should consider when deciding whether to
record, and the process for documenting whether to record.
Agencies should prohibit recording other agency personnel during
routine, non-enforcement-related activities unless recording is
12
required by a court order or is authorized as part of an administrative
or criminal investigation.
Policies should clearly state any other types of recordings that are
prohibited by the agency. Prohibited recordings should include the
following: 1) Conversations with confidential informants and
13
undercover officers, 2) Places where a reasonable expectation of
privacy exists, 3) Strip searches, and 4) Conversations with other
agency personnel that involve case tactics or strategy.
Policies should designate the officer as the person responsible for
downloading recorded data from his or her body-worn camera.
14 However, in certain clearly identified circumstances, the officer’s
supervisor should immediately take physical custody of the camera
and should be responsible for downloading the data.
Policies should include specific measures to prevent data tampering,
15
deleting, and copying.
Data should be downloaded from the body-worn camera by the end of
16
each shift in which the camera was used.
Officers should properly categorize and tag body-worn camera videos
17 at the time they are downloaded. Videos should be classified
according to the type of event or incident captured in the footage.
Policies should specifically state the length of time that recorded data
18
must be retained.
Policies should clearly state where body-worn camera videos are to be
19
stored.
Officers should be permitted to review video footage of an incident in
20 which they were involved, prior to making a statement about the
incident.
Written policies should clearly describe the circumstances in which
21 supervisors will be authorized to review an officer’s body-worn
camera footage.
An agency’s internal audit unit, rather than the officer’s direct chain of
command, should periodically conduct a random review of body-worn
22
camera footage to monitor compliance with the program and assess
overall officer performance.
41

--- Page 44 ---
Part II
Police Executive Research Forum Recommendations
(Continued)
Item Recommendation
Policies should explicitly forbid agency personnel from accessing
23 recorded data for personal use and from uploading recorded data onto
public and social media websites.
Policies should include specific measures for preventing unauthorized
24
access or release of recorded data.
Agencies should have clear and consistent protocols for releasing
recorded data externally to the public and the news media. Each
25
agency’s policy must be in compliance with the state’s public
disclosure laws.
Body-worn camera training should be required for all agency
26 personnel who may use or otherwise be involved with body-worn
cameras.
Before agency personnel are equipped with body-worn cameras, they
27
must receive all mandated training.
Body-worn camera training should include all practices and protocols
covered by the agency’s body-worn camera policy (which should be
distributed to all personnel during training). It should also include an
28 overview of relevant laws, operating procedures, scenario based
exercises, downloading and tagging data, preparing to present the
video evidence in court, and procedures for reporting malfunctioning
equipment.
A body-worn camera training manual should be created in both digital
29 and hard-copy form and should be readily available at all times to
agency personnel.
Agencies should require refresher courses on body-worn camera usage
30
and protocols at least once per year.
Agencies should collect statistical data concerning body-worn camera
31 usage, including when video footage is used in criminal prosecutions
and internal affairs matters.
Agencies should conduct evaluations to analyze the financial impact
32
of implementing a body-worn camera program.
Agencies should conduct periodic reviews of their body-worn camera
33
policies and protocols.
42

--- Page 45 ---
APPENDIX

--- Page 46 ---
Baltimore Police Department
Surveillance Equipment
Agency Response Form
Finding 1
Our analyses and review of BPD audits disclosed that certain officers were not always in
compliance with BWC Policy requirements relating to uploading, categorizing, and titling
videos.
We recommend that BPD
a. take steps to ensure that all officers comply with all requirements of the BWC Policy,
including implementation of the recommendations made elsewhere in this report
regarding BWC compliance audits, the effective use of available BWC data, and
training (Findings 2 and 5); and
b. develop and implement appropriate corrective action plans with regard to the instances
of noncompliance identified in this finding.
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide N/A
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 1a Agree Estimated Completion Date: Completed
Please provide details of
corrective action or In October of 2020, the BWC Unit was reassigned from the
explain disagreement. Administrative Bureau-- Evidence Services Section, to the Compliance
Bureau. This change was made to facilitate an increased focus on Audits
and Performance Measures. Under the Evidence Services Section, the
main focus of the BWC Unit was the creation of Electronic Case folders
to provide the State’s Attorney’s Office (SAO) the required video
evidence to prosecute criminal cases.
Under the Compliance Bureau, the BWC Unit has:
1. Completed activation audits each month and backtracked to
complete audits of required months in 2020.
2. Generated a daily audit of uncategorized videos, sorted by
command. Data from the previous day1 is exported from Video
Management Systems (VMS) each morning. The data includes the
total number of BWC videos and each uncategorized video. Each
officer who has an uncategorized video is designated by their
correct assignment. The officers are then counted and sorted by
1 On Mondays, the previous time period of data is the weekend plus the previous Friday.
Page 1 of 10

--- Page 47 ---
Baltimore Police Department
Surveillance Equipment
Agency Response Form
command. A chart is formed which highlights each command. The
chart and list of officers is sent to all commanders, including PIB
by 11AM each morning. The daily report provides information to
commanders to take corrective action. Corrective action ranges
from counseling and training, to formal discipline through PIB.
This process also allows technical issues, such as a malfunctioning
loading dock, to be addressed quickly.
From June of 2021, through the end of the year, the data was
compiled into a weekly report and presented at Comstat.
Commanders were held to account for deficiencies and plans for
improvements.
This process achieved significant improvements. For
example, the week of July 6 to July 12, 2021, the BPD had
recorded 17,763 BWC videos. Officers did not categorize 1,120 of
those videos for a rate of 6.31%. The week of December 21, 2021,
officers did not categorize 295 of 13,504 videos for a rate of
2.18%. Rates have continued to decrease since then.
In 2022, daily reporting continued and monthly scorecards
were issued. The scorecards outlined the performance of each
command, each day for cumulative totals for the month. The
scorecards are presented at Comstat. The rate of uncategorized
BWC videos in February 2022 was 2.05%. Noteworthy was the
Northern District who had 21 of the 28 days without any
uncategorized videos.
Consistent decreases in rates of uncategorized videos was
seen in the next three months of March (1.92%), April (1.72%)
and May (1.67%).
These new methods of accountability demonstrate BPD’s
continued commitment to correcting issues found in this report.
3. Drafted an MOU with the SAO to provide them VMS access thus
streamlining the evidence collection process and allowing the
BWC Unit members more time to focus on Compliance.
4. Initiated a Pilot Program to mandate arresting officers create their
own electronic case folder in VMS for the SAO, thus allowing the
BWC Unit members more time to focus on Compliance. Although
this program has been initiated, the new system is not expected to
be fully effective until the end of calendar year 2022.
5. Created a draft BWC Unit Standard Operating Procedure (SOP)
that contains needed updates to past systems and addresses
findings in the OLA report. The SOP will also leverage the
Page 2 of 10

--- Page 48 ---
Baltimore Police Department
Surveillance Equipment
Agency Response Form
capabilities of Axon Performance, an auditing tool that has been
recently introduced to the BPD. The SOP is under internal review.
The anticipated date of completion is June 2022. Although the
SOP draft is compete, implementation of the final version is not
expected until July of 2022.
1 On Mondays, the previous time period of data is the weekend plus the previous
Friday.
Recommendation 1b Agree Estimated Completion Date: June 30, 2022
Please provide details of The BWC Unit has recently been provided a demonstration of “Axon
corrective action or Performance” and plans to leverage this tool for Audits and Inspections.
explain disagreement. The updated BWC Unit SOP will incorporate audit methodologies and
corrective action options. Corrective action could range from formal
discipline through PIB to command counseling or re-training. BPD has
developed a draft disciplinary matrix, which will include a range of
sanctions for BWC-related negligence and was created in collaboration
with the U.S. Department of Justice (DOJ) and the Monitoring Team. This
draft disciplinary matrix addresses Consent Decree paragraph 375, which
calls on BPD to review its disciplinary matrices to ensure consistency in
the imposition of discipline. It also has heavily influenced the
development of a statewide disciplinary matrix pursuant to 2021 police
reform legislation.
The BWC unit will begin generating a “Top 10” list of members who most
frequently leave BWC footage uncategorized. Along with the monthly
scorecard, the Top 10 list will be discussed at Comstat, and shared with
PIB. This tool is another measure to highlight non-compliance, take
appropriate corrective action and prevent repeated deficiencies.
Page 3 of 10

--- Page 49 ---
Baltimore Police Department
Surveillance Equipment
Agency Response Form
Finding 2
BPD did not have policies and procedures governing the scope and methodology of BWC
compliance audits and did not use available BWC data or a risk-based audit approach to
focus audit efforts and maximize its audit coverage.
We recommend that BPD
a. develop a formal BWC compliance audit policy and plan to uniformly address all
critical components of the audit process, including BWC Policy requirements to be
examined, documentation to be maintained, the reporting of results, and any action
required when violations are identified; and
b. include in that policy a provision for the use of available data analysis procedures and a
risk-based audit approach to more effectively and efficiently audit BWC Program
activity.
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide N/A
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 2a Agree Estimated Completion Date: June 30, 2022
Please provide details of The BWC Unit is developing an SOP, which will include newly
corrective action or
available tools such as Axon Performance. The SOP will incorporate
explain disagreement.
audit methodologies and corrective action options (See Item 5 from
OLA recommendation 1a). The BWC policy requirements to be
examined include:
 Activation (Late Activation and Early Deactivation
included)2
 Categorization
 Titling
 Timely Uploading
The BWC Unit will retain audit documentation indefinitely and
maintain both physical and electronic copies. Paper copies will be
2 Activation accountability is layered throughout the BPD. For example, PIB will ensure proper activation when
investigating a misconduct complaint; transportation auditors will ensure proper activation during transport reviews;
and the Use of Force Assessment process focuses on BWC activation. Violations result in formal discipline.
Page 4 of 10

--- Page 50 ---
Baltimore Police Department
Surveillance Equipment
Agency Response Form
stored in the BWC Unit offices; PDF versions will be stored inside
VMS and in a BPD shared drive.
Audit results will be sent to command to include PIB. BWC
compliance will be presented at Comstat. The BWC Unit will follow
up on non-compliant members by prioritizing them for additional
audits related to the non-compliant item, in addition to other BWC
mandates.
2 Activation accountability is layered throughout the BPD. For example, PIB will
ensure proper activation when investigating a misconduct complaint; transportation
auditors will ensure proper activation during transport reviews; and the Use of Force
Assessment process focuses on BWC activation. Violations result in formal discipline.
Recommendation 2b Agree Estimated Completion Date: June 30, 2022
Please provide details of Axon Performance has the potential for flagging high-risk incidents for
corrective action or review. The BWC Unit plans to utilize this tool. The Performance
explain disagreement. Standards Section will concentrate resources on BPD units that focus on
seizing drugs and guns and make arrests at levels substantially higher than
other units performing similar functions. This enhanced level of scrutiny
is to ensure that the statistical achievements are not the product of policy
violations. Additionally, as stated in the previous recommendation 2a, the
BWC Unit will follow up on non-compliant members by prioritizing them
for additional audits related to the non-compliant item, in addition to other
BWC mandates.
Page 5 of 10

--- Page 51 ---
Baltimore Police Department
Surveillance Equipment
Agency Response Form
Finding 3
BPD did not conduct a sufficient number of BWC compliance audits, did not maintain
adequate documentation to support audits performed, and did not always take appropriate
action when noncompliance was identified.
We recommend that BPD
a. conduct at least the minimum required number of audits each month;
b. maintain sufficient documentation to support the audit work performed;
c. refer non-compliant officers for further investigation as required; and
d. clarify in its formal audit policy the criteria and circumstances under which a decision
to not refer noncompliance to PIB may be warranted, as well as the documentation
required.
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide At the time of these audits, the BWC Unit was part of the Evidence
additional comments as Services Section and not sufficiently focused on Audit documentation
deemed necessary. systems.
Recommendation 3a Agree Estimated Completion Date: Completed
Please provide details of With increased staffing and SAO access to VMS granted, the BWC Unit
corrective action or is completing 30 audits per month, at minimum. The BWC Unit has also
explain disagreement.
completed activation audits for each required month spanning back to July
2020. The activation audit from February 2022 found 10 activation
violations3 out of 337 total required videos4 for a rate of activation
violations of 2.97%. The categorization audits from February 2022 found
the cumulative rate of uncategorized videos from each of the 28 days to
be 2.05%.
3 Activation violations are considered (1) failure to record, (2) late activation, and/or
(3) early de-activation.
4 The number of required videos is found in VMS (these can only be evaluated for late
activation and/or early deactivation) plus incidents found in CAD that are not in VMS in
which the member responded to a scene but did not record the required event.
Recommendation 3b Agree Estimated Completion Date: Completed
3 Activation violations are considered (1) failure to record, (2) late activation, and/or (3) early de-activation.
4 The number of required videos is found in VMS (these can only be evaluated for late activation and/or early
deactivation) plus incidents found in CAD that are not in VMS in which the member responded to a scene but did
not record the required event.
Page 6 of 10

--- Page 52 ---
Baltimore Police Department
Surveillance Equipment
Agency Response Form
Please provide details of The BWC Unit now maintains documentation in support of each audit.
corrective action or This process will be outlined in the SOP. As stated in the response to
explain disagreement. recommendation 2a, the BWC Unit will retain audit documentation
indefinitely and maintain both physical and electronic copies. Paper
copies will be stored at the BWC Unit offices; PDF versions will be
stored inside VMS and in a BPD shared drive. These three methods
create a redundancy to ensure proper documentation in the event of
unforeseen future events such as a malware attack.
Recommendation 3c Agree Estimated Completion Date: Completed
Please provide details of The BWC Unit shares reports on non-compliance with PIB in addition to
corrective action or the member’s command. Additionally, other units within the
explain disagreement. Compliance Bureau refer BWC violations to PIB for corrective action.
Recommendation 3d Agree Estimated Completion Date: Completed
Please provide details of The Compliance Bureau is developing a BWC Unit SOP, which will
corrective action or incorporate audit methodologies and corrective action options. Corrective
explain disagreement. action could range from formal discipline to command counseling or re-
training. Specific criteria will indicate what constitutes a violation,
whether non-compliance is a systems issue or a user issue, and what
factors generate formal discipline as opposed to non-punitive corrective
action.
The Office of Legislative Audits (OLA) has determined that Finding 4 related to “cybersecurity”,
as defined by the State Finance and Procurement Article, Section 3A-301(b) of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, and therefore is subject to redaction from the publicly available audit report
in accordance with State Government Article 2-1224(i). Consequently, the specifics of the
finding, including the analysis, related recommendation(s), along with the Agency’s responses,
have been redacted from this report copy.
Finding 4
Redacted cybersecurity related finding.
Agency Response has been redacted by OLA.
Page 7 of 10

--- Page 53 ---
Baltimore Police Department
Surveillance Equipment
Agency Response Form
Finding 5
BPD did not require annual refresher training on BWC usage and protocols consistent
with best practices.
We recommend that BPD, consistent with best practices, require refresher training on
BWC usage and protocols for all applicable officers at least annually.
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide N/A
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 5 Agree Estimated Completion Date: January 31,
2023
Please provide details of BWC training will occur on an annual basis, at minimum. This
corrective action or
could be incorporated into annual in-person training and/or
explain disagreement.
department-wide eLearning.
Page 8 of 10

--- Page 54 ---
Baltimore Police Department
Surveillance Equipment
Agency Response Form
Finding 6
CitiWatch did not have a formal or comprehensive policies and procedures manual and did
not always maintain executed agreements with other entities administering the CitiWatch
Program.
We recommend that BPD
a. formalize and update its Citiwatch Closed Caption Television Monitoring System policies
and procedures manual to include more comprehensive and up-to-date information
pertaining to administering its program; and
b. maintain current and fully executed Citiwatch agreements with other City agencies and
entities, including those noted above.
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide CitiWatch is not a strictly BPD program. BPD is the main beneficiary,
additional comments as but the cameras are maintained by the City for all public safety and
deemed necessary. services.
Recommendation 6a Agree Estimated Completion Date: June 30, 2023
Please provide details of As the Citiwatch program evolves, manuals and SOPs continuously need
corrective action or to be updated. We recognize this need.
explain disagreement.
Recommendation 6b Agree Estimated Completion Date: June 30, 2023
Please provide details of CitiWatch has recognized that prior City administrations did not
corrective action or maintain executed agreements. We are currently working to rectify any
explain disagreement. pertinent MOU or agreements that need to be updated.
Page 9 of 10

--- Page 55 ---
Baltimore Police Department
Surveillance Equipment
Agency Response Form
Finding 7
CitiWatch did not track camera uptime (the time cameras were functioning properly) and
did not have procedures to ensure broken cameras were repaired timely. As of July 23,
2021, approximately 12 percent of the cameras were not functional.
We recommend that BPD ensure that CitiWatch develops
a. procedures for routinely tracking camera uptime (and conversely, individual camera
downtime); and
b. a mechanism that continually tracks and readily reports key maintenance information
such as the number of opened and closed tickets for a specified period of time,
turnaround times for closed tickets, and aging of open tickets.
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide N/A
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 7a Agree Estimated Completion Date: Completed
Please provide details of CitiWatch had recognized this deficiency prior to this audit process and
corrective action or switched VMS, along with our technological maintenance vendor. Since
explain disagreement. that change, there are formal procedures in place, including ticketing
systems, automated email notifications from the VMS, as well as a
tracking process. We are currently showing a 93% operational uptime
rate, as we work through long delivery times for camera inventory
orders, etc.
Recommendation 7b Agree Estimated Completion Date: Completed
Please provide details of CitiWatch now utilizes the City’s Solar Winds ticketing system. This
corrective action or system also links together our technological maintenance vendor’s
explain disagreement. tracking system (SOAR). Both systems provide turnaround times and
tracking of tickets.
Page 10 of 10

--- Page 56 ---
A T
UDIT EAM
Robert A. Wells, Jr., CPA
Audit Manager
Adam M. Auerback
Senior Auditor
Ibijoke O. Owolabi, CPA
John B. Wachter, CFE
Staff Auditors