Title: Department of Human Services - Social Services Administration - Follow-up Review
Date: 07/06/2022
Type: Special Reports and Letters
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=62c5c15da1ce580a64a29f70
Extracted: 2025-06-20T00:20:43.341946
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Special Review
Department of Human Services
Social Services Administration
Follow-up Review
January 2019
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
For further information concerning this report contact:
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
301 West Preston Street, Room 1202
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Phone: 410-946-5900 · 301-970-5900
Toll Free in Maryland: 1-877-486-9964
Maryland Relay: 711
TTY: 410-946-5401 · 301-970-5401
E-mail: OLAWebmaster@ola.state.md.us
Website: www.ola.state.md.us
The Office of Legislative Audits operates a Fraud Hotline to report fraud, waste, or abuse
involving State of Maryland government resources. Reports of fraud, waste, or abuse
may be communicated anonymously by a toll-free call to 1-877-FRAUD-11, by mail to the
Fraud Hotline, c/o Office of Legislative Audits, or through the Office’s website.
The Department of Legislative Services does not discriminate on the basis of age, ancestry, color,
creed, marital status, national origin, race, religion, gender, gender identity, sexual orientation,
or disability in the admission or access to its programs, services, or activities. The Department’s
Information Officer has been designated to coordinate compliance with the nondiscrimination
requirements contained in Section 35.107 of the Department of Justice Regulations. Requests for
assistance should be directed to the Information Officer at 410-946-5400 or 410-970-5400.

--- Page 5 ---
Exhibit 1
Implementation Status of Findings in the November 2017
SSA Audit Report
Status as
Determined by Status Based on
Prior Finding
SSA as of Auditor’s Review
June 20181
Quality Assurance Program
1. The Social Services Administration (SSA) did not
have comprehensive quality assurance processes in In Progress
In Progress
place to adequately monitor the administration of (See Exhibit 2)
child welfare program services by the State’s local
departments of social services (LDSSs).
Monitoring Compliance with Foster Care Requirements
2. SSA had not established procedures to monitor the
LDSSs to ensure that foster children were placed in
the least restrictive environment and received
required services. Further, reports from the In Progress
In Progress
Children’s Electronic Social Services Information (See Exhibit 2)
Exchange (CHESSIE) did not accurately reflect
services provided to children in foster care, which
hampered the ability of SSA to monitor service
delivery.
Monitoring of Foster Care, Adoption, and Guardianship
Assistance
3. SSA did not establish procedures to ensure that the
In Progress
LDSSs complied with State regulations regarding In Progress
(See Exhibit 2)
the initial approval of foster care providers, as well
as ongoing monitoring requirements for foster care
providers, adoptive parents, and guardians.
4. SSA had not established procedures to ensure that
children who remained in the foster care, adoption,
or guardianship programs after they reached the
In Progress N/A
age of 18 were eligible to do so and, for certain
cases we reviewed, there was a lack of
documentation supporting continued eligibility.
Page 1 of 3
N/A – Not applicable since we did not review the implementation status of this finding
1 SSA’s implementation status for each finding is based upon SSA’s status report, as of June 13,
2018. The status based on the auditor’s review presented by finding in Exhibit 1 was discussed
with, and agreed to, by SSA management personnel.
3

--- Page 6 ---
Exhibit 1
Implementation Status of Findings in the November 2017
SSA Audit Report
Status as
Determined by Status Based on
Prior Finding
SSA as of Auditor’s Review
June 20182
Federal Funds
5. SSA did not have adequate procedures to ensure that
it received federal reimbursement for all children
eligible for Title IV-E funding. Our tests disclosed In Progress In Progress
instances in which children were incorrectly (See Exhibit 2)
determined to be ineligible, resulting in a potential
loss of federal funds totaling approximately $1
million.
6. SSA did not maximize the recovery of federal funds
for children who were eligible to receive Corrected N/A
Supplemental Security Income.
Child Protective Services
7. SSA did not monitor the timeliness of child abuse
In Progress
and neglect investigations conducted by the LDSSs. In Progress
(See Exhibit 2)
In addition, reviews and investigations of allegations
were not always performed timely.
8. SSA did not monitor the timeliness of required
assessments of substance-exposed newborns
completed by the LDSSs. In addition, these In Progress N/A
assessments were not always completed within the
required time frames.
9. SSA lacked adequate controls to ensure the LDSSs
were immediately notified of children born to
individuals who had previously had their parental
rights terminated for abuse or neglect. In addition, In Progress N/A
SSA did not ensure that the LDSSs completed an
assessment of these families and offered services
when appropriate.
Page 2 of 3
N/A – Not applicable since we did not review the implementation status of this finding
2 SSA’s implementation status for each finding is based upon SSA’s status report, as of June 13,
2018. The status based on the auditor’s review presented by finding in Exhibit 1 was discussed
with, and agreed to, by SSA management personnel.
4

--- Page 7 ---
Exhibit 1
Implementation Status of Findings in the November 2017
SSA Audit Report
Status as
Determined by SSA Status Based on
Prior Finding
as of Auditor’s Review
June 20183
Foster Care, Adoption, and Guardianship Payments
10. SSA did not ensure that overpayments made to
Corrected N/A
certain providers of child placement services
were identified and resolved in a timely manner.
11. SSA had not established procedures to ensure
that adoption assistance payments were
suspended, terminated, or as permitted, In Progress
In Progress
renegotiated with the adoptive parent when an
(See Exhibit 2)
adoptive child was removed from the adoptive
home.
12. Ancillary expenditures incurred by the LDSSs to
further support children in social services
In Progress N/A
programs were not adequately controlled.
13. SSA did not approve certain adoption assistance
rates being paid by LDSSs as required by SSA
In Progress N/A
policy.
Interagency Agreements
14. SSA did not ensure that payments made to a
State university for three interagency agreements
In Progress N/A
were adequately supported, were reasonable in
relation to the tasks performed, and were made in
accordance with the terms of the agreements.
Page 3 of 3
N/A – Not applicable since we did not review the implementation status of this finding
3 SSA’s implementation status for each finding is based upon SSA’s status report, as of June 13,
2018. The status based on the auditor’s review presented by finding in Exhibit 1 was discussed
with, and agreed to, by SSA management personnel.
5

--- Page 8 ---
Exhibit 2
Detailed Comments on the Findings for Which
the Office of Legislative Audits Deemed the
Implementation Status to be “In Progress”
Quality Assurance Program
Prior Finding 1
The Social Services Administration (SSA) did not have comprehensive
quality assurance processes in place to adequately monitor the
administration of child welfare program services by the State’s local
department of social services (LDSSs).
Prior Report Recommendation 1
We recommended that SSA establish comprehensive quality assurance processes
to ensure its child welfare programs are effectively and properly administered by
the LDSSs. Specifically, we recommended that SSA develop, implement, and
oversee
a. comprehensive written procedures for monitoring program services and
functions to ensure compliance with applicable laws, regulations, and policies;
appropriate and timely recordkeeping; and the maintenance of supporting
documentation related to services and functions performed; and
b. a quality assurance case review process at each LDSS.
Auditor’s Assessment of Status – In Progress
Although SSA established procedures to address recommendation a, the
procedures were not complete or sufficient for all programs, and SSA had not
addressed recommendation b.
With regard to recommendation a, SSA developed certain written procedures for
monitoring program services and functions. However, these procedures were not
always complete or sufficient to address compliance with applicable laws,
regulations, and policies; appropriate and timely recordkeeping; and the
maintenance of supporting documentation for all programs. For example, for
most programs, the procedures did not specify how cases were to be selected for
monitoring purposes, how many cases were to be reviewed, and the nature of
supporting documentation the LDSSs were required to include in the Children’s
Electronic Social Services Information Exchange (CHESSIE). The shortcomings
of these procedures are further addressed elsewhere in this report.
6

--- Page 9 ---
In addition, SSA revised its written Continuous Quality Improvement (CQI) plan
in June 2018. This plan provides for periodic on-site reviews of local department
performance and compliance every six months to three years. At the time of our
review, SSA management advised us that no final CQI reports had been issued.
With regard to recommendation b, we were advised that SSA was relying on
periodic reviews of the LDSSs but had not developed a quality assurance case
review process at each LDSS.
Monitoring Compliance with Foster Care Requirements
Prior Finding 2
SSA had not established procedures to monitor the LDSSs to ensure that
foster children were placed in the least restrictive environment and received
required services. Further, reports from CHESSIE did not accurately reflect
services provided to children in foster care, which hampered the ability of
SSA to monitor service delivery.
Prior Report Recommendation 2
We recommended that SSA establish procedures to monitor the LDSSs to ensure
compliance with foster care requirements. Specifically, we recommended that
SSA
a. ensure that the applicable legal documentation is included in each foster
child’s case record;
b. ensure that the LDSSs place children in the least restrictive environment and
document attempts to place the child with a relative;
c. ensure compliance with medical, dental, and education requirements by
reviewing applicable documentation; and
d. ensure that all required activity is accurately reflected in CHESSIE so that
CHESSIE can be effectively used as a tool to monitor case management
activity.
Auditor’s Assessment of Status – In Progress
SSA established certain written procedures to monitor LDSS compliance with
foster care program requirements on a test basis. However, the procedures were
not comprehensive in that they did not specify how cases were to be selected for
monitoring purposes, how many cases were to be reviewed, and the nature of
supporting documentation the LDSSs were required to include in CHESSIE.
Furthermore, the procedures did not adequately address all program requirements
included in our finding.
7

--- Page 10 ---
With regard to recommendations a and b, SSA had not established monitoring
procedures to ensure that applicable legal documentation was included in
CHESSIE for each child’s case record, and each child was placed in the least
restrictive environment, as required.
For recommendation c, SSA’s status report indicated that it had completed
implementation of this recommendation. In June 2018, SSA conducted a review
of medical, dental, and education records for compliance with foster care
requirements. For example, SSA obtained an existing report that identified cases
in which the LDSSs did not record in CHESSIE that a medical exam had been
provided for the child within the required timeframe. However, we found that
SSA’s follow-up of the cases on this report improperly excluded children for
which an initial medical exam had not been recorded in CHESSIE. In this regard,
SSA’s review of records for six LDSSs excluded consideration of 350 children
from five LDSSs who had been in foster care for at least two years without an
initial medical exam. Furthermore, SSA did not ensure that cases it identified
were properly resolved. Specifically, SSA requested these six LDSSs to provide
documentation of the status of medical exams for 482 children, but did not follow
up with the LDSSs to ensure that the documentation of the medical exams was
subsequently recorded in CHESSIE.
Regarding recommendation d, SSA had not established procedures to ensure that
all required activity was accurately reflected in CHESSIE and, based on our
limited review, the accuracy of information recorded in CHESSIE remained
questionable. Specifically, our examination of the records for nine children for
which the LDSSs had recorded in CHESSIE that a medical exam was performed,
disclosed that no corresponding medical documentation had been scanned into
CHESSIE for six of these children.
8

--- Page 11 ---
Monitoring of Foster Care, Adoption, and Guardianship Assistance
Prior Finding 3
SSA did not establish procedures to ensure that the LDSS complied with
State regulations regarding the initial approval of foster care providers, as
well as ongoing monitoring requirements for foster care providers, adoptive
parents, and guardians.
Prior Report Recommendation 3
We recommended that SSA
a. establish monitoring procedures, including a review of documentation, to
ensure that the LDSSs approve and monitor family foster care providers in
accordance with State regulations;
b. establish monitoring procedures to ensure the LDSSs conduct required
redeterminations of the continued eligibility of family foster care providers,
adoptive parents, and guardians in accordance with State regulations; and
c. ensure that the LDSSs correctly record/scan all necessary documentation in
CHESSIE relating to the approval, monitoring, and continued eligibility of
family foster care providers, adoptive parents, and guardians, including
documentation of quarterly meetings with family foster care providers.
Auditor’s Assessment of Status – In Progress
SSA established certain procedures to address recommendations a, b, and c
through the use of a quarterly monitoring process, and advised that the first
sample for review would be selected after the date of its status report. However,
our review of the quarterly monitoring process disclosed the procedures were not
sufficient.
To address recommendations a and b, SSA established certain written procedures
to monitor compliance with regulatory requirements for foster care providers,
adoptive parents, and guardians, relating to the approval and monitoring of foster
care providers, and redeterminations of foster care providers, adoptive parents,
and guardians. The procedures required SSA to perform a quarterly review of
randomly selected adoption, guardianship, and family foster care providers that
were approved or redetermined during the preceding 60 days. For example, SSA
reviewed 10 of the 413 family foster care providers that were approved or
redetermined during the quarter ending May 2018, which included 2 of the 97
new providers for that quarter. However, this methodology essentially excluded
from review cases approved or redetermined during the first 30 days of the
quarter. In addition, the procedures did not require SSA to increase the number of
cases selected, or take other actions, if errors were noted. Furthermore, although
SSA advised that it had reviewed 10 adoption redeterminations for this quarter,
9

--- Page 12 ---
SSA could not provide any documentation of its review, and we noted that the
required application for adoption assistance was not included in the case record
for 5 of these cases. This absence should have been detected had the
redeterminations been properly performed.
Regarding recommendation c, SSA’s written procedures did not state the types of
documentation (such as medical evaluations and background checks) the LDSSs
should record/scan into CHESSIE.
Federal Funds
Prior Finding 5
SSA did not have adequate procedures to ensure that it received federal
reimbursement for all children eligible for Title IV-E funding. Our tests
disclosed instances in which children were incorrectly determined to be
ineligible, resulting in a potential loss of federal funds totaling approximately
$1 million.
Prior Recommendation 5
We recommended that SSA establish procedures to ensure federal reimbursement
is obtained for all children eligible for Title IV-E funding. Specifically, we
recommended that SSA
a. ensure that Title IV-E eligibility is properly determined for all children and
recorded in CHESSIE;
b. ensure that determination and redetermination worksheets are completed for
all children, are signed by the preparer and reviewed and approved by a
supervisor, and include all supporting documentation;
c. review all children who are currently determined to be ineligible, including
the aforementioned cases, and obtain Title IV-E funds when possible; and
d. include children classified as ineligible for Title IV-E federal reimbursement
in its secondary review procedures.
Auditor’s Assessment of Status – In Progress
SSA established certain procedures to address recommendations a and b, but
those procedures were not comprehensive. SSA’s review of children deemed
ineligible was not as comprehensive as specified in recommendation c.
Procedures were established to address recommendation d; however, the
secondary review procedures had not yet been implemented.
Regarding recommendations a and b, SSA developed written procedures that
require regional supervisors to review eligibility determinations for Title IV-E
10

--- Page 13 ---
federal reimbursement when each child enters foster care, and to perform a
redetermination of eligibility within 14 months after the original review.
However, these procedures did not specify the documentation requirements for
redeterminations (such as worksheets completed for all children, signed by the
preparer, and reviewed and approved by supervisory personnel). In addition, the
procedures did not address eligibility determinations and redeterminations for
children in the adoption or guardianship assistance programs.
In regard to recommendation c, SSA did not review the eligibility determinations
for all children currently determined to be ineligible for Title IV-E, as
recommended. Alternatively, consistent with its new procedures, SSA is
including ineligible children in its reviews of redeterminations going forward,
beginning with children who entered care during July 2016. Specifically, during
October 2017, SSA’s central office conducted a redetermination of eligibility for
110 children who were classified as ineligible and concluded that all children
were properly classified.
In regard to recommendation d, in addition to the aforementioned 14-month
redetermination, SSA developed a written procedure that requires SSA’s central
office personnel to perform an annual secondary review of five percent of foster
children determined to be ineligible. As of July 20, 2018, however, SSA had not
begun performing this planned secondary review.
Child Protective Services
Prior Finding 7
SSA did not monitor the timeliness of child abuse and neglect investigations
conducted by the LDSSs. In addition, reviews and investigations of
allegations were not always performed timely.
Prior Report Recommendation 7
We recommended that SSA establish oversight procedures to ensure that the
LDSSs review allegations of child abuse or neglect and conduct and complete
related investigations in a timely manner, as required by SSA policy and State
law.
Auditor’s Assessment of Status – In Progress
SSA established written procedures requiring the LDSSs to provide justification
in CHESSIE for all allegations of child abuse or neglect that are not reviewed and
a disposition determined (as to whether an investigation is warranted) within two
hours of receipt as required by SSA policy. The procedure also requires
11

--- Page 14 ---
justifications when related investigations are not completed within 60 days, as
required by State law. In addition, the procedures require SSA to periodically
select allegations approved for investigation to determine if the dispositions were
determined timely. The procedures also require SSA to periodically select
investigations to determine if they were completed timely. However, we
determined that the procedures were not comprehensive because they did not
address the LDSS responsibility to initiate abuse investigations within 24 hours
and neglect investigations within 5 days, as required by State law, and did not
address SSA’s responsibility to ensure that the investigations were initiated
timely.
SSA obtained a report of all allegations that were approved for investigation
during April 2018, and randomly selected two days which identified 43
allegations that were not reviewed within 24 hours. As of July 2018, SSA had not
requested an explanation from the LDSSs for delays that were not adequately
justified in CHESSIE.
In addition, the SSA’s monthly review procedures could be more effective
through the use of a case selection process that considers an analysis of all
allegations approved for investigation. For example, we performed a detailed
analysis for the entire month of April 2018 and we noted that there were 250
allegations for which the disposition had not been approved within two days,
which is the comparison we made in our original audit report, of which 113 (45
percent) were assigned to just three LDSS supervisors.
Foster Care, Adoption, and Guardianship Payments
Prior Finding 11
SSA had not established procedures to ensure that adoption assistance
payments were suspended, terminated or, as permitted, renegotiated with the
adoptive parent when an adopted child was removed from the adoptive
home.
Prior Report Recommendation 11
We recommended that SSA
a. establish procedures to ensure compliance with State regulations regarding
adoption assistance payments being made for a child who has been moved
from the adoptive home to an out-of-home placement; and
b. review adoption assistance payments made on behalf of children in out-of-
home placement, including for the aforementioned children, and recover any
amounts that were inappropriately paid.
12

--- Page 15 ---
Auditor’s Assessment of Status – In Progress
SSA had developed certain procedures to address recommendation a, and
attempted to develop a report to aid in the implementation of these procedures;
however, the report was not functioning correctly at the time of our review and
SSA was attempting to implement the necessary modifications. In addition, the
procedures did not address a critical element of the compliance verification
process. SSA made a management decision not to take any action with respect to
recommendation b.
In regard to recommendation a, SSA established written procedures requiring the
LDSSs to suspend adoption assistance payments funded entirely by the State
when a child is moved to an out-of-home placement. For cases for which the
State receives federal reimbursement (Title IV-E), the procedures further require
SSA to review adoption assistance payments that have not been suspended. State
regulations stipulate that adoption assistance funded entirely by the State shall be
suspended when an adopted child enters an out-of-home placement, but assistance
that is federally funded may be terminated only when the adoptive parent is no
longer legally responsible for the child or is no longer providing financial support
to the child. The regulations further provide for the renegotiation of adoption
assistance payments for Title IV-E funded children only, to reflect any continued
financial support provided by the adoptive parent.
SSA’s procedures did not require SSA to ensure that the LDSSs identified the
amount of financial support (if any) being provided by the adoptive parent to a
child moved to an out-of-home placement so that the amount of the adoption
assistance could be renegotiated. SSA had attempted to develop a report to
identify for review all children who had been moved from an adoptive home to an
out-of-home placement; however, these attempts had been unsuccessful at the
time of our review. Through other means, we determined that, during June 2018,
adoption assistance payments totaling $16,148 were paid for 20 children (16 Title
IV-E eligible and 4 State-funded) who had previously been moved to an out-of-
home placement. SSA had not identified nor performed a review of these dual
payments (that is, instances in which both adoption assistance and foster care
payments were made).
In regard to recommendation b, SSA management advised us that it would not be
reviewing and recovering improper adoption assistance payments made in error
on behalf of children in out-of-home placements, as recommended. SSA
management also advised that it believes procedures being put in place will
eliminate future dual payments.
13

--- Page 16 ---
Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We conducted a follow-up review of the actions taken by the Department of
Human Services (DHS) – Social Services Administration (SSA) to address the
findings in our November 20, 2017 audit report. In that report, we concluded that
SSA’s fiscal accountability and compliance rating was unsatisfactory.
The purpose of our review was to determine the status of SSA’s corrective actions
to address certain of our audit findings and recommendations. This review was
conducted under the authority of Section 2-1220(a)(4) of the State Government
Article and was based on our long-standing practice of performing a follow-up
review whenever an agency receives an unsatisfactory rating in its fiscal
compliance audit report. The rating system was established, in accordance with
State Government Article, Section 2-1221 of the Annotated Code of Maryland,
for the purpose of determining an overall evaluation of an agency’s fiscal
accountability and compliance with State laws and regulations.
Initially, we requested and obtained a status report from SSA, as of June 13, 2018,
which described the level of implementation of each prior audit report finding.
To perform our review, using auditor judgment and based on significance and
risk, we selected certain prior findings that SSA had identifying as requiring
additional corrective action. For those selected findings, we also obtained
additional clarification from SSA of the actions taken to resolve the findings.
Specifically, we performed tests and analyses of selected information and held
discussions with SSA personnel, as we deemed necessary, to determine the status
of SSA’s corrective actions to address selected findings, including the related
recommendations, from our November 20, 2017 audit report.
This review did not constitute an audit conducted in accordance with generally
accepted government auditing standards. Had we conducted an audit in
accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards, other matters
may have come to our attention that would have been reported.
Our review was conducted primarily during the period from July to September
2018, and our assessment of the status of SSA’s corrective actions was performed
at the time of our review.
DHS’s response, on behalf of SSA, to our follow-up review is included as an
appendix to this report. As prescribed in the State Government Article, Section 2-
1224 of the Annotated Code of Maryland, we will advise SSA regarding the
results of our review of its response.
14

--- Page 17 ---
APPENDIX A

--- Page 18 ---
PLANNED /
PROCESS
ACTION TAKEN FOR EACH COMPLETED
FINDING RECOMMENDATION IMPLEMENTATION
RECOMENDATION MONITORING
DATE
REVIEWS
1 The Social Services We recommend that SSA establish See Attached Summary
Administration comprehensive quality assurance
(SSA) did not have processes to ensure its child welfare
IN
comprehensive programs are effectively and properly
PROGRESS
quality assurance administered by the LDSSs.
processes in place to Specifically, we recommend that SSA
adequately monitor develop, implement, and oversee
the administration of a.comprehensive written procedures for 1. November 2017: SSA CQI Plan outlining SSA's overall CQI CQI Plan Date- Nov 2017
child welfare monitoring program services and processes developed ; 2. December 2017: Children's Bureau approves revised June 2018 CQI Policy
program services by functions to ensure compliance with SSA's CQI Policy and Procedure Manual outlining SSA's onsite case and Procedures Manual -
December 2017
the State’s local applicable laws, regulations, and review process for the CFSR in alignment with federal requirements; 3. April 2018 Audit Compliance
departments of social policies; appropriate and timely January - March 2018: Meetings held with TA partners and SSA staff to Desk Guides Webinars with
services (LDSSs). recordkeeping; and the maintenance of develop a plan for program monitoring acitivies and Audit Compliance LDSS 4/19 - Health and Well-
Being 4/23 - CPS
supporting documentation relating to Desk Guides for LDSS; 4. April 2018: Audit Compliance Desk Guides
4/25 - Placement and
services and functions performed and companion webinars for LDSS staff held
Permanency
b. a quality assurance case reviewThe SSA CQI Plan, that outlines both a quality assurance process and a 4/1/2018 - Maryland's
process at each LDSS. qualitative case review, was developed in November 2017 and revised in CFSR reviews began;
June 2018. The QA process outlined in the CQI Plan includes strategies Reviews occur over a 6 Baltimore City-
for monitoring LDSS compliance with state and federal regualtions. The month cycle with one April 9-16th
State led CFSR process outlined in the CQI Plan and the CQI Policy and LDSS recviewed each Baltimore City- May
7- May 14th
procedures Manual outlines an on-site case review process that assesses month
Carroll County-
quaity of practice in line with federal requirements. This process was
June 11th- June
approved by the Children's Brueau in December 2017. 20th

--- Page 19 ---
PROCESS PLANNED /
ACTION TAKEN FOR EACH COMPLETED
FINDING RECOMMENDATION IMPLEMENTATION
RECOMENDATION MONITORING
DATE
REVIEWS
2 SSA had not We recommend that SSA establish
established procedures to monitor the LDSSs to ensure COMPLETED
compliance with foster care requirements.
procedures to
Specifically, we recommend that SSA
monitor the LDSS's
a. ensure that the applicable legal1. March 2018 - SSA worked with OTHS and modified MDCHESSIE to March - May
to ensure that foster
documentationisincludedineachfosterinclude a pick list and a naming convention for documents in the file 2018 IN
children were placed
child’s case record cabinet. 2. April 2018- SSA conducted a webinar to guide the LDSS in PROGRESS:
in the least restrictive
uploading legal documentation into each child's case record appropriately 3.
environment and May 2018- SSA instituted a monitoring process utilizing a quarterly random Sample of
received required sample of OOH cases. SSA monitors via the Out of Home Milestone report records for April-
services. Further, and MD CHESSIE (Court folder) for review to ensure fields are completed June to be pulled
reports from the in compliance with SSA policy. If fields are incomplete, SSA contacts the in July 2018
Children’s Electronic LDSS for course correction and re-reviews to ensure compliance.
Social Services b.ensure that the LDSSs place children 1. April and May 2018- Baltimore City CFSR conducted. 2. April 2018- April- June 2018
Information in the least restrictive environment and SSA conducted a webinar to guide the LDSS in documenting the least IN
Exchange document attempts to place the child restrictive placements and all attempts to place children with relatives in PROGRESS:
(CHESSIE) did not with a relative MDCHESSIE 3. June 2018- SSA instituted a monitoring process utilizing a
accurately reflect quarterly random sample of OOH cases. SSA monitors via MD CHESSIE Sample of
services provided to (Caseplan 2, contacts, and court documentation) to ensure compliance with records for April-
children in foster SSA policy. If documentation is incomplete, SSA contacts the LDSS for June to be pulled
care, which course correction and re-reviews to ensure compliance. in July 2018
hampered the ability
of SSA to monitor c.ensure compliance with medical, 1.February 2018- SSA provided onsite technical assistance to Baltimore April-18
service delivery. dental, and education requirements by City DSS focused on the health benchmarks. 2. April and May 2018- COMPLETED
reviewing applicable documentation Baltimore City CFSR conducted. 3. April 2018- SSA conducted a webinar
to guide the LDSS on documentation of the education and health folder in February 15,
MDCHESSIE. 4. May 2018- SSA began monitoring compliance of 2018- TA
education, health and dental information via the monthly Out of Home Baltimore City for
milestone report. SSA is documenting the monthly trends and will utilize the Health
information to identify training and technical assistance needs where non- Benchmarks;
compliance has been identified.
d.ensure that all required activity is See comment above about monitoring process April/May 2018
accurately reflected in CHESSIE so that
CHESSIE can be effectively used as a IN PROGRESS
tool to monitor case management
activity.

--- Page 20 ---
PLANNED /
PROCESS
ACTION TAKEN FOR EACH COMPLETED
FINDING RECOMMENDATION IMPLEMENTATION
RECOMENDATION MONITORING
DATE
REVIEWS
3 SSA did not We recommend that SSA 1. April 2018- SSA conducted a webinar to guide the LDSS on the June-18
IN
establish procedures a.establish monitoring procedures, proper documentation of the Resource Homes folder. 2. June 2018- SSA
PROGRESS:
to ensure that the including a review of documentation, to developed a monitoring process to utilize a quarterly random sample of
LDSS's complied ensure that the LDSSs approve and Resource Homes cases. SSA monitors via MD CHESSIE to ensure fields
Sample of
with State regulations monitor family foster care providers in are in compliance with SSA policy. If fields are incomplete, SSA contacts
records for April-
regarding the initial accordance with State regulations the LDSS for course correction and re-reviews to ensure compliance. A
June to be pulled
approval of foster provider milestone report is being created to increase sample size to be
in July 2018
care providers, as reviewed.
well as ongoing
b.establish monitoring procedures to 1. April 2018- SSA conducted a webinar to guide the LDSS on the June-18
monitoring IN
ensure the LDSSs conduct required proper documentation of the Resource Homes folder. 2. June 2018- SSA
requirements for PROGRESS:
redeterminations of the continued developed a monitoring process to utilize a quarterly random sample of
foster care providers,
eligibility of family foster care providers, Resource Homes cases. SSA monitors via MD CHESSIE to ensure fields
adoptive parents, Sample of
adoptive parents, and guardians in are in compliance with SSA policy. If fields are incomplete, SSA contacts
and guardians. records for April-
accordance with State regulations the LDSS for course correction and re-reviews to ensure compliance. A
June to be pulled
provider milestone report is being created to increase sample size to be
in July 2018
reviewed.
c.ensure that the LDSSs correctly 1. April 2018- SSA conducted a webinar to guide the LDSS on the June-18
record/scan all necessary proper documentation of the Resource Homes folder. 2. June 2018- SSA IN
documentation in CHESSIE relating to developed a monitoring process to utilize a quarterly random sample of PROGRESS:
the approval, monitoring, and continued Resource Homes cases. SSA monitors via MD CHESSIE to ensure fields
eligibility of family foster care providers, are in compliance with SSA policy. If fields are incomplete, SSA contacts Sample of
adoptive parents, and guardians, the LDSS for course correction and re-reviews to ensure compliance. A records for April-
including documentation of quarterly provider milestone report is being created to increase sample size to be June to be pulled
meetings with family foster care reviewed. in July 2018
providers.

--- Page 21 ---
PLANNED /
PROCESS
ACTION TAKEN FOR EACH COMPLETED
FINDING RECOMMENDATION IMPLEMENTATION
RECOMENDATION MONITORING
DATE
REVIEWS
4 SSA had not We recommend that SSA 1. April 2018- SSA conducted a webinar to guide the LDSS in properly June-18
established a.establish procedures to ensure that the documenting the education folder and court folder. 2. June 2018- SSA
procedures to ensure LDSSs verify that children 18 years of implemented utilization of the the monthly OOH milestone report to
that children who age or older who remain in the foster monitor that the LDSS is ensuring that the youth 18-20 are meeting the
IN
remained in the foster care, adoption, or guardianship requirements to stay in extended foster care as required per policy. SSA is
PROGRESS:
care, adoption, or programs are eligible to remain in the identifying when information is missing, and alerting the LDSS on a
guardianship applicable program, and such eligibility monthly basis to ensure information is accurate and in accordance with
7/1/2018
programs after they is accurately recorded in CHESSIE and policy. However, Baltimore City is under a Consent Decree and is not
reached the age of documented permitted to close any cases of foster youth prior to age 21 unless they
18 were eligible to achieve permanency. Therefore, the requirements in this policy do not
do so and, for certain apply to BCDSS.
cases we reviewed,
b.document implementation of these SSA is identifying when information is missing, and alerting the LDSS on a June-18
there was a lack of
procedures, including the resolution of monthly basis to ensure information is accurate and in accordance with IN
documentation
cases for which the eligibility criteria policy. However, Baltimore City is under a Consent Decree and is not PROGRESS:
supporting continued
stipulated in State regulations have not permitted to close any cases of foster youth prior to age 21 unless they
eligibility.
been met. achieve permanency. Therefore, the requirements in this policy do not 7/1/2018
apply to BCDSS.

--- Page 22 ---
PLANNED /
PROCESS
ACTION TAKEN FOR EACH COMPLETED
FINDING RECOMMENDATION IMPLEMENTATION
RECOMENDATION MONITORING
DATE
REVIEWS
5 SSA did not have We recommend that SSA establish
adequate procedures procedures to ensure federal
IN
to ensure that it reimbursement is obtained for all children
PROGRESS
received federal eligible for Title IV-E funding.
reimbursement for all Specifically, we recommend that SSA
children eligible for a.ensure that Title IV-E eligibility is May 2018- SSA revised Title IV-E Procedure Manual to ensure Title IV- June-18
IN
Title IV-E funding. properly determined for all children and E eligibility is properly determined; June 2018- Trained all IV-E
PROGRESS
Our tests disclosed recorded in CHESSIE supervisors on new procedures outlined in the manual
instances in which b.ensure that determination and May 2018- Standard Operating Procedure for IV- E Supervisory Review June-18
children were redetermination worksheets are completed for was developed; June 2018- Distribution to LDSS IN
incorrectly all children, are signed by the preparer and
reviewed and approved by a supervisor, and PROGRESS
determined to be
include all supporting documentation
ineligible, resulting in
c.review all children who are currentlyMay 2018- Reviewed of all ineligible cases. Title IV-E has been performing Completed
a potential loss of
determinedtobeineligible,includingthere-determination on ineligible cases beginning with FY2017 (July 2016)
federal funds totaling
aforementioned cases, and obtainTitlewhich are due for re-determination 1 year later, Cases have been
approximately $1
IV-E funds when possible redetermined through the end of January 2017 (due for re-determnation
mil. IN
April 2018) with the exception of BaltimoreCity, which due to volume is
PROGRESS
current through December 2017. Because of the timeliness of the
redetermination, corrected cases have had claims adjustment. Not counting
Baltimore City (which has yet to conclude at this point) approximately 19
ineligible cases have been corrected.
d.include children classified as ineligible July2016 all ineligible children have undergone a secondary review for7/1/2016-Completed
for Title IV-E federal reimbursement in eligibilty.
COMPLETED
its secondary review procedures.

--- Page 23 ---
PROCESS PLANNED /
ACTION TAKEN FOR EACH COMPLETED
FINDING RECOMMENDATION IMPLEMENTATION
RECOMENDATION MONITORING
DATE
REVIEWS
6 SSA did not We recommend that SSA maximize the
maximize the recovery of federal funds for children
COMPLETED
recovery of federal who are eligible for SSI (repeat).
funds for children Specifically, we recommend that SSA
who were eligible to a.ensure SSI is promptly collected toFebruary 2018- SSA in conjunction with FIA meets monthly with Maximus February-18
receive SSI. coverthecostoffostercareforchildrento review cases. March 2018- SSA implemented quarterly meetings with
who are only eligible for SSI LDSS and Maximus to strategize ways to improve the referral process used
by LDSS to identify children potentially eligible for SSI benefits. May 2018- COMPLETED
SSA implemented a process with Maximus to cross check referrals
recieved from LDSS and ensure all appropriate referrals were received.
b.review all SSI eligible cases andMay 2018- Maximus obtained the ability to remotely access CHESSIE at March-18
ensure federal recoveries are maximized their office location to obtain information to initiate and process SSI/SSA
applications on behalf of foster care children who may be eligible for
COMPLETED
benefits. May 2018- SSA receives the monthly progress reports from the
vendor, SSA cross checks the list with MDCHESSIE records to ensure
that benefits were applied for appropriately.
c.for children eligible for both funding July 2016-SSA sought technical assistance from the Social Security July 2016- Completed
sources, prepare, document & implement Administration and it was determined that if a child is in a high cost
a process to maximize federal funding placement and IV-E eligible, there will be no benefits as Social Security COMPLETED
for the cost of foster care reduces the amount dollar for dollar for Title IV-E receipts.
7 SSA did not monitor We recommend that SSA establish April 2018- SSA conducted a webinar to guide the LDSS on timliness of April/May 2018
the timeliness of child oversight procedures to ensure that the CPS cases and ensuring appropriate documentation in MDCHESSIE.
abuse and neglect LDSS's review allegations of child May 2018- SSA began monitoring compliance of timliness of CPS cases
investigations abuse or neglect and conduct and utilizing the In Home Milestone Report. SSA is documenting the monthly IN
conducted by the complete related investigations in a trends and will utilize the information to identify training and technical PROGRESS:
LDSSs. In addition, timely manner, as required by SSA assistance needs where non-compliance has been identified. April - May
reviews and policy and State law. 2018- completed CFSR review in Baltimore City. Monthly
investigations of
allegations were not
always performed

--- Page 24 ---
PROCESS PLANNED /
ACTION TAKEN FOR EACH COMPLETED
FINDING RECOMMENDATION IMPLEMENTATION
RECOMENDATION MONITORING
DATE
REVIEWS
8 SSA did not monitor We recommend that SSA April 2018- SSA conducted a webinar to guide the LDSS on timliness of April-18
the timeliness of a.establish oversight procedures to assessments of SEN cases and ensuring appropriate documentation in
IN
required assessments ensure that LDSSs complete required MDCHESSIE. May 2018- SSA began monitoring compliance of
PROGRESS:
of substance-exposed safety and risk assessments of timliness of SEN assessments utilizing the In Home Milestone Report.
newborns completed substance-exposed newborns within the SSA is documenting the monthly trends and will utilize the information to
Monthly
by the LDSSs. In time frames required by State identify training and technical assistance needs where non-compliance has
addition, these regulations and SSA policy, and been identified.
assessments were not
b.enhance the accuracy and April 2018-Training and Implementation on Audit Compliance Desk April-18
always completed
completeness of the aforementioned Guide conducted and uploaded to the HUB as a resource for LDSS staff.
within the required
CHESSIE report to ensure it can be IN
time frames.
reliably used to monitor compliance with PROGRESS
these requirements.
SSA lacked adequate We recommend that SSA establish February 2018- Identified an Alternate CPS/Family Preservation Staff May-18
controls to ensure the adequate procedures and controls, such Person to correspond with the LDSS; May 2018-Instituted a weekly and
LDSS's were as a requirement for supervisory review, monthly Supervisory Review of the status of the Birth Matches. Additional
immediately notified to ensure that LDSSs are promptly steps are being added during the summer of 2018 to improve the Birth
of children born to notified of children born to individuals Match process further: Forwarding LDSS reminder notices 10 days prior
individuals who had who have previously had their parental to the 30 day due date to remind LDSSs about returning a timely report to
previously had their rights terminated by the court, and that a SSA about their assessment and possible services offered; and the IN
parental rights
family assessment is completed timely if creation of a common Birth Match email address PROGRESS:
9 terminated for abuse
determined to be appropriate by the (birth.match@maryland.gov) to serve as a central repository of SSA and
or neglect. In
LDSS. LDSS correspondence. 7/1/2018
addition, SSA did not
ensure that the
LDSS's completed an
assessment of these
families and offered
services when
appropriate.

--- Page 25 ---
PROCESS PLANNED /
ACTION TAKEN FOR EACH COMPLETED
FINDING RECOMMENDATION IMPLEMENTATION
RECOMENDATION MONITORING
DATE
REVIEWS
10 SSA did not ensure We recommend that SSA, inImprovement in OIG process to review financial audit reports as well SSA December-17
that overpayments conjunction with the OIG, ensure thatimplementation of monitoring in conjunction with OIG.
made to certain reviews offinancialreports fromgroup
providers of child homesandchildplacementagenciesare
COMPLETED
placement services completed in a timely manner in order to
were identified and promptlyidentityanyoverpaymentsand
resolved in a timely ensure their proper disposition.
manner.
11 SSA had not We recommend that SSA June 2018-SSA established procedures to review information included in June-18
established a.establish procedures to ensure the revised Adoption Subsidy Paid/Non-Paid milestone report.
procedures to ensure compliance with State regulations Performance Monitoring efforts were implemented utilizing the monthly
that adoption regarding adoption assistance payments adoption subsidy report, SSA monitors Adoption Subsidies to ensure that
assistance payments being made for a child who has been if a Removal Episode occured and the youth was placed in OOH care, COMPLETED
were suspended, moved from the adoptive home to an the subsidy was suspended/stopped, per Policy Directive. If the LDSS
terminated, or, as out-of-home placement; and failed to complete this step, SSA contacts the LDSS for course correction
permitted, and re-reviews to ensure compliance.
renegotiated with the
adoptive parent b.review adoption assistance payments Review of cases completed and it was determined that for the March-18
when an adopted made on behalf of children in out-of- aforementioned cases DHS/SSA will not seek recovery. However, when
child was removed home placement, including for the practical and possible DHS will pursure recovery of inappropriately IN
from the adoptive aforementioned children, and recover payments PROGRESS
home. any amounts that were inappropriately
paid.

--- Page 26 ---
PROCESS PLANNED /
ACTION TAKEN FOR EACH COMPLETED
FINDING RECOMMENDATION IMPLEMENTATION
RECOMENDATION MONITORING
DATE
REVIEWS
12 Ancillary We recommend that SSA ensure -SSA to reiterate flexible spending COMAR Regulation via SSA Steering June-18
expenditures incurred adequate control over ancillary Committee with Local Directors and Assistant Directors; Seek regulation
by the LDSSs to expenditures made to support children change
IN
further support in social services programs by requiring
PROGRESS:
children in social and verifying LDSS compliance with the
services programs aforementioned State regulations.
7/11/2018
were not adequately
controlled.
13 SSA did not approve We recommend that SSA Procedures Established to review information included revised milestone June-18
IN
certain adoption a.ensure each LDSS obtains SSA report. Performance Monitoring efforts implemented utilizing the monthly
PROGRESS:
assistance rates being approval, as required, prior to adoption subsidy report, SSA monitors Adoption Subsidies to ensure
paid by LDSSs as processing adoption assistance rates SSA approval was granted for all youth receiving above the intermediate
June 1, 2018- To
required by SSA greater than the current maximum board rate subsidy payments as stated in the Audit Finding training and
be reviewed
policy. allowed rate; and Policy Directive. If the LDSS failed to complete this step, SSA contacts
continuously on
the LDSS for course correction and re-reviews to ensure compliance.
monthly basis
b.take steps to periodically identify the SSA reviews overpayment reports monthly, in order to alert LDSS to May-18 IN
use of rates greater than the maximum address any overpayment issues. PROGRESS:
allowed rate to verify that the rates were
approved as required. June 1, 2018- To be
reviewed
continuously on
monthly basis

--- Page 27 ---
PROCESS PLANNED /
ACTION TAKEN FOR EACH COMPLETED
FINDING RECOMMENDATION IMPLEMENTATION
RECOMENDATION MONITORING
DATE
REVIEWS
14 SSA did not ensure We recommend that SSA Note: DHS is in discussions to determine how best to address Audit N/A
that payments made a.obtain and review detailed time records concerns about State University Interagency Agreements. Currently SSA
to a State university (timesheets), including hours worked by is continuing to use the methods established in response to the prior audit
for three interagency each employee by task, to support the (2014) to review invoices for these three interagency agreements. IN
agreements were propriety of labor charges billed, and to PROGRESS
adequately monitor the State university’s efforts to
supported, were complete the tasks (repeat);
reasonable in relation
b.compare the State university’s payroll SSA has approved the salaries paid under the agreement with the review N/A
to the tasks
records (payroll register) to labor and approval of the DHS Monthly Invoice Detail Form, UMB Funding IN
performed, and were
charges billed to ensure amounts billed Profile of funding changes of effort, and timesheets that are classified as PROGRESS
made in accordance
are accurate (repeat); payroll sheets.
with the terms of the
c.compare labor charges for each SSA instituted an improvement in the documentation supporting each invoice N/A
agreements.
employee with the amounts specified in received for all university contracts including a listing of staff persons (and
the agreement and investigate any any notifications about staff or salary changes) associated with the
IN
variances; agreement, areas of the scope of work under which the staff worked during
PROGRESS
the month, signed timesheets relating to the staff work during the month, and
invoices relating to non-labor costs charged during the month.
d.amend the interagency agreements to The prior audit (2013) stated "the invoices did not identify the specific N/A
include provisions for personnel changes employees who performed services during the billing periods, the hours
or additions and document approval for worked, and the related salary costs." The documentation process instituted
all changes in personnel, including the in response to the prior audit does identify specific employees, the hours
costs associated with each employee; worked (as based on their level of effort in a 40 hour week), and their salary
and costs. SSA did in good faith comply with the audit recommendation, and this IN
was a considerable effort adding additional time for both UMB to produce PROGRESS
and SSA to review as part of the monthly invoice submission/review
process. These agreements have never been paid more than the budgeted
amount, and although at times the salaries of some staff members have
exceeded the individual budgeted amounts, those increases were approved
through the monthly invoice documentation process, as noted above.
e.obtain and review adequate documentation N/A
to support the propriety of amounts billed for IN
work performed by subcontractors, such as
PROGRESS
subcontractor billings.

--- Page 29 ---
Social Services Administration
Follow-up Review 2018
Agency Response Form
Prior Finding 1
The Social Services Administration (SSA) did not have comprehensive quality assurance
processes in place to adequately monitor the administration of child welfare program
services by the State’s local department of social services (LDSSs).
Prior Report Recommendation 1
We recommend that SSA establish comprehensive quality assurance processes to ensure its child
welfare programs are effectively and properly administered by the LDSSs. Specifically, we
recommend that SSA develop, implement, and oversee
a. comprehensive written procedures for monitoring program services and functions to ensure
compliance with applicable laws, regulations, and policies; appropriate and timely
recordkeeping; and the maintenance of supporting documentation related to services and
functions performed; and
b. a quality assurance case review process at each LDSS.
Agency Response
Auditor’s Assessment Not Factually Accurate
of Status – In Progress
Recommendation a Agree Estimated Completion Date: Ongoing
Please provide details of SSA developed and revised Standard Operating Procedures (SOPs) for
corrective action or each of the findings to ensure standardized monitoring and sampling
explain disagreement. across programs. The revisions to each of the SOPs are addressed in
each of the subsequent findings.
Recommendation b Agree Estimated Completion Date: Ongoing
Please provide details of SSA has established an onsite case review process that includes all
corrective action or
local departments and has been approved by our federal partners. The
explain disagreement.
onsite review process established will allow for all jurisdictions to be
reviewed on a three year cycle with the exception of Baltimore City
which will be reviewed every six months. SSA is working with the
LDSS to develop an interim review process for those jurisdictions that
are on a three year cycle.
SSA has completed onsite reviews for Baltimore City
(April and May 2018), Carroll (June 2018), Anne Arundel (July 2018),
Allegany (August 2018), and Queen Anne’s (September 2018). Final
reports were issued for Baltimore City in July 2018 and Carroll County
in August 2018. Anne Arundel County’s report has received executive
office approval and will be issued soon. Allegany and Queen Anne’s
Counties are pending.
Page 1 of 8

--- Page 30 ---
Social Services Administration
Follow-up Review 2018
Agency Response Form
Recommendation c Choose an item Estimated Completion Date: N/A
Prior Finding 2
SSA had not established procedures to monitor the LDSSs to ensure that foster children
were placed in the least restrictive environment and received required services. Further,
reports from the Children’s Electronic Social Services Information Exchanges (CHESSIE)
did not accurately reflect services provided to children in foster care, which hampered the
ability of SSA to monitor service delivery.
Prior Report Recommendation 2
We recommend that SSA establish procedures to monitor the LDSSs to ensure compliance with
foster care requirements. Specifically, we recommend that SSA
a. ensure that the applicable legal documentation is included in each foster child’s case record;
b. ensure that the LDSSs place children in the least restrictive environment and document
attempts to place the child with a relative;
c. ensure compliance with medical, dental, and education requirements by reviewing applicable
documentation; and
d. ensure that all required activity is accurately reflected in CHESSIE so that CHESSIE can be
effectively used as a tool to monitor case management activity.
Agency Response
Auditor’s Assessment Factually Accurate
of Status – In Progress
Recommendation a Agree Estimated Completion Date: November
2018
Please provide details of SSA finalized revisions to the Legal Placement SOP and Stratified
corrective action or Random Sample (SRS) process in November 2018. The SRS SOP was
explain disagreement. revised to specify how many cases were to be selected for monitoring
purposes. The Legal Placement SOP was revised to include the
applicable legal documents to be uploaded into CHESSIE.
Recommendation b Agree Estimated Completion Date: November
2018
Please provide details of SSA finalized revisions to the Least Restrictive Placement SOP and
corrective action or Stratified Random Sample (SRS) process in November 2018. The SRS
explain disagreement. SOP was revised to specify how many cases were to be selected for
monitoring purposes. The Least Restrictive Placement SOP was revised
to include the documents to be uploaded into CHESSIE.
Page 2 of 8

--- Page 31 ---
Social Services Administration
Follow-up Review 2018
Agency Response Form
Recommendation c Agree Estimated Completion Date: September
2018
Please provide details of While the auditors were onsite in July 2018, SSA corrected the
corrective action or sampling process to ensure that children were not incorrectly excluded
explain disagreement. from the sample and revised the SOP to ensure consistent follow up
with the LDSS to resolve any issues.
Recommendation d Agree Estimated Completion Date: November
2018
Please provide details of
corrective action or Between September and November 2018, SSA updated SOPs to include
explain disagreement. a review of CHESSIE for appropriate documentation as well as
procedures for conducting outreach to the LDSS to ensure that all
required activity is accurately reflected in CHESSIE.
Note: Please note that SSA’s monitoring process involves reviewing local data and
identifying trends by tracking which local departments are consistently and accurately
reflecting required activity in CHESSIE and those that need additional technical assistance
to address systemic barriers to accurately reflect required activity in CHESSIE.
Prior Finding 3
SSA did not establish procedures to ensure that the LDSS complied with State regulations
regarding the initial approval of foster care providers, as well as ongoing monitoring
requirements for foster care providers, adoptive parents, and guardians.
Prior Report Recommendation 3
We recommend that SSA
a. establish monitoring procedures, including a review of documentation, to ensure that the
LDSSs approve and monitor family foster care providers in accordance with State
regulations;
b. establish monitoring procedures to ensure the LDSSs conduct required redeterminations of
the continued eligibility of family foster care providers, adoptive parents, and guardians in
accordance with State regulations; and
c. ensure that the LDSSs correctly record/scan all necessary documentation in CHESSIE
relating to the approval, monitoring, and continued eligibility of family foster care providers,
adoptive parents, and guardians, including documentation of quarterly meetings with family
foster care providers.
Page 3 of 8

--- Page 32 ---
Social Services Administration
Follow-up Review 2018
Agency Response Form
Agency Response
Auditor’s Assessment Factually Accurate
of Status – In Progress
Recommendation a Agree Estimated Completion Date: September
2018
Please provide details of In September 2018, SSA revised the Resource Home and SRS SOPs to
corrective action or identify a complete sample of resource, adoption, and guardianship
explain disagreement. homes that will allow for a more accurate monitoring process. SSA
specifically disagrees with the recommendation to increase the number
of cases selected if errors were noted because the process being
implemented allows for a continuous and ongoing review.
Recommendation b Agree Estimated Completion Date: November
2018
Please provide details of Between September and November 2018, SSA revised the Resource
corrective action or Home and SRS SOPs to identify a complete sample of resource,
explain disagreement. adoption, and guardianship homes that will allow for a more accurate
monitoring process.
Recommendation c Disagree Estimated Completion Date: April
2018
Please provide details of In April 2018, SSA completed a Desk Guide and training that reviewed
corrective action or the required documentation to be recorded/scanned into CHESSIE. The
explain disagreement. training was recorded and continues to be available to the LDSS staff.
In addition, the Resource Home SOPs include the appropriate policy
directive which identifies the documentation that should be
recorded/scanned into CHESSIE.
Page 4 of 8

--- Page 33 ---
Social Services Administration
Follow-up Review 2018
Agency Response Form
Prior Finding 5
SSA did not have adequate procedures to ensure that it received federal reimbursement for
all children eligible for Title IV-E funding. Our tests disclosed instances in which children
were incorrectly determined to be ineligible, resulting in a potential loss of federal funds
totaling approximately $1 million.
Prior Recommendation 5
We recommend that SSA establish procedures to ensure federal reimbursement is obtained for
all children eligible for Title IV-E funding. Specifically, we recommend that SSA
a. ensure that Title IV-E eligibility is properly determined for all children and recorded in
CHESSIE;
b. ensure that determination and redetermination worksheets are completed for all children, are
signed by the preparer and reviewed and approved by a supervisor, and include all supporting
documentation;
c. review all children who are currently determined to be ineligible, including the
aforementioned cases, and obtain Title IV-E funds when possible; and
d. include children classified as ineligible for Title IV-E federal reimbursement in its secondary
review procedures.
Agency Response
Auditor’s Assessment Not Factually Accurate
of Status – In Progress
Recommendation a Disagree Estimated Completion Date: March
2017
Please provide details of SSA developed a “Title IV-E Paperless Process SOP” in March 2017
corrective action or which addresses the process for completing a Title IV-E eligibility
explain disagreement. determination/redetermination for all children in Foster Care, Adoption
and the Guardianship Assistance Program (GAP). The SOP defines the
documents that are to be reviewed and saved in MD CHESSIE for each
program. The SOP also defines the procedure for sign-off, supervisory
approval and storage of the final output document in MD CHESSIE. In
addition, SSA will be implementing a Skills Assessment that will be
posted on the HUB for Title IV-E staff to identify areas of need so that
ongoing training can be better targeted.
Page 5 of 8

--- Page 34 ---
Social Services Administration
Follow-up Review 2018
Agency Response Form
Recommendation b Agree Estimated Completion Date: March
2017
Please provide details of SSA developed a “Title IV-E Paperless Process SOP” in March 2017
corrective action or which addresses the process for completing a Title IV-E eligibility
explain disagreement. determination/redetermination for all children in foster care, adoption
and GAP. The SOP details how to complete the determination or
redetermination in MD CHESSIE, printing or downloading the
worksheets, the procedure for sign-off, supervisory approval and
storage of the final output worksheet document in MD CHESSIE. The
Title IV-E Supervisory Review Instrument has been revised and SSA is
in the process of creating an equivalent Title IV-E Supervisory
Instrument for Adoption and GAP determinations.
On December 11, 2018, SSA provided training to Title IV-E
supervisory staff related to the instructions for the Supervisory Review
Instrument.
Recommendation c Agree Estimated Completion Date: September
2017
Please provide details of SSA completed a 100% review of all children determined to be
corrective action or ineligible in foster care, adoption and GAP for federal fiscal year (FFY)
explain disagreement. 2017 in September 2017. FFY 2017 was chosen as this was the period
for which Title-IV funds could have been recouped if errors were found.
This process is now a standard practice as all ineligible cases receive a
first year redetermination. SSA developed an SOP to address ongoing
requirements for review/redetermination of ineligible cases.
Recommendation d Agree Estimated Completion Date: August 2018
Please provide details of SSA began performing the planned secondary review on
corrective action or August 1, 2018 of five percent of the foster children determined to be
explain disagreement. ineligible. The secondary review will continue as a standard practice as
part of the Quality Assurance (QA) procedure.
Page 6 of 8

--- Page 35 ---
Social Services Administration
Follow-up Review 2018
Agency Response Form
Prior Finding 7
SSA did not monitor the timeliness of child abuse and neglect investigations conducted by
the LDSSs. In addition, reviews and investigations of allegations were not always
performed timely.
Prior Report Recommendation 7
We recommend that SSA establish oversight procedures to ensure that the LDSSs review
allegations of child abuse or neglect and conduct and complete related investigations in a timely
manner, as required by SSA policy and State law.
Agency Response
Auditor’s Assessment Factually Accurate
of Status – In Progress
Recommendation Agree Estimated Completion Date: Ongoing
Please provide details of SSA revised the Screening SOP to reflect the updated approach to
corrective action or identifying cases to be reviewed. Between May and August 2018, SSA
explain disagreement. revised the allegations report to include the screening received
date/time, approval request date, supervisor approved date and the
length of time between the screening received date/time and the
supervisor approved date. Based on the report SSA sent out instructions
related to the screening approval process including documenting when
an approval took longer than the required time. SSA has received
responses back from the LDSS regarding the reasons for any referral
that took longer than one (1) day to approve. In October 2018, SSA
finalized the Face-to-Face Mandated Response Time SOP. Based on
these procedures a report is being developed and monitoring will begin
with the issuance of the first report. SSA will continue to send out this
report and to monitor the timeliness of this finding.
Note: Please note that SSA’s monitoring process involves reviewing local data and
identifying trends by tracking which local departments are consistently and accurately
reflecting required activity in CHESSIE and those that need additional technical assistance
to address systemic barriers to accurately reflect required activity in CHESSIE.
Page 7 of 8

--- Page 36 ---
Social Services Administration
Follow-up Review 2018
Agency Response Form
Prior Finding 11
SSA had not established procedures to ensure that adoption assistance payments were
suspended, terminated, or, as permitted, renegotiated with the adoptive parent when an
adopted child was removed from the adoptive home.
Prior Report Recommendation 11
We recommend that SSA
a. establish procedures to ensure compliance with State regulations regarding adoption
assistance payments being made for a child who has been moved from the adoptive home to
an out-of-home placement; and
b. review adoption assistance payments made on behalf of children in out-of-home placement,
including for the aforementioned children, and recover any amounts that were
inappropriately paid.
Agency Response
Auditor’s Assessment Factually Accurate
of Status – In Progress
Recommendation a Agree Estimated Completion Date: November
2018
Please provide details of In November 2018, SSA finalized the process for identifying children
corrective action or who had been moved from an adoptive home to an out of home
explain disagreement. placement. Accordingly, to correct the issues noted by OLA an SOP
has been modified to ensure proper monitoring of Adoption and
Guardianship subsidies.
Recommendation b Agree Estimated Completion Date: November
2018
Please provide details of In November 2018, SSA finalized procedures as part of the
corrective action or Adoption/Guardianship Quarterly Monitoring process to ensure that
explain disagreement. there is adequate monitoring of adoption assistance payments.
Page 8 of 8

--- Page 37 ---
A T
UDIT EAM
Mark S. Hagenbuch, CPA
Audit Manager
Robert J. Smith, CPA
Senior Auditor
Syed M. Taqvi
Staff Auditor