Title: Maryland Department of Health - Regional Institutes for Children and Adolescents
Date: 07/13/2022
Type: Fiscal Compliance
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=62d583fea1ce580f6c8a7759
Extracted: 2025-06-20T00:21:10.384199
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Audit Report
Maryland Department of Health
Regional Institutes for Children and Adolescents
July 2022
Public Notice
In compliance with the requirements of the State Government Article Section
2-1224(i), of the Annotated Code of Maryland, the Office of Legislative Audits
has redacted a cybersecurity finding and related auditee response from this
public report.
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Senator Clarence K. Lam, M.D. (Senate Chair) Delegate Mark S. Chang (House Chair)
Senator Malcolm L. Augustine Delegate Steven J. Arentz
Senator Adelaide C. Eckardt Delegate Nicholas P. Charles II
Senator George C. Edwards Delegate Andrea Fletcher Harrison
Senator Katie Fry Hester Delegate Trent M. Kittleman
Senator Cheryl C. Kagan Delegate Carol L. Krimm
Senator Benjamin F. Kramer Delegate David Moon
Senator Cory V. McCray Delegate Julie Palakovich Carr
Senator Justin D. Ready Delegate Elizabeth G. Proctor
Senator Craig J. Zucker Delegate Geraldine Valentino-Smith
To Obtain Further Information
Office of Legislative Audits
The Warehouse at Camden Yards
351 West Camden Street, Suite 400
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Phone: 410-946-5900
Maryland Relay: 711
TTY: 410-946-5401 ꞏ 301-970-5401
E-mail: OLAWebmaster@ola.state.md.us
Website: www.ola.state.md.us
To Report Fraud
The Office of Legislative Audits operates a Fraud Hotline to report fraud, waste, or abuse involving State
of Maryland government resources. Reports of fraud, waste, or abuse may be communicated anonymously
by a toll-free call to 1-877-FRAUD-11, by mail to the Fraud Hotline, c/o Office of Legislative Audits, or
through the Office’s website.
Nondiscrimination Statement
The Department of Legislative Services does not discriminate on the basis of age, ancestry, color, creed,
marital status, national origin, race, religion, gender, gender identity, sexual orientation, or disability in the
admission or access to its programs, services, or activities. The Department’s Information Officer has been
designated to coordinate compliance with the nondiscrimination requirements contained in Section 35.107
of the United States Department of Justice Regulations. Requests for assistance should be directed to the
Information Officer at 410-946-5400 or 410-970-5400.

--- Page 3 ---
July 13, 2022
Senator Clarence K. Lam, M.D., Senate Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Delegate Mark S. Chang, House Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Members of Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Annapolis, Maryland
Ladies and Gentlemen:
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the Maryland Department of
Health (MDH) – John L. Gildner Regional Institute for Children and Adolescents
(Gildner RICA) and the Regional Institute for Children and Adolescents –
Baltimore (Baltimore RICA), for the period beginning May 15, 2017 and ending
March 31, 2021. Throughout this report, individually, we refer to each Institute
as Gildner RICA and Baltimore RICA, respectively, and collectively as,
Institutes. The Institutes provide mental health and educational services to
adolescents from counties throughout the State of Maryland and Baltimore City.
In our previous audits of the Institutes, we issued separate audit reports for
Gildner RICA and Baltimore RICA. Effective July 1, 2020, the Maryland
Department of Health (MDH) transferred oversight of the Institutes from the
Behavioral Health Administration budgetary unit to the MDH Operations
Administration budgetary unit. To promote audit efficiency, we have
consolidated our review of the two Institutes into one audit, with our
recommendations being made to MDH Healthcare System under the MDH
Operations Administration, on behalf of the Institutes.
Our audit disclosed that the Institutes did not consolidate procurements which
resulted in the failure to maximize leverage as high-volume purchases and the
circumvention of certain control agency approvals. For example, Baltimore
RICA made 358 individual payments, each less than $50,000 to one vendor,
totaling $683,000. By keeping individual purchases low, Baltimore RICA missed
the opportunity to maximize its purchasing power and was not required to obtain
certain approvals, such as the Department of General Services or Board of Public
Works, as necessary.

--- Page 4 ---
In addition, the Institutes did not competitively procure certain goods and
services, did not always have written contracts, and did not verify the propriety of
invoices prior to payment. For example, Baltimore RICA made seven payments
totaling $97,000 to one vendor for sign language interpretation services without
competitively procuring or establishing a contract for the services.
The Institutes also did not have agreements with their respective affiliated
foundation to address the Institutes’ and foundations’ roles and responsibilities.
Furthermore, we found certain risks existed within the Institutes’ payroll system.
However, in accordance with the State Government Article, Section 2-1224(i) of
the Annotated Code of Maryland, we have redacted that finding from this audit
report. Specifically, State law requires the Office of Legislative Audits to redact
cybersecurity findings in a manner consistent with auditing best practices before
the report is made available to the public. The term “cybersecurity” is defined in
the State Finance and Procurement Article, Section 3A-301(b), and using our
professional judgment we have determined that the redacted finding falls under
the referenced definition. The specifics of the cybersecurity finding were
previously communicated to the MDH Healthcare System and the Institutes as
well as those parties responsible for acting on our recommendations.
Finally, our audit included a review to determine the status of the two findings
contained in our preceding audit report of Gildner RICA. We determined that
both of these findings were satisfactorily addressed. Our audit also included a
review to determine the status of the five findings contained in our preceding
audit report of Baltimore RICA. We determined that Baltimore RICA
satisfactorily addressed four of these findings. The remaining finding is repeated
in this report.
MDH Healthcare System’s response to this audit, on behalf of the Institutes, is
included as an appendix to this report. We reviewed the response to our findings
and related recommendations, and have concluded that the corrective actions
identified are sufficient to address all audit issues. However, consistent with the
requirements of State law, we have redacted the elements of MDH Healthcare
System’s response related to the cybersecurity audit finding.
2

--- Page 5 ---
We wish to acknowledge the cooperation extended to us during the audit by the
Institutes. We also wish to acknowledge MDH’s and the Institutes’ willingness to
address the audit issues and implement appropriate corrective actions.
Respectfully submitted,
Gregory A. Hook, CPA
Legislative Auditor
3

--- Page 6 ---
4

--- Page 7 ---
Table of Contents
Background Information 6
Agency Responsibilities 6
Organizational and Audit Approach Changes 7
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Reports 7
Findings and Recommendations 9
Purchases and Disbursements
Finding 1 – Both John L. Gildner Regional Institute for Children and 9
Adolescents and the Regional Institute for Children and Adolescents
– Baltimore (Baltimore RICA) did not consolidate procurements for
similar goods and services, resulting in the failure to maximize
each’s leverage as a high-volume purchaser and the circumvention
of certain oversight.
* Finding 2 – The Institutes did not competitively procure certain 11
goods and services, did not always have written contracts, and did
not verify the propriety of invoices prior to payment.
Payroll
Finding 3 – Redacted cybersecurity-related finding 13
Affiliated Foundations
Finding 4 – The Institutes did not have agreements with their respective 13
affiliated foundation to address each entities’ roles and responsibilities.
Cash Receipts
Finding 5 – Procedures and controls over cash receipts at Baltimore 15
RICA were not sufficiently comprehensive.
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology 17
Agency Response Appendix
* Denotes item repeated in full or part from preceding audit report
5

--- Page 8 ---
Background Information
Agency Responsibilities
This audit includes the operations of the John L. Gildner Regional Institute for
Children and Adolescents (Gildner RICA) and the Regional Institute for Children
and Adolescents – Baltimore (Baltimore RICA). Throughout this report,
individually, we refer to each Institute as Gildner RICA and Baltimore RICA,
respectively, and collectively as, Institutes. The Institutes are residential and day
treatment centers located in Rockville and Baltimore City, respectively, that
provide inpatient and outpatient mental health treatment, education, and
rehabilitative services to children and adolescents and their families throughout
the State of Maryland. In addition, the Gildner RICA is responsible for the
dietary program for the Alfred D. Noyes Children’s Center (a unit of the
Department of Juvenile Services).
In fiscal year 2020, the Institutes provided housing for an average daily
population of 73 residential students, and treatment for an average daily
population of 121 outpatient students (see Figure 1). According to the State’s
records, the Institutes’ expenditures for fiscal year 2020 totaled approximately
$35.3 million.
Figure 1
Average Daily Student Populations
Fiscal Year
Student Type Institute
2017 2018 2019 2020
Residential Gildner RICA 30 33 43 39
(inpatient) Baltimore RICA 30 37 44 34
Total 60 70 87 73
Day Gildner RICA 82 64 55 79
(outpatient) Baltimore RICA 55 55 58 42
Total 137 119 113 121
Source: Agency records
The cost of treatment for the education program has remained relatively steady
over the past several years (fiscal years 2017 through 2020), averaging
approximately $44,000 per student at both Institutes. The annual cost for students
enrolled in the residential programs at the Gildner RICA and Baltimore RICA,
6

--- Page 9 ---
totaled approximately $116,000 and $164,000, respectively, in fiscal year 2020.
This cost has fluctuated significantly over the past several years, due to various
factors, such as variations in the average length of stay per child (see Figure 2).
Figure 2
Residential Cost per Admission
(Excluding Educational Expenses)
Fiscal Year
Institute
2017 2018 2019 2020
Gildner RICA $128,681 $101,490 $116,369 $116,402
Baltimore RICA $203,683 $189,426 $192,517 $163,968
Source: Agency records
Organizational and Audit Approach Changes
Effective July 1, 2020, the Maryland Department of Health (MDH) transferred
oversight of the Institutes from the Behavioral Health Administration (BHA)
budgetary unit to the MDH Operations Administration budgetary unit. In our
previous audits of the Institutes, we issued separate audit reports for Gildner
RICA and Baltimore RICA. In response to the change in oversight and to
promote audit efficiency, we have consolidated our review of the two Institutes
into one audit. Consequently, our audit report recommendations will be made to
the MDH Healthcare System under the MDH Operations Administration, on
behalf of the Institutes.
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Reports
Our audit included a review to determine the status of the two findings contained
in the Gildner RICA report, dated February 14, 2018, and the five findings in the
Baltimore RICA report dated January 5, 2018. As disclosed in Figure 3 on the
following page, we determined that the Institutes collectively satisfactorily
addressed six of these findings. The remaining finding is repeated in this report.
7

--- Page 10 ---
Figure 3
Status of Preceding Findings
Preceding Implementation
Finding Description
Finding Status
John L. Gildner Regional Institute for Children and Adolescents
The Institute did not always maintain sufficient
documentation to support decisions made during its student
Finding 1 Not repeated
prescreening process or maintain a tracking system to ensure
such decisions were made within a reasonable period.
The Institute admitted 47 children directly to its short-term
Finding 2 Evaluation Unit without any formal application process Not repeated
established by policy or regulation.
Regional Institute for Children and Adolescents – Baltimore
RICA did not maintain an admission team to make admission
Finding 1 determinations as required by State regulations, and certain Not repeated
critical documentation was not maintained.
There was a lack of segregation of duties in collection
Finding 2 Not repeated
processing and accounts receivable recordkeeping.
RICA did not use a competitive procurement process for Repeated
Finding 3
certain services, as required. (Current Finding 2)
RICA did not have a process to ensure that all vendor amounts
Finding 4 Not repeated
billed agreed to the related contractual terms and conditions.
RICA did not report unprovided for payables totaling
Finding 5 $700,000 to the Comptroller of Maryland at the 2015 fiscal Not repeated
year-end, as required.
8

--- Page 11 ---
Findings and Recommendations
Purchases and Disbursements
Finding 1
Both John L. Gildner Regional Institute for Children and Adolescents and
the Regional Institute for Children and Adolescents – Baltimore did not
consolidate procurements for similar goods and services, resulting in the
failure to maximize each’s leverage as a high-volume purchaser and the
circumvention of certain oversight.
Analysis
Both John L. Gildner Regional Institute for Children and Adolescents (Gildner
RICA) and the Regional Institute for Children and Adolescents – Baltimore
(Baltimore RICA) referred collectively as Institutes, did not consolidate their
individual procurements to vendors for similar services and goods to maximize
each’s leverage as a high-volume purchaser. Rather, the purchases were made by
the respective Institute as separate individual purchases during the year. In
addition, since these procurements were below certain dollar value thresholds,
each Institute was able to circumvent certain State procurement regulations
intended to enhance controls, oversight, and transparency. The Institutes
procured goods and services totaling $5.5 million in fiscal year 2020.
Our review of purchasing and payment activity for several vendors disclosed that
each Institute had a pattern of not consolidating procurements, but rather splitting
purchases into multiple purchase orders or payments not associated with purchase
orders (see Figure 4 on the following page). Specifically, during the period from
June 1, 2017 through March 31, 2021, the Institutes issued 1,610 purchase orders
valued at approximately $1.8 million and made an additional 264 payments
unrelated to purchase orders valued at $169,900. The total payments to five
vendors, including both through purchase orders and direct payments unrelated to
purchase orders, totaled $1.8 million. Each of these purchase orders and
payments were in amounts below $25,000.
9

--- Page 12 ---
Figure 4
Vendor Purchasing Activity
June 1, 2017 through March 31, 2021
Purchase Orders
Direct
Vendor Institute Total Paid
PO Payments
Number Total Value
Payments
Educational Baltimore
128 $724,800 $613,000 $70,000 $683,000
Services1 RICA
Gildner Direct
Food 453 382,700 356,200 3,500 359,700
RICA
Baltimore
Food 142 328,000 296,600 3,500 300,100
RICA
Gildner
Food 769 296,900 275,300 3,100 278,400
RICA
Gildner
Janitorial 118 103,100 77,300 89,800 167,100
RICA
Total 1,610 $1,835,500 $1,618,400 $169,900 $1,788,300
Source: State financial records
1 Purchasing activity for this vendor ended February 2020
For example, for the educational services vendor, the Baltimore RICA issued 128
purchase orders valued at $724,800, and made 287 related payments totaling
$613,000. In addition, Baltimore RICA made a further 71 direct payments
totaling $70,000 unrelated to these purchase orders. The total payments to this
vendor were $683,000 and ranged in amounts from $35 to $8,705. By keeping
individual purchases low (under $50,000), the Baltimore RICA was not required
to obtain MDH – Office of Contract Management and Procurement (OCMP),
Department of General Services (DGS), or Board of Public Works (BPW)
approvals as necessary.
A similar condition was noted in the prior report with this vendor and a lack of
competitive procurement for the related services. State records disclosed the final
payment to this vendor was posted in February 2020 and we were advised by
Baltimore RICA personnel that a competitive procurement was performed in
March 2020, which resulted in a formal contract executed to a new educational
services vendor.
10

--- Page 13 ---
State procurement regulations prohibit procurements from being artificially
divided to circumvent procurement requirements. Regulations further state that
contracts for goods or services of $50,000 or more require DGS approval and
BPW approval for contracts valued at $200,000 or greater. Finally, the Maryland
Department of Health (MDH) Procurement Policy requires procurements
exceeding $50,000 to be submitted to MDH OCMP for processing.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that MDH Healthcare System, in conjunction with DGS,
consolidate each Institute’s respective procurements to maximize State
purchasing power and enhance controls and oversight.
Finding 2
The Institutes did not competitively procure certain goods and services, did
not always have written contracts, and did not verify the propriety of
invoices prior to payment.
Analysis
The Institutes did not competitively procure certain goods and services, did not
always have written contracts, and did not verify the propriety of invoices prior to
payment. Our test1 of 16 payments totaling approximately $284,000 (ranging
from $5,600 to $48,400) disclosed that 10 payments totaling $128,000 to three
vendors were made without seeking competition and without formal contracts
(see Figure 5). For each of these 10 payments, the applicable Institute created a
purchase order after the related invoice was received in order to process a
payment through the State’s automated financial system, but did not seek
competition or establish a formal contract with the vendor.
Figure 5
Results of Test of Payments
Payments Tested
Institute Payments Tested Without a Competitive
Contract
Baltimore RICA 10 $145,000 8 $106,000
Gildner RICA 6 139,000 2 22,000
Total 16 $284,000 10 $128,000
Source: Agency records
1 Our selection of test items was based on the significance of vendor payments during the audit
period.
11

--- Page 14 ---
For example, Baltimore RICA made seven payments totaling $97,000 to one
vendor for sign language interpretation services without competitively procuring
or establishing a contract for the services. Baltimore RICA processed these
payments by creating a purchase order after the related services were received.
We were advised by Baltimore RICA management that these services were
obtained through a statewide contract for translation services; however, this
contract specifically excluded sign language services.
We expanded our review to include 176 payments totaling $543,000 which
disclosed that for 168 payments totaling $452,000, the applicable Institute could
not locate documentation (such as a contract, purchase order, or quote) that would
allow verification of the accuracy of the related invoice (see Figure 6).
Figure 6
Review of Payments
Payment Activity Payments Lacking
Institute
Reviewed Support
Baltimore RICA 138 $336,000 138 $336,000
Gildner RICA 38 207,000 30 116,000
Total 176 $543,000 168 $452,000
Source: Agency records
For example, Gildner RICA made 25 payments totaling $67,400 to one vendor for
nursing services provided between September 2017 and February 2021. Of those
25 payments, 7 referenced a contract which could not be located, and 12 did not
reference a contract. Consequently, Gildner RICA paid the invoice without
verifying the accuracy of the hourly rate billed.
A similar condition regarding the need to comply with State procurement
regulations was commented upon in our two preceding reports of Baltimore
RICA. State procurement regulations require a formal written procurement
process (such as competitive sealed bidding) for procurements that are reasonably
expected to exceed $5,000 and that these procurements be supported by a written
contract or purchase order. In addition, the Comptroller of Maryland’s
Accounting Procedures Manual requires agencies to document that invoices agree
with supporting documentation.
12

--- Page 15 ---
Recommendation 2
We recommend that MDH Healthcare System ensure that each Institute
a. comply with State procurement regulations and ensure procurements are
properly solicited and documented (repeat from Baltimore RICA), and
b. retain appropriate documentation (such as contracts) and use this
documentation to verify the accuracy of the invoices.
Payroll
We determined that Finding 3 related to “cybersecurity”, as defined by the State
Finance and Procurement Article, Section 3A-301(b) of the Annotated Code of
Maryland, and therefore is subject to redaction from the publicly available audit
report in accordance with the State Government Article 2-1224(i). Consequently,
the specifics of the following finding, including the analysis, related
recommendation(s), along with MDH Healthcare System’s responses, have been
redacted from this report copy.
Finding 3
Redacted cybersecurity-related finding.
Affiliated Foundations
Finding 4
The Institutes did not have agreements with their respective affiliated
foundation to address each entities’ roles and responsibilities.
Analysis
Each Institute did not have a memorandum of agreement (MOA) with its
respective affiliated foundation, the RICA Rockville Association (for Gildner
RICA) and the RICA Auxiliary, Inc. (for Baltimore RICA), to address each
entities’ roles and responsibilities. The foundations are tax exempt organizations
that were created in 1987 and 2018, respectively, to fund special programs and
projects for enrolled students, by fundraising and providing contributions to each
Institute. According to filings with the Internal Revenue Service, the foundations
affiliated with the Gildner RICA and Baltimore RICA reported on their federal
tax returns, receipts totaling $74,420 and less than $50,000 for the year ending
June 30, 2020, respectively.
13

--- Page 16 ---
The MOA should specify the roles and responsibilities of each entity, including
the following:
 The foundation’s solicitation, collection, administration, and investment of
funds,
 The foundation’s procurement policies for purchases donated to the Institute,
 The foundation’s submission of an annual audited report to the Institute,
 The sharing of priorities, projects and resource requirements, including the
sharing of any non-private data to assist the foundation’s effort,
 Providing of any in-kind support functions and the use of its facilities, and
 The foundation’s ethics policies to identify and manage potential conflicts of
interest.
For example, an MOA between the Institutes and affiliated foundations could
address possible conflicts of interest that we noted from the affiliated foundations’
federal tax returns. Specifically, while we were advised by RICA management
that its employees only act as volunteers, the tax return identified one Gildner
RICA employee as the custodian of the foundation’s financial records and the
primary contact. In addition, a foundation officer was the spouse of a senior
manager at Baltimore RICA. Senior management personnel at the State Ethics
Commission advised us that such relationships may violate State ethics law. The
State Ethics Commission would ultimately make any final decision related to
violations of the State ethics laws. In addition, the MDH Policies for the
Organization and Operation of Ancillary Organizations prohibits MDH
employees from working for an affiliated foundation because this may create the
appearance of a conflict of interest.
As of January 2022, the RICA Rockville Association had five board members and
RICA Auxiliary, Inc. had three board members. These board members were
collectively responsible for managing each foundation’s fiscal affairs and
approving expenditures to support their mission.
Recommendation 4
We recommend that MDH Healthcare System
a. ensures that each Institute enters into MOAs with affiliated foundations
to, at a minimum, detail the roles and responsibilities for each entity in
critical areas such as solicitation, investment, procurement, and ethics
policies (both MDH and State Ethics Commission); and
b. refers any matters potentially violating State ethics law, including the
matter discussed above relating to Baltimore RICA, to the State Ethics
Commission and take action to comply with any decisions that the State
Ethics Commission provides on these matters.
14

--- Page 17 ---
Cash Receipts
Finding 5
Procedures and controls over cash receipts at Baltimore RICA were not
sufficiently comprehensive.
Analysis
Baltimore RICA’s2 controls over the cash receipts and the deposit process were
inadequate. The cash and check collections at Baltimore RICA totaled
approximately $3 million during fiscal year 2020.
 The employee who was responsible for verifying collections were deposited
had access to the related collections and was not independent. Consequently,
there was a lack of assurance that all collections had been deposited. The
Comptroller of Maryland’s Accounting Procedures Manual requires that an
independent employee perform a reconciliation of recorded collections from
the initial point of recordation to amounts deposited.
 Baltimore RICA did not maintain a log of checks destroyed after being
deposited through the remote deposit system, as required. Consequently,
there was a lack of assurance that all checks received were destroyed. The
State Treasurer’s Policy on the Use of Remote Deposit Services by Maryland
State Agencies requires a log to be maintained tracking the dates checks are
destroyed to verify that all checks received and processed through the bank’s
remote deposit system were subsequently destroyed.
 Baltimore RICA did not require large payments to be made electronically to
enhance accountability and security over the funds. During fiscal year 2020,
$2.9 million in collections were received from Local Education Agencies as
reimbursement for education services provided to students. Our review
disclosed that 30 of these 174 check payments (totaling $2.7 million) ranged
in amounts from $22,000 up to $214,000. Controls could be enhanced by
requiring these payments to be submitted electronically (such as via wire
transfer).
2 Based on our assessment of risk, we limited our review of procedures and controls over cash and
check collections to Baltimore RICA.
15

--- Page 18 ---
Recommendation 5
We recommend that MDH Healthcare System ensure that sufficient controls
over cash receipts are implemented at Baltimore RICA by
a. ensuring that an independent employee is responsible for verifying that
all recorded collections were deposited by establishing an adequate
segregation of duties between collections and reconciling,
b. ensuring that checks processed through the bank’s remote deposit system
are logged and reconciled, and
c. considering requiring large payments to be made electronically to
enhance control over the funds.
We advised Baltimore RICA on accomplishing the necessary separation of
duties using existing personnel.
16

--- Page 19 ---
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the Maryland Department of
Health (MDH) – John L. Gildner Regional Institute for Children and Adolescents
(Gildner RICA) and the Regional Institute for Children and Adolescents –
Baltimore (Baltimore RICA) (Institutes), for the period beginning May 15, 2017
and ending March 31, 2021. The audit was conducted in accordance with
generally accepted government auditing standards. Those standards require that
we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient, appropriate evidence to
provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit
objectives. We believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for
our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives.
As prescribed by the State Government Article, Section 2-1221 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, the objectives of this audit were to examine the Institutes’
financial transactions, records, and internal control, and to evaluate its compliance
with applicable State laws, rules, and regulations.
In planning and conducting our audit, we focused on the major financial-related
areas of operations based on assessments of significance and risk. The areas
addressed by the audit included certain procurements and disbursements, cash
receipts, equipment, certain payroll activities, and patient admissions. We also
determined the status of the findings contained in our preceding audit reports.
Our audit did not include certain support services provided to the Institutes by
MDH – Office of the Secretary. These support services (such as certain other
payroll and procurement activities, maintenance of accounting records, and
related fiscal functions) are included within the scope of our audit of the Office of
the Secretary.
Our assessment of internal controls was based on agency procedures and controls
in place at the time of our fieldwork. Our tests of transactions and other auditing
procedures were generally focused on the transactions occurring during our audit
period of May 15, 2017 to March 31, 2021, but may include transactions before or
after this period as we considered necessary to achieve our audit objectives.
To accomplish our audit objectives, our audit procedures included inquiries of
appropriate personnel, inspections of documents and records, tests of transactions
and to the extent practicable, observations of the Institutes’ operations. Generally,
transactions were selected for testing based on auditor judgment, which primarily
considers risk, the timing or dollar amount of the transaction, or the significance
of the transaction to the area of operation reviewed. As a matter of course, we do
17

--- Page 20 ---
not normally use sampling in our tests, so unless otherwise specifically indicated,
neither statistical nor non-statistical audit sampling was used to select the
transactions tested. Therefore, unless sampling is specifically indicated in a
finding, the results from any tests conducted or disclosed by us cannot be used to
project those results to the entire population from which the test items were
selected.
We also performed various data extracts of pertinent information from the State’s
Financial Management Information System (such as revenue and expenditure
data) and the State’s Central Payroll Bureau (payroll data). The extracts are
performed as part of ongoing internal processes established by the Office of
Legislative Audits and were subject to various tests to determine data reliability.
We determined that the data extracted from these sources were sufficiently
reliable for the purposes the data were used during this audit. Finally, we
performed other auditing procedures that we considered necessary to achieve our
audit objectives. The reliability of data used in this report for background or
informational purposes was not assessed.
Under MDH Healthcare System, a part of MDH Operations Administration, the
Institutes’ managements are responsible for establishing and maintaining effective
internal control. Internal control is a process designed to provide reasonable
assurance that objectives pertaining to the reliability of financial records;
effectiveness and efficiency of operations including safeguarding of assets; and
compliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations are achieved. As
provided in Government Auditing Standards, there are five components of
internal control: control environment, risk assessment, control activities,
information and communication, and monitoring. Each of the five components,
when significant to the audit objectives, and as applicable to the Institutes, were
considered by us during the course of this audit.
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate.
Our reports are designed to assist the Maryland General Assembly in exercising
its legislative oversight function and to provide constructive recommendations for
improving State operations. As a result, our reports generally do not address
activities we reviewed that are functioning properly.
18

--- Page 21 ---
This report includes findings relating to conditions that we consider to be
significant deficiencies in the design or operation of internal control that could
adversely affect the Institutes’ ability to maintain reliable financial records,
operate effectively and efficiently, and/or comply with applicable laws, rules, and
regulations. Our report also includes findings regarding significant instances of
noncompliance with applicable laws, rules, or regulations. Other less significant
findings were communicated to the Institutes’ that did not warrant inclusion in
this report.
State Government Article Section 2-1224(i) requires that we redact in a manner
consistent with auditing best practices any cybersecurity findings before a report
is made available to the public. This results in the issuance of two different
versions of an audit report that contains cybersecurity findings – a redacted
version for the public and an unredacted version for government officials
responsible for acting on our audit recommendations.
The State Finance and Procurement Article, Section 3A-301(b), states that
cybersecurity is defined as “means processes or capabilities wherein systems,
communications, and information are protected and defended against damage,
unauthorized use or modification, and exploitation”. Based on that definition, and
in our professional judgement, we concluded that a finding in this report meets
that definition. Consequently, for the publicly available audit report all specifics
as to the nature of that cybersecurity finding and required corrective actions have
been redacted. We have determined that such aforementioned practices, and
government auditing standards, support the redaction of this information from the
public audit report. The specifics of the cybersecurity finding have been
communicated to the MDH Healthcare System and those parties responsible for
acting on our recommendations in an unredacted audit report.
The response from MDH Healthcare System, on behalf of the Institutes, to our
findings and recommendations is included as an appendix to this report.
Depending on the version of the audit report, responses to any cybersecurity
findings may be redacted in accordance with State law. As prescribed in the State
Government Article, Section 2-1224 of the Annotated Code of Maryland, we will
advise MDH regarding the results of our review of its response.
19

--- Page 22 ---
APPENDIX
June 17, 2022
Mr. Gregory A. Hook, CPA
Legislative Auditor
Office of Legislative Audits
State Office Building, Room 1202
301 West Preston Street
Baltimore, MD 21201
Dear Mr. Hook:
Enclosed is the draft audit report on the Maryland Department of Health – Regional Institutes for
Children and Adolescents for the period beginning May 15, 2017 and ending March 31, 2021.
If you have any questions, please contact Frederick D. Doggett at 410-767-0885 or email at
frederick.doggett@maryland.gov.
Sincerely,
Dennis R Schrader, Secretary
Maryland Department of Health
Enclosure
cc: Webster Ye, Assistant Secretary, Health Policy, MDH
Dwain Shaw, Director, Prevention and Health Promotion Administration
Atif Chaudry, Deputy Secretary for Operations
Sara Barra, Chief of Staff
Frederick D. Doggett, Director, Internal Controls, Audit Compliance & Security, MDH
Annie Olle, Chief of Staff, MPP
Bryan Mroz, Director, MDH Healthcare System

--- Page 23 ---
Maryland Department of Health
Regional Institutes for Children and Adolescents
Agency Response Form
Purchases and Disbursements
Finding 1
Both John L. Gildner Regional Institute for Children and Adolescents and the Regional
Institute for Children and Adolescents – Baltimore did not consolidate procurements for
similar goods and services, resulting in the failure to maximize each’s leverage as a high-
volume purchaser and the circumvention of certain oversight.
We recommend that MDH Healthcare System, in conjunction with DGS, consolidate each
Institute’s respective procurements to maximize State purchasing power and enhance
controls and oversight.
Agency Response
Analysis Factually Accurate
The MDH Healthcare System, which was established on July 1, 2021
comprises the eleven operating MDH healthcare facilities, including the
five adult psychiatric hospitals, the two long term acute care hospitals,
the two facilities for individuals with intellectual disabilities, and the two
Regional Institutes for Children and Adolescents, which are the subject
of this audit report.
The MDH Healthcare System was established to create opportunities for
both standardization of policies and procedures and sharing of resources
where appropriate and beneficial to optimize patient care and fiscal
responsibility. We are in the process of creating and hiring additional
oversight positions for functions such as procurement and financial
services to ensure that appropriate procedures are followed consistently.
We are reviewing existing practices to ensure compliance and
exploration of opportunities to maximize State purchasing power across
the system as a top priority for the next phase of the MDH Healthcare
System’s development.
Although the purpose of the MDH Healthcare System is to unify the
MDH healthcare facilities under one administration, it is important to
note that each facility is different and not all policies, procedures, and
recommendations will impact every facility in the same way, nor will
every facility be able to implement them uniformly. Even among
facilities grouped together by the service lines listed above, there are key
differences that must be taken into account. We expect those differences
will be highlighted as you continue your grouped facility audits.
Page 1 of 6

--- Page 24 ---
Maryland Department of Health
Regional Institutes for Children and Adolescents
Agency Response Form
The MDH Healthcare System will pursue shared services contracts for
certain services covering multiple facilities to optimize our procurements
both fiscally and in terms of goods and services provided. In this
particular case, the RICAs already use state contracts where practicable,
but after consultation with the MDH Office of Contract Management
and Procurement and the Department of General Service’s Office of
State Procurement, we have found that there are additional opportunities
to consolidate procurements, such as a multi-vendor award master
procurement for foods and other items, as well as opportunities to take
advantage of federal programs used by MSDE and DJS for the provision
of fresh foods directly from the USDA.
Recommendation 1 Agree Estimated Completion Date: December 31,
2022
Please provide details of The MDH Healthcare System will explore opportunities to consolidate
corrective action or contracts, including pursuing multi-vendor award master contracts for
explain disagreement. the provision of foods as well as opportunities to take advantage of
federal programs used by MSDE and DJS for the provision of fresh
foods directly from the USDA. To the extent possible, MDH will take
appropriate actions to follow procurement practices while ensuring
compliance with the USDA regulations and meeting the needs of
teenagers. The RICAs will continue to procure goods to the maximum
State purchase power to enhance controls and oversight.
Finding 2
The Institutes did not competitively procure certain goods and services, did not always
have written contracts, and did not verify the propriety of invoices prior to payment.
We recommend that MDH Healthcare System ensure that each Institute
a. comply with State procurement regulations and ensure procurements are properly
solicited and documented (repeat from Baltimore RICA), and
b. retain appropriate documentation (such as contracts) and use this documentation to
verify the accuracy of the invoices.
Agency Response
Analysis Factually Accurate
Page 2 of 6

--- Page 25 ---
Maryland Department of Health
Regional Institutes for Children and Adolescents
Agency Response Form
Please provide
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 2a Agree Estimated Completion Date: December 31,
2022
Please provide details of The RICAs will document and implement a process for complying with
corrective action or State procurement regulations and ensuring procurements are properly
explain disagreement. solicited and documented. Purchases within delegated authority will be
done immediately, while others will have to go through the full
contracting process which will take 6 months to a year.
Recommendation 2b Agree Estimated Completion Date: April 1, 2022
Please provide details of The RICAs will document and implement a process for retaining
corrective action or contracts and verifying the accuracy of invoices.
explain disagreement.
Payroll
The Office of Legislative Audits (OLA) has determined that Finding 3 related to “cybersecurity”,
as defined by the State Finance and Procurement Article, Section 3A-301(b) of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, and therefore is subject to redaction from the publicly available audit report
in accordance with State Government Article 2-1224(i). Although the specifics of the finding,
including the analysis, related recommendation(s), along with the Agency’s responses, have been
redacted from this report copy, the System’s response indicated agreement with the finding and
related recommendation(s).
Finding 3
Redacted cybersecurity-related finding.
Agency Response has been redacted by OLA.
Affiliated Foundations
Finding 4
The Institutes did not have agreements with their respective affiliated foundation to
address each entities’ roles and responsibilities.
Page 3 of 6

--- Page 26 ---
Maryland Department of Health
Regional Institutes for Children and Adolescents
Agency Response Form
We recommend that MDH Healthcare System
a. ensures that each Institute enters into MOAs with affiliated foundations to, at a
minimum, detail the roles and responsibilities for each entity in critical areas such as
solicitation, investment, procurement, and ethics policies (both MDH and State Ethics
Commission); and
b. refers any matters potentially violating State ethics law, including the matter discussed
above relating to Baltimore RICA, to the State Ethics Commission and take action to
comply with any decisions that the State Ethics Commission provides on these matters.
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 4a Agree Estimated Completion Date: June 30, 2022
Please provide details of JLG-RICA
corrective action or
explain disagreement. RICA Gildner will enter into MOAs with affiliated foundations to, at a
minimum, detail the roles and responsibilities for each entity in critical
areas such as solicitation, investment, procurement and ethics policies
where applicable.
RICA-Baltimore
Agree: Estimated Completion Date: June 30, 2022
RICA-Baltimore will enter into a MOA with the RICA Auxiliary. The
MOA will address the roles and responsibilities for each entity in critical
areas such as solicitation, investment, procurement, and ethics policies.
As part of the MOA, MDH intends to require the auxiliary to submit an
affidavit of compliance every year that ensures none of its members have
engaged in any solicitation, investments, procurement or any ethics
violations.
Recommendation 4b Agree Estimated Completion Date: July 15, 2022
Page 4 of 6

--- Page 27 ---
Maryland Department of Health
Regional Institutes for Children and Adolescents
Agency Response Form
Please provide details of The RICAs agree to refer any matters potentially violating State ethics
corrective action or law, including the matter discussed above relating to Baltimore RICA, to
explain disagreement.
the State Ethics Commission and take action to comply with any
decisions that the State Ethics Commission provides on these matters.
Cash Receipts
Finding 5
Procedures and controls over cash receipts at Baltimore RICA were not sufficiently
comprehensive.
We recommend that MDH Healthcare System ensure that sufficient controls over cash
receipts are implemented at Baltimore RICA by
a. ensuring that an independent employee is responsible for verifying that all recorded
collections were deposited by establishing an adequate segregation of duties between
collections and reconciling,
b. ensuring that checks processed through the bank’s remote deposit system are logged
and reconciled, and
c. considering requiring large payments to be made electronically to enhance control over
the funds.
We advised Baltimore RICA on accomplishing the necessary separation of duties using
existing personnel.
Agency Response
Analysis Factually Agree
Please provide
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 5a Agree Estimated Completion Date: June 30, 2022
Please provide details of RICA Baltimore will document and implement a process to ensure that
corrective action or fiscal and program staff will follow the State Treasury Remote Deposit
explain disagreement. Policy where an independent employee will be responsible for verifying
that all recorded collections were deposited by establishing an adequate
segregation of duties between processing receipt transactions and
reconciling.
Page 5 of 6

--- Page 28 ---
Maryland Department of Health
Regional Institutes for Children and Adolescents
Agency Response Form
Recommendation 5b Agree Estimated Completion Date: June 30, 2022
Please provide details of RICA will document and update, as needed, its process for ensuring
corrective action or checks processed through the remote system are logged & reconciled.
explain disagreement.
Recommendation 5c Agree Estimated Completion Date: June 30, 2022
Please provide details of RICA will document and implement a process for requiring large
corrective action or payments to be made electronically to enhance control over the funds.
explain disagreement.
Page 6 of 6

--- Page 29 ---
A T
UDIT EAM
Heather A. Warriner, CPA
Audit Manager
Walter L. Horan, IV
Senior Auditor
Ibijoke O. Owolabi, CPA
Staff Auditor