Title: Maryland Department of the Environment
Date: 08/03/2022
Type: Fiscal Compliance
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=62f10885a1ce581544b83840
Extracted: 2025-06-20T00:21:45.354209
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Audit Report
Maryland Department of the Environment
May 2018
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
For further information concerning this report contact:
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
301 West Preston Street, Room 1202
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Phone: 410-946-5900 ꞏ 301-970-5900
Toll Free in Maryland: 1-877-486-9964
Maryland Relay: 711
TTY: 410-946-5401 ꞏ 301-970-5401
E-mail: OLAWebmaster@ola.state.md.us
Website: www.ola.state.md.us
The Office of Legislative Audits operates a Fraud Hotline to report fraud, waste, or abuse
involving State of Maryland government resources. Reports of fraud, waste, or abuse
may be communicated anonymously by a toll-free call to 1-877-FRAUD-11, by mail to the
Fraud Hotline, c/o Office of Legislative Audits, or through the Office’s website.
The Department of Legislative Services does not discriminate on the basis of age, ancestry, color,
creed, marital status, national origin, race, religion, gender, gender identity, sexual orientation,
or disability in the admission or access to its programs, services, or activities. The Department’s
Information Officer has been designated to coordinate compliance with the nondiscrimination
requirements contained in Section 35.107 of the Department of Justice Regulations. Requests for
assistance should be directed to the Information Officer at 410-946-5400 or 410-970-5400.

--- Page 5 ---
Table of Contents
Background Information 5
Agency Responsibilities 5
Financial Statement Audits – Maryland Water Quality Financing 5
Administration
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report 6
Findings and Recommendations 7
Interagency Agreements
Finding 1 – The Maryland Department of the Environment (MDE) used 8
interagency agreements with a college to augment its staff, allowing
it to avoid using competitive procurement processes or budgeted
positions. MDE did not ensure the rates for these services were
reasonable.
Lead Poisoning Prevention Program
* Finding 2 – MDE did not establish a sufficient process to ensure that 11
owners of affected lead paint properties had required inspection
certificates. We identified 10,832 registered rental units without
inspection certificates that MDE had not investigated.
Erosion and Sediment Control Plan Inspections
* Finding 3 – Inspections of certain construction sites were not performed 13
as required by State regulations, and MDE lacked a formal plan for
inspecting all sites. Only 1,033 of 5,942 sites were inspected during
fiscal year 2016.
Finding 4 – MDE did not always retain documentation to support 14
penalties assessed against construction contractors and to evidence
supervisory approval.
Information Systems Security and Control
Finding 5 – Eleven contractors had unnecessary network-level access to 16
the entire MDE internal network.
* Denotes item repeated in full or part from preceding audit report
3

--- Page 6 ---
Finding 6 – Malware protection was not sufficient to provide MDE 16
with adequate assurance that its computers were properly protected.
Finding 7 – A critical database and numerous servers were running 18
on outdated software.
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology 19
Agency Response Appendix
4

--- Page 7 ---
Background Information
Agency Responsibilities
The Maryland Department of the Environment (MDE) was created to protect and
restore the quality of the State’s land, air, and water resources, and to safeguard
the public from health risks associated with pollution. MDE’s duties and
responsibilities include enforcing applicable laws and regulations, conducting
long-term planning and research, and assisting industries and communities in their
efforts to handle pollution, waste disposal, and emergency spills of waste or oil.
MDE consists of the following units:
 Office of the Secretary
 Budget and Financing (including the Maryland Water Quality Financing
Administration)
 Operational Services Administration
 Water and Science Administration
 Land and Materials Administration
 Air and Radiation Administration
The Maryland Water Quality Financing Administration administers the Water
Quality and Drinking Water Revolving Loan Funds and the Bay Restoration
Fund.
According to the State’s records, during fiscal year 2017, MDE’s operating and
capital expenditures totaled approximately $410.2 million. These expenditures
were funded by general funds totaling approximately $29.9 million, special funds
totaling approximately $292.8 million, federal funds totaling approximately $74.2
million, and reimbursable funds totaling approximately $13.3 million. MDE’s
capital expenditures primarily related to its Water Quality and Drinking Water
Revolving Loan Funds and the Bay Restoration Fund; these capital expenditures
totaled approximately $153.2 million and $94.0 million, respectively.
Financial Statement Audits – Maryland Water Quality Financing
Administration
MDE engaged an independent accounting firm to perform audits of the Maryland
Water Quality Financing Administration’s financial statements for the Water
Quality and Drinking Water Revolving Loan Funds and the Bay Restoration Fund
for the fiscal years ended June 30, 2014, 2015, 2016, and 2017. In the related
audit reports, the firm stated that the Administration’s financial statements
5

--- Page 8 ---
presented fairly, in all material respects, the financial position of the
Administration and its changes in financial position and its cash flows for the
years then ended in accordance with the accounting principles generally accepted
in the United States of America. According to the financial statements, as of June
30, 2017, the Maryland Water Quality Financing Administration’s net position
totaled approximately $1.37 billion.
The Maryland Water Quality Financing Administration provides a combination of
federal and State funds for low-interest loans to local jurisdictions and private
entities throughout the State for drinking water and water quality capital projects.
These projects include upgrades and expansions to wastewater treatment plants
and pump stations, and creation of storm water management facilities.
Additionally, the Administration provides Bay Restoration Fund grants for
enhanced nutrient removal upgrades to existing wastewater facilities, for sewer
infrastructure rehabilitation, and for septic system upgrades.
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report
Our audit included a review to determine the status of the six findings contained
in our preceding audit report dated January 6, 2015. We determined that MDE
satisfactorily addressed four of the six findings. The remaining two findings are
repeated in this report.
6

--- Page 9 ---
Findings and Recommendations
Interagency Agreements
Background
Interagency agreements are used by State agencies to obtain services, such as
technical assistance and training, from another State agency, including institutions
of higher education. Interagency agreements are exempt from State procurement
laws, including the requirements for competitive procurement, publication of
solicitations and awards, and Board of Public Works’ approval.
Prior to our audit, the Maryland Department of the Environment (MDE) entered
into four interagency agreements with a college valued collectively at $12 million.
The first of these agreements began in August 2009 and the agreements are
scheduled to terminate in June 2018. After our audit period, MDE entered into
another agreement with the college for $3 million beginning February 17, 2017
and ending June 30, 2021. Although the college is not a State agency, we were
advised by the executive secretary of the Board of Public Works that a State
agency’s agreement with a college should be considered an interagency
agreement and, accordingly, would also be exempt from State procurement
regulations.
The college includes an entity which, according to its website, frequently provides
environmental, safety, and health training, as well as certain regulatory
compliance assistance. We were advised that MDE has a longstanding
partnership with this entity to provide training and technical assistance to water
and environmental operators in Maryland.
State budget law places requirements on State agencies to report certain
interagency agreement activity to the State’s Department of Budget and
Management (DBM) for its review and reporting to the General Assembly’s
budget committees. DBM’s written instructions to agencies for reporting such
activity stipulate that agreements with certain types of colleges are not subject to
these reporting requirements. Accordingly, there was no review of these
agreements by DBM.
7

--- Page 10 ---
Finding 1
MDE used interagency agreements with the college to augment its staff,
allowing it to avoid using competitive procurement processes for these
services or using budgeted positions as necessary. Certain staffing services
provided through these agreements did not appear to be within the college’s
mission. MDE also did not ensure the rates charged for these services were
reasonable.
Analysis
MDE used interagency agreements with a college to provide staff for certain
MDE services which allowed MDE to avoid using competitive procurement
processes for these services or filling or seeking additional budgeted positions, as
necessary. In addition, some of the services provided were administrative in
nature, and were not specific to the mission of the college or the entity under
which these arrangements took place. Finally, MDE did not verify the
reasonableness of the rates charged by the college, including administrative fees.
Assurance was lacking, therefore, that these services were obtained by MDE at
the most advantageous cost to the State.
Based on a referral to our fraud, waste, and abuse hotline, we reviewed four
interagency agreements that MDE had with the college and the related
expenditures. According to State records, disbursements to the college during our
audit period totaled approximately $4.5 million. Our review focused on the
expenditures of one of MDE’s Administrations, which accounted for the majority
of the expenditures under these agreements. According to the State’s records, this
Administration’s expenditures for these four agreements totaled approximately
$3.1 million between July 2013 and February 2018, which included an estimated
$996,000 in administrative fees.
Interagency Agreements Were Used to Augment Budgeted Staff
MDE’s use of interagency agreements with the college to provide staffing
services allowed certain MDE administrations to augment their staff without
using competitive procurement processes or filling or seeking additional budgeted
positions, as necessary. For example, under these four agreements, the MDE
Administration entered into at least 43 task orders with the college, which covered
specific timeframes and provided for a specific number of employee positions.
For example, based on MDE’s representation, these task orders provided the
Administration with approximately 40 college employees that had employment
start dates ranging from June 2014 to October 2017, to provide the services as
described in the task orders.
8

--- Page 11 ---
For example, staffing services provided included natural resource planners and
regulatory and compliance engineers. In most cases, these individuals were not
existing college employees, but were hired by the college on behalf of MDE to
fulfill the task order requirements. We were advised by MDE management that
these agreements were often used because their use required less administrative
effort by MDE and provided for faster and more flexible hiring and firing
processes for required staff.
The college posted required job listings on its website, on behalf of MDE,
reviewed applications received, interviewed candidates with MDE input, and
hired successful candidates as college employees. MDE directly assigned and
supervised the work of these employees, including verifying their timesheets.
The college billed MDE for reimbursement of salaries paid as specified in the
applicable task orders. According to MDE’s records for these 40 employees, the
employees sometimes remained in these positions for extended periods. For
example, under the related task orders, 6 of these 40 employees worked at MDE
for over two years.
Certain Services Did Not Appear to be Within the Mission of the College
Certain staffing services provided through these interagency agreements were
administrative in nature and, therefore, did not appear to be within the mission of
the college in general, or the entity in particular. Specifically, 11 of the 40
aforementioned employees were hired for administrative or clerical positions,
such as office secretaries and administrative assistants. One job posting for a
Senior Administrative Assistant for MDE stated that responsibilities would
include, for example, coordinating office staff activities, ensuring filing systems
are maintained and current, and monitoring the inventory of office supplies. The
remaining 29 employees were filling technical positions within MDE.
MDE Lacked Assurance that Rates Charged Were Reasonable
Task orders (scope of work) prepared by the college specified the general services
to be provided, the required staff positions to complete those services, and the
rates to be charged MDE. However, MDE did not evaluate and review the
reasonableness of these rates, and our review of four task orders disclosed the
rates were generally higher than those of a comparable State employee. For
example, for one task order we reviewed, which covered the period from March
2015 to February 2016, MDE’s total cost for a certain technical position ranged
from $69,600 to $92,000. In contrast, we estimated the State employee cost
(salary and benefits) for the same position to be $53,000 to $83,800. Of the 29
employees noted above, 15 were classified as being within this technical position.
9

--- Page 12 ---
Because MDE did not review these costs, it was not aware that, in addition to
salary and benefits, these rates included administrative fees. Furthermore, task
orders and related invoices did not specify the rate used for the administrative
fees, and we were advised by MDE management that it was unaware of the
administrative rates charged by the college.
We contacted entity management who informed us that, for all task orders, MDE
was charged an administrative fee for direct costs, which was 15 percent of each
applicable employee’s salary (including benefits), as well as an administrative fee
for indirect costs equal to 15 percent of total costs. For example, in one
agreement, the entity’s annual direct salary costs (including benefits) for a certain
technical position was $52,967 and, with the 15 percent fee increased to $60,912.
The entity then added an additional 15 percent fee to bring the total employee cost
to $70,049. This resulted in an effective administrative fee rate of 32 percent
based on the direct salary cost. For the aforementioned 43 task orders for the
MDE Administration, for example, we estimated MDE paid approximately
$996,000 in administrative fees between July 2013 and February 2018.
Assurance was lacking, therefore, that the services MDE obtained through
interagency agreements with the college were the most advantageous to the State.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that MDE
a. discontinue using interagency agreements to avoid using competitive
procurement processes for required services or seeking additional
budgeted positions as necessary; and
b. when it is determined appropriate to use interagency agreements, ensure
that agreements contain provisions to enable an evaluation of the
reasonableness of the costs and that the related invoices contain sufficient
details, including overhead and administrative fees charged, to enable a
verification of billings.
Lead Poisoning Prevention Program
Background
The Lead Poisoning Prevention Program was established to oversee activities
designated to reduce the incidence of childhood lead poisoning and is funded
through various fees as required by State law and collected by MDE. Prior to
January 1, 2015, State law required that owners of properties that were
constructed prior to 1950 to register their properties annually with MDE, meet
specific lead paint reduction standards as determined through independent
10

--- Page 13 ---
inspections, and pay an annual $30 fee for each rental dwelling unit. Effective
January 1, 2015, the registration and renewal requirements were extended to
include properties constructed prior to 1978.
MDE’s Online Lead Rental Registration system (OLRR) includes all registration
and renewal information, such as property and payment information, for each
owner. This information is recorded by property owners through online
registrations and by MDE through paper registrations. According to MDE’s
records, as of June 30, 2016, there were 153,383 rental dwelling units constructed
before 1978 that were recorded in OLRR as registered properties. MDE also
maintains a separate inspection certification database. The inspection certification
database is updated by MDE staff based on documentation submitted by the
inspectors after the completion of the related property inspections. During fiscal
year 2016, registration and renewal fee revenue totaled approximately $4.3
million.
In our preceding audit report, we recommended that MDE develop a process to
ensure that registered properties affected by lead paint received the required
inspection certificate, and investigate 9,967 property owners identified as not
having an inspection certificate on file. In response to our preceding report, MDE
researched the 9,967 property owners and, as of May 2017, identified 1,763 rental
units without the required inspection certificate.
Finding 2
MDE did not establish a sufficient process to ensure that owners of affected
lead paint properties had required inspection certificates. We identified
10,832 registered rental units without inspection certificates that MDE had
not investigated.
Analysis
MDE lacked an adequate process to ensure that all owners who have registered
properties had the required inspection certificate. Specifically, MDE did not
compare all registered properties in its OLRR to its inspection certification
database to identify missing certificates and then determine whether those
properties without an inspection certificate were required to obtain one.
MDE implemented a process during fiscal year 2014 in an effort to ensure, on a
test basis, that required properties were registered and had a valid inspection
certificate; however, the process was generally ineffective. Specifically, MDE
randomly selected 10 newly registered properties each month and verified that
they had a valid certificate on file; however, previously registered properties were
excluded from this monthly review process. Furthermore, the percentage of
11

--- Page 14 ---
newly registered properties being examined was minimal. For example, only 50
of the 3,081 properties (less than two percent) registered during the period from
May through September 2016 were verified.
We obtained a report from OLRR, as of May 23, 2017, that included all active
rental units newly registered in calendar years 2014 through 2016. This report
included 98,295 registered rental units. We compared this report to a report of
certificates recorded in the certification database. Our comparison disclosed that
10,832 units in the OLRR did not have any inspection certificates recorded in the
certification database. While not all registered rental units require an owner to
have an inspection certificate (for example, unoccupied properties), the
certification database does not designate which properties require a certificate.
Therefore, MDE should investigate all registered owners without a certificate to
determine if one should be obtained. A similar condition was commented upon in
our preceding audit report.
State law requires that an owner of an affected property (based on year of
construction) initially satisfy the risk reduction standard established by passing a
test for lead-contaminated dust. The owner is also required to have the property
inspected at each change in occupancy to verify that the risk reduction standard
has been satisfied. State regulations require that registered rental properties
affected by lead paint have an inspection certificate. State law further allows for
penalties, not to exceed $500 per day, for violations of these provisions and
procedures.
Recommendation 2
We recommend that MDE
a. establish adequate procedures to ensure that owners with affected
properties have an inspection certificate when required (repeat), and
b. investigate the aforementioned 10,832 properties without any recorded
inspection certificates and take appropriate action.
Erosion and Sediment Control Plan Inspections
Background
MDE is responsible for the review and approval of erosion and sediment control
plans for certain construction activity, as well as for the subsequent inspection of
construction sites for the implementation and maintenance of the approved plans.
The purpose of these plans is to lessen the impact of sediment leaving
construction sites. These plans are necessary to protect the water resources of the
State from the adverse impact of soil erosion, sediment deposition, and increased
12

--- Page 15 ---
storm water runoff. Through the plan review and approval process and the related
inspection process, MDE ensures that all applicable development, redevelopment,
and restoration projects provide for erosion and sediment control measures in
accordance with State regulations.
For every active erosion and sediment control plan, State regulations require an
on-site inspection for compliance with the approved plan. MDE either conducts
these inspections itself or, as permitted by State regulations, delegates inspection
and enforcement authority for certain construction sites to the applicable local
jurisdiction. According to its records, MDE was responsible for inspecting 5,942
active construction sites (that is, had not been delegated) as of June 30, 2016.
State regulations permit certain enforcement actions be taken as a result of
inspections, such as the issuance of a corrective action or a stop work order, as
well as the issuance of a penalty or fine. For example, MDE is allowed to assess
contractors penalties of up to $10,000 a day for violations of their approved plan.
According to MDE’s records, it assessed 179 penalties totaling approximately
$658,000 for violations detected during site inspections performed in fiscal years
2015 and 2016.
Finding 3
Inspections of certain construction sites were not performed as required by
State regulations, and MDE lacked a formal plan for inspecting all sites.
Only 1,033 of 5,942 sites were inspected during fiscal year 2016.
Analysis
Inspections of certain construction sites were not performed as required and MDE
lacked a formal plan for inspecting all sites. MDE’s records indicate that, during
fiscal year 2016, inspections had not been conducted for 4,909 of the 5,942 active
construction sites that had not been delegated as of June 30, 2016. During that
year, MDE performed 2,591 inspections at 1,033 unique sites, which resulted in
32 new violations deemed significant. A similar condition was commented upon
in our two preceding audit reports.
Prior to April 2017, State regulations provided that inspections were required of
each site on average of once every two weeks. Subsequently, the revised
regulations still require inspections be performed, but the timing and frequency of
these inspections is not specified.
MDE management advised us that these inspections should be frequent because
of the continuously evolving land conditions of active construction sites.
However, MDE also stated that it does not have a sufficient number of inspectors
13

--- Page 16 ---
to inspect more sites each year, and that it prioritizes site inspections based on
citizen complaints and size of the construction sites. Current regulations do not
provide for a risk-based inspection process. Furthermore, MDE had no formal
written plan for inspecting all sites or selected sites based on its prioritized
approach.
Recommendation 3
We recommend that MDE establish a formal written plan to comply with
State regulations regarding inspections of the aforementioned construction
sites. If MDE determines that the inspection requirement cannot be achieved
with current resources, MDE should either seek additional resources through
the budget process or pursue modifying State regulations to allow a risk-
based approach (repeat).
Finding 4
MDE did not always retain documentation to support penalties assessed
against construction contractors and to evidence supervisory approval.
Analysis
MDE did not always retain documentation to support penalty amounts that were
assessed against construction contractors as a result of noncompliance with
erosion and sediment control plans that were detected during site inspections.
Additionally, evidence of required supervisory approvals of penalties assessed
was frequently lacking.
Our test of 10 penalties assessed during our audit period, totaling $200,333,
disclosed that 5 penalties totaling $106,200 did not have sufficient documentation
on file to support the basis for the amount of penalties assessed. In addition, for 8
of the 10 penalties reviewed (including 4 of the 5 without sufficient
documentation) there was no documentation that evidenced supervisory personnel
had approved the penalty amount prior to its assessment as required by MDE
policy. Criteria that may be considered when determining the amount of any
penalty to be assessed include the seriousness of the violation, the likelihood of
the violation affecting the waterways, and the length of time the violation was
occurring. Consequently, there was a lack of assurance that penalty amounts
assessed were appropriate.
MDE’s policy required that penalty calculations be retained for only one year.
Accordingly, the supporting calculations for many of the penalties we tested had
been destroyed. State law prohibits an agency from destroying any record that
relates to the financial operation of a unit of State government until the audit
14

--- Page 17 ---
requirements established in the law for the Office of Legislative Audits have been
met with regard to that agency.
Recommendation 4
We recommend that MDE
a. retain documentation in support of penalty amounts assessed, and
b. ensure that penalty calculations are approved by appropriate
management personnel as required by its policy.
Information Systems Security and Control
Background
MDE’s Office of Information Management and Technology was solely
responsible for MDE’s information technology (IT) support. However, beginning
in August 2016, MDE began a conversion to use the State of Maryland
Department of Information Technology’s (DoIT) IT support services, which
ultimately would include the following functions:
 Network and IT Security Services (including firewall and intrusion
detection prevention systems operations and maintenance and malware
protection)
 IT Service Desk
 Hardware Support
 Software Support
 Web and Geographic Information Services
 IT Procurement Services
As part of the conversion to DoIT IT support services, DoIT personnel assumed
control of and began to operate and maintain the separate MDE network which
connected MDE’s branch offices and the MDE headquarters. The MDE branch
and headquarters network provides MDE users access to various information
technology applications, network and email services and Internet access.
MDE personnel operated several computer applications and related databases on
servers for which DoIT maintained the related servers’ operating systems
software. MDE operated a critical application for a comprehensive data
management system, which utilizes a unified approach to data collection and
reporting. The system encompasses numerous business applications and their
related data such as hazardous waste and air quality monitoring and control.
15

--- Page 18 ---
Finding 5
Eleven contractors had unnecessary network-level access to the entire MDE
internal network.
Analysis
Eleven contractors had unnecessary network-level access to the entire MDE
internal network. Specifically, we identified 11 contractors working for IT
vendors, who were provided remote access via a virtual private network
connection to the MDE network to perform various IT project support activities.
However, this access was not properly restricted, and these 11 contractors had
improper network-level access to the entire MDE internal network. These
contractors could access servers holding various applications’ information,
employee workstations, and other network resources, rather than being limited to
accessing only those network resources related to their respective responsibilities.
The State of Maryland Information Security Policy require that entities’ networks
must ensure that only authorized individuals have access to confidential
information and that such access is strictly controlled, audited, and that it supports
the concepts of least possible privilege and need to know.
Recommendation 5
We recommend that MDE, in conjunction with DoIT, properly secure its
network resources from third parties. Specifically, we recommend that each
contractor’s network-level access be restricted to only those servers and
workstations that each contractor needs to access for support purposes.
Finding 6
Malware protection was not sufficient to provide MDE with adequate
assurance that its computers were properly protected.
Analysis
Malware protection was not sufficient to provide MDE with adequate assurance
that its computers were properly protected. Using two separate management
consoles, DoIT managed the malware protection software installed on MDE
computers, the assignment of workstation administrator rights, and the control of
software products having significant security-related vulnerabilities.
 Our September 2017 testing of DoIT’s automated malware protection console
information identified 1,152 MDE computers which were not operating a
current malware protection software version and 148 of these computers also
did not have current malware signatures. We noted that the outdated malware
16

--- Page 19 ---
protection software versions had been released from 6 to 13 months earlier.
The outdated malware signatures (which are used to identify malware) were
from seven days to up to 8 months older than the current signatures. The
malware protection software vendor updates the software version regularly
and signatures at least daily. These malware protection software versions
should generally be installed promptly after being released and signature
updates within a week of release.
 We identified over 1,000 workstations that had not been updated with the
latest releases for two software products that are known to have significant
security-related vulnerabilities. Although the vendors for these software
products frequently provide software patches to address these vulnerabilities,
DoIT had not updated the MDE workstations for these patches. For example,
at the time of our review in August 2017, many of these workstations were
running one of these software products with a version that was released in
February 2013.
 We determined that users of 102 workstations were assigned local
administrative rights on their workstations, even though these users were not
system/network administrators and, documentation was not maintained that
authorized and supported the necessity of the assigned administrative rights.
Consequently, if the above workstations were infected with malware, the
malware would run with administrative rights and expose these workstations
to a greater risk of compromise than if the workstations’ user accounts
operated with only user rights.
The State of Maryland Information Security Policy, states that agencies, at a
minimum, must protect against malicious code (viruses, worms, Trojan horses) by
implementing protections (anti-virus, anti-malware) that, to the extent possible,
include a capability for automatic updates.
Recommendation 6
We recommend that MDE, in conjunction with DoIT,
a. ensure that the computers are running current versions of the malware
protection software and that the malware signatures provided by the
malware protection software vendor are installed immediately upon
release;
b. promptly install all critical security-related software updates for known
vulnerable applications on all MDE workstations; and
c. limit the assignment of administrative rights on workstations to only
system/network administrators and any other exception users, with any
17

--- Page 20 ---
such exception assignments being justified, approved, documented, and
regularly reviewed to determine whether they are still needed.
Finding 7
A critical database and numerous servers were running on outdated
software.
Analysis
A critical database and numerous servers were running on software versions that
had been out-of-date for many years.
 The database was running a software version that was no longer supported by
the database vendor. Specifically, the system database software version in use
as of May 2017 had not been supported by the vendor since July 2013. As a
result, the database vendor was no longer monitoring or issuing patches for
newly discovered security vulnerabilities for the database version in use. This
out-of-date database software may expose MDE to security vulnerabilities
discovered since the end-of-support date, which could create security and
control issues.
 The server supporting the database as well as 14 other servers were running an
outdated operating system software version which was no longer supported by
the operating system developer. Developer support for this operating system
ended by 2015 and since then updates for this software to address newly
discovered vulnerabilities have not been provided.
The State of Maryland Information Security Policy states that system hardening
procedures shall be created and maintained to ensure up-to-date security best
practices are deployed at all levels of IT systems (operating systems, applications,
databases and network devices).
Recommendation 7
We recommend that MDE, in conjunction with DoIT, ensure that
a. all databases are fully supported by the database vendors and kept
current for all critical security related updates, and
b. all servers operate with current vendor supported versions of operating
system software.
18

--- Page 21 ---
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the Maryland Department of the
Environment (MDE) for the period beginning July 30, 2013 and ending December
19, 2016. The audit was conducted in accordance with generally accepted
government auditing standards. Those standards require that we plan and perform
the audit to obtain sufficient, appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis
for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives. We believe that
the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and
conclusions based on our audit objectives.
As prescribed by the State Government Article, Section 2-1221 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, the objectives of this audit were to examine MDE’s financial
transactions, records, and internal control, and to evaluate its compliance with
applicable State laws, rules, and regulations.
In planning and conducting our audit, we focused on the major financial-related
areas of operations based on assessments of significance and risk. The areas
addressed by the audit included certain special funded programs (such as the Bay
Restoration Fund Septic System grants); federal fund recoveries; permitting,
inspections, and violation assessments; procurements and disbursements; critical
information technology systems; accounts receivable; and payroll. Furthermore,
we reviewed certain interagency agreements that MDE had with a college, and the
related expenditures, based on a referral to our fraud, waste, and abuse hotline.
We also determined the status of the findings contained in our preceding audit
report.
MDE engages an independent accounting firm to perform audits of the Maryland
Water Quality Financing Administration’s financial statements. In the related
audit reports for the fiscal years ended June 30, 2014, 2015, 2016, and 2017 the
firm stated that the Administration’s financial statements presented fairly, in all
material respects, the financial position of the Administration and its changes in
financial position and its cash flows for the years then ended in accordance with
the accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America. We
have relied on the work of the independent accounting firm to provide audit
coverage of certain aspects of the Maryland Water Quality Financing
Administration’s operations (internal controls and testing for the water quality and
drinking water revolving loan fund programs). Our audit procedures in these
areas were generally limited, therefore, to obtaining a sufficient basis for that
reliance.
19

--- Page 22 ---
Our audit did not include an evaluation of internal controls over compliance with
federal laws and regulations for federal financial assistance programs and an
assessment of MDE’s compliance with those laws and regulations because the
State of Maryland engages an independent accounting firm to annually audit such
programs administered by State agencies, including MDE.
To accomplish our audit objectives, our audit procedures included inquiries of
appropriate personnel, inspections of documents and records, observations of
MDE’s operations, and tests of transactions. Generally, transactions were
selected for testing based on auditor judgment, which primarily considers risk.
Unless otherwise specifically indicated, neither statistical nor non-statistical audit
sampling was used to select the transactions tested. Therefore, the results of the
tests cannot be used to project those results to the entire population from which
the test items were selected.
We performed various data extracts of pertinent information from the State’s
Financial Management Information System (such as revenue and expenditure
data) and the State’s Central Payroll Bureau (payroll data). These extracts are
performed as part of ongoing internal processes established by the Office of
Legislative Audits and were subject to various tests to determine data reliability.
We determined that the data extracted from these sources were sufficiently
reliable for the purposes the data were used during this audit.
We also extracted data from MDE’s permit, registration, and enforcement
systems, and from the Statewide Personnel System (SPS) for the purpose of
testing related payroll transactions, including the conversion of employee payroll
data to SPS. We performed various tests of the relevant data and determined that
the data were sufficiently reliable for the purposes the data were used during the
audit. Finally, we performed other auditing procedures that we considered
necessary to achieve our audit objectives. The reliability of data used in this
report for background or informational purposes was not assessed.
MDE’s management is responsible for establishing and maintaining effective
internal control. Internal control is a process designed to provide reasonable
assurance that objectives pertaining to the reliability of financial records,
effectiveness and efficiency of operations including safeguarding of assets, and
compliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations are achieved.
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate.
20

--- Page 23 ---
Our reports are designed to assist the Maryland General Assembly in exercising
its legislative oversight function and to provide constructive recommendations for
improving State operations. As a result, our reports generally do not address
activities we reviewed that are functioning properly.
This report includes findings relating to conditions that we consider to be
significant deficiencies in the design or operation of internal control that could
adversely affect MDE’s ability to maintain reliable financial records, operate
effectively and efficiently, and/or comply with applicable laws, rules, and
regulations. Our report also includes findings regarding significant instances of
noncompliance with applicable laws, rules, or regulations. Other less significant
findings were communicated to MDE that did not warrant inclusion in this report.
MDE’s response to our findings and recommendations is included as an appendix
to this report. As prescribed in the State Government Article, Section 2-1224 of
the Annotated Code of Maryland, we will advise MDE regarding the results of
our review of its response.
21

--- Page 25 ---
Finding 1
MDE used interagency agreements with the college to augment its staff, allowing it to avoid using
competitive procurement processes for these services or using budgeted positions as necessary.
Certain staffing services provided through these agreements did not appear to be within the
college’s mission. MDE also did not ensure the rates charged for these services were reasonable.
MDE’s Response:
MDE does not concur with Finding 1.
The agreement between the college and the Maryland Department of the Environment was established to
“facilitate the assessment, review, enhancement and creation of technical services that will allow MDE to
meet its goals and objectives for restoring the quality of Maryland’s air, water and land resources.” The
Office of Legislative Audits and the Board of Public Works acknowledged that this arrangement is
considered a legal mechanism not subject to procurement regulations.
The personnel hired by the college to assist MDE in meeting its goals and objectives were hired through
an advertised and competitive process. In cases where MDE used this agreement to augment its work
capabilities, it did so utilizing available Special or Federal Funds included in the State budget to
complete tasks mandated by State or federal law. Currently, the college provides 21 staff to perform
services, which is 2.2% of MDE’s workforce.
These contractual services are critical to the essential and effective operations of existing regulatory
programs. As we stated to OLA, these agreements provided MDE with faster and more flexible hiring and
firing processes for staff augmentation.
The MOU was reviewed and approved by the Board of Trustees for the college, which strongly suggests
that the Board believed that the services provided to MDE were within the school’s mission.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that MDE
a. discontinue using interagency agreements to avoid using competitive procurement processes for
required services or seeking additional budgeted positions as necessary; and
b. when it is determined appropriate to use interagency agreements, ensure that agreements
contain provisions to enable an evaluation of the reasonableness of the costs and that the related
invoices contain sufficient details, including overhead and administrative fees charged, to
enable a verification of billings.
MDE’s Response:
MDE does not concur with recommendation “a” but does concur with recommendation “b”.
a. MDE intends to implement a policy which will define the conditions when this type of service
agreement is warranted and seek approval from MDE’s senior management team.
b. The new policy will take effect January 01, 2018 and will contain provisions such as evaluating
existing internal resources beforehand, and MDE will obtain detailed and itemized invoices for the
contracted services to better track administrative and overhead charges.

--- Page 26 ---
Auditor’s Comment: While MDE indicates that it does not concur with the Finding, it does
indicate that it intends to implement a policy which will define when an interagency agreement is
warranted. MDE’s response emphasizes its need to hire essential personnel with faster and more
flexible hiring and firing processes and, accordingly, places greater emphasis on the convenience
available by using the college, which was not selected based on a competitive process, to perform
MDE’s hiring responsibilities. Therefore, it lacks assurance that services were obtained at the
most advantageous cost to the State. Any policy adopted by MDE should limit the use of
interagency agreements to the procurement of services for which the college can provide
particular expertise and should prohibit the use of these agreements for the purpose of hiring staff
for MDE.
Finding 2
MDE did not establish a sufficient process to ensure that owners of affected lead paint properties
had required inspection certificates. We identified 10,832 registered rental units without inspection
certificates that MDE had not investigated.
MDE’s Response:
MDE does not concur with Finding 2.
As noted in OLA assessment, MDE has established a process to review 10 random properties registered
each month to ensure they have valid certificates on file, if required. This is the process that MDE
committed to during the last audit. The current review of 10 random properties per month is compliant
with MDE’s commitments during the last audit and based on MDE’s limited resources. In addition to the
random sample of 10 properties per month, MDE reviews each disputed Notice of Violation account to
ensure valid certificates are in place. MDE is currently working to standardize data collection to
demonstrate actual accounts reviewed, beyond the 10 random properties per month.
Recommendation 2
We recommend that MDE
a. establish adequate procedures to ensure that owners with affected properties have an inspection
certificate when required (repeat), and
b. investigate the aforementioned 10,832 properties without any recorded inspection certificates
and take appropriate action.
MDE’s Response:
MDE concurs with recommendation “a” but does not with recommendation “b”.
a. MDE is currently working with the Department of Information Technology (DoIT) to develop a new
database that will link the certificate database to the registration database and compare certificates to
registrations. A Task Order Request for Proposals is currently being finalized under an interagency
agreement with Towson University and we expect the work to begin late 2018. Until this database is
complete, MDE will continue to follow its written established procedures to randomly select 10 properties
per month and verify required inspection certificates as committed to during the 2015 Legislative Audit.
As discussed above, certificates are also reviewed as accounts are reviewed for registration compliance
whenever a Notice of Violation is disputed by a property owner.

--- Page 27 ---
b. The aforementioned 10,832 properties include properties mostly built between 1950 and 1978. Per
Environment Article, §§ 6-815(b) and 6-817, a property built between 1950 and 1978 is not required to
obtain a certificate until a triggering event occurs, such as change of occupancy or notice of defect. Of
the 10,832 properties cited above, 2,099 properties were built prior to 1950 and therefore are required by
law to have valid certificates. The 2,099 properties were reviewed and found that 837 have certificates or
are no longer affected properties leaving 1,262 to be investigated.
In order to determine whether a certificate is required for a property built between 1950 and 1978, the
Department would need to determine whether a change in occupancy has occurred since 1950-1978
properties became subject to the law effective January 1, 2015. Practically, the Department has only two
options for determining whether and when a change in occupancy has occurred in a manner sufficient to
support a legal action for noncompliance: (1) The Department can request information from a property
owner about changes in occupancy, essentially asking the owner to self-disclose the need for a
certificate; and (2) If the property owner fails to respond, the other option is to speak to a tenant to obtain
his or her move-in date. Typically, this involves visiting the property in person, knocking on the door, and
interviewing the tenant. In addition to being very labor-intensive, this method is not always successful.
Tenants may refuse to answer the door or may not be home when the inspector visits. A tenant is not
subject to the requirements of the Reduction of Lead Risk in Housing Act and has no obligation to provide
his or her move-in information to the Department. The property owner and tenant are the only sources of
information on changes in occupancy. As a result, it is not practicable to investigate each of the estimated
8,733 units (of the 10,832 that OLA identified) that were built between 1950 and 1978 to determine
whether a certificate was required.
Auditor’s Comment: MDE did not concur with the finding and disagreed with our
recommendation to investigate the 10,832 properties without any recorded inspection certificates,
stating that it was not practicable to investigate each of the 8,732 units built between 1950 and
1978 to determine whether a certificate was required. Similar to its response to our 2015 report
finding, MDE again asserts that it is working to develop a database to link the registration and
certificate databases. Until that database is operational, MDE stated it would continue to review
10 properties registered each month to determine compliance as committed to during its
preceding audit. (In follow up to the prior audit, we encouraged MDE to increase its inspection
verification efforts over lead paint affected properties, pending MDE’s planned development of
an integrated registration and certifications database system.) It is not apparent as to why that
database will make the follow-up efforts more practical since potentially noncompliant properties
are readily identifiable now and each of those properties will still need to be individually
addressed as recommended in the report. In this regard, MDE does not address whether it will
follow up on all registered properties identified through this database for which inspection
certificates are not on file to evidence compliance with risk reduction standards.

--- Page 28 ---
Finding 3
Inspections of certain construction sites were not performed as required by State regulations, and
MDE lacked a formal plan for inspecting all sites. Only 1,033 of 5,942 sites were inspected during
fiscal year 2016.
MDE’s Response:
MDE partially concurs with Finding 3, but does not believe it should be classified as a repeat.
MDE revised the regulations effective May 8, 2017 to eliminate the language requiring inspections an
average of every two weeks. The operating procedures adopted by MDE in 2013 include a risk-based
approach to prioritizing inspection sites. The Department believes it has sufficient inspection resources to
meet the requirements of the new regulations.
Recommendation 3
We recommend that MDE establish a formal written plan to comply with State regulations
regarding inspections of the aforementioned construction sites. If MDE determines that the
inspection requirement cannot be achieved with current resources, MDE should either seek
additional resources through the budget process or pursue modifying State regulations to allow a
risk-based approach (repeat).
MDE’s Response:
MDE partially concurs with the recommendation, but does not believe a formal written plan is needed
due to the revision in the regulations.
As noted above, the operating procedures adopted by MDE in 2013 include a risk-based approach to
prioritizing inspection sites. The Department believes it has sufficient inspection resources to meet the
requirements of the new regulations.
Also, MDE revised the regulations effective May 8, 2017 that eliminates the language requiring
inspections an average of every two weeks. In addition, the Department has taken the actions listed below
to further address sediment control activities.
All construction projects that disturb more than 1 acre of land are required to obtain a federal Clean
Water Act Permit from MDE that mandates weekly erosion and sediment control inspections by the
projects’ contractors who are required to keep a logbook describing inspections and provide the logbook
for review by the MDE inspector. If the inspections and logbook documentation are not provided, the
contractor is subject to formal enforcement action and significant penalties.
MDE has also delegated enforcement authority for erosion and sediment control to Anne Arundel County,
Baltimore City, Baltimore County, Calvert County, Carroll County, Charles County, Dorchester County,
Frederick County, Harford County, Howard County, Kent County, Montgomery County, Prince George’s
County, and Worcester County. The following municipalities also have delegated enforcement authority,
Annapolis, Bel Air, Aberdeen, Gaithersburg, Rockville, Bowie, Greenbelt, and Laurel. The Washington
Suburban Sanitary Commission (WSSC) also has delegated authority. MDE has also entered in to a
Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) with State Highway Administration (SHA) regarding erosion and
sediment control inspections for that agency’s construction projects.

--- Page 29 ---
Finding 4
MDE did not always retain documentation to support penalties assessed against construction
contractors and to evidence supervisory approval.
MDE’s Response:
MDE concurs with Finding 4.
Recommendation 4
We recommend that MDE
a. retain documentation in support of penalty amounts assessed, and
b. ensure that penalty calculations are approved by appropriate management personnel as
required by its policy.
MDE’s Response
MDE concurs with both recommendations.
a. MDE immediately implemented an internal policy change to keep the penalty documentation for a
minimum of three years based on discussions during the audit. Note that the program’s one year retention
policy was reviewed and approved by Department of General Services (DGS) and State Archives as
required. The program will revise the retention policy for these documents to three years and submit for
proper approval.
b. MDE also implemented a new procedure during the period covered by this audit requiring all
proposed penalties to be sent to the Director’s office for review and approval. Stipulated penalties
specified in executed enforcement agreements may still be assessed directly by MDE’s Compliance
Program. Penalty requests and supporting documentation are routed through appropriate levels of
Program supervision before they are submitted to the Director’s office for approval.
Finding 5
Eleven contractors had unnecessary network-level access to the entire MDE internal network.
MDE’s Response:
MDE and DoIT concur with Finding 5.
Recommendation 5
We recommend that MDE, in conjunction with DoIT, properly secure its network resources from
third parties. Specifically, we recommend that each contractor’s network-level access be restricted
to only those servers and workstations that each contractor needs to access for support purposes.
MDE’s Response:
MDE and DoIT concur with the recommendation.
Through the use of compensating controls, at no time did the contractors have any inappropriate access
to any actual data however, DoIT ardently agrees with the practice of “least privilege access.” It is

--- Page 30 ---
universally applied to both employees and vendors alike (both are subject to the same background checks
as regular employees). DoIT has perform a review and will take corrective action by end of April 2018.
Finding 6
Malware protection was not sufficient to provide MDE with adequate assurance that its computers
were properly protected.
MDE’s Response:
MDE and DoIT concur with Finding 6.
Recommendation 6
We recommend that MDE, in conjunction with DoIT,
a. ensure that the computers are running current versions of the malware protection software and
that the malware signatures provided by the malware protection software vendor are installed
immediately upon release;
b. promptly install all critical security-related software updates for known vulnerable applications
on all MDE workstations; and
c. limit the assignment of administrative rights on workstations to only system/network
administrators and any other exception users, with any such exception assignments being
justified, approved, documented, and regularly reviewed to determine whether they are still
needed.
MDE’s Response:
MDE and DoIT concur with the recommendations.
DoIT has taken action to correct this issue. DoIT security scans show MDE patching compliance at 97%
for servers and 98% for Workstations as well as a combined 98% compliance for malware protection.
Important Note: Due to moves, adds, changes, reporting schedules, and timing issues the compliance
percentages are typically higher than what is reflected in the reports. Local admin access was also
restricted to only DoIT support staff and a few key MDE staff in March 2018.
Finding 7
A critical database and numerous servers were running on outdated software.
MDE’s Response:
MDE and DoIT concur with Finding 7.
DoIT has taken actions to upgrade OS versions where possible, however funding is required to update the
applications before DoIT can update the OS.
Recommendation 7
We recommend that MDE, in conjunction with DoIT, ensure that
a. all databases are fully supported by the database vendors and kept current for all critical
security related updates, and
b. all servers operate with current vendor supported versions of operating system software.

--- Page 31 ---
MDE’s Response:
MDE and DoIT concur with these recommendations.
a. Actions have been taken to ensure MDE databases are fully supported by the vendor and are
maintained for critical security updates.
b. Actions are being taken to upgrade all servers to vendor supported operating system software.
Currently only 2 servers remain to be upgraded. The first server is scheduled to be upgraded on
April 27, 2018. The other remaining server will be decommissioned after all applications are
moved to a newer vendor supported file server. This is scheduled to be completed by the end of
June 2018.

--- Page 32 ---
A T
UDIT EAM
Michael J. Murdzak, CPA
Audit Manager
Richard L. Carter, CISA
R. Brendan Coffey, CPA, CISA
Information Systems Audit Managers
J. Alexander Twigg
Nathan H. Suffin, CPA
Senior Auditors
J. Gregory Busch
Edward O. Kendall
Information Systems Senior Auditors
Christopher J. Fowler
Alice Z. Liu, CPA
Joshua A. Naylor
Syed M. A. Taqvi, CPA
Staff Auditors
Robert H. Dean
Justin P. Vlahacos
Information Systems Staff Auditors