Title: Review of Local Government Audit Reports - Fiscal Year Ending June 30, 2021
Date: 09/13/2022
Type: Special Reports and Letters
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=631f8ba6a1ce5815d8255407
Extracted: 2025-06-20T00:22:19.853765
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Review of Local Government Audit Reports
Fiscal Year Ending June 30, 2021
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Senator Clarence K. Lam, M.D. (Senate Chair) Delegate Mark S. Chang (House Chair)
Senator Malcolm L. Augustine Delegate Steven J. Arentz
Senator Adelaide C. Eckardt Delegate Nicholas P. Charles II
Senator George C. Edwards Delegate Andrea Fletcher Harrison
Senator Katie Fry Hester Delegate Trent M. Kittleman
Senator Cheryl C. Kagan Delegate Carol L. Krimm
Senator Benjamin F. Kramer Delegate David Moon
Senator Cory V. McCray Delegate Julie Palakovich Carr
Senator Justin D. Ready Delegate Elizabeth G. Proctor
Senator Craig J. Zucker Delegate Geraldine Valentino-Smith
To Obtain Further Information
Office of Legislative Audits
The Warehouse at Camden Yards
351 West Camden Street, Suite 400
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Phone: 410-946-5900
Maryland Relay: 711
TTY: 410-946-5401 ꞏ 301-970-5401
E-mail: OLAWebmaster@ola.state.md.us
Website: www.ola.state.md.us
To Report Fraud
The Office of Legislative Audits operates a Fraud Hotline to report fraud, waste, or abuse involving State
of Maryland government resources. Reports of fraud, waste, or abuse may be communicated anonymously
by a toll-free call to 1-877-FRAUD-11, by mail to the Fraud Hotline, c/o Office of Legislative Audits, or
through the Office’s website.
Nondiscrimination Statement
The Department of Legislative Services does not discriminate on the basis of age, ancestry, color, creed,
marital status, national origin, race, religion, gender, gender identity, sexual orientation, or disability in the
admission or access to its programs, services, or activities. The Department’s Information Officer has been
designated to coordinate compliance with the nondiscrimination requirements contained in Section 35.107
of the United States Department of Justice Regulations. Requests for assistance should be directed to the
Information Officer at 410-946-5400 or 410-970-5400.

--- Page 3 ---
September 13, 2022
Senator Clarence K. Lam, M.D., Senate Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Delegate Mark S. Chang, House Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Members of Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Annapolis, Maryland
The Honorable Peter V. R. Franchot
Comptroller of Maryland
Ms. Victoria L. Gruber, Executive Director
Department of Legislative Services
Ladies and Gentlemen:
In accordance with the Local Government Article, Section 16-307 of the
Annotated Code of Maryland, we have performed desk reviews of the audit
reports for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2021 filed by each county, incorporated
city or town, and taxing district in Maryland (referred to as local governments).
We also reviewed overdue audit reports for prior fiscal years that were received
over the past year. The desk reviews consisted of assessments of compliance with
certain accounting and auditing standards, evaluations of compliance with certain
State laws, and analyses of selected financial data to identify potential financial
problems.
Most of the financial statements filed by the local governments for the fiscal year
ended June 30, 2021, along with the related independent auditors’ reports,
complied with the accounting and auditing standards that we assessed.
Nevertheless, we identified instances of noncompliance with certain requirements
of our audit guidelines, generally accepted accounting principles, and/or generally
accepted auditing standards. We sent letters to 30 local governments (some of
whom had several different instances of non-compliance) and, as applicable, to
their independent auditors to notify them of the deficiencies disclosed by our

--- Page 4 ---
reviews so that corrective actions could be taken to help ensure future
compliance.
For example, a number of audit reports were not filed timely in accordance with
the requirements of State law. As of July 15, 2022, 13 local governments had not
submitted audit reports for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2021. Additionally, 4 of
those 13 local governments had not filed audit reports for fiscal years ending June
30, 2020; and one of those 4 also had not filed its audit report for the fiscal year
ended June 30, 2019.
If a local government does not comply with the audit report filing requirements,
State law provides that the Comptroller of Maryland, on notice from the
Executive Director of the Department of Legislative Services, may order the
discontinuance of all moneys, grants, or State aid to which the local governments
are entitled. Previously, in a separate letter, we notified the Executive Director of
the Department of Legislative Services of the local government with more than
one fiscal year’s audit report outstanding.
The fiscal year 2021 financial statements disclosed 11 local governments with
cash deposits that were not adequately collateralized, or otherwise insured, which
is an area of noncompliance with State law. Additionally, for one local
government, the auditor’s report included an explanatory paragraph describing an
uncertainty about its ability to continue as a going concern. As appropriate, we
sent letters to these local governments, and to their legislative representatives, to
communicate their noncompliance and to request that the local governments
advise us of the corrective actions that will be taken.
Respectfully submitted,
Gregory A. Hook, CPA
Legislative Auditor
2

--- Page 5 ---
Table of Contents
Introduction and Scope, Objectives, and Methodology 5
Results of Desk Reviews 7
Audit Reports
Finding 1 – A number of local governments had not filed the required 7
audit reports or had filed after the required date.
Finding 2 – The auditor’s report for one local government contained 8
a qualified opinion on one opinion unit.
Finding 3 – Auditors’ reports for three local governmental units 9
were not presented in accordance with certain generally accepted
auditing standards.
Financial Statements
Finding 4 – Eight financial statements submitted by six local 9
governments did not meet certain requirements of generally
accepted accounting principles.
Finding 5 – Financial statements, accompanying notes, and required 10
supplementary information did not include certain disclosures
required by generally accepted accounting principles for three
audit reports.
Noncompliance with State Law
Finding 6 – The respective financial statements submitted by 11 local 11
governments contained disclosures that cash deposits were not
adequately collateralized, or otherwise insured, as required by
State law.
Potential Financial Problems
Finding 7 – One local government disclosed potential financial 11
problems resulting in uncertainty regarding its ability to
continue as a going concern.
Special Taxing Districts
Finding 8 – The required reports had not been filed for four special 12
taxing districts as of July 15, 2022.
3

--- Page 6 ---
Exhibit A – Schedule of Audit Reports Containing Disclosures that 13
Cash Deposits Were Not Fully Collateralized or Otherwise Insured
4

--- Page 7 ---
Introduction and Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
The Local Government Article, Section 16-306 of the Annotated Code of
Maryland requires each county, incorporated city or town, and taxing district in
Maryland (referred to in this report as local governments) to file audit reports
annually or once every four years under specified conditions. There were 186
local government audit reports due for inclusion in our fiscal year 2021 review
(23 counties and Baltimore City, 150 other incorporated cities and towns, and 12
taxing areas that are created under State law). The reports are to include financial
statements, with accompanying notes, and auditors’ reports that express opinions
as to whether the financial statements are fairly presented. The financial
statements are required to be prepared in accordance with generally accepted
accounting principles and audited in accordance with generally accepted auditing
standards. Finally, we annually prepare and distribute audit guidelines to provide
additional information regarding the accounting, reporting, and auditing
requirements.
The Local Government Article, Section 16-307 of the Code requires the Office of
Legislative Audits to perform a desk review of each local government’s annual
audit report for compliance with generally accepted accounting principles and
auditing standards. As part of the desk review process, we also addressed other
attributes as described below. Section 16-308 of the Article specifies the
reporting and review requirements applicable to special taxing districts created by
the counties. The applicable county is responsible for reviewing each special
taxing district’s compliance with the applicable provisions of the law and for
submitting the districts’ reports to the Office of Legislative Audits. The Office is
required to review the results of the counties’ reviews and the districts’ reports for
compliance with the law.
We conducted a desk review of each of the fiscal year 2021 reports that had been
received from the counties, incorporated cities and towns, and taxing districts.
We also reviewed one fiscal year 2018 report (Town of Deer Park) and five fiscal
year 2020 reports (Town of Capitol Heights, Town of Chesapeake City, Town of
East New Market, City of Mount Rainier, and Town of Sudlersville) that were
received over the last year. The desk reviews consisted of reviewing each audit
report in order to accomplish the following tasks:
 Identify areas of noncompliance with our audit guidelines and certain
accounting and auditing standards pertaining to the presentation of the
financial statements and auditors’ reports.
5

--- Page 8 ---
 Identify any instances of noncompliance with certain provisions of State law
(for example, collateral for bank deposits, timely filing of audit reports).
 Identify local governments with potential financial problems relating to deficit
fund balances or unfavorable trends and ratios, based on analyses of financial
data over the most recent five-year period (July 1, 2016 through June 30,
2021).
We also reviewed each of the fiscal year 2021 special taxing district reports
received and the related results of the counties’ reviews of these reports. The
purpose of our review was to ensure that the counties had reviewed the reports
submitted for compliance with the provisions of the law and to identify instances
in which required reports were not submitted.
At the conclusion of our review, we sent letters to applicable local governments
and their independent auditors to notify them of the deficiencies disclosed during
the review so that corrective actions can be taken to help ensure future
compliance. Additionally, as appropriate, we sent letters to local governments,
and to their legislative representatives, to communicate certain noncompliance
with State law or potential financial problems. For these issues, we asked the
local governments to advise us of corrective actions that will be taken.
6

--- Page 9 ---
Results of Desk Reviews
Audit Reports
Finding 1
A number of local governments had not filed the required audit reports or
had filed after the required filing date.
As of July 15, 2022, 13 local governments were delinquent in filing audit reports
as required by the Local Government Article of the Annotated Code of Maryland.
Local Government Fiscal Years Outstanding
Dorchester County 2021
Town of Capitol Heights 2021
Town of Cheverly 2021
Town of Deer Park 2019, 2020, 2021
Town of East New Market 2021
Town of Forest Heights 2021
City of Hyattsville 2020, 2021
Town of Middletown 2020, 2021
City of Mount Rainier 2021
Town of Princess Anne 2021
Town of Rock Hall 2021
City of Seat Pleasant 2020, 2021
Town of Sudlersville 2021
Furthermore, 22 local government audit reports were submitted after the required
filing date. The submission of audit reports after the required filing date was also
noted for 8 of these 22 local government reports during at least our preceding
year’s review. The failure of a local government to file an audit report, or a delay
in filing, results in the lack of timely accountability to its citizens. The Local
Government Article, Section 16-306 of the Annotated Code of Maryland
generally requires audit reports to be filed on or before October 31 after the close
of the fiscal year, or on or before December 31 after the close of the fiscal year for
those local governments with a population of more than 400,000.
Budget language adopted during previous sessions of the Maryland General
Assembly resulted in the withholding of transportation aid from certain local
governments pending receipt of their delinquent audit reports. Furthermore, the
failure to file a required report with the Department of Legislative Services for
three successive years provides the Department’s Executive Director with
7

--- Page 10 ---
reasonable cause to suppose that the municipality is no longer actively operating
under its charter, which could cause the municipality to have its charter repealed.
We have reported the failure of the Town of Deer Park to file the required reports
for the fiscal years ending June 30, 2019, 2020, and 2021 to the Executive
Director.
We will review all audit reports outstanding as of July 15, 2022 and take any
follow-up action necessary when the delinquent reports are received. The results
of these reviews will be included in the report on our review of fiscal year 2022
local government audit reports.
The towns of Barclay, Barnesville, Barton, Brookview, Burkittsville, Church
Creek, Eagle Harbor, Eldorado, Galestown, Goldsboro, Henderson, Highland
Beach, Hillsboro, Marydel, Port Tobacco, Queen Anne, Rosemont, and special
taxing areas Ellerslie and Mount Savage previously requested waivers from filing
audit reports, which we granted, as required by State law. Each of the
aforementioned local governments met the conditions for filing an audit report
every fourth year as provided for under the Local Government Article, Section
16-305 of the Code and, depending on the waiver period, will be required to file
its next audit report for either fiscal year 2022, 2023, or 2024.
Finding 2
The auditor’s report for one local government contained a qualified opinion
on one opinion unit.
The auditor’s report for the Town of East New Market contained a qualified
opinion on the Governmental Activities and General Funds opinion units because
the auditor was unable to obtain sufficient appropriate audit evidence supporting
the amounts recorded for taxes receivable and local tax revenues.
Although required by our audit guidelines, the auditor for the Town of East New
Market did not submit a separate letter to the Office of Legislative Audits
explaining the reason why an unqualified opinion could not be expressed and the
Town management’s plan to rectify the problem to enable the auditor to express
unqualified opinions in the future.
8

--- Page 11 ---
Finding 3
Auditors’ reports for three local governmental units were not presented in
accordance with certain generally accepted auditing standards.
Auditors’ reports for three local governmental units were not presented in
accordance with certain generally accepted auditing standards. Specifically, the
auditors did not express an opinion on all opinion units or financial statements of
the three reports. The auditors’ reports for these local governmental units
included deficiencies that were also cited during our preceding year’s review.
The Local Government Article, Section 16-306 of the Annotated Code of
Maryland requires that audits be performed in accordance with generally accepted
auditing standards. These standards require, in part, that the auditor express an
opinion(s) as to whether the basic financial statements present fairly, in all
material respects, the respective financial position, the respective changes in
financial position, and cash flows, where applicable, of the local government in
conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of
America.
Financial Statements
Finding 4
Eight financial statements submitted by six local governments did not meet
certain requirements of generally accepted accounting principles.
Eight financial statements submitted by six local governments did not meet
certain requirements of generally accepted accounting principles. None of these
eight financial statements included a deficiency, which in each case was also cited
during our preceding year’s review. The following is a summary of the
deficiencies and the corresponding number of instances:
9

--- Page 12 ---
Number of
Deficiency
Instances
Presentation of financial statement(s) was inappropriate 2
(for example, certain amounts reported on more than
one financial statement did not agree).
Misclassification or improper presentation (for example, 4
financial statement was not mathematically
accurate).
Items reported as assets, deferred outflows of resources, 1
liabilities, or deferred inflows of resources were not
properly displayed.
Governmental fund balances were not properly 1
classified.
Finding 5
Financial statements, accompanying notes, and required supplementary
information did not include certain disclosures required by generally
accepted accounting principles for three audit reports.
Certain required information was not included in the financial statements, or
disclosed in the accompanying notes, or the required supplementary information,
for three audit reports. Adequate disclosure is necessary to facilitate the
understanding of and to provide for fair presentation of the financial information.
The financial statements of two of these local governments included a deficiency
that was also cited during our preceding year’s review. The following is a
summary of the areas of insufficient disclosure and the corresponding number of
instances:
Number of
Area of Insufficient Disclosure
Instances
Information related to other postemployment benefits 1
Information related to pensions 1
Cash and cash equivalents 1
10

--- Page 13 ---
Noncompliance with State Law
Finding 6
The respective financial statements submitted by 11 local governments
contained disclosures that cash deposits were not adequately collateralized,
or otherwise insured, as required by State law.
The financial statements submitted by 11 local governments contained disclosures
that cash deposits were not adequately collateralized, or otherwise insured, as
required by State law (see Exhibit A). The Local Government Article, Section
17-101 of the Annotated Code of Maryland requires that deposits with financial
institutions by local governmental units be fully collateralized. Full
collateralization minimizes the risk of loss of deposits in the event the financial
institution defaults. In addition, this law requires that collateral be of the types
specified in the State Finance and Procurement Article, Section 6-202 of the
Code.
Potential Financial Problems
Finding 7
One local government disclosed potential financial problems resulting in
uncertainty regarding its ability to continue as a going concern.
One local government, the Upper Potomac River Commission – Waste Treatment
Plant, Trunk Sewer and Municipal Connecting System Fund (Fund), disclosed
potential financial problems resulting in uncertainty regarding its ability to
continue as a going concern. The auditor’s report for this Fund included an
emphasis paragraph describing an uncertainty about the Fund’s ability to continue
as a going concern. Specifically, the auditor’s report referenced the Fund’s notes
to the financial statements which stated that substantial doubt exists about its
ability to continue as a going concern. Additionally, the notes stated that the Fund
management is in the process of addressing how it will fulfill the Fund’s
obligations, given its economic dependence on a private corporation. This Fund
had an unrestricted net position deficit of $1,149,886, which was offset by net
investment in capital assets of $1,343,060 leaving the Fund with a positive net
position of $193,174 as of June 30, 2021.
11

--- Page 14 ---
Special Taxing Districts
The preceding contents of this report are applicable to local governments filing
audit reports in accordance with the provisions of the Local Government Article,
Section 16-306 of the Code. Section 16-308 of this Article requires that certain
types of special taxing districts (created by a county) file annual audit or financial
reports with the county in which the districts are located not later than 90 days
after the close of the fiscal year, in accordance with the rules and regulations
established by the applicable county. The applicable county is responsible for
reviewing each district’s compliance with the applicable provisions of the law and
for submitting copies of these reports to the Office of Legislative Audits.
Finding 8
The required reports had not been filed for four special taxing districts as of
July 15 2022.
As of July 15, 2022, we had not received the required reports for the fiscal year
ended June 30, 2021 for four special taxing districts, which were located in Anne
Arundel County. Anne Arundel County advised us that they were in the process
of pursuing compliance with the applicable filing requirement for these districts
and that appropriate follow-up action would be taken (for example, withholding
funds).
12

--- Page 15 ---
Exhibit A
Schedule of Audit Reports Containing Disclosures That Cash
Deposits Were Not Fully Collateralized or Otherwise Insured
Uninsured/ Similar Disclosures
Uncollateralized Included in Audit
Cash Deposit Reports for Each Fiscal
Entity Amount Year Since:
At June 30, 2021
Counties
Howard County $ 2,518,279 2016
Cities and Towns
Town of Boonsboro 468,619 n/a
Town of Brentwood 1,308,987 2016
Town of Garrett Park 100,700 2019
Town of Landover Hills 809,091 2020
Town of Leonardtown 442,795 n/a
Town of North Chevy Chase 393,684 n/a
Town of Smithsburg 109,674 n/a
Town of Westernport 411,705 n/a
Special Taxing Areas
Upper Potomac River Commission 418,407 2019
Village of Drummond 11,952 2020
n/a – not applicable, as not included in prior fiscal year report
13

--- Page 16 ---
A T
UDIT EAM
Bekana Edossa, CPA, CFE
Audit Manager
W. Thomas Sides
Senior Auditor
Stephen R. Alexander, CFE
Ibijoke O. Owolabi, CPA
Staff Auditors