Title: Morgan State University
Date: 09/22/2022
Type: Fiscal Compliance
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=632de986a1ce581628423222
Extracted: 2025-06-20T00:22:33.587753
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Audit Report
Morgan State University
October 2014
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
 This report and any related follow-up correspondence are available to the public through the
Office of Legislative Audits at 301 West Preston Street, Room 1202, Baltimore, Maryland
21201. The Office may be contacted by telephone at 410-946-5900, 301-970-5900, or 1-877-
486-9964.
 Electronic copies of our audit reports can be viewed or downloaded from our website at
http://www.ola.state.md.us.
 Alternate formats may be requested through the Maryland Relay Service at 1-800-735-2258.
 The Department of Legislative Services – Office of the Executive Director, 90 State Circle,
Annapolis, Maryland 21401 can also assist you in obtaining copies of our reports and related
correspondence. The Department may be contacted by telephone at 410 946-5400 or 301
970-5400.

--- Page 5 ---
Table of Contents
Background Information 4
Agency Responsibilities 4
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report 4
Findings and Recommendations 5
Student Accounts Receivable and Residency
 Finding 1 – MSU Had Not Established Adequate Controls Over Changes to 5
Student Residency Status Determinations
Finding 2 – Adjustments to Room and Board Charges Were Not Adequately 6
Reviewed
Grants
 Finding 3 – Outstanding Grant Receivables Were Not Adequately 7
Accounted for or Pursued as Required
Payroll
 Finding 4 – Controls Over Electronic Timesheets Were Not Sufficient to 8
Ensure the Validity of All Time Reported
Information Systems Security and Control
Finding 5 – Access, Monitoring, Password, and Account Controls Over 10
Critical Systems Were Not Sufficient
Finding 6 – The Intrusion Detection Prevention System Was Not Properly 11
Protecting the Network
Finding 7 – Malware Protection on Workstations and Servers Needs 12
Improvement
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology 14
Agency Response Appendix
* Denotes item repeated in full or part from preceding audit report
3

--- Page 6 ---
Background Information
Agency Responsibilities
Morgan State University (MSU), which is the State’s public urban research
university, offers baccalaureate, master’s, and doctoral programs. MSU is
governed by a Board of Regents appointed by the Governor with the advice and
consent of the Maryland Senate. Based on MSU’s records, its student population
for the Fall 2013 semester totaled 7,546, including 6,252 undergraduate students
and 1,294 graduate students. MSU’s budget is funded by unrestricted revenues,
such as tuition and fees, a State general fund appropriation, and restricted
revenues, such as federal grants and contracts. According to the State’s records,
MSU revenues for fiscal year 2013 totaled approximately $211.3 million,
including a State general fund appropriation of approximately $67.7 million.
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report
Our audit included a review to determine the status of the 10 findings contained in
our preceding audit report dated July 15, 2011. We determined that MSU
satisfactorily addressed 7 of the findings. The remaining 3 findings are repeated
in this report.
4

--- Page 7 ---
Findings and Recommendations
Student Accounts Receivable and Residency
Finding 1
Morgan State University (MSU) had not established adequate controls over
changes to student residency status determinations.
Analysis
MSU had not established adequate controls over changes to student residency
status determinations for both graduate and undergraduate students. An accurate
student residency status is critical because of the significant differences between
resident and nonresident tuition rates. For example, full-time undergraduate
tuition and fee charges for the Fall 2013 semester totaled $3,609 for Maryland
residents and $8,316 for nonresidents. According to MSU’s records, there were
1,318 residency changes (both graduate and undergraduate) from out-of-state to
in-state status processed between January 2012 and July 2013.
 MSU did not ensure that student residency status changes for graduate
students were independently verified to supporting documentation.
Furthermore, the only independent verification of residency status changes
performed for undergraduate students during our audit period was conducted
in June 2013 and consisted of reviewing 35 such changes, including 25 from
out-of-state to in-state. Under these conditions, unauthorized changes in
residency could be processed without detection. Our test of 17 student
residency status changes from out-of-state to in-state, made between January
2012 and June 2013, disclosed one change without adequate supporting
documentation; MSU advised that appropriate documentation was
subsequently obtained. Similar conditions regarding controls over changes to
student residency status were commented upon in our preceding audit report.
MSU’s Board of Regents Policy on Student Residency Classification for
Admission and Tuition Purposes states that a student requesting a change in
residency status must submit a MSU Petition for Change in Classification for
Tuition Purposes along with supporting evidence that provides clear and
convincing evidence of his or her residency status, such as a valid Maryland
driver’s license.
 Numerous employees were assigned system capabilities that allowed them to
change student residency status in MSU’s automated records even though
these system capabilities were not required to perform their normal job duties.
We noted 126 employees in approximately 50 MSU academic departments or
5

--- Page 8 ---
schools who were able to modify a student’s residency status, but did not need
such capabilities. Subsequent to our inquiries, MSU advised us that steps
were taken to restrict the system capabilities granted to these employees.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that MSU improve controls over student residency status
changes. Specifically, we recommend that MSU
a. ensure that a sufficient number of both graduate and undergraduate
residency status changes is reviewed for propriety by independent
supervisory personnel, and that the reviews are adequately documented
(repeat); and
b. assign system capabilities to change student residency to only those
employees who require such capabilities to perform their job duties.
Finding 2
Adjustments to room and board charges were not adequately reviewed.
Analysis
MSU had not established adequate controls over adjustments to student room and
board charges. Although MSU management advised us that adjustments to
student room and board charges processed in MSU’s automated records were
reviewed and approved for propriety by supervisory personnel, based on our tests,
there was no documentation that such reviews were performed. Our test of 10
students with room and board adjustments that reduced student charges by
$40,140 disclosed that none of these adjustments had been independently
approved. Furthermore, MSU waived all room and board charges totaling $7,283
for 2 of these students based upon cancellations received after the start of classes
for the semester, which is not consistent with MSU policy. Specifically, MSU
policy stipulates that students will not receive a refund of charges when
cancellations occur after the first day of class, or in cases where the student
withdraws from MSU, a 20 percent penalty will be charged. Without a
documented independent review of adjustments made, there is a lack of assurance
that adjustments processed were accurate, valid, and complied with MSU policy.
During fiscal year 2013, room and board adjustments to reduce student charges
totaled approximately $4.8 million.
Recommendation 2
We recommend that MSU ensure that room and board adjustments
processed are reviewed and approved by independent supervisory personnel,
that these reviews are documented, and that the adjustments comply with
MSU policy.
6

--- Page 9 ---
Grants
Finding 3
MSU had not established adequate accountability over outstanding grant
receivables and outstanding grant accounts were not pursued for payment as
required by the State’s Central Collection Unit’s (CCU) regulations.
Analysis
MSU had not established adequate accountability over grants received from
federal, state, and private entities for research and development. Furthermore,
outstanding grant amounts due from the entities were not pursued as required by
CCU regulations.
 MSU did not record grant amounts due from entities in centralized accounts
receivable records. Rather, MSU recorded outstanding grant receivables on a
combination of handwritten logs and computer files. Manual billings were
primarily recorded on handwritten logs, while electronic draw-downs of funds
were recorded on other automated records, neither of which reflected the total
outstanding amounts due. As a result, there was a lack of accountability over
grant activity to ensure that all billings and collections were accounted for.
Furthermore, the informal manner in which the grant records were kept
precluded MSU from readily producing an aging report to identify unpaid
accounts, the amounts due, and the length of time they had been outstanding.
 MSU did not ensure that billing adjustments on the handwritten logs were
adequately documented and reviewed by an independent supervisory
employee for propriety. Furthermore, the handwritten logs were accessible to
several MSU employees. Consequently, errors or other discrepancies could
occur without timely detection. Our analysis of the logs for fiscal years 2011
through 2013 identified 34 billings totaling $912,634 that had been crossed
through on the logs without notations adequately explaining the reason for the
deletions or an indication that the deletions had been reviewed by independent
supervisory personnel. We were advised that these adjustments were usually
made to indicate that revised billings had been issued; however, the records
did not clearly support this assertion. According to MSU’s records, manual
grant billings totaled approximately $6 million during fiscal year 2013.
 Written payment demands for outstanding grant reimbursement requests were
not sent to grantor entities at predetermined intervals as required. We were
advised by MSU management personnel that, after the initial billings, MSU
generally relied on telephone contacts with the grantor entities to request
payment. Our test of 10 grant billings totaling $1.3 million for fiscal years
2011 through 2013 disclosed that MSU did not receive payment until 3 to 18
7

--- Page 10 ---
months after the dates billed, and MSU had not sent dunning notices to pursue
collection while these accounts were outstanding as required. Similar
conditions were commented upon in our two preceding audit reports. Delays
in the pursuit of outstanding debts may decrease the likelihood of collecting
the funds. State regulations generally require that three written demands for
payment be made on accounts at 30-day intervals. If payment is not received
within 75 days of the original demand for payment, outstanding accounts
should be transferred to CCU for further collection efforts.
Recommendation 3
We recommend that MSU
a. establish centralized grant accounts receivable records to account for all
billing and collection activity,
b. routinely prepare reports to track and monitor the age of outstanding
accounts,
c. ensure that adjustments to accounts receivable are adequately
documented and that an independent supervisory employee periodically
reviews adjustments for propriety,
d. investigate the propriety of the aforementioned 34 adjustments we noted
as being crossed out on the accounts receivable logs, and
e. send written payment demands to the applicable grantor agencies and
submit delinquent accounts to CCU in accordance with State regulations
(repeat).
Payroll
Finding 4
Controls over electronic timesheets for regular and contractual employees
were not sufficient to ensure the validity of all time reported.
Analysis
Controls over electronic timesheets for regular and contractual employees were
not adequate to ensure they were properly completed and approved. Generally,
MSU employees prepared their own timesheets on an automated payroll system
and supervisors approved their employees’ timesheets on that system. According
to the State’s records, MSU’s payroll expenditures totaled approximately $96
million during fiscal year 2013 for 1,107 regular and 525 contractual employees.
Our review of the records of the automated timekeeping system for fiscal year
2013 disclosed the following conditions:
 According to the automated system, 24 employees approved their own
timesheets one or more times during fiscal year 2013. In total, 151
8

--- Page 11 ---
timesheets, for which the related earnings totaled $313,309, were approved by
these employees. One of these employees did not have supervisory approval
for any timesheet for the entire year. Although MSU’s written policies and
procedures require supervisory approval of timesheets, the automated controls
in place were not sufficient to ensure that this occurred in all cases.
 Thirteen employees (primarily human resources and payroll employees) had
been assigned system capabilities that allowed them to prepare, modify, and
approve the electronic timesheets of all MSU employees without independent
supervisory review and approval. MSU advised us that these capabilities were
generally used to prepare and submit an employee’s electronic timesheet when
the employee was unable to prepare his or her own timesheet (for example,
the employee was on extended leave). According to MSU’s records, 10,604
electronic timesheets were prepared or modified by the aforementioned
employees during fiscal years 2011, 2012, and 2013. A similar condition was
commented upon in our preceding audit report.
 During fiscal year 2013 a total of 286 timesheets for 194 employees, for
which related earnings totaling $392,607, were approved by supervisors at
least seven days prior to the end of the pay period. Further examination of 10
of these timesheets disclosed that 704 hours totaling $20,719 were recorded as
worked after supervisory approval. For example, one contractual employee’s
timesheet, indicating 80 hours of work for the pay period ending June 11,
2013, had an approval date of May 17, 2013—11 days before the pay period
began.
Recommendation 4
We recommend that MSU improve controls over the preparation, approval,
and submission of employee timesheets. Specifically, we recommend that
MSU
a. revise system capabilities to ensure that all timesheets are subject to
independent supervisory review and approval (repeat), and
b. ensure that timesheets are approved after the end of the pay period and
the employee has finalized his or her timesheet.
Information Systems Security and Control
Background
MSU’s information technology department provides information technology
support to MSU by maintaining its campus-wide administrative applications, such
as the student administration, human resources, and financial systems. The
information technology department also operates an integrated administrative and
9

--- Page 12 ---
academic computer network, which provides connections to multiple servers used
for administrative applications and related databases. The campus network also
includes separate email and file servers, Internet connectivity, and firewalls and
routers. MSU also maintains a website that functions as an entry point to many of
MSU’s services.
Finding 5
Access, monitoring, password, and account controls over the student
administration, human resources, and financial systems were not sufficient.
Analysis
Access, monitoring, password, and account controls over the student
administration, human resources, and financial systems were not sufficient.
Specifically, our review disclosed the following conditions:
 Powerful privileges on the database used for the student administration,
human resources, and financial systems were not properly restricted. We
noted that 16 accounts (assigned to 16 individuals) were unnecessarily
assigned powerful privileges that allowed direct read and modification access
to critical tables in this database.
 Monitoring of security events for the aforementioned systems’ database and
applications was not adequate. For example, the use of numerous database
critical system privileges was not logged and although MSU personnel
advised that reviews of logged database and application security events were
performed, documentation did not exist to support these reviews.
 Password and account controls over the aforementioned database were not in
accordance with the requirements of the Department of Information
Technology’s (DoIT) Information Security Policy. For example, password
age, length, complexity, and history were not in accordance with the
aforementioned Policy. Furthermore, the password file was not adequately
secured.
These conditions could result in unauthorized or inappropriate activities (affecting
the confidentiality, integrity, and/or availability of the production database) which
could go undetected by management.
Recommendation 5
We recommend that MSU
a. restrict the use of powerful database privileges to only those users
requiring such privileges;
10

--- Page 13 ---
b. log the use of all critical database privileges, review the use of these
privileges, document these reviews, and retain the documentation for
verification purposes; and
c. ensure that password and account controls are in accordance with the
DoIT Information Security Policy requirements and that the password file
is properly secured.
Finding 6
The MSU intrusion detection prevention system (IDPS) was not properly
protecting the network.
Analysis
The MSU intrusion detection prevention system (IDPS) was not properly
protecting the network. Specifically, we noted the following conditions:
 Although MSU used a network-based IDPS to monitor traffic, certain network
devices were improperly configured and, as a result, untrusted traffic to
numerous critical servers was not subject to IDPS coverage.
 At the time of our testing, the IDPS signatures (used to detect malicious
traffic) had not been updated for at least 19 months and the IDPS
configurations were not backed-up.
 MSU did not use host-based intrusion protection systems (HIPS) on numerous
servers that processed encrypted network traffic. The absence of HIPS
coverage for such traffic created a network security risk in that MSU’s
network-based IDPS cannot read encrypted traffic flowing into its network,
whereas HIPS can read and analyze such traffic and protect critical servers
from encrypted malicious traffic.
 Password complexity and history and account lockout were not enabled for
users authenticating to the IDPS modules; accordingly, these authentication
settings were not in accordance with the DoIT Information Security Policy
requirements.
Complete IDPS coverage includes use of properly configured network-based
IDPS that is supplemented, where necessary, with HIPS to aid significantly in the
detection/prevention of and response to potential network security breaches and
attacks. Furthermore, without proper monitoring, critical network security
breaches may occur that could otherwise possibly be detected and prevented.
11

--- Page 14 ---
Recommendation 6
We recommend that MSU
a. perform a documented review and assessment of its network security
risks and identify how IDPS coverage (including HIPS coverage) should
be best applied to its network, and implement such coverage for all
critical portions of its network;
b. update its IDPS signatures as they are released by the vendor and back
up its IDPS configurations to an offsite, secure, environmentally
controlled location; and
c. ensure that IDPS authentication control settings for user accounts and
passwords comply with the aforementioned DoIT requirements.
Finding 7
Malware protection on MSU workstations and servers needs improvement.
Analysis
Malware protection on MSU workstations and servers needs improvement.
Specifically, we noted the following conditions:
 MSU did not have a centralized management console to monitor and ensure
that the anti-malware software was installed and up-to-date on approximately
200 servers. Without the use of a centralized management console, there is a
lack of assurance that all MSU servers are properly protected with up-to-date
anti-malware software.
 Certain workstations were improperly configured with users having
administrator rights. Administrator rights are the highest permission level that
can be granted to users and it allows users to install software and change
configuration settings. Our testing of five workstations disclosed that all five
employees’ user accounts were defined with administrator rights, rather than
with user rights, and did not need these administrative rights. As a result, if
these workstations were infected with malware, the malware would run with
administrative rights and expose these workstations to a greater risk of
compromise than if the workstations’ user accounts operated with only user
rights.
 Computers tested had not been updated with the latest releases for software
products that are known to have significant security software-related
vulnerabilities. Although the vendors for these software products frequently
provide software patches to address these vulnerabilities, MSU had not
updated its computers for these patches. For example, 10 computers tested for
12

--- Page 15 ---
one of these software products noted that 7 computers were running older
versions of this software.
 Four of 10 computers tested had not been updated with the latest releases of
the anti-malware software. Furthermore, users on all 10 of these computers
could disable features of the anti-malware software that would render it
unable to protect against attack.
The DoIT Information Security Policy states that agencies should configure
security settings of information technology products to the most restrictive mode
consistent with operational requirements.
Recommendation 7
We recommend that MSU
a. use a centralized management console to monitor and ensure that anti-
malware software was installed and up-to-date on its servers,
b. ensure that administrative privileges on workstations are restricted to
system/network administrators,
c. keep its computers up-to-date for all critical security related updates to
potentially vulnerable installed software, and
d. continually update all computers for the latest versions of the anti-
malware software and adjust the software settings so that users cannot
disable features of this software.
13

--- Page 16 ---
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of Morgan State University (MSU)
for the period beginning March 24, 2010 and ending June 30, 2013. The audit
was conducted in accordance with generally accepted government auditing
standards. Those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain
sufficient, appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and
conclusions based on our audit objectives. We believe that the evidence obtained
provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit
objectives.
As prescribed by the State Government Article, Section 2-1221 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, the objectives of this audit were to examine MSU’s financial
transactions, records and internal control, and to evaluate its compliance with
applicable State laws, rules, and regulations.
In planning and conducting our audit, we focused on the major financial-related
areas of operations based on assessments of significance and risk. The areas
addressed by the audit included purchases and disbursements, student accounts
receivable, financial aid, cash receipts, payroll, federal funds, and information
technology systems. We also determined the status of the findings contained in
our preceding audit report.
To accomplish our audit objectives, our audit procedures included inquiries of
appropriate personnel, inspections of documents and records, observations of
MSU’s operations, and tests of transactions. We also performed various data
extracts of pertinent information from the State’s Financial Management
Information System (such as revenue and expenditure data) and the State’s
Central Payroll Bureau (payroll data), as well as from the contractor administering
the State’s Corporate Purchasing Card Program (credit card activity). The
extracts are performed as part of ongoing internal processes established by the
Office of Legislative Audits and were subject to various tests to determine data
reliability. We determined that the data extracted from these various sources were
sufficiently reliable for the purposes the data were used during this audit. We also
extracted data from MSU’s financial system for the purpose of testing payroll,
purchases, disbursements, financial aid, and student accounts receivable. We
performed various tests of the relevant data and determined that the data were
sufficiently reliable for the purposes the data were used during the audit. Finally,
we performed other auditing procedures that we considered necessary to achieve
our objectives. The reliability of data used in this report for background or
informational purposes was not assessed.
14

--- Page 17 ---
Our audit did not include an evaluation of internal controls for federal financial
assistance programs and assessment of MSU’s compliance with federal laws and
regulations pertaining to those programs because the State of Maryland engages
an independent accounting firm to annually audit such programs administered by
State agencies, including MSU.
MSU’s management is responsible for establishing and maintaining effective
internal control. Internal control is a process designed to provide reasonable
assurance that objectives pertaining to the reliability of financial records,
effectiveness and efficiency of operations including the safeguarding of assets,
and compliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations are achieved.
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate.
Our reports are designed to assist the Maryland General Assembly in exercising
its legislative oversight function and to provide constructive recommendations for
improving State operations. As a result, our reports generally do not address
activities we reviewed that are functioning properly.
This report includes findings relating to conditions that we consider to be
significant deficiencies in the design or operation of internal control that could
adversely affect MSU’s ability to maintain reliable financial records, operate
effectively and efficiently, and/or comply with applicable laws, rules, and
regulations. Our report also includes findings regarding significant instances of
noncompliance with applicable laws, rules, or regulations. Other less significant
findings were communicated to MSU that did not warrant inclusion in this report.
MSU’s response to our findings and recommendations is included as an appendix
to this report. As prescribed in the State Government Article, Section 2-1224 of
the Annotated Code of Maryland, we will advise MSU regarding the results of our
review of its response.
15

--- Page 19 ---
Finding 1
Morgan State University (MSU) had not established adequate controls over
changes to student residency status determinations.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that MSU improve controls over student residency status
changes. Specifically, we recommend that MSU
a. ensure that a sufficient number of both graduate and undergraduate
residency status changes is reviewed for propriety by independent
supervisory personnel, and that the reviews are adequately documented
(repeat); and
b. assign system capabilities to change student residency to only those
employees who require such capabilities to perform their job duties.
University Response:
The University concurs. Please note that students are assessed with an out-of-state
status unless the necessary steps are taken to support the in-state status, which
frequently occurs well after the student is admitted to the University (thereby
requiring a residency status change).
a. The independent review that was implemented as a result of the last audit has
been expanded to the Graduate Studies Program and is now conducted in a
manner that meets the audit standards as communicated by the auditors. In
addition, supervisors’ access to change the residency status has been revoked
(seen the next item below) thereby rendering them independent to perform a
review of changes. The supervisors in the Offices of Admissions and Records
and Registration now perform another independent review (in addition to the
one performed by the independent contractor referenced above) that was not
possible previously. The reviews are documented and retained for audit
verification. Furthermore, the University is currently working with the vendor
to implement “workflow” functionality. This entails establishing a role to
request residency status changes and a role to approve those requests
(mutually exclusive). Accordingly, independent reviews will occur before the
transaction is completed thereby strengthening the internal control system.
b. The University has engaged the vendor and reconfigured the Student
Information System to restrict access at a granular level. Accordingly, as of
June 27, 2014, the residency status field has been restricted to 19 employees
that are assigned to the Offices of Admissions, Records and Registration, and
the Graduate Studies Program. The access is currently appropriate. Previously,
the vendor had advised the University that users with the ability to register
students cannot be restricted from changing the residency status. The
University has opted to grant each academic unit with the capability to register
students for classes to bolster customer service excellence and efficiency.

--- Page 20 ---
Finding 2
Adjustments to room and board charges were not adequately reviewed.
Recommendation 2
We recommend that MSU ensure that room and board adjustments
processed are reviewed and approved by independent supervisory personnel,
that these reviews are documented, and that the adjustments comply with
MSU policy.
University Response:
The University concurs. The University has accounted for each adjustment;
however, agrees that the level of documentation for the independent supervisory
review may be improved. Effective July 1, 2014, independent reviews are
documented sufficiently and retained for audit verification. The University’s
process is for the Director of the Office of Residence Life (supervisor level) to
independently review and approve all student room and board adjustments. The
approval is documented on the Housing Contract Release Form. The 10
exceptions referenced above are isolated incidents where the Director authorized
the changes, but did not document the review. In addition, the five adjustments
that were incurred after the start of the semester are attributed to students who had
withdrawn from the University and could not cancel services sooner due to
extenuating circumstances. The Director obtained the supporting documentation
and used his discretion to waive the charges. The University will develop a policy
that delineates how extenuating cases should be handled. A draft policy will be
presented to the Board of Regents on November 3, 2014.
Please note that there are numerous reasons for housing and meal plan
adjustments. For example, room and board upgrades, downgrades, proration,
room switches, judicial sanctions, system automatic rollovers, student no-shows,
cancelations, and withdrawals for lack of funds. Additionally, the adjustment
amount cited above ($4.8M) represents one portion of the accounting entry –
namely, the debit side of the transaction. In many cases, there is a corresponding
adjustment, e.g., proration, penalty, and assignment replacement, which are
associated with the same transaction resulting in a credit. Therefore, the $4.8M
amount represents the gross total amount for “adjustments” and not the net
amount.

--- Page 21 ---
Finding 3
MSU had not established adequate accountability over outstanding grant
receivables and outstanding grant accounts were not pursued for payment as
required by the State’s Central Collection Unit’s (CCU) regulations.
Recommendation 3
We recommend that MSU
a. establish centralized grant accounts receivable records to account for all
billing and collection activity,
b. routinely prepare reports to track and monitor the age of outstanding
accounts,
c. ensure that adjustments to accounts receivable are adequately
documented and that an independent supervisory employee periodically
reviews adjustments for propriety,
d. investigate the propriety of the aforementioned 34 adjustments we noted
as being crossed out on the accounts receivable logs, and
e. send written payment demands to the applicable grantor agencies and
submit delinquent accounts to CCU in accordance with State regulations
(repeat).
University Response:
The University concurs. The current grants management information system does
not provide the University with the necessary accounts receivable reporting. The
University has therefore resorted to employing shadow systems that are
decentralized, manual, and less supportive of a structured billing process. In
addition, please note that the high majority of the University’s sponsored research
is funded by sponsors that render payment in a timely manner. There were special
circumstances why the few late payments that were identified by the auditors had
occurred.
By the end of the fall 2014 semester, the University will have implemented a
robust grant accounts receivable management process that complies with the
recommendations cited above. More specifically, the University will develop and
implement a grant accounts receivable aging report and monitoring process
thereof, establish a centralized and secured repository to account for all billing
and collection activities, implement independent supervisory reviews to ensure
adjustments of accounts receivables are documented properly and are appropriate,
and send dunning letters at thirty-day intervals and remit delinquent accounts to
CCU, as required. The University has reviewed the 34 adjustments. Each one is
appropriate. The documented review is available for inspection.

--- Page 22 ---
Finding 4
Controls over electronic timesheets for regular and contractual employees
were not sufficient to ensure the validity of all time reported.
Recommendation 4
We recommend that MSU improve controls over the preparation, approval,
and submission of employee timesheets. Specifically, we recommend that
MSU
a. revise system capabilities to ensure that all timesheets are subject to
independent supervisory review and approval (repeat), and
b. ensure that timesheets are approved after the end of the pay period and
the employee has finalized his or her timesheet.
University Response:
The University concurs.
a. In June 2014, the University developed and implemented a report and
monitoring procedures to ensure employees do not approve their own
timesheets. There have been no violations since that time. The exceptions that
were identified by the auditors are attributed to instances where supervisors
delegated the role to sign timesheets to other employees (“proxy role” and
sometimes only in the supervisor’s absence). The proxy users approved their
own timesheets among other employees’ timesheets in the department. The
supervisors were informed to discontinue this practice and to sign the proxy
users’ timesheets. A similar report and monitoring procedures will be fully
implemented, by the end of the fall 2014 semester, to ensure the propriety of
changes that are executed by the 13 employees with super-user access cited
above.
b. During the course of the audit, the University reconfigured the timekeeping
system to avail a timesheet for the current pay period only. Employees are no
longer able to submit timesheets for a future pay period. In addition, on June
27, 2014, the University initiated ongoing training of employees and
supervisors to comply with the audit recommendations. Please note that there
are instances where employees are required to submit timesheets well in
advance (e.g., before the University closes for winter recess).

--- Page 23 ---
Finding 5
Access, monitoring, password, and account controls over the student
administration, human resources, and financial systems were not sufficient.
Recommendation 5
We recommend that MSU
a. restrict the use of powerful database privileges to only those users
requiring such privileges;
b. log the use of all critical database privileges, review the use of these
privileges, document these reviews, and retain the documentation for
verification purposes; and
c. ensure that password and account controls are in accordance with the
DoIT Information Security Policy requirements and that the password file
is properly secured.
University Response:
The University concurs.
a. During the audit, the University had corrected this item and restricted the
access properly.
b. During the audit, the University enabled additional audit logs and has
expanded its review of system privileges and tables to satisfy the audit
requirements. By the end of the fall 2014 semester, the University will have
conducted a comprehensive risk assessment to identify the best compliment of
privileges and tables to monitor. Monitoring activities are now documented
sufficiently.
c. Password and account controls were strengthened during the audit to comply
with DoIT requirements. The password file was always secured properly and
strictly complies with DoIT requirements. However, the University agrees that
certain security enhancements may be applied. The University will implement
those enhancements by the end of the fall 2014 semester.

--- Page 24 ---
Finding 6
The MSU intrusion detection prevention system (IDPS) was not properly
protecting the network.
Recommendation 6
We recommend that MSU
a. perform a documented review and assessment of its network security
risks and identify how IDPS coverage (including HIPS coverage) should
be best applied to its network, and implement such coverage for all
critical portions of its network;
b. update its IDPS signatures as they are released by the vendor and back
up its IDPS configurations to an offsite, secure, environmentally
controlled location; and
c. ensure that IDPS authentication control settings for user accounts and
passwords comply with the aforementioned DoIT requirements.
University Response:
The University concurs.
a. During the audit, the University had reconfigured the IDPS to gain broad
coverage of all critical portions of the network. Please note that the
configuration reviewed by the auditors was only a temporary configuration
change that was applied in order to assess a new monitoring tool that
management was considering to acquire and was immediately corrected
during the audit. The University is in the process of upgrading its network. By
the end of the spring 2015 semester, the University will perform and
document a robust network security assessment that identifies the best
solution for the University (including IDPS and HIPS coverage).
b. IDPS signatures are updated, backed-up, and rotated to an offsite, secure
location that has the appropriate environmental controls.
c. The University had changed the user account and password control settings
during the audit to comply with DoIT requirements. The University fully
complies with DoIT standards.

--- Page 25 ---
Finding 7
Malware protection on MSU workstations and servers needs improvement.
Recommendation 7
We recommend that MSU
a. use a centralized management console to monitor and ensure that anti-
malware software was installed and up-to-date on its servers,
b. ensure that administrative privileges on workstations are restricted to
system/network administrators,
c. keep its computers up-to-date for all critical security related updates to
potentially vulnerable installed software, and
d. continually update all computers for the latest versions of the anti-
malware software and adjust the software settings so that users cannot
disable features of this software.
University Response:
The University concurs. The University is currently in the process of deploying a
centralized management console that will be used to monitor and install up-to-
date critical patches/hotfixes and malware software on all servers and
workstations. The University is in the process of restricting administrative
privileges on workstations properly. The above will be implemented by the spring
2015 semester.

--- Page 26 ---
A T
UDIT EAM
Paul R. Denz, CPA
Audit Manager
Richard L. Carter, CISA
Stephen P. Jersey, CPA, CISA
Information Systems Audit Managers
Abdullah I. Adam, CFE
Senior Auditor
Eric Alexander, CPA
Michael K. Bliss, CISA
Information Systems Senior Auditors
Evan E. Naugle
James J. Podhorniak
Kortue C. Sammy
Kimberly J. Wagner
Staff Auditors