Title: Office of the Clerk of Circuit Court - Baltimore City
Date: 10/17/2022
Type: Fiscal Compliance
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=63515aa7a1ce5816ac5d2553
Extracted: 2025-06-20T00:24:06.206397
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Audit Report
Office of the Clerk of Circuit Court
Baltimore City, Maryland
October 2022
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Senator Clarence K. Lam, M.D. (Senate Chair) Delegate Mark S. Chang (House Chair)
Senator Malcolm L. Augustine Delegate Steven J. Arentz
Senator Adelaide C. Eckardt Delegate Nicholas P. Charles II
Senator George C. Edwards Delegate Andrea Fletcher Harrison
Senator Katie Fry Hester Delegate Trent M. Kittleman
Senator Cheryl C. Kagan Delegate Carol L. Krimm
Senator Benjamin F. Kramer Delegate David Moon
Senator Cory V. McCray Delegate Julie Palakovich Carr
Senator Justin D. Ready Delegate Elizabeth G. Proctor
Senator Craig J. Zucker Delegate Geraldine Valentino-Smith
To Obtain Further Information
Office of Legislative Audits
The Warehouse at Camden Yards
351 West Camden Street, Suite 400
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Phone: 410-946-5900
Maryland Relay: 711
TTY: 410-946-5401 ꞏ 301-970-5401
E-mail: OLAWebmaster@ola.state.md.us
Website: www.ola.state.md.us
To Report Fraud
The Office of Legislative Audits operates a Fraud Hotline to report fraud, waste, or abuse involving State
of Maryland government resources. Reports of fraud, waste, or abuse may be communicated anonymously
by a toll-free call to 1-877-FRAUD-11, by mail to the Fraud Hotline, c/o Office of Legislative Audits, or
through the Office’s website.
Nondiscrimination Statement
The Department of Legislative Services does not discriminate on the basis of age, ancestry, color, creed,
marital status, national origin, race, religion, gender, gender identity, sexual orientation, or disability in the
admission or access to its programs, services, or activities. The Department’s Information Officer has been
designated to coordinate compliance with the nondiscrimination requirements contained in Section 35.107
of the United States Department of Justice Regulations. Requests for assistance should be directed to the
Information Officer at 410-946-5400 or 410-970-5400.

--- Page 3 ---
October 17, 2022
Senator Clarence K. Lam, M.D., Senate Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Delegate Mark S. Chang, House Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Members of Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Annapolis, Maryland
Ladies and Gentlemen:
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the Office of the Clerk of Circuit
Court for Baltimore City, Maryland for the period beginning September 26, 2017
and ending October 15, 2021. The Office performs various functions for the
public, including maintaining various legal records, recording certain real estate
documents, collecting related fees and taxes, and issuing certain licenses.
Our audit disclosed that the Office had not corrected certain longstanding
deficiencies regarding the collection of delinquent criminal court fees, fines, and
penalties which have been included in audit reports dating back to 2008. For
example, as of March 2021, there were 30,150 outstanding accounts totaling $7.6
million due prior to January 2008 that had not been forwarded to the Department
of Budget and Management’s Central Collection Unit in accordance with State
regulations. Also our audit disclosed that the Office did not have adequate
controls over land recordation, licensing, and civil court fee collections.
Our audit also included a review to determine the status of the three findings
contained in our preceding audit report. We determined that the Office
satisfactorily addressed two of these findings, with the remaining finding repeated
in this report, as noted above.
The Judiciary’s response to this audit, on behalf of the Office, is included as an
appendix to this report. We reviewed the response to our findings and related

--- Page 4 ---
recommendations, and have concluded that the corrective actions identified are
sufficient to address all audit issues.
We wish to acknowledge the cooperation extended to us during the audit by the
Office. We also wish to acknowledge the Judiciary’s and the Office’s willingness
to address the audit issues and implement appropriate corrective actions.
Respectfully submitted,
Gregory A. Hook, CPA
Legislative Auditor
2

--- Page 5 ---
Background Information
Agency Responsibilities
The Office is organized into several divisions, including the Trust Clerk, and
performs a variety of functions for the public such as filing, docketing, and
maintaining various legal records; recording documents involving title to real
estate; collecting the related fees, commissions, and taxes; and issuing certain
licenses. In performing these functions, the Office collects funds on behalf of the
State, Baltimore City, and others, and subsequently distributes the funds to the
applicable entities.
Financial Information
According to the State’s accounting records, the Office’s fiscal year 2021
revenues totaled $27,424,560. These revenues were distributed in the following
manner:
 $1,764,936 was distributed to Baltimore City,
 $237,859 was distributed to others, and
 $25,421,765 (the remaining amount) represented revenues available to the
State for purposes specified in various provisions of State law.
The Office’s fiscal year 2021 operating expenses, which were paid primarily from
a general fund appropriation, totaled $23,517,805.
The Office also maintained custody of certain trust and special purpose funds that,
according to its records, had balances totaling $2,440,504 at the 2021 fiscal year
end.
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report
Our audit included a review to determine the status of the three findings contained
in our preceding audit report dated July 24, 2018. As disclosed in Figure 1 on the
following page, we determined that the Office satisfactorily addressed two of
these findings. The remaining finding is repeated in this report.
3

--- Page 6 ---
Figure 1
Status of Preceding Findings
Preceding Implementation
Finding Finding Description Status
The Office’s collection efforts, and related
Finding 1 Repeated
recordkeeping were not sufficient to ensure
(Current Finding 1)
compliance with State regulations.
The Office lacked adequate controls to account for
Finding 2
and safeguard land record tax and civil court Not repeated
collections.
Finding 3 The Office did not sufficiently ensure the propriety
Not repeated
of juror stipends.
Findings and Recommendations
Criminal Court Fees
Finding 1
Collection efforts for criminal court fees, fines, and penalties, and the related
recordkeeping, were not sufficient to ensure compliance with State
regulations.
Analysis
Collection efforts for criminal court fees, fines, and penalties, and related
recordkeeping, were not sufficient to ensure compliance with State regulations.
As allowed by State law, and pursuant to a memorandum of understanding with
the Office of the Clerk of Circuit Court for Baltimore City (Office), the Baltimore
City Sheriff’s Office (BCSO) maintains criminal court fee detailed accounts
receivable records, prepares the related dunning notices, and processes any
collections and distributes them to the appropriate State and local entities as
required by law. The Office is responsible for issuing the initial billings,
maintaining the accounts receivable control account, mailing the aforementioned
dunning notices, and forwarding delinquent accounts to the Department of Budget
and Management’s Central Collection Unit (CCU) based on information received
from the BCSO. According to records maintained by the BCSO, as of June 30,
4

--- Page 7 ---
2021, the outstanding accounts receivable balance for criminal court fees totaled
approximately $12.7 million.
 The Office did not refer certain accounts to CCU as required. In March 2021,
the Administrative Judge for the Circuit Court signed two Administrative
Orders stating that accounts with balances prior to January 2008 were
uncollectible. According to records maintained by BCSO, as of March 2021,
these orders related to 30,150 accounts totaling $7.6 million. Our review as of
March 2022, disclosed that the Office had not referred 22,750 of these
accounts totaling $6.2 million to CCU.
State regulations require accounts deemed uncollectible by an agency to be
referred to CCU for additional collection efforts, such as tax refund intercepts.
We were advised by Office management that it is in the process of reviewing
the accounts. A similar condition regarding uncollectible accounts has been
commented upon in our four preceding audit reports dating back to August
2008.
 The Office did not pursue collection of approximately 10,400 accounts
totaling $3.2 million in receivables whose due date was deferred by a judge.
For example, if a judge specified that court fees were due after a defendant’s
release, a due date was not always recorded on the accounts receivable system
since the defendant’s actual release date was unknown. The Office did not
periodically monitor these deferred accounts in order to identify and record
any due dates.
A similar condition has been commented upon in our three preceding audit
reports dating back to June 2011. According to Office management, it had
taken certain actions to pursue the collection of the 10,400 accounts, but we
found those actions to be inadequate. Specifically, in response to our most
recent report, the Office investigated 5,700 accounts totaling $2.2 million and
either determined the defendant’s release date or determined the account was
uncollectible, and updated the related accounts receivable records accordingly.
However, as of January 2022, the Office had only sent dunning notices for
approximately 50 of these accounts. Further, we were advised by Office
management that, as of January 2022, the Office had identified release dates
for an additional 4,700 accounts; however, the related accounts receivable
records did not have due dates posted. According to Office records, as of June
2021, the 4,700 accounts totaling $1 million did not have a due date in the
accounts receivable system.
5

--- Page 8 ---
Recommendation 1
We recommend that the Office
a. forward all delinquent accounts, including those determined to be
uncollectible and noted above, to CCU (repeat); and
b. periodically monitor, pursue collection efforts, and account for deferred
court fees (repeat).
Land Recordation, Licensing, and Civil Court Fees
Finding 2
The Office lacked adequate controls over land recordation, licensing, and
civil court fee collections.
Analysis
The Office lacked adequate controls over land recordation, licensing, and civil
court fee collections. As a result, receipts could be misappropriated without
detection. During fiscal year 2021, the land recordation, licensing, and civil court
fees totaled $22.5 million, $2.1 million, and $3.2 million, respectively. Our
review of the procedures and controls over the mail and walk-in collections of
those fees disclosed the following conditions:
 Collections received by mail for land recordation, licensing, and civil court
fees were not properly controlled. Specifically, checks received for land
recordation and licensing were not restrictively endorsed immediately upon
receipt. In addition, the Office did not consistently document the transfer of
the three types of collections between employees for further processing and
deposit, to establish accountability over the funds.
 The Office did not perform proper deposit verifications for land recordation,
licensing, and civil court fees. While an independent deposit verification was
performed, the employee performing the verification did not use the initial
record for all collections. Rather, the employee used summary reports from
the Office’s automated systems, which were generated after the initial receipt
occurred. As a result, there was a lack of assurance that these fees were
subsequently deposited.
The Comptroller of Maryland’s Accounting Procedures Manual requires agencies
to establish adequate controls over collections. For example, agencies should
immediately restrictively endorse collections and perform deposit verifications
using initial source documents.
6

--- Page 9 ---
Recommendation 2
We recommend that the Office
a. restrictively endorse all checks immediately upon receipt,
b. document the transfer of collections to establish accountability over the
collections, and
c. ensure the initial record of collections is used in the independent deposit
verification process.
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the Office of the Clerk of Circuit
Court for Baltimore City, Maryland for the period beginning September 26, 2017
and ending October 15, 2021. The audit was conducted in accordance with
generally accepted government auditing standards. Those standards require that
we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient, appropriate evidence to
provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit
objectives. We believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for
our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives.
As prescribed by the State Government Article, Section 2-1221 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, the objectives of this audit were to examine the Office’s
financial transactions, records, and internal control, and to evaluate its compliance
with applicable State laws, rules, and regulations.
In planning and conducting our audit, we focused on the major financial-related
areas of operations based on assessments of significance and risk. The areas
addressed by the audit included cash receipts (including taxes and fees collected
for real estate transactions), certain payroll activities, and bank accounts. We also
determined the status of the findings contained in our preceding audit report.
Our audit did not include a review of certain support services provided to the
Office by the Administrative Office of the Courts. These support services (such
as human resources and payroll activities, invoice processing, and maintenance of
budgetary accounting records) are included within the scope of our audits of the
Judiciary.
Our assessment of internal controls was based on agency procedures and controls
in place at the time of our fieldwork. Our tests of transactions and other auditing
procedures were generally focused on the transactions occurring during our audit
period of September 26, 2017 to October 15, 2021, but may include transactions
7

--- Page 10 ---
before or after this period as we considered necessary to achieve our audit
objectives.
To accomplish our audit objectives, our audit procedures included inquiries of
appropriate personnel, inspections of documents and records, tests of transactions,
and to the extent practicable, observations of the Office’s operations. Generally,
transactions were selected for testing based on auditor judgment, which primarily
considers risk, the timing or dollar amount of the transaction, or the significance
of the transaction to the area of operation reviewed. As a matter of course, we do
not normally use sampling in our tests, so unless otherwise specifically indicated,
neither statistical nor non-statistical audit sampling was used to select the
transactions tested. Therefore, unless sampling is specifically indicated in a
finding, the results from any tests conducted or disclosed by us cannot be used to
project those results to the entire population from which the test items were
selected. We also performed other auditing procedures that we considered
necessary to achieve our audit objectives. The reliability of data used in this
report for background or informational purposes was not assessed.
The Office’s management is responsible for establishing and maintaining
effective internal control. Internal control is a process designed to provide
reasonable assurance that objectives pertaining to the reliability of financial
records; effectiveness and efficiency of operations, including safeguarding of
assets; and compliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations are achieved.
As provided in Government Auditing Standards, there are five components of
internal control: control environment, risk assessment, control activities,
information and communication, and monitoring. Each of the five components,
when significant to the audit objectives, and as applicable to the Office, were
considered by us during the course of this audit.
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate.
Our reports are designed to assist the Maryland General Assembly in exercising
its legislative oversight function and to provide constructive recommendations for
improving State operations. As a result, our reports generally do not address
activities we reviewed that are functioning properly.
This report includes findings relating to conditions that we consider to be
significant deficiencies in the design or operation of internal control that could
adversely affect the Office’s ability to maintain reliable financial records, operate
8

--- Page 11 ---
effectively and efficiently, and/or comply with applicable laws, rules, and
regulations. Our report also includes a finding regarding a significant instance of
noncompliance with applicable laws, rules, or regulations. Other less significant
findings were communicated to the Office that did not warrant inclusion in this
report.
The response from the Judiciary, on behalf of the Office, to our findings and
recommendations is included as an appendix to this report. As prescribed in the
State Government Article, Section 2-1224 of the Annotated Code of Maryland,
we will advise the Judiciary regarding the results of our review of its response.
9

--- Page 12 ---
APPENDIX

--- Page 13 ---
Office of the Clerk of Circuit Court
Baltimore City, Maryland
Agency Response Form
Criminal Court Fees
Finding 1
Collection efforts for criminal court fees, fines, and penalties, and the related
recordkeeping, were not sufficient to ensure compliance with State regulations.
We recommend that the Office
a. forward all delinquent accounts, including those determined to be uncollectible and
noted above, to CCU (repeat); and
b. periodically monitor, pursue collection efforts, and account for deferred court fees
(repeat).
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide Included in the two Administrative Orders were accounts with balances
additional comments as prior to January 2008 which include account balances that have been
deemed necessary. paid, were referred to P & P by the court, court abated, court waived,
expunged, account balance less than $30, and other status that would
render the account not suitable for referral to CCU. There are no social
security numbers for these cases. The Clerk’s Office cannot update the
data maintained by the City for the Sheriff’s Office.
Recommendation 1a Agree Estimated Completion Date: Pending CCU
decision
Please provide details The Office of the Clerk of the Circuit Court for Baltimore met with
of corrective action or Managers from CCU in September 2022. At that meeting the
explain disagreement. Clerk’s Office requested abatement of the excessively aged cases,
that is, from 1961 through 2007 criminal costs and fines. A response
is pending.
Recommendation 1b Agree Estimated Completion Date: Implementation
of MDEC
Please provide details The Clerk’s Office monitors the accounts receivable files and is
of corrective action or working to assume the accounts receivable function for criminal
explain disagreement. costs and fines from the Baltimore City Sheriff’s Office in
preparation for MDEC. There is work in progress to correct the
data and to incorporate the corrected data in electronic court
records and an accounts receivable system. Periodically cases are
sent to CCU.
Page 1 of 3

--- Page 14 ---
Office of the Clerk of Circuit Court
Baltimore City, Maryland
Agency Response Form
Land Recordation, Licensing, and Civil Court Fees
Finding 2
The Office lacked adequate controls over land recordation, licensing, and civil court fee
collections.
We recommend that the Office
a. restrictively endorse all checks immediately upon receipt,
b. document the transfer of collections to establish accountability over the collections, and
c. ensure the initial record of collections is used in the independent deposit verification
process.
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide During the Covid 19 pandemic, the City of Baltimore Offices closed.
additional comments as Documents cannot be processed without clearance from the City Finance
deemed necessary. Office. Documents were not processed timely. When Baltimore City
Offices resumed operations there was a significant backlog. Bulk
transfers of land records documents are hand delivered late in the day
usually once a week. Checks are endorsed when the mail is opened and
sorted in date order received. Frequently there are three to eight bins of
mail. Unopened mail that is/was received is secured in a safe until such
time the division can process it. When mail is opened, it is endorsed and
sorted. Additionally, due to Covid 19 and many restrictions such as
building closings and reduced staff, mail from the USPS was delayed,
courthouse drop boxes were created (which required a 48 hour hold
before recipient delivery per Covid 19 protocols) and Baltimore City
government also had significant delayed processing.
Recommendation 2a Agree Estimated Completion Date: Effective
immediately
Please provide details of All checks for the Clerk’s Office will be restrictively endorsed
corrective action or immediately upon receipt.
explain disagreement.
Recommendation 2b Agree Estimated Completion Date: Effective
immediately
Page 2 of 3

--- Page 15 ---
Office of the Clerk of Circuit Court
Baltimore City, Maryland
Agency Response Form
Please provide details of The transfer of document collections will be documented.
corrective action or
explain disagreement.
Recommendation 2c Agree Estimated Completion Date: Effective
immediately
Please provide details of The initial record of mail collections will be used in the independent
corrective action or deposit verification process.
explain disagreement.
Page 3 of 3

--- Page 16 ---
A T
UDIT EAM
Heather A. Warriner, CPA
Audit Manager
Patrick J. Cavanaugh, CPA
Senior Auditor
Brian M. Webbert
Staff Auditor