Title: Maryland Department of Health - Intellectual Disabilities Residential Centers - Holly Center and Potomac Center
Date: 10/24/2022
Type: Fiscal Compliance
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=6352f04ca1ce580a74f1c31c
Extracted: 2025-06-20T00:24:50.050777
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Audit Report
Maryland Department of Health
Intellectual Disabilities Residential Centers
Holly Center and Potomac Center
October 2022
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Senator Clarence K. Lam, M.D. (Senate Chair) Delegate Mark S. Chang (House Chair)
Senator Malcom L. Augustine Delegate Steven J. Arentz
Senator Adelaide C. Eckardt Delegate Nicholas P. Charles II
Senator George C. Edwards Delegate Andrea Fletcher Harrison
Senator Katie Fry Hester Delegate Trent M. Kittleman
Senator Cheryl C. Kagan Delegate Carol L. Krimm
Senator Benjamin F. Kramer Delegate David Moon
Senator Cory V. McCray Delegate Julie Palakovich Carr
Senator Justin D. Ready Delegate Elizabeth G. Proctor
Senator Craig J. Zucker Delegate Geraldine Valentino-Smith
To Obtain Further Information
Office of Legislative Audits
The Warehouse at Camden Yards
351 West Camden Street, Suite 400
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Phone: 410-946-5900 ·
Maryland Relay: 711
TTY: 410-946-5401 · 301-970-5401
E-mail: OLAWebmaster@ola.state.md.us
Website: www.ola.state.md.us
To Report Fraud
The Office of Legislative Audits operates a Fraud Hotline to report fraud, waste, or abuse involving State
of Maryland government resources. Reports of fraud, waste, or abuse may be communicated anonymously
by a toll-free call to 1-877-FRAUD-11, by mail to the Fraud Hotline, c/o Office of Legislative Audits, or
through the Office’s website.
Nondiscrimination Statement
The Department of Legislative Services does not discriminate on the basis of age, ancestry, color, creed,
marital status, national origin, race, religion, gender, gender identity, sexual orientation, or disability in the
admission or access to its programs, services, or activities. The Department’s Information Officer has been
designated to coordinate compliance with the nondiscrimination requirements contained in Section 35.107
of the United States Department of Justice Regulations. Requests for assistance should be directed to the
Information Officer at 410-946-5400 or 410-970-5400.

--- Page 3 ---
October 24, 2022
Senator Clarence K. Lam, M.D., Senate Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Delegate Mark S. Chang, House Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Members of Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Annapolis, Maryland
Ladies and Gentlemen:
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the following units of the
Maryland Department of Health (MDH): the Holly Center for the period
beginning September 28, 2018 and ending June 30, 2021 and the Potomac Center
for the period beginning May 18, 2017 and ending June 30, 2021, which includes
the Secure Evaluation and Therapeutic Treatment (SETT) Program for the period
beginning May 1, 2018 and ending June 30, 2021. These units, collectively
referred to as the Intellectual Disabilities Residential Centers (IDRCs), provide
comprehensive services to maximize the physical, intellectual, emotional, and
social development of individuals who have borderline to profound intellectual
disabilities.
In our previous audits of the IDRCs, we issued separate audit reports for the Holly
Center, the Potomac Center, and included SETT as part of our audit of the
Developmental Disabilities Administration (DDA). Effective July 1, 2020, the
MDH transferred oversight of the IDRCs from the DDA budgetary unit to the
MDH Operations Administration budgetary unit. To promote audit efficiency, we
have consolidated our review of the IDRCs into one audit, with our
recommendations being made to MDH Healthcare System under the MDH
Operations Administration, on behalf of the IDRCs.
Our audit disclosed that the Potomac Center obtained nursing services using
contracts that had been fully expended and/or had expired. This resulted in the
Center paying the vendor an additional $310,546 more than the original
agreements and circumventing State Proc urement regulations. We also found

--- Page 4 ---
that the related invoices were not adequately verified and were paid using
improper payment methods. We also found that the Holly Center did not ensure
invoices paid for nursing services agreed to supporting documentation. Further,
we found a potential violation of State ethics law and MDH policy. Specifically,
10 Holly Center employees engaged in secondary employment with vendors that
provided services to the Center. In addition, 1 of the 10 employees was also
responsible for oversight of certain aspects of the contracts, which could present a
conflict of interest or the appearance of impropriety.
Additionally, the IDRCs had not established adequate controls over the propriety
of payroll transactions. For example, the IDRCs were unable to provide
documentation that payroll adjustments had been reviewed prior to submission for
Statewide Personnel System processing.
Finally, our audit included a review to determine the status of the finding
contained in our preceding report of the Potomac Center. We determined that this
finding was satisfactorily addressed. The preceding report of the Holly Center did
not contain any findings nor did the respective preceding reports contain any
findings relating to SETT financial operations.
MDH Healthcare System’s response to this audit, on behalf of the IDRCs, is
included as an appendix to this report. We reviewed the response and noted
general agreement to our findings and related recommendations. Subsequent to
the response receipt, but prior to the issuance of the final report, we contacted
MDH staff and obtained additional clarification that satisfactorily resolved all
outstanding questions and issues. Consequently, we have concluded that the
written responses and additional clarification together indicate that the IDRC’s
corrective actions identified are sufficient to address all audit issues.
We wish to acknowledge the cooperation extended to us during the audit by the
IDRCs. We also wish to acknowledge MDH’s and the IDRCs’ willingness to
address the audit issues and implement appropriate corrective actions.
Respectfully submitted,
Gregory A. Hook, CPA
Legislative Auditor
2

--- Page 5 ---
Table of Contents
Background Information 4
Agency Responsibilities 4
Organizational and Audit Approach Changes 5
Status of Finding From Preceding Audit Reports 5
Findings and Recommendations 6
Nursing Services Contracts and Disbursements
Finding 1 – The Potomac Center obtained nursing services using contracts 6
that had been fully expended and/or expired. In addition, the related
invoices were not adequately verified and were paid using improper
payment methods.
Finding 2 – The Holly Center prepayment review of amounts invoiced for 8
nursing services was not sufficiently comprehensive.
Possible Ethics Violations
Finding 3 – Ten Holly Center employees potentially violated State ethics 9
law and Maryland Department of Health policy by having secondary
employment with vendors that provided services to the Holly Center,
including one employee that participated in the oversight of these
vendors.
Payroll
Finding 4 – The Potomac Center and the Holly Center had not established 11
adequate controls to ensure the propriety of payroll transactions,
including adjustments to employee pay and leave balances.
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology 13
Agency Response Appendix
3

--- Page 6 ---
Background Information
Agency Responsibilities
The Maryland Department of Health (MDH) operates two Intellectual Disabilities
Residential Centers (IDRCs). The IDRCs are the Holly Center and the Potomac
Center, which includes the forensic residential center Secure Evaluation and
Therapeutic Treatment (SETT) Program.
• The Holly Center, located in Salisbury, Maryland, provides comprehensive
services for individuals with intellectual disabilities that reside in the nine
counties of Maryland’s Eastern Shore. Additionally, the Holly Center
provides certain outpatient services, and coordination and support services to
day programs and group homes for the intellectually disabled. As of June 30,
2021, the Holly Center had a licensed capacity of 100 inpatient residents.
During fiscal year 2021, the Holly Center had an average daily inpatient
population of 49 residents. According to the State’s records, the Holly
Center’s expenditures were approximately $18.9 million during fiscal year
2021.
• The Potomac Center, located in Hagerstown, Maryland, serves individuals
with intellectual disabilities from the entire State. The Potomac Center
provides services intended to maximize the physical, intellectual, emotional,
and social development of individuals with borderline to profound intellectual
disabilities. It also provides habilitative services to expedite the return of
individuals to a less restrictive environment. Furthermore, the Potomac
Center operates a Transitions Program to serve individuals who have both
intellectual disabilities and mental illness and to provide a therapeutic
habilitation model before discharge to the community. As of June 30, 2021,
the Potomac Center, had a licensed capacity of 62 residents. During fiscal
year 2021, the Potomac Center had an average daily inpatient population of 45
residents. According to the State’s records, the Potomac Center’s
expenditures were approximately $19.5 million during fiscal year 2021.
MDH relocated SETT from the Springfield Hospital Center to the Potomac
Center campus effective January 2020. SETT provides evaluation,
assessment, and active treatment to people with intellectual disabilities and
court involvement. As of June 30, 2021, SETT has a licensed inpatient
capacity of 32 residents. During fiscal year 2021, SETT had an average daily
inpatient population of 24 residents. According to the State’s records, SETT
expenditures were $7.4 million during fiscal year 2021.
4

--- Page 7 ---
Organizational and Audit Approach Changes
Effective July 1, 2021, MDH transferred oversight of the IDRCs from the
Developmental Disabilities Administration (DDA) budgetary unit to the MDH
Operations Administration budgetary unit. In our previous audits of the IDRCs,
we issued separate audit reports for the Holly Center and the Potomac Center with
SETT included within our audits of the MDH Office of the Secretary (for payroll
processing) and DDA (for non-payroll related services). In response to the
change in oversight and to promote audit efficiency, we have consolidated our
review of the IDRCs into one audit. Consequently, our audit report
recommendations will be made to the MDH Healthcare System under the MDH
Operations Administration, on behalf of the IDRCs.
Status of Finding From Preceding Audit Reports
Our audit included a review to determine the status of the finding contained in our
preceding audit report of the Potomac Center dated January 3, 2018. We
determined that the Potomac Center satisfactorily addressed this finding. The
preceding audit report of the Holly Center dated February 12, 2019, did not
contain any findings. The audit reports of the MDH – Office of the Secretary and
Other Units dated July 14, 2020 and MDH –Developmental Disabilities
Administration dated July 8, 2019 did not contain any findings relating to SETT
financial operations.
5

--- Page 8 ---
Findings and Recommendations
Nursing Services Contracts and Disbursements
Finding 1
The Potomac Center obtained nursing services using contracts that had been
fully expended and/or expired. In addition, the related invoices were not
adequately verified and were paid using improper payment methods.
Analysis
The Potomac Center continued to obtain nursing services from one vendor after
the vendor’s contracts were expended and/or expired. In addition, the Center’s
review of the related invoices did not identity charges that had been billed in
excess of the contractual rate, and the invoices were paid using improper payment
methods. The Developmental Disabilities Administration initially procured these
nursing services from one vendor using two contracts (one for the Potomac Center
and one for the Secure Evaluation Therapeutic Treatment (SETT) Program), each
valued at $49,320 (or $98,640 in total). The Potomac Center was responsible for
the payment and monitoring of these nursing services for both Potomac Center
and SETT. Our review disclosed the following:
• The Potomac Center continued to use the two contracts after the contract
values had been fully expended and/or the contract had expired, without a
formal contract extension or required approvals. We determined that the
vendor was paid $310,546 more than the two contracts’ combined maximum
value. Specifically, during the contract period of April 17, 2020 through
August 31, 2020, the Potomac Center paid the vendor $10,361 in excess of the
combined contracts’ value and continued to use the contracts up to 10 months
after they expired, incurring an additional cost of $300,185 (approximately 3
times the initial contract value).
Based on the amount ultimately paid to the vendor, we concluded that the
Potomac Center circumvented State regulations for contracts valued in excess
of $50,000, which requires State agencies to obtain approval from the
Department of General Services, publish the contracts on eMaryland
Marketplace, and obtain approval from the Board of Public Works for
purchases over $200,000. In addition, Potomac Center circumvented the
MDH requirement that contracts exceeding $50,000 were to be procured
centrally through its Office of Contract Management and Procurement.
6

--- Page 9 ---
• Although Potomac Center management advised that vendor invoices were
reviewed and approved by a documented signoff of the hours worked and the
hourly (unit) price charged, the results of our testing indicated that it was
ineffective. Specifically, our test of seven approved invoices disclosed that
for each invoice the vendor charged a rate that exceeded the rate specified in
the existing and then expired contract by $0.25 per hour. Although we did not
verify the occurrence of this billing error for all invoices paid; if the vendor
consistently charged the improper rate during the period of April 2020
through June 2021, using total hours billed we extrapolated the impact to be a
total overpayment of approximately $3,000. The Potomac Center was
unaware of these overcharges and paid the invoices in full.
• The Potomac Center payments to the vendor, which totaled $409,186, were
made using methods that violated State policies and procedures, and without
matching the payments to a contract/purchase order, as required. Specifically,
the Potomac Center made numerous payments to the vendor totaling $360,972
using the State’s corporate purchasing cards (CPC) and another $48,214 using
direct vouchers. The use of these payment methods violated State policies,
which generally require payment methods that include a matching of the
payments to a contract/purchase order, which would preclude the use of CPC
for this activity.
Specifically, the Comptroller of Maryland’s (COM) Corporate Purchasing
Card Program Policy and Procedures Manual provides that the cards are
intended to help agencies obtain small dollar value items in a more efficient
and cost effective manner and cards will generally have a single purchase
limit up to $5,000. We confirmed our understanding of CPC use with COM
management personnel. In regard to the direct voucher payments, the
Department of Information Technology’s Internal Control and Security Policy
and Procedures Manual restricts this payment method to specific types of
transactions, such as, utilities, tuition reimbursement, or travel.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that the MDH Healthcare System ensure that the Potomac
Center
a. discontinue the practice of paying a vendor after a contract has been fully
expended without an approved contract modification,
b. verify invoice charges to contractual billing rates, and
c. ensure the appropriate payment method is used to ensure that invoices
are matched to the corresponding contract/purchase order prior to
payment.
7

--- Page 10 ---
Finding 2
The Holly Center prepayment review of amounts invoiced for nursing
services was not sufficiently comprehensive.
Analysis
The Holly Center could not support certain amounts invoiced and paid for nursing
services. Nursing services were generally provided by two vendors that were paid
$738,000 and $276,000 during our audit period. We were advised that a Holly
Center employee verified the hours charged on the invoices to the hours recorded
on both vendor employee sign-in sheets and shift schedules; however, the
employee did not review the timesheets prepared by the vendor employees and
signed by Holly Center employees supervising their work. These timesheets,
approved by Holly Center supervisory personnel, would be the appropriate
primary document for verification of hours billed, and should be used in
conjunction with the other mentioned documents.
In addition, our test of 4 approved invoices1 totaling approximately $66,000,
which included charges for 240 shifts worked by 28 employees, disclosed that the
sign-in sheets and/or shift schedules for both vendors’ employees did not support
the amounts invoiced, raising questions about the aforementioned reviews.
Specifically, for 102 shifts the vendor employees did not sign the sign-in sheets or
were not listed on the shift schedules and for 17 shifts the employee did not sign
the sign-in sheet and were also not listed on the shift schedules. The missing
support was not noted during the Holly Center’s reviews of the invoices. We
subsequently obtained timesheets prepared by the vendor employees for the
aforementioned invoices (which were not used in the Holly Center verification
process) and determined that the amounts charged were generally supported.
These conditions support the need for all reviews to include approved timesheets
prior to payment.
The Comptroller of Maryland’s Accounting Procedures Manual requires that
agency personnel verify invoices submitted to supporting documentation prior to
payment to ensure that billed goods/services were received.
Recommendation 2
We recommend that the MDH Healthcare System ensure that the Holly
Center obtains and verifies supporting documentation, including approved
timesheets, against vendor invoices prior to payment.
1 We selected 3 invoices from the first vendor and 1 invoice from the other vendor.
8

--- Page 11 ---
Possible Ethics Violations
Finding 3
Ten Holly Center employees potentially violated State ethics law and MDH
policy by having secondary employment with vendors that provided services
to the Holly Center, including one employee that participated in the oversight
of these vendors.
Analysis
Ten Holly Center employees potentially violated State ethics law by having
secondary employment with two vendors that provided nursing services to the
Holly Center, including one employee that participated in the oversight of these
vendors. In addition, these employees may have violated MDH policy by not
reporting their secondary employment to MDH’s Office of Internal Controls and
Audit Compliance (IAC) as required. Furthermore, five of these employees
recorded hours on their Holly Center State employee timesheets that overlapped
with the hours billed by the vendors for their services.
• During our audit, Holly Center management advised us that 10 Holly Center
employees had secondary employment with 2 vendors that provided nursing
services to the Holly Center. Our review substantiated the secondary
employment of 9 of these employees, while we concluded that 1 did not
actually have secondary employment with the vendors. In addition, we
identified 1 additional employee that had secondary employment with both of
the vendors. Holly Center management advised us that it was aware of this
employee’s secondary employment, but had not disclosed it to us due to an
oversight.
We reviewed each invoice from these vendors during our audit period and
identified 83 invoices totaling approximately $812,000 that included charges
for time worked on 473 shifts by 9 of the 10 employees.2 The secondary
employment with a vendor doing business with the Holly Center may violate
State ethics law. In addition, although Holly Center management was aware
of the secondary employment, the secondary employment was not reported to
MDH’s IAC, as required by MDH policy.
• One employee was responsible for oversight of certain aspects of the
contracts, which could present a conflict of interest or the appearance of a
conflict. We reviewed all of the vendor employee timesheets for the hours
2 The remaining employee may have had secondary employment with the vendor, but did not
provide services to the Holly Center.
9

--- Page 12 ---
worked by the nine employees and noted that one employee, in their role as a
Holly Center employee, approved the timesheets used by the vendor to
support amounts invoiced. For example, our review of 8 invoices that
included charges for the Holly Center employees with secondary employment
disclosed that the supervisory employee approved 20 vendor timesheets in
their role as a Holly Center employee. Although this employee did not
approve their own timesheet, participation in the oversight of a contract with
which they had secondary employment may violate State ethics laws.
• Our review of the invoices containing charges for the aforementioned
employees disclosed that 5 of the employees (including the supervisory
employee above) recorded hours on their Holly Center State employee
timesheets that overlapped with the hours they were paid while working at the
Holly Center as employees of the vendors. Specifically, our analysis
identified eight timesheets with a total of 32.5 overlapping hours ranging from
30 minutes to 8 hours. These employees received $722 in pay from the Holly
Center for these overlapping hours and the Holly Center paid the vendors
$1,274 for the same hours.
Senior management personnel at the State Ethics Commission advised us that the
aforementioned secondary employment and participation activities could
potentially violate certain provisions of State ethics law. Specifically, Section 5-
502 of the General Provisions Article of the Annotated Code of Maryland
prohibits an employee from having secondary employment with a business entity
that has entered into a contract with the employee’s agency. Section 5-501 of the
Article prohibits an employee from participating in matters involving a business
entity if the employee has secondary employment with the business entity. Any
final decision as to whether violations of State ethics law occurred would
ultimately be made by the Commission.
Recommendation 3
We recommend that the MDH Healthcare System
a. refer the secondary employment and participation matters to the
Commission and take appropriate action based on the Commission’s
decisions and direction,
b. ensure that secondary employment is reported to MDH’s IAC as required
by MDH policy, and
c. pursue recovery of the funds paid for overlapping hours as appropriate.
10

--- Page 13 ---
Payroll
Finding 4
The Potomac Center and the Holly Center had not established adequate
controls to ensure the propriety of payroll transactions, including
adjustments to employee pay and leave balances.
Analysis
The Potomac Center and the Holly Center, referred collectively as the Intellectual
Disabilities Residential Centers (IDRCs), had not established adequate controls
over the processing of payroll transactions on the Statewide Personnel System
(SPS). According to the State’s records, the payroll-related expenditures of the
two IDRCs totaled approximately $38.4 million during fiscal year 2021.
• The IDRCs could not provide documentation that payroll adjustments were
reviewed prior to submission to the MDH Office of Human Resources for
processing in SPS. In addition, the IDRCs did not have a procedure to verify
the propriety of leave balance adjustments made by 10 IDRC employees
directly in SPS. Finally, the IDRCs did not use available system output
reports of all payroll and leave adjustments recorded to ensure that only
authorized adjustments had been processed.
During the IDRCs’ respective audit periods they processed 524 payroll
adjustments (such as retroactive payroll payments) that changed employee pay
by a total of $165,830 (increase of $149,205 and decrease of $16,625).
During this period, the IDRCs also processed 1,033 leave adjustments (such
as leave bank enrollments) that changed employee leave balances by 45,240
hours (increase of 34,358 hours and decrease of 10,882 hours). Our test of
leave and payroll adjustments processed by the IDRCs did not disclose any
material improper transactions.
• The IDRCs did not verify that the total payroll, as reflected in the Central
Payroll Bureau (CPB) payroll registers, agreed with SPS payroll summary
reports reflecting the amount that should have been paid based on each
employee’s approved work time and salary information. Generally,
employees recorded their work time directly into SPS for online approval by
their assigned supervisors or had their work time entered by a timekeeper
from paper documentation. Payroll payments were processed by CPB based
on the approved work time for the pay period and the salary information
reflected in SPS.
11

--- Page 14 ---
The IDRCs advised that they were not aware of the need to conduct the
verifications. The verification is important because certain unique SPS design
features often result in differences between the CPB and SPS. For example,
we compared each IDRC’s CPB payroll register with the SPS payroll
summary reports for the pay period ending June 1, 2021 and noted that CPB
reported payroll expenses were $43,600 greater than SPS. The IDRCs could
not readily explain the difference.
Prudent business practices dictate that a documented, independent review of
payroll adjustments should be made for validity, completeness, authorization,
accuracy, and proper classification. In addition, the Comptroller of Maryland’s
Accounting Procedures Manual requires agencies to verify that the total payroll,
as reflected in the CPB payroll registers, agrees with SPS payroll summary
reports.
Recommendation 4
We recommend that the MDH Healthcare System
a. ensure that payroll adjustments are reviewed and approved by
independent supervisory personnel, and that this approval is
documented, before submission for processing;
b. independently verify SPS output reports of payroll and leave balance
adjustments to ensure only authorized adjustments had been processed;
and
c. reconcile total payroll as reflected in CPB payroll registers each pay
period with SPS payroll summary reports, investigate any differences,
and ensure that these reconciliations are documented.
12

--- Page 15 ---
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the following units of the
Maryland Department of Health (MDH): the Holly Center for the period
beginning September 28, 2018 and ending June 30, 2021 and the Potomac Center
for the period beginning May 18, 2017 and ending June 30, 2021, which includes
the forensic residential center Secure Evaluation and Therapeutic Treatment
(SETT) Program for the period beginning May 1, 2018 and ending June 30, 2021.
These units are collectively referred to as the Intellectual Disabilities Residential
Centers (IDRCs).
The audit was conducted in accordance with generally accepted government
auditing standards. Those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to
obtain sufficient, appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our
findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives. We believe that the
evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions
based on our audit objectives.
As prescribed by the State Government Article, Section 2-1221 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, the objectives of this audit were to examine the IDRCs
financial transactions, records, and internal control, and to evaluate its compliance
with applicable State laws, rules, and regulations.
In planning and conducting our audit, we focused on the major financial-related
areas of operations based on assessments of significance and risk. The areas
addressed by the audit included certain procurements and disbursements for
operating expenditures, corporate purchasing cards, and certain payroll activities.
We also determined the status of the finding included in our preceding audit
report of the Potomac Center.
Our audit did not include certain support services provided to the IDRCs by MDH
– Office of the Secretary. These support services (such as certain other payroll
and procurement activities, maintenance of accounting records, and related fiscal
functions) are included within the scope of our audit of MDH – Office of the
Secretary and Other Units.
Our assessment of internal controls was based on agency procedures and controls
in place at the time of our fieldwork. Our tests of transactions and other auditing
procedures were generally focused on the transactions occurring during our audit
period, as detailed above for the various units audited, but may include
transactions before or after this period as we considered necessary to achieve our
audit objectives.
13

--- Page 16 ---
To accomplish our audit objectives, our audit procedures included inquiries of
appropriate personnel, inspections of documents and records, tests of transactions,
and to the extent practicable, observations of operations at the IDRCs. Generally,
transactions were selected for testing based on auditor judgment, which primarily
considers risk, the timing or dollar amount of the transaction, or the significance
of the transaction to the area of operation reviewed. As a matter of course, we do
not normally use sampling in our tests, so unless otherwise specifically indicated,
neither statistical nor non-statistical audit sampling was used to select the
transactions tested. Therefore, unless sampling is specifically indicated in a
finding, the results from any tests conducted or disclosed by us cannot be used to
project those results to the entire population from which the test items were
selected.
We also performed various data extracts of pertinent information from the State’s
Financial Management Information System (such as revenue and expenditure
data) and the State’s Central Payroll Bureau (payroll data), as well as from the
contractor administering the State’s Corporate Purchasing Card Program (credit
card activity). The extracts are performed as part of ongoing internal processes
established by the Office of Legislative Audits and were subject to various tests to
determine data reliability. We determined that the data extracted from these
sources were sufficiently reliable for the purposes the data were used during this
audit. Finally, we performed other auditing procedures that we considered
necessary to achieve our audit objectives. The reliability of data used in this
report for background or informational purposes was not assessed.
Under MDH Healthcare System, a part of MDH Operations Administration, the
IDRCs’ managements are responsible for establishing and maintaining effective
internal control. Internal control is a process designed to provide reasonable
assurance that objectives pertaining to the reliability of financial records;
effectiveness and efficiency of operations, including safeguarding of assets; and
compliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations are achieved. As
provided in Government Auditing Standards, there are five components of
internal control: control environment, risk assessment, control activities,
information and communication, and monitoring. Each of the five components,
when significant to the audit objectives, and as applicable to the IDRCs, were
considered by us during the course of this audit.
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate.
14

--- Page 17 ---
Our reports are designed to assist the Maryland General Assembly in exercising
its legislative oversight function and to provide constructive recommendations for
improving State operations. As a result, our reports generally do not address
activities we reviewed that are functioning properly.
This report includes findings relating to conditions that we consider to be
significant deficiencies in the design or operation of internal control that could
adversely affect the IDRCs’ ability to maintain reliable financial records, operate
effectively and efficiently, and/or comply with applicable laws, rules, and
regulations. Our report also includes findings regarding significant instances of
noncompliance with applicable laws, rules, or regulations. Other less significant
findings were communicated to the IDRCs that did not warrant inclusion in this
report.
The response from MDH Healthcare System, on behalf of the IDRCs, to our
findings and recommendations is included as an appendix to this report. As
prescribed in the State Government Article, Section 2-1224 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, we will advise MDH regarding the results of our review of its
response.
15

--- Page 18 ---
APPENDIX
October 13, 2022
Mr. Gregory A. Hook, CPA
Legislative Auditor
Office of Legislative Audits
The Warehouse at Camden Yards
351 West Camden Street, Suite 400
Baltimore, MD 21201
Dear Mr. Hook:
Enclosed, please find the responses to the draft audit report on the Maryland Department of
Health – the Holly Center for the period beginning September 28, 2018 and ending June 30,
2021 and the Potomac Center for the period beginning May 18, 2017 and ending June 30, 2021,
which includes the Secure Evaluation and Therapeutic Treatment Program for the period
beginning May 1, 2018 and ending June 30, 2021. These units are collectively referred to as the
Intellectual Disabilities Residential Centers.
If you have any questions, please contact Frederick D. Doggett at 410-767-0885 or email at
frederick.doggett@maryland.gov.
Sincerely,
Dennis R. Schrader
Secretary
Enclosure
cc: Frederick D. Doggett, Director, Ofc. of Internal Controls, Audit Compliance &
Information Security, MDH
Atif Chaudhry, Deputy Secretary, Operations, MDH
Bryan Mroz, Director, MDH Healthcare System
Mabel S. Esh, Director, Holly Center, MDH
Holly C. Young, Director, Potomac Center, MDH

--- Page 19 ---
Maryland Department of Health
Intellectual Disabilities Residential Centers
Holly Center and Potomac Center
Agency Response Form
Nursing Services Contracts and Disbursements
Finding 1
The Potomac Center obtained nursing services using contracts that had been fully
expended and/or expired. In addition, the related invoices were not adequately verified
and were paid using improper payment methods.
We recommend that the MDH Healthcare System ensure that the Potomac Center
a. discontinue the practice of paying a vendor after a contract has been fully expended
without an approved contract modification,
b. verify invoice charges to contractual billing rates, and
c. ensure the appropriate payment method is used to ensure that invoices are matched to
the corresponding contract/purchase order prior to payment.
Agency Response
Analysis Factually Accurate
Please provide The MDH Healthcare System, which was established on July 1, 2021
additional comments as comprises the eleven operating MDH healthcare facilities, including the
deemed necessary. five adult psychiatric hospitals, the two long term acute care hospitals,
the two Regional Institutes for Children and Adolescents, and the two
facilities for individuals with intellectual disabilities, which are the
subject of this audit report.
The IRDCs were brought under the MDH Healthcare System and MDH
Operations Administration after the reporting period for this audit.
The MDH Healthcare System was established to create opportunities for
both standardization of policies and procedures and sharing of resources
where appropriate and beneficial to optimize patient care and fiscal
responsibility.
We are in the process of creating and hiring additional oversight
positions for functions such as procurement and financial services to
ensure that appropriate procedures are followed consistently moving
forward. We are reviewing existing practices to ensure compliance and
exploration of opportunities to maximize State purchasing power across
Page 1 of 9

--- Page 20 ---
Maryland Department of Health
Intellectual Disabilities Residential Centers
Holly Center and Potomac Center
Agency Response Form
the system as a top priority for the next phase of the MDH Healthcare
System’s development. As completed, we expect that revised standard
operating processes and procedures (SOPs) will be reviewed by the
MDH Office of Internal Controls, Audit Compliance & Information
Security and tested for implementation compliance.
Although the purpose of the MDH Healthcare System is to unify the
MDH healthcare facilities under one administration, it is important to
note that each facility is different and not all policies, procedures, and
recommendations will impact every facility in the same way, nor will
every facility be able to implement them uniformly. Even among
facilities grouped together by the service lines listed above, there are key
differences that must be taken into account. We expect those differences
will be highlighted as you continue your grouped facility audits.
Additionally, the Maryland Department of Health reorganized the
Department’s procurement unit into the Office of Contract Management
& Procurement (OCMP) in early 2021. OCMP’s mission is to implement
lifecycle contract management and procurement initiatives into all
aspects of MDH operations, including for the MDH Healthcare system.
Recommendation 1a Agree Estimated Completion Date: 7/1/2022
Please provide details of The immediate plan of correction was to hire a Procurement Officer for
corrective action or the Potomac Center/SETT in February 2021 and the Procurement
explain disagreement. Officer became a Certified Maryland Procurement Officer (CMPO) on
August 17, 2021. We have discontinued the practice of paying a vendor
after the contract has been fully expended without an approved contract
modification or approved exemption. The following improved process
for monitoring contracts at Potomac Center has been implemented:
The Procurement Officer tracks deadline dates of all contracts in a
database shared with Contract Monitor and Department Heads under
which the service falls. For long term contracts, the Procurement Officer
will send the Contract Monitor reminders one year before a contract ends
to start to discuss if a new contract is needed for these services; develop
a new contract; or extend the current contract (if applicable). For short
term contracts the Procurement Officer will send a reminder two months
Page 2 of 9

--- Page 21 ---
Maryland Department of Health
Intellectual Disabilities Residential Centers
Holly Center and Potomac Center
Agency Response Form
before a contract ends. The Chief Financial Officer will monitor and
conduct a yearly audit of the process.
Recommendation 1b Agree Estimated Completion Date: 10/15/2022
Please provide details of The Center concurs with the recommendation. The Chief Financial
corrective action or Officer will develop a Standard Operating Procedure (SOP) for all
explain disagreement. Contract Monitors to follow by 10/1/2022. The Procurement Officer
will review the SOP and the contract with Contract Monitors at the
beginning of each contract. This review will include verifying invoices,
hours, and details of services. The Contract Monitors will report any
discrepancies to the Procurement Officer and the CFO immediately upon
finding the discrepancies.
As completed, we expect that revised standard operating processes and
procedures (SOPs) will be reviewed by the MDH Office of Internal
Controls, Audit Compliance & Information Security and tested for
implementation compliance.
Recommendation 1c Agree Estimated Completion Date: 10/15/2022
Please provide details of We have established written procedures that will ensure the appropriate
corrective action or payment method is used to ensure that invoices are matched to the
explain disagreement. corresponding contract/purchase order prior to payment.
As completed, we expect that revised standard operating processes and
procedures (SOPs) will be reviewed by the MDH Office of Internal
Controls, Audit Compliance & Information Security and tested for
implementation compliance.
Finding 2
The Holly Center prepayment review of amounts invoiced for nursing services was not
sufficiently comprehensive.
We recommend that the MDH Healthcare System ensure that the Holly Center obtains and
verifies supporting documentation, including approved timesheets, against vendor invoices
prior to payment.
Page 3 of 9

--- Page 22 ---
Maryland Department of Health
Intellectual Disabilities Residential Centers
Holly Center and Potomac Center
Agency Response Form
Agency Response
Analysis Factually Accurate
Please provide See overall comments above for Finding 1.
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 2 Agree Estimated Completion Date: 9/30/2022
Please provide details of 1. Holly Center has revised their prepayment review process for
corrective action or invoices from agency nursing services. The Chief Financial
explain disagreement. Officer will provide update training for key personnel.
2. Holly Center has revised the daily office policies and procedures
regarding agency nursing services contracts.
3. The Contract Monitor will maintain comprehensive boards, call
logs, assignment sheets and sign in/sign out logs daily.
4. The Contract Monitor or Designee will attach copies of the
timesheets, boards, assignment sheets and sign in/sign out sheets
to all invoices that they review/approve.
5. The Chief Financial Officer or designee will review approved
invoices and supporting documentation prior to payment
processing.
6. All discrepancies will be forwarded to the Chief Financial
Officer for resolution with the agency. The Chief Financial
Officer will correspond via email with the agency, the contract
monitor and the procurement director.
As completed, we expect that revised standard operating processes and
procedures (SOPs) will be reviewed by the MDH Office of Internal
Controls, Audit Compliance & Information Security and tested for
implementation compliance.
Page 4 of 9

--- Page 23 ---
Maryland Department of Health
Intellectual Disabilities Residential Centers
Holly Center and Potomac Center
Agency Response Form
Possible Ethics Violations
Finding 3
Ten Holly Center employees potentially violated State ethics law and MDH policy by
having secondary employment with vendors that provided services to the Holly Center,
including one employee that participated in the oversight of these vendors.
We recommend that the MDH Healthcare System
a. refer the secondary employment and participation matters to the Commission and take
appropriate action based on the Commission’s decisions and direction,
b. ensure that secondary employment is reported to MDH’s Office of Internal Controls
and Audit Compliance as required by MDH policy, and
c. pursue recovery of the funds paid for overlapping hours as appropriate.
Agency Response
Analysis Factually Accurate
Please provide
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 3a Agree Estimated Completion Date: 11/30/2022
Please provide details of 1. Holly Center will coordinate with the relevant MDH offices and
corrective action or follow both existing MDH procedures and contact the State
explain disagreement. Ethics Commission for guidance regarding the secondary
employment matter.
2. Holly Center will instruct nursing agency service contractors to
fill needs list vacancies with non-Holly Center employees.
3. Holly Center will send out a notification to all employees to
remind them to disclose secondary employment in accordance
with MDH’s Office of Internal Controls, Audit Compliance and
Information Security (IAC/S). Maryland Health-General Article
2-103(b)(6). https://efds.ethics.maryland.gov
4. Holly Center will ask employees to provide Human Resources
written confirmation that they have completed the necessary
secondary employment disclosure documents.
5. Written procedures were established on 7/1/2022
Page 5 of 9

--- Page 24 ---
Maryland Department of Health
Intellectual Disabilities Residential Centers
Holly Center and Potomac Center
Agency Response Form
As completed, we expect that revised standard operating processes and
procedures (SOPs) will be reviewed by the MDH Office of Internal
Controls, Audit Compliance & Information Security and tested for
implementation compliance.
Recommendation 3b Agree Estimated Completion Date: 10/15/22
Please provide details of 1. Holly Center will ensure that secondary employment is reported
corrective action or to MDH’s IAC/S as required by MDH policy.
explain disagreement.
Recommendation 3c Agree Estimated Completion Date: 6/30/2022
Please provide details of 1. Going forward: Nursing Agency Contractors will only provide
corrective action or non-Holly Center employees to fill needs list shift vacancies.
explain disagreement. 2. Holly Center acknowledges the overlapping in payment error
disclosed in the audit report and will consult with appropriate
authorities to ensure this does not occur in the future.
Page 6 of 9

--- Page 25 ---
Maryland Department of Health
Intellectual Disabilities Residential Centers
Holly Center and Potomac Center
Agency Response Form
Payroll
Finding 4
The Potomac Center and the Holly Center had not established adequate controls to ensure
the propriety of payroll transactions, including adjustments to employee pay and leave
balances.
We recommend that the MDH Healthcare System
a. ensure that payroll adjustments are reviewed and approved by independent
supervisory personnel, and that this approval is documented, before submission for
processing;
b. independently verify Statewide Personnel System output reports of payroll and leave
balance adjustments to ensure only authorized adjustments had been processed; and
c. reconcile total payroll as reflected in Central Payroll Bureau payroll registers each pay
period with SPS payroll summary reports, investigate any differences, and ensure that
these reconciliations are documented.
Agency Response
Analysis Factually Accurate
Please provide
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 4a Agree Estimated Completion Date: See below
Please provide details of Holly Center – Estimated Completion Date 9/30/2022
corrective action or Holly Center’s Human Resources Director and Chief Financial Officer,
explain disagreement. or another representative who does not have access to initiate, edit, or
approve, has reviewed and signed all payroll adjustments submitted by
the employee’s supervisor. Written procedures were established on
9/30/2022.
Potomac Center – Estimated Completion Date 10/1/2022
The Center concurs with the recommendation. The Potomac Center and
SETT has reviewed current operating procedures with the MDH Office
of Human Resources regarding payroll and leave balance adjustments.
The fiscal department established a form that the Initiator (this could be
Page 7 of 9

--- Page 26 ---
Maryland Department of Health
Intellectual Disabilities Residential Centers
Holly Center and Potomac Center
Agency Response Form
the employee, supervisor, timekeeper, HR) will fill out and sign off on
the request for payroll and leave balance adjustments. This form will be
forwarded to the Potomac Center Human Resources Department or
Office of Human Resources (OHR) to, review, approve, and make the
adjustment. The Fiscal Department, in conjunction with the Human
Resource Department, have established written Standard Operating
Procedure (SOP) on 10/1/22 to have standardized processes and
facilitate properly verified.
As completed, we expect that revised standard operating processes and
procedures (SOPs) will be reviewed by the MDH Office of Internal
Controls, Audit Compliance & Information Security and tested for
implementation compliance.
Recommendation 4b Agree Estimated Completion Date: See below
Please provide details of Holly Center – Estimated Completion Date 9/30/2022
corrective action or The Holly Center Human Resources Director or designee will print SPS
explain disagreement. output reports weekly to review the payroll and leave balance
adjustments for accuracy. Written procedures were established by
7/1/2022.
Potomac Center – Estimated Completion Date 10/1/2022
The Center concurs with the recommendation. The Center will work
with OHR to identify current SPS output reports then will use these to
verify adjustments processed. The fiscal department will establish a form
that will include sign off/approvals from the Initiator of request,
approver, and a designee of payroll. The Fiscal Department has
established Standard Operating Procedure to facilitate proper verification
of adjustments on 10/1/2022. The process is monitored by the Potomac
Center Human Resources Department.
As completed, we expect that revised standard operating processes and
procedures (SOPs) will be reviewed by the MDH Office of Internal
Controls, Audit Compliance & Information Security and tested for
implementation compliance.
Recommendation 4c Agree Estimated Completion Date: See below
Page 8 of 9

--- Page 27 ---
Maryland Department of Health
Intellectual Disabilities Residential Centers
Holly Center and Potomac Center
Agency Response Form
Please provide details of Holly Center – Estimated Completion Date 9/30/2022
corrective action or The Human Resource Officer and Chief Financial Officer will use the
explain disagreement. CPB payroll reports and the SPS payroll summary reports to reconcile
the weekly payroll and document with respective signatures. Written
procedures were established on 9/30/2022.
Potomac Center – Estimated Completion Date 7/1/2022
The Center agrees with the recommendation. During this reporting
period the Center did not have access to CPB Payroll Resisters. CPB
Check register access for the Potomac Center/SETT was acquired
6/2022. Reconciliation of the SPS Workday Payroll Summary report
with the CPB check register was developed by the CFO on 7/1/2022.
As completed, we expect that revised standard operating processes and
procedures (SOPs) will be reviewed by the MDH Office of Internal
Controls, Audit Compliance & Information Security and tested for
implementation compliance.
Page 9 of 9

--- Page 28 ---
A T
UDIT EAM
Catherine M. Clarke, CPA, CIA, CFE
Audit Manager
Sandra C. Medeiros
Senior Auditor
Brian M. Webbert
Staff Auditor