Title: Maryland Department of Health - Behavioral Health Administration and Medical Care Programs Administration - Administrative Service Organization for Behavioral Health Services


NOTE:  The scope of this audit includes the Behavioral Health Administration's (BHA) responsibilities overseeing the Public Behavioral Health System and the Medical Care Programs Administration's (MCPA) monitoring of the Administrative Service Organization (ASO) contract deliverables, claims processing, provider audits, and information systems security. During the prior audit cycle, MCPA's monitoring of the ASO was audited separately.
Date: 10/25/2022
Type: Fiscal Compliance
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=63597675a1ce58068c84e416
Extracted: 2025-06-20T00:25:05.684366
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Audit Report
Maryland Department of Health
Behavioral Health Administration and Medical Care Programs
Administration
Administrative Service Organization for
Behavioral Health Services
October 2022
Public Notice
In compliance with the requirements of the State Government Article Section
2-1224(i), of the Annotated Code of Maryland, the Office of Legislative
Audits has redacted a cybersecurity finding and related auditee response
from this public report.
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Senator Clarence K. Lam, M.D. (Senate Chair) Delegate Mark S. Chang (House Chair)
Senator Malcolm L. Augustine Delegate Steven J. Arentz
Senator Adelaide C. Eckardt Delegate Nicholas P. Charles II
Senator George C. Edwards Delegate Andrea Fletcher Harrison
Senator Katie Fry Hester Delegate Trent M. Kittleman
Senator Cheryl C. Kagan Delegate Carol L. Krimm
Senator Benjamin F. Kramer Delegate David Moon
Senator Cory V. McCray Delegate Julie Palakovich Carr
Senator Justin D. Ready Delegate Elizabeth G. Proctor
Senator Craig J. Zucker Delegate Geraldine Valentino-Smith
To Obtain Further Information
Office of Legislative Audits
The Warehouse at Camden Yards
351 West Camden Street, Suite 400
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Phone: 410-946-5900
Maryland Relay: 711
TTY: 410-946-5401 · 301-970-5401
E-mail: OLAWebmaster@ola.state.md.us
Website: www.ola.state.md.us
To Report Fraud
The Office of Legislative Audits operates a Fraud Hotline to report fraud, waste, or abuse involving State
of Maryland government resources. Reports of fraud, waste, or abuse may be communicated anonymously
by a toll-free call to 1-877-FRAUD-11, by mail to the Fraud Hotline, c/o Office of Legislative Audits, or
through the Office’s website.
Nondiscrimination Statement
The Department of Legislative Services does not discriminate on the basis of age, ancestry, color, creed,
marital status, national origin, race, religion, gender, gender identity, sexual orientation, or disability in the
admission or access to its programs, services, or activities. The Department’s Information Officer has been
designated to coordinate compliance with the nondiscrimination requirements contained in Section 35.107
of the United States Department of Justice Regulations. Requests for assistance should be directed to the
Information Officer at 410-946-5400 or 410-970-5400.

--- Page 3 ---
October 25, 2022
Senator Clarence K. Lam, M.D., Senate Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Delegate Mark S. Chang, House Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Members of Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Annapolis, Maryland
Ladies and Gentlemen:
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the Maryland Department of
Health (MDH) – Behavioral Health Administration (BHA) for the period
beginning November 13, 2017 and ending June 30, 2021 and the Medical Care
Programs Administration (MCPA) Administrative Service Organization (ASO)
for Behavioral Health Services for the period beginning January 1, 2019 and
ending June 30, 2021.
BHA is responsible for operating the Public Behavioral Health System to provide
mental health and substance-related disorder services to the citizens of Maryland.
Community-based services are financed through a combination of grants and
contracts with vendors and direct reimbursements. MCPA is responsible for
overseeing the ASO. The ASO pays provider claims through its fee-for-service
system, determines behavioral health recipient eligibility, authorizes recipient
services, and performs oversight of providers to ensure the propriety and accuracy
of claims and related services.
In our previous audit cycle, we issued separate audit reports for MDH BHA and
MCPA ASO. To promote audit efficiency and considering that both entities
provide services to overlapping populations we have consolidated our review of
the entities into one audit, with our recommendations being made to MDH.
Our audit disclosed numerous issues with MCPA’s procurement and monitoring
of its new ASO. MCPA contracted with the ASO for the five-year period from

--- Page 4 ---
January 1, 2020, to December 31, 2024, with one additional two-year option and a
cumulative value of approximately $198.2 million. According to the State's
records, during fiscal year 2021 behavioral health claims disbursements made by
the ASO totaled $1.8 billion.
Our review found that MCPA’s evaluation of the ASO technical proposals did not
include an independent comprehensive review of the subcontractor that was
responsible for the most critical aspect of the contract, the claims processing
system. We noted that prior to MCPA evaluating the ASO’s technical proposal,
three other localities had experienced performance issues with the subcontractor
related to the development and implementation of the claims processing systems.
In addition, MCPA did not ensure that the ASO’s claims processing system
functioned prior to launch. Ultimately, deficiencies with the claims processing
system required the ASO to make $1.06 billion in estimated payments to
providers, of which approximately $223.5 million had not been supported or
recovered. Moreover, the claims processing system was unable to evaluate
whether services provided to patients were medically necessary, improperly
denied valid claims, and could not provide critical claim payment information to
providers to perform reconciliations.
MDH did not conduct audits to ensure the ASO authorized services that were
medically necessary. While MDH management advised us that an annual audit
was performed, our review disclosed that the most recent audit covered calendar
years 2017 through the first two quarters of 2019 and the audit had not been
finalized. Moreover, MCPA and BHA did not ensure that the ASO performed a
sufficient number of provider audits. The purpose of provider audits is to ensure
patient medical records agree to paid claims, to identify and resolve
overpayments, to identify potential fraud or abuse by providers, and to monitor
providers who have filed claims with insufficient supporting documentation.
In accordance with the State Government Article, Section 2-1224(i) of the
Annotated Code of Maryland, we have redacted a cybersecurity-related finding
related to the services provided by the ASO from this audit report. Specifically,
State law requires the Office of Legislative Audits to redact cybersecurity-related
findings in a manner consistent with auditing best practices before the report is
made available to the public. The term “cybersecurity” is defined in the State
Finance and Procurement Article, Section 3A-301(b), and using our professional
judgment we have determined that the redacted finding falls under the referenced
definition. The specifics of the cybersecurity finding were previously
communicated to BHA and MCPA as well as those parties responsible for acting
on our recommendations.
2

--- Page 5 ---
We also noted that MCPA did not ensure the ASO complied with contractual
operational requirements to implement certain federal best practices that
ultimately resulted in the inability of MDH to recover enhanced federal funding,
which we estimated could total $28.8 million over the life of the ASO contract.
Further, MCPA did not timely investigate and resolve claims paid by the ASO for
which federal reimbursement was denied or approved for a different amount.
Although MCPA worked with the ASO to investigate denied and discrepant
claims, as of September 10, 2021, according to MDH’s records, there were
approximately 292,000 unresolved denied claims requiring investigation totaling
approximately $106.7 million.
MDH did not assess up to $20.5 million in liquidated damages permitted by the
ASO contract despite the vendor’s ongoing failure to provide an operational
system or comply with specific requirements. MDH executive management
advised that it had not assessed additional liquidated damages because it was
concerned that such actions would discourage the ASO from resolving noted
defects and may lead to litigation with an uncertain outcome. The State of
Maryland Procurement Manual states that liquidated damages allow for
compensation upon a specific breach of contract when actual damages may be
difficult to ascertain.
MDH circumvented State procurement regulations by obtaining information
technology (IT) consulting services totaling approximately $19.8 million from
one vendor without seeking competition. Specifically, MDH obtained the
services of a single IT vendor using a combination of procurement methods, such
as, sole source contracts and grant agreements, which did not include competition.
Our audit included a review to determine the status of five non-cybersecurity-
related findings contained in certain preceding audit reports. Specifically, our
audit included a review to determine the status of three of the four findings
contained in our preceding audit report of BHA dated July 9, 2019 and two
findings contained in our preceding audit report of MCPA ASO dated January 13,
2020. We determined that three of these five findings were satisfactorily
addressed. The remaining two findings are repeated in this report.
We determined that MDH’s accountability and compliance level was
unsatisfactory in accordance with the rating system we established in conformity
with State law. The primary factors contributing to the unsatisfactory rating were
the financial significance and repeat nature of many of the findings. In addition,
although not specifically quantifiable, several identified deficiencies potentially
impacted the effective and efficient delivery of health care to a vulnerable and
needy population.
3

--- Page 6 ---
MDH’s response to this audit, on behalf of BHA and MCPA, is included as an
appendix to this report. In accordance with State law, we have reviewed this
response and, while MDH agrees with the majority of our findings and
recommendations, we found the responses to several findings indicate that MDH
does not intend on implementing the recommendations until the current ASO
contract expires on December 31, 2024. Furthermore, despite agreeing with
certain findings related to the long-standing ASO performance issues, MDH
disagrees with finding 8 and the related recommendation regarding the assessment
of liquidated damages based on ASO performance; contending that liquidated
damages would increase the risk of litigation and an adversarial relationship,
along with the potential of furthering minimum performance by the contractor. In
accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards, we have
included an “auditor’s comment” within MDH’s response to explain our position.
Based on the issues identified with the ASO in this report, we stand by our finding
and recommendation. Finally, while there are other aspects of MDH’s response
which will require further clarification, we do not anticipate that these will require
the Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee’s attention to resolve.
We wish to acknowledge the cooperation extended to us during the audit by BHA
and MCPA.
Respectfully submitted,
Gregory A. Hook, CPA
Legislative Auditor
4

--- Page 7 ---
Table of Contents
Background Information 7
Agency Responsibilities and Audit Scope 7
Ransomware Security Incident 8
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Reports 8
Findings and Recommendations 10
Administrative Service Organization (ASO)
Finding 1 – The Medical Care Programs Administration (MCPA) 12
evaluation of the ASO technical proposals was not sufficiently
comprehensive or documented.
Finding 2 – MCPA did not ensure that the ASO’s claim processing 15
system was functioning prior to launch, resulting in numerous system
deficiencies that ultimately required the ASO to make $1.06 billion in
estimated payments to providers, of which approximately $223.5
million has not been supported or recovered.
* Finding 3 – The Maryland Department of Health (MDH) did not conduct 17
audits to ensure that the ASO properly authorized behavioral health
services.
* Finding 4 – MCPA and BHA did not ensure that the ASO performed a 18
sufficient number of provider audits, that the audits included
financially material and current transactions, and that any
overpayments and deficiencies identified were corrected.
Finding 5 – Redacted cybersecurity–related finding. 20
Finding 6 (Policy Issue) – A lack of ASO vendor compliance with a 21
certain contract requirement prevented MCPA from obtaining
enhanced federal funding.
Finding 7 – MCPA did not timely investigate and resolve claims paid by 22
the ASO for which federal reimbursement was denied or approved for
a different amount than the amount paid.
∗ Denotes item repeated in full or part from preceding audit report
5

--- Page 8 ---
Finding 8 – MDH had not developed a formal policy on the assessing 23
of liquidated damages and did not assess up to $20.5 million in
liquidated damages permitted by the ASO contract despite the
vendor’s ongoing failure to provide an operational system or comply
with certain requirements.
Procurement
Finding 9 – MDH circumvented State procurement regulations to obtain 24
information technology consulting services totaling approximately
$19.8 million from one vendor.
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology 27
Agency Response Appendix
6

--- Page 9 ---
Background Information
Agency Responsibilities and Audit Scope
The Behavioral Health Administration (BHA) of the Maryland Department of
Health (MDH) operates the Public Behavioral Health System (PBHS) to provide
mental health and substance-related disorder (including drug, alcohol, and
gambling addictions) services to the citizens of Maryland. These services are
delivered through private for-profit and non-profit community-based providers,
local health department clinics, and State operated facilities. Community-based
services are financed through a combination of grants and contracts with vendors
and direct reimbursements through a fee-for-service system operated by an
Administrative Service Organization (ASO). The ASO is monitored by MDH’s
Medical Care Programs Administration (MCPA).
The scope of this audit includes BHA's responsibilities in overseeing the PBHS
and MCPA's monitoring of the ASO contract deliverables, claims processing
(including denied claims), provider audits, and information systems security.
During the prior audit cycle, MCPA’s monitoring of the ASO was audited
separately. To promote consistency and a more comprehensive reporting of audit
issues related to BHA activities, we have modified our audit approach and
consolidated our review of MCPA’s ASO monitoring into this audit’s scope.
Separate audits are conducted of MCPA’s primary functions (such as recipient
eligibility, long-term care, and hospital services), MCPA’s monitoring of
Managed Care Organizations, and the MCPA pharmacy programs. The
administration of the behavioral health facilities was transferred from BHA to the
Office of the Deputy Secretary for Operations effective May 2019 and, as such,
was not included in the scope of this audit.
According to the State's records, BHA's expenditures, which were primarily for
mental health and substance-related disorder programs and services, totaled
approximately $356.6 million during fiscal year 2021 (primarily funded by State
and federal funds). For the same fiscal year, behavioral health claims
disbursements made by the ASO from two State-funded bank accounts totaled
$1.8 billion. The vast majority of these claims were eligible for federal fund
participation (reimbursement), which is normally at least 50 percent of the amount
paid.
7

--- Page 10 ---
Ransomware Security Incident
In December 2021, MDH experienced a broad security incident which resulted
from a ransomware attack.1 This incident affected the entire MDH computer
network and disrupted information technology (IT) operations for all MDH
servers and end user computers resulting in substantial impact on all MDH
business operations including BHA. MDH notified the Department of
Information Technology’s (DoIT) Office of Security Management, which
initiated incident response measures. The aforementioned incident and related
controls will be subject to review as part of our next audit of the MDH Office of
the Secretary and Other Units.
The incident did not significantly impact our audit and we were able to obtain
information needed to satisfy our audit objectives and related conclusions.
Status of Findings from Preceding Audit Reports
Based on our current assessment of significance and risk relative to our audit
objectives, our audit included a review to determine the status of three of the four
findings contained in our preceding audit report of BHA dated July 9, 2019; and
three findings contained in our preceding audit report of MCPA ASO dated
January 13, 2020.
As disclosed in Figure 1, for the non-cybersecurity-related findings we
determined three of these five findings were satisfactorily addressed. The
remaining two findings are repeated in this report. The status of the remaining
finding from the BHA report was previously determined during our separate audit
of Prevention and Health Promotion Administration, Office of Population Health
Improvement, Office of Preparedness and Response, and Office of Provider
Engagement and Regulation, and reported upon in the resultant audit report dated
February 23, 2021.
1 As defined by the Federal Department of Homeland Security Cybersecurity and Infrastructure
Security Agency, ransomware is an ever-evolving form of malware designed to encrypt files on a
device, rendering any files and the systems that rely on them unusable. Malicious actors then
demand ransom in exchange for decryption.
8

--- Page 11 ---
Figure 1
Status of Preceding Findings
Preceding Implementation
Finding Description
Finding Status
Behavioral Health Administration
BHA did not adequately monitor the Core Service Agencies,
Local Addiction Authorities, and Local Behavioral Health
Authorities to verify actual performance as required by the
Finding 1 Not repeated
grant agreements. In addition, BHA’s monitoring of the
grantees did not ensure that the required mental health and
substance use disorder services were provided to clients.
BHA did not adequately monitor a State university
administering a problem gambling program on behalf of BHA
Finding 2 Not repeated
to ensure the required public awareness services were
provided.
BHA did not monitor the State vendor responsible for
Finding 3 providing care management services to children with intensive Not repeated
needs and did not ensure payments to the vendor were proper.
Medical Care Programs Administration Administrative Services Organization for
Behavioral Health Services
MCPA did not ensure that the ASO properly authorized
Repeated
Finding 1 behavioral health services and that the bases for the
(Current Finding 3)
authorizations were adequately documented.
MCPA did not direct the ASO to recover certain provider
overpayments identified during audits, did not ensure the ASO
Repeated
Finding 2 recovered overpayments once directed to do so, and did not
(Current Finding 4)
ensure that deficiencies identified by provider audits were
corrected.
MCPA did not have a process to verify that adjustments to Not repeated (Not
Finding 3
provider payments processed by the ASO were proper. followed up on)
Intrusion detection prevention system coverage did not exist
Status Redacted2
Finding 4 for encrypted traffic, and sensitive personally identifiable
information was stored without adequate safeguards.
2 Specific information on the current status of this cybersecurity-related finding has been redacted
from this publicly available audit report in accordance with State Government Article,
Section 2-1224(i) of the Annotated Code of Maryland.
9

--- Page 12 ---
Findings and Recommendations
Administrative Service Organization (ASO)
Background
The ASO is responsible for determining behavioral health recipient eligibility,
authorizing recipient services, paying provider claims, and performing oversight
of providers to ensure the propriety and accuracy of claims and related services.
In November 2018, the Medical Care Programs Administration (MCPA) solicited
proposals for a new ASO contract. Responses were received from two vendors,
including the incumbent ASO. In accordance with the terms of the request for
proposal, bidder submissions were evaluated by a three-member evaluation
committee, under an evaluative process established by Maryland Department of
Health (MDH) that weighted the technical proposal higher than the financial
proposal. Technical proposals were evaluated on four primary criteria, in order of
importance:
1. Statement/Understanding of scope of work to perform as an ASO for
managing behavioral health integrated services in Maryland,
2. Experience and qualifications of proposed staff,
3. Offeror and subcontractor qualifications and capabilities, and
4. Economic benefit to the State.
These criteria were broken down into 36 sub-criteria where bidders were rated
“poor”, “satisfactory”, “good”, “very good”, and “excellent” by each member of
the evaluation committee. This served as the basis for the technical ranking of the
proposals evaluated.
MDH ultimately awarded the contract to the non-incumbent bidder whose
proposal was rated “excellent” while the incumbent ASO’s proposal was rated
“very good.” On June 12, 2019, the Behavioral Health Administration (BHA)
contracted with the winning bidder to provide ASO services for the five-year
period from January 1, 2020 to December 31, 2024, with one additional two-year
option and a cumulative value of approximately $198.2 million, including the
option years. The contract included a monthly administrative fee for each
recipient eligible to receive behavioral health services and a fixed fee for other
services provided by the vendor. According to State accounting records, as of
August 2021 administrative fees paid to the ASO totaled $39.8 million.
The new ASO uses the services of seven subcontractors to meet various contract
requirements, as detailed in Figure 2.
10

--- Page 13 ---
Figure 2
ASO Service Subcontractor Schedule
Subcontractor Description of Service(s)
1 Provides the ASO with provider training initiatives.
Provides specialty telephonic behavioral health services and
2
call center services for the ASO.
Provides and maintains the claims processing system used
3
by the ASO and providers.
Provides medical staffing services to enable the ASO to
4
fulfill the scope of work.
Provides staffing services to enable the ASO to fulfill the
5
scope of work.
Performs market research and assists the ASO with the
6
participant and provider survey and associated reporting.
Disburses payments to behavioral health providers for
7
processed claims.
Source: ASO proposal and MDH management
Maryland Insurance Administration Report on ASO
Subsequent to the completion of our fieldwork, the Maryland Insurance
Administration issued a report on the ASO dated June 7, 2022 which identified
issues with the timeliness of paying provider claims. Specifically, the report
noted that the ASO did not pay certain claims within 30 days and the ASO did not
pay providers the related interest as required by State law. In response, per the
report, the ASO paid providers interest totaling $3.1 million and owed the
providers an additional $631,933 in interest.
Provider Impact, Concerns, and Complaints
Maryland’s provider advocacy groups have publicly expressed concerns to MDH
and the Maryland General Assembly regarding the lack of functionality of the
new ASO’s system since the start of the contract. The concerns included the
ASO’s inability to generate claim payment information using the healthcare
industry standard reporting format, referred to as an “835 form” (discussed in
finding 2) which is needed to post payments for services rendered and reconcile
the estimated payments authorized by MDH (discussed further below). In
addition there were continuing data integrity problems highlighted, with providers
receiving payments or portal access for patients not associated with their specific
practice. As a result, the providers claimed their staff has had to devote time and
energy to address the issues attributed to the ASO. Ultimately, the provider
groups have requested that the ASO replace the claims processing system
currently in use due to its failure to resolve ongoing issues.
11

--- Page 14 ---
Finding 1
The MCPA evaluation of the ASO technical proposals was not sufficiently
comprehensive or documented.
Analysis
The MCPA evaluation of the ASO technical proposals was not sufficiently
comprehensive and documented. We reviewed MCPA procedures for evaluating
the technical proposals for the vendors bidding for the ASO contract. Each of the
vendors submitted a technical proposal that included extensive use of
subcontractors.
MCPA Did Not Evaluate Subcontractors’ Past Experience and Qualifications
MCPA did not perform an independent comprehensive review of the past
experience and qualifications of subcontractors responsible for performing critical
work under the contract. Rather, MCPA relied upon a summary of qualifications
of the proposed subcontractors submitted by each vendor bidding on the contract,
which generally consisted of a few sentences. According to MCPA management,
they did not obtain references or contact the proposed subcontractors – including
the subcontractor identified as being responsible for the claims processing system.
As a result, there was no independent attempt to obtain information or
confirmation of the subcontractors’ ability to perform the required services.
It is our belief that the sole reliance on bidder representations was a practice of
questionable value in this circumstance given the significance of certain
subcontractors’ responsibilities. Specifically, we were advised by the winning
ASO bidder that it had only used the aforementioned claims processing
subcontractor’s system at one locality with limited functionality compared to the
extensive services being provided to Maryland. In addition, based on provider
complaints we received during the audit, apparently three other localities had
experienced performance issues with this subcontractor related to the
development and implementation of claims processing systems (Figure 3).
12

--- Page 15 ---
Figure 3
Summary of Prior Work Experience (Subcontractor 3)
Date Description
A locality participated in a contract with the subcontractor in October
2013 to develop a healthcare management information system. Despite
November
numerous attempts to fix many issues with the system, the locality
2018
withdrew from the contract in November 2018 because the
subcontractor failed to provide a working system.
The subcontractor provided a claims processing system for a local
December Department of Mental Health. An audit found the system did not meet
2007 the needs of the department and that programming and file format
issues affected the department’s ability to conduct business.
A locality entered into a contract with the subcontractor to develop a
October claims system for mental health services. The locality paid the
2006 subcontractor $4.6 million before terminating the contract in October
2006 without implementing the new system.
Sources: November 14, 2018 Ohio’s Alcohol, Drug Addiction and Mental Health Board of Cuyahoga County
Resolution 18-11-01, December 2017 District of Columbia Office of the Inspector General Audit of the
District of Columbia Department of Mental Health’s Program Management and Administration of Provider
Reimbursements, February 19, 2009 California Healthline Daily Edition article Database Project for Medi-
Cal Claims a Bust in Sacramento County
Evaluations of ASO Bidders’ Experience Were Not Sufficiently Comprehensive
Our review of the evaluations of the vendor awarded the ASO contract for past
experience (considered under the “Offeror and subcontractor qualifications and
capabilities” criterion) did not consider the nature of the past experience and were
limited to the entities identified by the vendor in its bid documents.
• MDH did not formally document that it considered the nature of the vendor’s
past experience in relation to the services to be provided as Maryland’s ASO.
Specifically, three of the four references provided by the winning bidder were
from states and localities where the vendor operated as a Managed Care
Organization (MCO) and was paid on a capitated3 payment basis. According
to the references provided, only one locality received ASO services from this
vendor totaling $21.2 million. In contrast, the incumbent ASO in its bid
documents listed three states and localities where it operated as an ASO, with
contracts ranging in value from $16.2 million to $87 million.
3 A Managed Care Organization (MCO) is compensated for services through recurring capitation
fees, such as monthly fees, paid for each member covered.
13

--- Page 16 ---
• MDH did not document in its technical specification analysis that it
considered concerns noted by one state government that had a $149 million
contract with the winning bidder. Specifically, this state was included as a
reference in the winning vendor’s bid documents, and responded to an
individual conducting reference checks that the vendor struggled to manage
detailed patient claim data and recommended that any agreement include the
ability to assess daily penalties for missed deadlines. Furthermore, although
these concerns were noted by the individual who contacted this reference,
there was no documentation these concerns were considered when evaluating
the bids by the ASO evaluation committee.
Evaluation Forms Were Not Sufficiently Documented or Were Not Supported
Based on our review of the three evaluation forms (one for each evaluator) we
noted instances where the evaluation either was not clearly documented or did not
support the rating.
• Each of the three evaluations did not consider whether the ASO had sufficient
controls over its information systems which was required by the request for
proposals (RFP). In this regard, we noted the incumbent ASO provided a
comprehensive response to the independent control review requirement while
the winning vendor that received an overall higher rating only responded with
"noted and agreed.” The RFP specified that limited responses to requirements
such as "concur" or "will comply" will receive a lower ranking than those
proposals that demonstrate an understanding and include plans to meet or
exceed them.
• The winning vendor’s ASO transition plan included in the proposal was rated
“very good” despite indicating an eight-month transition period, even though
the RFP provided for a shorter transition period of up to six months.
Ultimately, the Board of Public Works questioned the winning vendor’s
experience as an ASO, and its ability to perform satisfactorily considering the
financial proposal submitted was $72.1 million lower than the incumbent ASO’s
proposal. MDH responded that it had done “a lot of due diligence” in selecting
the ASO. Subsequent events may have justified the Board’s questioning, as it is
possible that the value of the anticipated savings resulting from awarding this
contract to the current ASO ultimately may have been negated by various
deficiencies (such as overpayments made to providers and lost federal income)
identified in findings 2 and 6 of this report.
14

--- Page 17 ---
Recommendation 1
We recommend that for future procurements, MDH
a. perform a comprehensive review of subcontractors performing critical
services and vendor prior experience and ensure that the results are
documented; and
b. ensure that evaluations encompass all critical contract requirements, are
clearly documented, and are supported by the vendor’s technical
proposal.
Finding 2
MCPA did not ensure that the ASO’s claim processing system was
functioning prior to launch, resulting in numerous system deficiencies that
ultimately required the ASO to make $1.06 billion in estimated payments to
providers, of which approximately $223.5 million has not been supported or
recovered.
Analysis
MCPA did not ensure that the ASO’s claim processing system was functioning
prior to its January 2020 launch, resulting in numerous system deficiencies that
ultimately required the ASO to make $1.06 billion in estimated payments to
providers, of which approximately $223.5 million has not been supported or
recovered as of December 2021.
MCPA Did Not Ensure the ASO System Was Functional Prior to Launch
MCPA authorized the launch of the ASO claims processing system in January
2020, even though critical system testing had not been completed. As a result, the
system was launched without having previously identifed the system’s ability to
perform critical functions, including the following:
• The system could not process provider service authorization requests which
ensure services provided to patients were medically necessary, met quality
standards, and were provided in a cost effective manner. One of the main
functions of the ASO was to review claims to determine whether they met the
criteria for authorization. According to MCPA records, system defects related
to service authorizations included, but were not limited to, providers being
unable to upload supporting documentation, authorization requests being
automatically denied improperly, and providers being unable to perform data
entry to submit authorization requests. Although providers were required to
maintain documentation to support the medical necessity of services, the ASO
has not reviewed the claims to this provider documentation, therefore there
was a lack of assurance that the claims were proper.
15

--- Page 18 ---
• The system improperly denied valid claims (unrelated to medical necessity)
submitted by providers. MCPA was unable to document the number and
amount of claims that were improperly denied. However, we noted that paid
claims in January 2020 (the ASO’s first month of the contract) totaled $65.8
million compared to $103.5 million in January 2021. We were advised by
MCPA management that the difference in claims paid was due to the
improperly denied claims.
• The system was unable to generate accurate claim payment information using
the healthcare industry standard reporting form (referred to as an “835 form”)
used by providers to perform basic reconciliations. Specifically, the 835 form
used by the ASO did not reflect provider negative balances or accurate denial
reason codes when claims were denied. We were advised by MCPA and ASO
management that as of October 28, 2021, an accurate 835 form was being
issued to providers. However, in December 2021 (two years into the new
contract period), we were advised by a behavioral health provider advocacy
group that certain providers had not received accurate 835 forms and that
other providers received 835 forms with missing critical information, such as
patient identifiers.
• The ASO’s claims processing system was unable to properly process
retroactive claims. Certain claims are processed pending approval of the
recipient’s eligibilty using State general funds, and must be submitted for
retroactive federal reimbursement once eligibility is approved. MCPA’s
contract with the ASO required the system to account for federal rules
allowing Medicaid coverage to be applied retroactively for up to three months.
However, the ASO’s automated system did not have the capability to process
these retroactive claims until February 2021, 13 months after the start of the
contract.
Furthermore, once the system was corrected, the ASO erroneously made
another payment to the providers for these previously paid retroactive claims
instead of submitting the original claims for federal reimbursement. MCPA
could not readily quantify these duplicate payments, but identified provider
credit balances (payments that exceeded reported expenditures), which as of
August 2021 totaled approximately $102 million. MCPA management
advised that a majority of these credit balances were caused by the duplicate
payments. As of February 2022, MDH had only recovered $1.5 million of the
duplicate payments and advised us that it directed the ASO not to recover the
remaining payments due to other unspecified system payment processing
issues. We were further advised by MCPA management personnel that the
16

--- Page 19 ---
ASO corrected the claims processing system, but MCPA could not support
this assertion.
MDH Directed the ASO to Make $1.06 Billion in Estimated Payments
Due to the aforementioned system deficiencies, during the period from Janurary
23, 2020 through August 3, 2020 MDH directed the ASO to bypass the
authorization process and make estimated payments to providers based on the
prior year’s activity. According to MDH’s records the estimated payments totaled
$1.06 billion. The providers have been subsequently providing claim data
supporting actual claims. However, as of December 2, 2021 (16 months after
estimated payments were made), MDH reported that support or recoupment had
still not been received for $223.5 million of the estimated payments made to
2,107 providers.
MDH management initially planned on waiving $3.5 million relating to
unsupported payments of less than $25,000. Subsequently, MDH obtained
deficiency appropriations of approximately $13 million to fund the forgiveness of
unsupported payments of less than $25,000. We were further advised that MDH
is working with providers to recoup the remaining unsupported estimated
payments. This condition was also disclosed in our report on the Statewide
Review of Budget Closeout Transactions for Fiscal Year 2021.
Recommendation 2
We recommend that MDH ensure the ASO
a. corrects system deficiencies, including those noted above;
b. reviews all claims processed during the period that authorization
requirements were lifted to ensure services were medically necessary and
properly documented; and
c. recovers any improper payments due to retroactive claims processing
problems and the remaining estimated payments that have not been
supported.
Finding 3
MDH did not conduct audits to ensure that the ASO properly authorized
behavioral health services.
Analysis
MDH did not conduct audits to ensure that the ASO properly authorized
behavioral health services. According to MDH written procedures, BHA
personnel are to conduct annual audits of the ASO to verify the propriety of ASO
behavioral health services authorizations. Our review disclosed that BHA only
17

--- Page 20 ---
performed one audit that covered calendar years 2017 and 2018, and the first two
quarters of calendar year 2019.
However, as of September 2021 this audit had not been finalized, and therefore no
corrective action had been initiated to address deficiencies identified in the audit.
MDH management advised us that since it transitioned to a different ASO in
January 2020, the results were considered irrelevant and not communicated to
either vendor. No audits were performed of calendar year 2020 and 2021 claims
activity and MDH did not plan on starting these audits until 2022. MDH
management advised that the delay in these audits was due to complications
encountered with the new ASO.
The lack of timely audits is significant because the aforementioned audit (which
had not been finalized) identified certain authorized services for which the
medical necessity of services and the clients’ diagnoses were not documented.
We could not readily determine whether these conditions resulted in improper
payments to providers. Similar conditions were noted in our prior audit report of
the MCPA ASO for behavioral health services.
Recommendation 3
We recommend that MDH ensure that the ASO properly authorized
behavioral health services and that the bases for the authorizations were
adequately documented. Specifically, we recommend that MDH ensure that
a. BHA personnel conduct audits of the ASO at least annually (repeat), and
b. appropriate corrective action is taken to address deficiencies identified by
these audits (repeat).
Finding 4
MCPA and BHA did not ensure that the ASO performed a sufficient number
of provider audits, that the audits included financially material and current
transactions, and that any overpayments and deficiencies identified were
corrected.
Analysis
MCPA and BHA did not ensure that the ASO performed a sufficient number of
provider audits, that the audits included financially material and current
transactions, and that any overpayments were recovered and deficiencies
identified were corrected. Under the contract terms, the ASO is to audit clinical
and financial records of providers to ensure patient medical records agree to paid
claims, to identify and resolve overpayments, identify potential fraud or abuse by
18

--- Page 21 ---
providers, and monitor providers who have filed claims with insufficient
supporting documentation.
• MCPA and BHA did not ensure the ASO completed 370 provider audits
annually as required by the contract. In this regard, the ASO did not begin
performing audits until September 2020, 9 months after the contract
commenced, and MCPA allowed the ASO to conduct the required 1,110
audits for a collective 3 year period ending December 2022, rather than the
required number of audits for annual periods (that is, 370 audits each calendar
year). However, per a listing of audits conducted that was provided to us by
the ASO as of November 2021, we determined that only 211 audits (or 19
percent) of the 1,110 audits had been completed. In addition, the audits
conducted were of less material providers. Specifically, our review of the 193
providers associated with the aforementioned 211 audits for the period of
January 1, 2020 through March 31, 2021, disclosed that these providers only
accounted for approximately 6 percent of the total claims paid. MCPA and
BHA did not have a plan in place to ensure the remaining 889 audits would be
conducted in the next 13 months. As a result of the condition described in the
next bullet, the value of the audit process is greatly diminished by not
requiring timely audits of current or recent provider activity.
• MCPA did not require the ASO to audit current transactions. Specifically, as
of November 2021, the ASO had been allowed to exclusively audit older
transactions that occurred prior to January 1, 2020 under the prior ASO. We
were advised by MCPA management that due to the complications
experienced during the transition and implementation of the new ASO, it was
determined that claims data for calendar year 2020 and 2021 related to the
current ASO could not be relied upon for audit purposes.
• MCPA did not direct the ASO to recover outstanding overpayments identified
during provider audits, including amounts identified during audits performed
by the prior ASO. Specifically, we were advised by MCPA management that
due to issues with the ASO transition, the current ASO had not been directed
to recover such overpayments. Based on agency records, as of February 2022
outstanding overpayments identified during provider audits totaled $2.1
million, including $1.2 million identified by the prior ASO.
• BHA did not verify that deficiencies (such as, failure to maintain client
records in accordance with State regulations) identified during provider audits
were resolved. Providers were required to submit a Program Improvement
Plan (PIP) to the ASO identifying processes to reduce the likelihood of the
deficiency. BHA did not establish a documented process for monitoring
19

--- Page 22 ---
provider compliance with PIPs and instead relied on the Local Behavioral
Health Authorities4 to monitor provider compliance. Since BHA did not
monitor the local authorities’ completion of this process, there was a lack of
assurance that the deficiencies were properly resolved.
Similar conditions regarding the failure to ensure provider overpayments were
recovered were commented upon in our preceding audit report of MCPA ASO. In
addition, similar conditions regarding the failure to ensure corrective actions were
taken were commented upon in our preceding two audit reports of MCPA ASO.
Recommendation 4
We recommend that MDH
a. ensure the ASO develops a realistic plan so that provider audit
requirements are completed within the timeframe provided and annually
thereafter,
b. ensure that the provider audits include claims processed by the current
ASO and the materiality of payments is considered in provider selection,
c. timely direct the ASO to recover overpayments identified during audits
(repeat), and
d. develop and implement a process to monitor provider PIPs to ensure
noted deficiencies are properly addressed (repeat).
We determined that Finding 5 related to “cybersecurity”, as defined by the State
Finance and Procurement Article, Section 3A-301(b) of the Annotated Code of
Maryland, and therefore is subject to redaction from the publicly available audit
report in accordance with the State Government Article 2-1224(i). Consequently,
the specifics of the following finding, including the analysis, related
recommendation(s), along with MDH’s responses, have been redacted from this
report copy.
Finding 5
Redacted cybersecurity-related finding.
4 Local Behavioral Health Authorities are local health departments or private contractors that are
responsible for planning, managing, and monitoring certain publicly funded mental health and
addiction services.
20

--- Page 23 ---
Finding 6 (Policy Issue)
A lack of ASO vendor compliance with a certain contract requirement
prevented MCPA from obtaining enhanced federal funding.
Analysis
The ASO vendor’s failure to comply with a certain contract requirement
prevented MCPA from obtaining enhanced federal funding. The contract
required the ASO to implement certain operational best practices prescribed by
the federal government, which would enable the State to obtain federal
reimbursement of significant costs. Specifically, the contract required the vendor
to complete an information technology related implementation plan to meet the
specified best practices by the ASO’s launch date of January 1, 2020. Although,
the ASO provided an implementation schedule, as of January 2022 it had failed to
fully implement the plan.
Compliance with these practices would allow MDH to pursue federal approval of
its ASO process, making MDH eligible for reimbursement at 75 percent of
maintenance and operation costs instead of the regular 50 percent federal fund
reimbursement rate. Based on our calculations, this would result in an additional
$28.8 million in federal funding over the course of the contract.
In January 2022, MCPA decided that it would no longer pursue federal approval
due to the ASO’s ongoing inability to comply with the practices and therefore
would forego the enhanced federal funding. This decision will also require the
return of prior federal reimbursed funding. Our review disclosed that MDH had
erroneously requested reimbursement for 75 percent of these costs, resulting in
$5.8 million in federal funding that needs to be reverted to the federal government
and may need to be funded with State general funds. Finally, MDH had
previously withheld $4.4 million from the ASO related to the implementation plan
issue, however this would not compensate MDH for the full loss of the enhanced
federal funds.
Recommendation 6
We recommend that MDH reevaluate its decision to not pursue completion
of the ASO implementation plan and pursue federal approval with its
enhanced federal funding.
21

--- Page 24 ---
Finding 7
MCPA did not timely investigate and resolve claims paid by the ASO for
which federal reimbursement was denied or approved for a different amount
than the amount paid.
Analysis
MCPA has not established a process to timely investigate claims paid by the
current ASO that were denied or approved for a different amount (discrepant) by
the federally certified Medicaid Management Information System (MMIS II).5
Further, reports generated by the ASO to investigate these claims were not always
reliable, contributing to a lack of assurance that federal reimbursement was
maximized and proper. The ASO is responsible for initially receiving and
processing provider claims through its claim processing system. Once a claim has
been processed and paid by the ASO, it is submitted to MMIS II and subject to
the claim processing edits that are intended to ensure only eligible claims are
submitted for federal reimbursement.
Although MCPA has worked with the ASO to investigate denied and discrepant
claims, according to MDH’s records, as of September 10, 2021 there were
approximately 292,000 unresolved denied claims requiring investigation totaling
approximately $106.7 million (including $1.5 million and $36.1 million from the
first and second quarters in calendar year 2020, respectively). In addition, there
were 388,000 discrepant claims, including claims paid by the ASO that exceeded
the Medicaid rate totaling more than $13.8 million and approximately 31,000
claims totaling more than $4.0 million where the amount paid by the ASO was
lower than the Medicaid rate.
MCPA management advised it relied on reports generated by the ASO to identify
and resolve denied and discrepant claims. However, we found, and MCPA
management acknowledged, that these ASO generated reports were not always
reliable and sometimes included incorrect data. Timely pursuit of a resolution to
these claims is critical, since federal regulations only provide two years from the
calendar quarter a claim was paid by the State to request federal reimbursement.
Federal reimbursement for eligible claims is normally at least 50 percent of the
amount paid. We were advised by MDH management that resolving the denied
and discrepant claims was not a priority because they were focused on more
significant issues, such as, recouping provider overpayments.
5 MDH uses MMIS II to process paid claims for federal reimbursement. In addition, although
provider payments for behavioral health services are issued by the ASO, MMIS II is used to pay
providers for other Medicaid programs that operate on a fee-for-service basis.
22

--- Page 25 ---
Recommendation 7
We recommend that MDH
a. take immediate action to ensure denied and discrepant claims are timely
investigated, resolved, and federal reimbursement recovered; and
b. ensure the ASO generates accurate reports of denied and discrepant
claims.
Finding 8
MDH had not developed a formal policy on the assessing of liquidated
damages and did not assess up to $20.5 million in liquidated damages
permitted by the ASO contract despite the vendor’s ongoing failure to
provide an operational system or comply with certain requirements.
MDH had not developed a formal policy on the assessing of liquidated damages
and did not assess up to $20.5 million in liquidated damages that were permitted
by the terms of the ASO contract, despite the vendor’s ongoing failure to provide
an operational system or comply with certain requirements.
• The ASO contract permitted MDH to assess liquidated damages of $25,000 a
day for the ASO’s failure to be operational to the point of service6 at the
January 1, 2020 launch date. In December 2020, MDH informed the ASO
that it had still not provided MDH a functional system because it was unable
to generate accurate 835 forms. As noted in Finding 2, deficiencies with the
835 forms were ultimately not rectified until October 2021. Therefore, based
on our calculations, MDH could have assessed the ASO liquidated damages
totaling up to $16.7 million for not providing a functional system.
• The contract authorized MDH to assess liquidated damages of $5,000 a day if
the ASO failed to follow the approved implementation plan for compliance
with specified requirements. As of January 2022, we were advised by MDH
management that the ASO had not met these requirements since
commencement of the contract. Therefore, based on our calculations, as of
January 2022, MDH could have assessed the ASO liquidated damages totaling
approximately $3.8 million.
MDH did not assess these liquidated damages as of the time of our review, nor
had it established a formal policy on the assessment of liquidated damages to aid
in determining the appropriateness of assessing such damages (such as conditions
6 The ASO contract defines operational to the point of service as “where 835 forms, eligibility
files, and provider files are accepted for operations and claims payment, priority reports, bank
and financial reports are available.”
23

--- Page 26 ---
requiring damages and how to determine the amount of damages to be pursued).
Rather, MDH had assessed certain charges for the ASO’s failure to meet specified
performance measures. MDH executive management advised that it has not
assessed liquidated damages because it was concerned that such actions would
discourage the ASO from resolving noted defects. We were further advised that
MDH was concerned that the ASO may not pay the damages without litigation
which may have an uncertain outcome. The State of Maryland Procurement
Manual states that liquidated damages allow for compensation upon a specific
breach of contract when actual damages may be difficult to ascertain.
Recommendation 8
We recommend that MDH develop a formal policy on the assessment of
liquidated damages, including criteria for conditions warranting damages
and the determination of the amount to be assessed. Further, MDH should
assess liquidated damages as provided for in the ASO contract in accordance
with that policy for long-standing periods of non-compliant performance,
including those identified above.
Procurement
Finding 9
MDH circumvented State procurement regulations to obtain information
technology (IT) consulting services totaling approximately $19.8 million from
one vendor.
Analysis
MDH circumvented State procurement regulations to obtain several, sometimes
related, IT consulting services totaling approximately $19.8 million from one
vendor. We concluded that MDH obtained these services by improperly using a
combination of interagency agreements (IA) with Core Service Agencies (CSA) ,7
grant agreements, sole source contracts, and a Department of Information
Technology (DoIT) master contract (See Figure 4).
7 Core Service Agencies are designated county or multi-county authorities, such as a local health
department or a private contractor, responsible for planning, managing, and monitoring certain
publicly funded mental health services.
24

--- Page 27 ---
Figure 4
IT Consulting Services Vendor
Contracts and Agreements
Fiscal Years 2018 – 2026
Agreement Total Paid as of
Agreement Type Term
Total 10/28/21
1 IA with CSA 7/1/17-6/30/18 $634,200 $634,200
2 IA with CSA 7/1/17-6/30/18 873,600 873,600
3 IA with CSA 7/1/18-6/30/19 655,200 655,200
4 IA with CSA 7/1/18-6/30/19 873,600 873,600
5 Grant Agreement 7/1/19-6/30/21 836,854 831,230
6 Grant Agreement 7/1/19-6/30/21 776,498 761,481
Sole Source
7 7/1/19-6/30/21 2,279,039 2,265,922
Procurement
8 DoIT Master Contract 7/1/20-6/30/21 312,000 312,000
9 DoIT Master Contract 7/1/21-2/28/26 12,600,000 675,000
Total $19,840,991 $7,882,233
Source: MDH agreements, grants, contracts, and State accounting records
• MDH used four IA’s with two CSAs to obtain IT consulting services from the
same vendor, circumventing State procurement regulations and the
competitive procurement process. Specifically, MDH directed the CSAs to
procure services on behalf of MDH, which included creating the groundwork
for the development of a business intelligence dashboard and various data
analysis and programming activities. According to agency records, MDH
paid the two CSAs $3 million in fiscal years 2018 and 2019 for services
performed by the vendor.
• MDH paid the vendor approximately $1.6 million in fiscal years 2020 and
2021 without competitively procuring the services. The services were
procured using funds from a federal grant with BHA to develop business
intelligence dashboards for MDH’s mental health and substance use disorder
services. Rather than competitively procuring the contract, MDH issued a
grant to the vendor because it did not believe that a competitive procurement
was necessary since the vendor was specifically identified in the federal grant.
However, the federal grant application submitted by BHA did not specify that
the services from this vendor were not competitively procured.
State procurement laws and regulations do not exempt procurements made
using grant funds from State procurement regulations. However, we
acknowledge that while comprehensive laws and regulations are in place for
25

--- Page 28 ---
all aspects of contract procurement and administration, similar laws and
regulations are not in place for grants to help safeguard the State’s interests.
• MDH awarded a two-year sole source contract for $2.3 million to the vendor
to provide technical and operational support to assist with ASO
implementation, ongoing day-to-day functions, and support for the Medicaid
program’s oversight of the ASO. Although MDH prepared a sole source
justification, it did not document that no other vendors were available to
provide these services as required by State procurement regulations. Rather,
the justification stated the vendor was selected because it had essential subject
matter expertise and experience and that the vendor’s pricing was below
market rates based on a comparison of labor rates from a State Consulting and
Technical Services Task Order Request for Proposal. This award was
approved by the State Board of Public Works on June 19, 2019.
• MDH directed a contractor under a DoIT master contract to use the vendor for
IT services on behalf of MDH. The use of the statewide contract in this
manner circumvented State procurement regulations and resulted in MDH
paying administrative fees to the statewide contractor. If all options of the
work orders are exercised, administrative fees will total $2.8 million for the
two work orders totaling $15.7 million.
• In addition, by using the aforementioned IA’s with CSA and grant
agreements, MDH circumvented State procurement regulations requiring
approval by the Board of Public Works. Furthermore, MDH did not obtain
Board of Public Works approval for the aforementioned work orders related to
the DoIT master contract, as required.
State procurement regulations generally require a formal written competitive
procurement for procurements exceeding $15,000, and control agency approval
such as by the Board of Public Works, for larger procurements. Without
competitive procurement, there is no assurance that the services provided
represent the best value to the State.
Recommendation 9
We recommend that MDH comply with State procurement regulations by
adequately documenting the justification for sole source procurements,
publicly soliciting competitive proposals, publishing contract awards,
executing written contracts, and obtaining control agency approval for
procurements, where applicable.
26

--- Page 29 ---
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the following units of the
Maryland Department of Health (MDH) for the periods indicated:
• Behavioral Health Administration (BHA) for the period beginning
November 13, 2017 and ending June 30, 2021.
• Medical Care Program Administration (MCPA) Administrative Service
Organization (ASO) for Behavioral Health Services for the period
beginning January 1, 2019 and ending June 30, 2021.
The audit was conducted in accordance with generally accepted government
auditing standards. Those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to
obtain sufficient, appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our
findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives. We believe that the
evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions
based on our audit objectives.
As prescribed by the State Government Article, Section 2-1221 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, the objectives of this audit were to examine the respective
MDH units’ financial transactions, records and internal control, and to evaluate its
compliance with applicable State laws, rules, and regulations.
In planning and conducting our audit, we focused on the major financial-related
areas of operations based on assessments of significance and risk. The areas
addressed by the audit included procurement, the monitoring of ASO contract
deliverables, claims processing (including denied claims), provider audits, and
monitoring of grant and contract provisions. We also determined the status of
three findings included in our preceding audit report of BHA and three findings
included in our preceding audit report of MCPA ASO.
Our audit did not include certain support services provided by MDH’s Office of
the Secretary. These support services (such as payroll, maintenance of accounting
records, and related fiscal functions) are included within the scope of our audit of
the MDH - Office of the Secretary and Other Units. In addition, a separate audit
of the State’s behavioral health hospital centers is performed by our office.
Therefore, the activities of these hospitals were not included in the scope of our
audit.
Our audit did not include an evaluation of internal controls over compliance with
federal laws and regulations for federal financial assistance programs and an
assessment of compliance with those laws and regulations by MDH and its units
27

--- Page 30 ---
because the State of Maryland engages an independent accounting firm to
annually audit such programs administered by State agencies.
Our assessment of internal controls was based on agency procedures and controls
in place at the time of our fieldwork. Our tests of transactions and other auditing
procedures were generally focused on the transactions occurring during our audit
period, as detailed above for the units audited, but may include transactions before
or after this period as we considered necessary to achieve our audit objectives.
To accomplish our audit objectives, our audit procedures included inquiries of
appropriate personnel (including certain ASO employees), inspection of
documents and records, tests of transactions, and to the extent practicable,
observations of BHA and MCPA operations. Generally, transactions were
selected for testing based on auditor judgement, which primarily considers risk,
the timing or dollar amount of the transaction, or the significance of the
transaction to the area of operation reviewed. As a matter of course, we do not
normally use sampling in our tests, so unless otherwise specifically indicated,
neither statistical nor non-statistical audit sampling was used to select the
transactions tested. Therefore, unless sampling is specifically indicated in a
finding, the results from any tests conducted or disclosed by us cannot be used to
project those results to the entire population from which the test items were
selected.
We also performed various data extracts of pertinent information from the State’s
Financial Management Information System (such as revenue and expenditure
data). The extracts are performed as part of ongoing internal processes
established by the Office of Legislative Audits and were subject to various tests to
determine data reliability. We determined that the data extracted from these
sources were sufficiently reliable for the purposes the data were used during the
audit. We also extracted data from MDH’s ASO system for the purpose of testing
compliance with the ASO contract provisions. We performed various tests of the
relevant data and determined that the data were sufficiently reliable for the
purposes the data were used during the audit. Finally, we performed other
auditing procedures that we considered necessary to achieve our objectives. The
reliability of data used in this report for background or informational purposes
was not assessed.
MDH’s management at the respective units is responsible for establishing and
maintaining effective internal control. Internal control is a process designed to
provide reasonable assurance that objectives pertaining to the reliability of
financial records; effectiveness and efficiency of operations, including
safeguarding of assets; and compliance with applicable laws, rules, and
28

--- Page 31 ---
regulations are achieved. As provided in Government Auditing Standards, there
are five components of internal control: control environment, risk assessment,
control activities, information and communication, and monitoring. Each of the
five components, when significant to the audit objectives, and as applicable to the
respective MDH units, were considered by us during the course of this audit.
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate.
Our reports are designed to assist the Maryland General Assembly in exercising
its legislative oversight function and to provide constructive recommendations for
improving State operations. As a result, our reports generally do not address
activities we reviewed that are functioning properly.
This report includes findings relating to conditions that we consider to be
significant deficiencies in the design or operation of internal control that could
adversely affect the respective MDH units’ ability to maintain reliable financial
records, operate effectively and efficiently, and/or comply with applicable laws,
rules, and regulations. Our report also includes findings regarding a significant
instance of noncompliance with applicable laws, rules, or regulations. Other less
significant findings were communicated to the respective MDH units that did not
warrant inclusion in this report.
State Government Article Section 2-1224(i) requires that we redact in a manner
consistent with auditing best practices any cybersecurity findings before a report
is made available to the public. This results in the issuance of two different
versions of an audit report that contains cybersecurity findings – a redacted
version for the public and an unredacted version for government officials
responsible for acting on our audit recommendations.
The State Finance and Procurement Article, Section 3A-301(b), states that
cybersecurity is defined as “processes or capabilities wherein systems,
communications, and information are protected and defended against damage,
unauthorized use or modification, and exploitation”. Based on that definition, and
in our professional judgment, we concluded that certain findings in this report fall
under that definition. Consequently, for the publicly available audit report all
specifics as to the nature of cybersecurity findings and required corrective actions
have been redacted. We have determined that such aforementioned practices, and
government auditing standards, support the redaction of this information from the
public audit report. The specifics of these cybersecurity findings have been
29

--- Page 32 ---
communicated to MDH and those parties responsible for acting on our
recommendations in an unredacted audit report.
As a result of our audit, we determined that MDH’s accountability and
compliance level was unsatisfactory. The primary factors contributing to the
unsatisfactory rating were the number and significance of our audit findings,
including the number of findings repeated from our preceding audit report. Our
rating conclusion has been made solely pursuant to the aforementioned law and
rating guidelines approved by the Joint Audit Committee. The rating process is
not a practice prescribed by professional auditing standards.
The response from MDH, on behalf of BHA and MCPA, to our findings and
recommendations, is included as an appendix to this report. Depending on the
version of the audit report, responses to any cybersecurity findings may be
redacted in accordance with State law. As prescribed in the State Government
Article, Section 2-1224 of the Annotated Code of Maryland, we will advise MDH
regarding our review of its response.
30

--- Page 33 ---
APPENDIX
October 20, 2022
Mr. Gregory A. Hook, CPA
Legislative Auditor
Office of Legislative Audits
The Warehouse at Camden Yards
351 West Camden Street, Suite 400
Baltimore, MD 21201
Dear Mr. Hook:
Enclosed, please find the Maryland Department of Health’s responses and attachments to the
draft audit report on the Maryland Department of Health –Behavioral Health Administration –
Medical Care Program Administration – Administrative Service Organization Audit for the
period beginning January 1, 2019 and ending June 30, 2021.
If you have any questions, please contact Frederick D. Doggett at 410-767-0885 or email at
frederick.doggett@maryland.gov.
Sincerely,
Dennis R. Schrader
Secretary
Enclosure
cc: Frederick D. Doggett, Director, Ofc. of Internal Controls, Audit Compliance & Security,
Steven R. Schuh, Deputy Secretary, Health Care Financing Admin & Medicaid Director
Lisa Burgess, M.D., Acting Deputy Secretary, Behavioral Health Administration
Jake Whitaker, Chief of Staff, Behavioral Health Administration
Tricia Roddy, Deputy Medicaid Director
Warren Waters, Jr., Chief of Staff, Health Care Financing Administration & Medicaid

--- Page 34 ---
Maryland Department of Health
Behavioral Health Administration and Medical Care Programs Administration
Administrative Service Organization for
Behavioral Health Services
Agency Response Form
Administrative Service Organization (ASO)
Finding 1
The MCPA evaluation of the ASO technical proposals was not sufficiently comprehensive
or documented.
We recommend that for future procurements, MDH
a. perform a comprehensive review of subcontractors performing critical services and
vendor prior experience and ensure that the results are documented; and
b. ensure that evaluations encompass all critical contract requirements, are clearly
documented, and are supported by the vendor’s technical proposal.
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 1a Agree Estimated Completion Date: 12/31/2024
Please provide details of Since the BHASO contract was awarded in 2019, MDH has made
corrective action or significant changes that will enhance all future procurements and will
explain disagreement. ensure better and more rigorous pre-award review, especially of
contractor-proposed technology. Chief among these changes is the
creation of the Office of Contract Management and Procurement
(OCMP), which has an enhanced role in the review and approval of
contract bids. MDH implemented a new IT project and fiscal
management policy in August 2022.
The MDH Office of the Secretary will confer and coordinate with the
Department of General Services (DGS) and its Office of State
Procurement on developing and implementing a contract
administration/management process as well as any attendant interim
departmental policies by December 31, 2022. As part of any policies or
procedures, we will include a section on the topic of liquidated damages.
We will continue to work to improve service level agreements
requirements and other contract management mechanisms in
forthcoming requests for procurement that are in process. In addition, we
will research contract administration and management national best
Page 1 of 15

--- Page 35 ---
Maryland Department of Health
Behavioral Health Administration and Medical Care Programs Administration
Administrative Service Organization for
Behavioral Health Services
Agency Response Form
practices to include in these policies and procedures. We will solicit and
consult with the Office of Legislative Auditors and the Office of State
Procurement for assistance in this process.
As described in our Joint Chairmen’s Report on this subject (submitted
September 13, 2022 to the Department of Legislative Services), we
intend to have a new contract for the next Behavioral Health
Administrative Services Organization approved by the Board of Public
Works by the first half of 2023. The current contract ends on December
31, 2024.
The next BHASO RFP will include a greater number of graduated
penalties for contractor performance to ensure they effectively manage
their subcontractors as well as a drastically expanded set of service level
agreements (SLAs) to ensure a greater flexibility of contract
administration and management.
Recommendation 1b Agree Estimated Completion Date: 12/31/2024
Please provide details of Please see the MDH response to Recommendation 1a, above.
corrective action or
explain disagreement.
Page 2 of 15

--- Page 36 ---
Maryland Department of Health
Behavioral Health Administration and Medical Care Programs Administration
Administrative Service Organization for
Behavioral Health Services
Agency Response Form
Finding 2
MCPA did not ensure that the ASO’s claim processing system was functioning prior to
launch, resulting in numerous system deficiencies that ultimately required the ASO to
make $1.06 billion in estimated payments to providers, of which approximately $223.5
million has not been supported or recovered.
We recommend that MDH ensure the ASO
a. corrects system deficiencies, including those noted above;
b. reviews all claims processed during the period that authorization requirements were
lifted to ensure services were medically necessary and properly documented; and
c. recovers any improper payments due to retroactive claims processing problems and the
remaining estimated payments that have not been supported.
Agency Response
Analysis Factually Accurate
Please provide Update as of June 1, 2022, $201.5 million has not been reconciled or
additional comments as recovered, although reconciliation is still occurring daily, along with
deemed necessary. reprocessing and review of all denials for the estimated payment period.
Please see the Joint Chairmen’s Report submission with the most recent
updated number, where the total estimated payments has decreased to
$146 million (as of September 13, 2022). This amount is expected to
further decrease in Fall-Winter 2022. Any remaining amounts still owed
by 12/31/2023 will be sent to CCU for collections.
Recommendation 2a Agree Estimated Completion Date: 12/31/2024
Please provide details of As noted in the response to Finding 1, MDH has made significant
corrective action or changes that will apply to all future procurements and contracts
explain disagreement. administration & management.
MDH is using all available resources to work with the current vendor to
address system deficiencies. Meetings both with and about the contractor
occur daily, and subject-matter experts are engaged in all oversight
activities to move the Contractor to correct their system deficiencies.
Page 3 of 15

--- Page 37 ---
Maryland Department of Health
Behavioral Health Administration and Medical Care Programs Administration
Administrative Service Organization for
Behavioral Health Services
Agency Response Form
Recommendation 2b Agree Estimated Completion Date: 12/31/2023
Please provide details of Services that were rendered solely during that time period that did not
corrective action or precede or have an authorization repeated after that six month period
explain disagreement. will be reviewed for medical necessity in future audits, but no later than
12/31/2023, presuming all reconciliation has occurred.
Recommendation 2c Agree Estimated Completion Date: 12/31/2023
Please provide details of MDH’s approach to obtaining the recoveries involves: 1) reconciliation
corrective action or of any outstanding denials for the estimated payment period; 2)
explain disagreement. recoupment of all overpayments from both the estimated payment
period; and 3) recoupment of duplicate payments or other payments
made in error that resulted in the accumulation of a negative balance; 4)
referral to central collections (CCU) for those providers not accounted
for in 1 through 3. MDH expects to complete these efforts by
12/31/2023.
Page 4 of 15

--- Page 38 ---
Maryland Department of Health
Behavioral Health Administration and Medical Care Programs Administration
Administrative Service Organization for
Behavioral Health Services
Agency Response Form
Finding 3
MDH did not conduct audits to ensure that the ASO properly authorized behavioral health
services.
We recommend that MDH ensure that the ASO properly authorized behavioral health
services and that the bases for the authorizations were adequately documented.
Specifically, we recommend that MDH ensure that
a. BHA personnel conduct audits of the ASO at least annually (repeat), and
b. appropriate corrective action is taken to address deficiencies identified by these audits
(repeat).
Agency Response
Analysis Factually Accurate
Please provide
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 3a Agree Estimated Completion Date: 12/31/2022
Please provide details of The first medical necessity criteria audit of the current BHASO has been
corrective action or completed and findings were shared on July 11, 2022. The overall scores
explain disagreement. for 2020 and 2021 were “meet standards” and “exceed standards”
respectively. All appropriate action will be taken to address any
deficiencies identified in the audits. Hereafter, annual audits will be
scheduled for February and will include review of the previous calendar
year. In addition, for ongoing quality assurance prior to the next BHA
audit, in 2023, the BHASO medical director on a quarterly basis will
oversee a random audit of at least 100 authorizations. It is noted that an
audit of service authorizations by the BHASO for the first half of 2020
did not occur because services were not reviewed and authorized by the
BHASO but had to initially be auto-authorized because of the problems
with their launch.
Recommendation 3b Agree Estimated Completion Date: 12/31/2022
Please provide details of MDH will document a corrective action plan for all findings noted in the
corrective action or audit completed in July 2022. A follow-up by BHA and Medicaid will
explain disagreement. be scheduled with BHA/ASO immediately thereafter, with corrective
actions implemented by 12/31/2022. The RFP for the next BHASO will
be revised to avoid the scenarios that contributed to the issues that led to
Page 5 of 15

--- Page 39 ---
Maryland Department of Health
Behavioral Health Administration and Medical Care Programs Administration
Administrative Service Organization for
Behavioral Health Services
Agency Response Form
this finding, such as an extension of the go-live testing period, more
robust transitions between ASOs, and a requirement for completion of
audits by an outgoing ASO.
Page 6 of 15

--- Page 40 ---
Maryland Department of Health
Behavioral Health Administration and Medical Care Programs Administration
Administrative Service Organization for
Behavioral Health Services
Agency Response Form
Finding 4
MCPA and BHA did not ensure that the ASO performed a sufficient number of provider
audits, that the audits included financially material and current transactions, and that any
overpayments and deficiencies identified were corrected.
We recommend that MDH
a. ensure the ASO develops a realistic plan so that provider audit requirements are
completed within the timeframe provided and annually thereafter,
b. ensure that the provider audits include claims processed by the current ASO and the
materiality of payments is considered in provider selection,
c. timely direct the ASO to recover overpayments identified during audits (repeat), and
d. develop and implement a process to monitor provider PIPs to ensure noted deficiencies
are properly addressed (repeat).
Agency Response
Analysis Factually Accurate
Please provide
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 4a Agree Estimated Completion Date: 12/31/2023
Please provide details of Due to delays in the implementation of the ASO’s audit process,
corrective action or Medicaid and BHA approved a plan for the ASO to conduct the total
explain disagreement. minimum audit requirements for calendar years 2020 through 2022
across the three calendar years instead of the amount required each
calendar year. The ASO projected that it would complete a total of 1,050
audits for mental health and substance use disorder providers, 60 audits
for ABA providers, and 45 audits for Health Homes by the end of CY
2022. MDH will seek best practices and consultation for assessing
additional penalties for failure to meet the contract deliverables by the
end of the full contract. MDH believes that this plan to complete audits
through the end of CY 2023 is achievable if the ASO allocates
appropriate resources, but also MDH will review progress at quarterly
intervals and report in the subsequent QSRs if the deadline is not met.
Even if the time frame is not met, the primary goal is that the ASO meets
the volume of audits with factual and accurate data.
Page 7 of 15

--- Page 41 ---
Maryland Department of Health
Behavioral Health Administration and Medical Care Programs Administration
Administrative Service Organization for
Behavioral Health Services
Agency Response Form
Recommendation 4b Agree Estimated Completion Date: 12/31/2023
Please provide details of MDH has requested several audits to include claims processed by the
corrective action or BHASO. Because the BHASO is not yet able to produce reliably
explain disagreement. validated claims from their reporting system, this approach will have to
rely, at least initially, on selection of audit samples from provider
caseloads and subsequent validation of claims. This approach will
initially be taken with providers who have generated some reason for
concern. The BHASO will also be required to increase the proportion of
audits of licensed programs, rather than individual providers.
Recommendation 4c Agree Estimated Completion Date: 12/31/2023
Please provide details of The recovery of overpayments based on audits will be fully reinstated
corrective action or once the recoupment of overpayments process has concluded, at least by
explain disagreement. the beginning of 2023. When the retraction process is reinstated, MDH
will direct the ASO to complete retractions each month. MDH will
request payment records for five randomly selected audits each month to
confirm recovery of overpayments.
Recommendation 4d Agree Estimated Completion Date: 12/31/2023
Please provide details of MDH developed a process to monitor Performance Improvement Plans
corrective action or (PIPs) prior to the pandemic, but the resulting work changes, followed
explain disagreement. by the State’s security incident, which affected the computing systems of
most of the LBHAs, led to its interruption. A revised process is now
being established that will require LBHAs to report on the progress of
PIPs to the BHA Licensing and Compliance unit on at least a quarterly
basis.
Page 8 of 15

--- Page 42 ---
Maryland Department of Health
Behavioral Health Administration and Medical Care Programs Administration
Administrative Service Organization for
Behavioral Health Services
Agency Response Form
The Office of Legislative Audits (OLA) has determined that Finding 5 related to “cybersecurity”
as defined by the State Finance and Procurement Article, Section 3A-301(b) of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, and therefore is subject to redaction from the publicly available audit report
in accordance with State Government Article 2-1224(i). Although the specifics of the finding,
including the analysis, related recommendation(s), along with MDH’s responses, have been
redacted from this report copy, MDH’s response indicated agreement with the finding and
related recommendation(s).
Finding 5
Redacted cybersecurity-related finding.
Agency Response has been redacted by OLA.
Page 9 of 15

--- Page 43 ---
Maryland Department of Health
Behavioral Health Administration and Medical Care Programs Administration
Administrative Service Organization for
Behavioral Health Services
Agency Response Form
Finding 6 (Policy Issue)
A lack of ASO vendor compliance with a certain contract requirement prevented MCPA
from obtaining enhanced federal funding.
We recommend that MDH reevaluate its decision to not pursue completion of the ASO
implementation plan and pursue federal approval with its enhanced federal funding.
Agency Response
Analysis Factually Accurate
Please provide
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 6 Agree Estimated Completion Date:
Please provide details of While MDH agrees to continue to pursue the requirements traceability
corrective action or matrix and the support that could lead toward CMS certification, there is
explain disagreement. no evidence that leads us to believe that the current ASO vendor can
attain CMS certification. We agree that it is a worthwhile goal, but
achievement may not be within reach given the ongoing system issues
with the current contractor during the life of the current contract.
Page 10 of 15

--- Page 44 ---
Maryland Department of Health
Behavioral Health Administration and Medical Care Programs Administration
Administrative Service Organization for
Behavioral Health Services
Agency Response Form
Finding 7
MCPA did not timely investigate and resolve claims paid by the ASO for which federal
reimbursement was denied or approved for a different amount than the amount paid.
We recommend that MDH
a. take immediate action to ensure denied and discrepant claims are timely investigated,
resolved, and federal reimbursement recovered; and
b. ensure the ASO generates accurate reports of denied and discrepant claims.
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 7a Agree Estimated Completion Date: 12/31/2024
Please provide details of Using claims analysis and findings produced by the MDH BHASO
corrective action or Oversight contractor, MDH has continuously directed the ASO to review
explain disagreement. and resolve denied and discrepant claims in a timely manner and federal
reimbursement recovered.. This is an ongoing, daily, weekly, monthly
effort that has required extensive effort to review. We plan to have a
fully reconciled system prior to the end of the BHA/ASO base year
period that includes all corrections to MMIS submissions.
Recommendation 7b Agree Estimated Completion Date: 12/31/2024
Please provide details of The MDH BHASO Oversight contractor is performing continuous
corrective action or review and corrections of BHA/ASO’s historical and current claims and
explain disagreement. authorizations. This is an ongoing, daily, weekly, monthly effort that has
required extensive effort to review. Final reports of claims are reviewed
in aggregate and compared against historical data, and each identified
problem area is further investigated by the resources employed by the
BHASO oversight contractor.
Page 11 of 15

--- Page 45 ---
Maryland Department of Health
Behavioral Health Administration and Medical Care Programs Administration
Administrative Service Organization for
Behavioral Health Services
Agency Response Form
Finding 8
MDH had not developed a formal policy on the assessing of liquidated damages and did not
assess up to $20.5 million in liquidated damages permitted by the ASO contract despite the
vendor’s ongoing failure to provide an operational system or comply with certain
requirements.
We recommend that MDH develop a formal policy on the assessment of liquidated
damages, including criteria for conditions warranting damages and the determination of
the amount to be assessed. Further, MDH should assess liquidated damages as provided
for in the ASO contract in accordance with that policy for long-standing periods of non-
compliant performance, including those identified above.
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 8 Disagree Estimated Completion Date: 12/31/2024
Please provide details of Liquidated damages in a contract are not an effective way at ensuring the
corrective action or state receives a working product for a mission critical healthcare services
explain disagreement. system. In this instance, imposing liquidated damages on this vendor
would have maximized the chances of litigation, adversarial working
relationship, and further minimum performance by the vendor.
The MDH Office of the Secretary will confer and coordinate with the
Department of General Services (DGS) and its Office of State
Procurement on developing and implementing a contract
administration/management process as well as any attendant interim
departmental policies by December 31, 2022. As part of any policies or
procedures, we will include a section on the topic of liquidated damages.
We will continue to work to improve service level agreements
requirements and other contract management mechanisms in
forthcoming requests for procurement that are in process. In addition, we
will research contract administration and management national best
practices to include in these policies and procedures. We will solicit and
consult with the Office of Legislative Auditors and the Office of State
Procurement for assistance in this process.
Page 12 of 15

--- Page 46 ---
Maryland Department of Health
Behavioral Health Administration and Medical Care Programs Administration
Administrative Service Organization for
Behavioral Health Services
Agency Response Form
MDH has decided not to assess the $25,000 per day and $5,000 per day
penalties at this time. Instead, other penalties have been applied, as
follows: (i) MDH has withheld over $4 million in implementation funds
in addition to SLAs which have resulted in $1,778,118 withheld to date.
(ii) Recently, MDH penalized the BHASO for Security issues and has a
$150K monthly penalty starting with the March invoice, with additional
penalties pending until the Security issues are resolved. We remain
committed to working with the current BHASO during this contract
period to improve the system deficiencies. All appropriate penalties will
continue to be applied for the duration of the contract.
Auditor’s Comment: Despite agreeing with our findings related to the longstanding
ASO performance issues, MDH refuses to assess liquidated damages in accordance with
the contract based on several cited factors. In our opinion, MDH's position is contrary to
the intent of State law (State Finance and Procurement § 13-218) that requires a provision
for liquidated damages, as appropriate, in procurement contracts, which implies that
damages are subject to assessment. In addition, MDH did not specifically agree to
establish a formal policy on the assessment of liquidated damages, including criteria for
conditions warranting damages and the determination of the amount to be assessed.
Based on the issues identified with ASO contractual performance in this report and the
lack of documented support for MDH’s justification for not assessing the liquidated
damages, we stand by our finding and recommendation.
Page 13 of 15

--- Page 47 ---
Maryland Department of Health
Behavioral Health Administration and Medical Care Programs Administration
Administrative Service Organization for
Behavioral Health Services
Agency Response Form
Procurement
Finding 9
MDH circumvented State procurement regulations to obtain information technology (IT)
consulting services totaling approximately $19.8 million from one vendor.
We recommend that MDH comply with State procurement regulations by adequately
documenting the justification for sole source procurements, publicly soliciting competitive
proposals, publishing contract awards, executing written contracts, and obtaining control
agency approval for procurements, where applicable.
Agency Response
Analysis Factually Accurate
Please provide
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 9 Agree Estimated Completion Date: Need date
Please provide details of MDH agrees, please see our previous responses to Findings 1 and 8
corrective action or (repeated in relevant part below). We are taking further corrective steps,
explain disagreement. which are currently in the procurement review process with the relevant
state agency partners. Any additional public actions will be posted on
eMaryland Marketplace Advantage (emma.maryland.gov).
(Finding 1)
Since the BHASO contract was awarded in 2019, MDH has made
significant changes that will enhance all future procurements and will
ensure better and more rigorous pre-award review, especially of
contractor-proposed technology. Chief among these changes is the
creation of the Office of Contract Management and Procurement
(OCMP), which has an enhanced role in the review and approval of
contract bids. MDH implemented a new IT project review policy in
August 2022.
The MDH Office of the Secretary will confer and coordinate with the
Department of General Services (DGS) and its Office of State
Procurement on developing and implementing a contract
administration/management process as well as any attendant interim
Page 14 of 15

--- Page 48 ---
Maryland Department of Health
Behavioral Health Administration and Medical Care Programs Administration
Administrative Service Organization for
Behavioral Health Services
Agency Response Form
departmental policies by December 31, 2022. As part of any policies or
procedures, we will include a section on the topic of liquidated damages.
We will continue to work to improve service level agreements
requirements and other contract management mechanisms in
forthcoming requests for procurement that are in process. In addition, we
will research contract administration and management national best
practices to include in these policies and procedures. We will solicit and
consult with the Office of Legislative Auditors and the Office of State
Procurement for assistance in this process.
As described in our Joint Chairmen’s Report on this subject (submitted
September 13, 2022 to the Department of Legislative Services), we
intend to have a new contract for the next Behavioral Health
Administrative Services Organization approved by the Board of Public
Works by the first half of 2023. The current contract ends on December
31, 2024.
Page 15 of 15

--- Page 49 ---
A T
UDIT EAM
Catherine M. Clarke, CPA, CIA, CFE
Audit Manager
James J. Podhorniak, CPA, CFE
Senior Auditor
Malik A. Farooq
Paul A. McGrew
Stacey D. Streett
Staff Auditors