Title: Maryland Department of Health - Developmental Disabilities Administration
Date: 10/26/2022
Type: Fiscal Compliance
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=635a879ea1ce5813dc77bd86
Extracted: 2025-06-20T00:25:30.173525
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Audit Report
Maryland Department of Health
Developmental Disabilities Administration
July 2019
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Senator Craig J. Zucker (Senate Chair) Delegate Shelly L. Hettleman (House Chair)
Senator Adelaide C. Eckardt Delegate Steven J. Arentz
Senator George C. Edwards Delegate Andrew P. Cassilly
Senator Guy J. Guzzone Delegate Mark S. Chang
Senator Katie Fry Hester Delegate Keith E. Haynes
Senator Cheryl C. Kagan Delegate Michael A. Jackson
Senator Benjamin F. Kramer Delegate David Moon
Senator Cory V. McCray Delegate April R. Rose
Senator Douglas J.J. Peters Delegate Geraldine Valentino-Smith
Senator Justin D. Ready Delegate Karen Lewis Young
To Obtain Further Information
Office of Legislative Audits
301 West Preston Street, Room 1202
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Phone: 410-946-5900 ꞏ 301-970-5900 ꞏ 1-877-486-9964 (Toll Free in Maryland)
Maryland Relay: 711
TTY: 410-946-5401 ꞏ 301-970-5401
E-mail: OLAWebmaster@ola.state.md.us
Website: www.ola.state.md.us
To Report Fraud
The Office of Legislative Audits operates a Fraud Hotline to report fraud, waste, or abuse involving State
of Maryland government resources. Reports of fraud, waste, or abuse may be communicated anonymously
by a toll-free call to 1-877-FRAUD-11, by mail to the Fraud Hotline, c/o Office of Legislative Audits, or
through the Office’s website.
Nondiscrimination Statement
The Department of Legislative Services does not discriminate on the basis of age, ancestry, color, creed,
marital status, national origin, race, religion, gender, gender identity, sexual orientation, or disability in the
admission or access to its programs, services, or activities. The Department’s Information Officer has been
designated to coordinate compliance with the nondiscrimination requirements contained in Section 35.107
of the United States Department of Justice Regulations. Requests for assistance should be directed to the
Information Officer at 410-946-5400 or 410-970-5400.

--- Page 6 ---
4

--- Page 7 ---
Table of Contents
Background Information 8
Agency Responsibilities 8
Developmentally Disabled Services Delivery Process 9
Rate-Setting Study 10
Federal Liability 11
Monitoring of Coordination of Community Services Agencies 11
Performance Audit
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report 12
Findings and Recommendations 14
Consumer Budgets
Finding 1 – The Developmental Disabilities Administration (DDA) did 14
not ensure level-of-need scores used to determine consumers’ service
budgets were assigned in accordance with DDA’s established criteria
and were properly recorded in its Provider Consumer Information
System II. Our testing disclosed that certain scores could not be
supported.
Provider Payments
Finding 2 – DDA did not identify recurring overpayments made over 15
several years totaling at least $1.7 million that were later self-reported
by a provider. In addition, DDA did not subsequently determine the
full extent of the overpayments to this provider and whether similar
overpayments were made to other providers.
* Finding 3 – DDA did not conduct audits of providers to ensure payments 16
were consistent with actual services delivered and in accordance with
the consumers’ approved individual plans.
* Denotes item repeated in full or part from preceding audit report
5

--- Page 8 ---
Procurement of Services and Related Billings
Fiscal Management Services
Finding 4 – Fiscal management services contracts were not 18
comprehensive and properly approved, and DDA did not monitor the
related vendors to ensure the required services were provided and the
propriety of payments. In addition, all related federal reimbursements
were not obtained, including federal funds totaling $4.9 million.
Financial Restructuring Contract
Finding 5 – DDA did not adequately justify a $2.7 million sole source 21
contract awarded to an incumbent vendor to continue assisting in the
financial restructuring of DDA operations, and could not support a
significant increase in the contract rates for one vendor employee.
Coordination of Community Services Agency Billings
Finding 6 – DDA did not have an adequate process to ensure that 22
amounts invoiced by Coordination of Community Services agencies
properly reflected consumer services provided.
Contribution to Care
* Finding 7 – DDA had not taken sufficient action to identify and return 23
improper contribution to care collections identified during our
preceding audit.
Federal Funds
* Finding 8 – DDA did not recover certain federal funds timely, resulting 25
in lost interest income of approximately $126,000. These delays
were due, in part, to untimely Medicaid eligibility redeterminations.
Provider Consumer Information System II (PCIS2)
* Finding 9 – DDA did not verify the accuracy and completeness of 27
critical adjustments that were processed in PCIS2, resulting in errors
such as overpayments going undetected, and did not adequately
restrict user access in the system.
Finding 10 – The PCIS2 database and its supporting server were running 28
on outdated software versions.
* Denotes item repeated in full or part from preceding audit report
6

--- Page 9 ---
Finding 11 – PCIS2 database and application backups were not stored 29
offsite, and DDA did not have a complete information technology
disaster recovery plan for recovering computer operations.
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology 31
Agency Response Appendix
7

--- Page 10 ---
Background Information
Agency Responsibilities
The Developmental Disabilities Administration (DDA) is an agency within the
Maryland Department of Health (MDH). DDA’s mission is to provide leadership
to assure the full participation of individuals with developmental disabilities
(consumers) and their families in all aspects of community life, and to promote
their access to quality support and services necessary to foster personal growth,
independence, and productivity. DDA also administers the Court Involved
Service Delivery System (the System) which serves individuals committed to
MDH by the courts.
DDA plans, develops policies and regulations, and funds a Statewide system of
services for consumers and their families. DDA coordinates its work with other
government, voluntary and private health, education, and welfare agencies. DDA
funds services to consumers through a combination of private licensed Medicaid
providers, not-for-profit licensed Medicaid providers, local health departments,
and fiscal management services vendors
(entities that assist consumers in a self-
directed support services delivery
system). Consumer services include an
array of options such as residential
living arrangements and support, and
employment assistance. During fiscal
year 2017, DDA expenditures totaled
approximately $1.1 billion (see table),
the majority of which related to provider payments for services on behalf of
consumers.
DDA consists of a headquarters unit, four regional offices that administer
community-based services, two forensic residential centers under the System, and
two residential centers – the Holly Center and the Potomac Center. We conduct
separate audits of the Holly Center and the Potomac Center. This audit included
the DDA headquarters unit, the four regional offices, and the System.
8

--- Page 11 ---
Developmentally Disabled Services Delivery Process
Consumer Eligibility and Provider Services
To obtain DDA services, a consumer submits an application to a DDA regional
office. Eligible
consumers select one
of the Coordinator of DDA Consumer Service Delivery Process
Community Services
(CCS) agencies under 1. Application/Eligibility
contract with DDA. •Individuals with disabilities (consumers) submit an application to
The CCS agency DDA. A Coordinator of Community Services (CCS) agency
reviews the consumer's medical profile and assigns the consumer a
works with the
category based on priority; the consumer is then generally placed
consumer to develop on a waiting list.
an individual plan •Once funding has been identified, the consumer applies for
Medicaid eligibility under DDA's Community Pathways Waiver.
that describes the
specific services the
2. Consumer Plan and Budgets
consumer is to
•Consumers work with a CCS agency to develop and implement an
receive from DDA
individual plan.
providers. Due to
•A vendor under contract with DDA reviews each consumer's
funding limitations, medical profile and provides the consumer with a score for each
required service based on an established DDA methodology. The
consumers are
level-of-need score is entered into DDA's automated system to
generally placed on a
calculate the amount of funding to be allocated to the consumer.
waiting list until
funding becomes 3. Service Delivery
available for their
•The majority of consumers are directed by DDA to providers
services. operating under the Fee Payments System; the providers are paid
based on rates established in State regulations.
•Consumers may also elect to select their own providers for certain
DDA provides
DDA services. These consumers are assigned a fiscal management
services in vendor which manages the payments to the providers.
accordance with the
Maryland Home and
Community Based
Services Waiver (Community Pathways Waiver), which allows DDA to receive
federal funding to cover a portion of the service costs and allows services to be
delivered in a non-institutional setting to people with different needs or different
income levels.
The majority of consumers receive services under DDA’s traditional services
model (the Fee Payments System), in which consumers receive services from
providers licensed by the MDH Office of Health Care Quality. DDA also offers a
self-directed service model, which allows consumers to select their own providers
9

--- Page 12 ---
for certain services. Consumers who elect self-direction are assigned a fiscal
management services vendor which manages the payments to providers.
Provider Payments
DDA has a prospective payment system whereby providers are paid prior to
services being rendered based on estimates of the services to be provided and the
associated costs. The majority of DDA’s provider payments are processed
through DDA’s Provider Consumer Information System II (PCIS2) based on rates
established in State regulations. At year-end, the providers submit records of
actual services provided, from which a reconciliation to payments previously
made is performed by MDH’s Division of Cost Accounting and Reimbursements.
Adjustments to future provider payments are made in PCIS2 for any differences.
In addition, certain residential consumers are responsible for paying the providers
for a portion of the cost of their services, referred to as “contribution to care.”
According to MDH’s records, DDA provider payments for fiscal year 2017
totaled $993.4 million.
Rate-Setting Study
In August 2015, DDA entered into an agreement with a vendor to conduct an
independent cost-driven, rate-setting study to set provider rates for community-
based services, as required by Chapter 648, Laws of Maryland 2014. The study
was intended to align the rates DDA pays providers for community-based services
with the actual costs of providing the services, including the costs of
transportation, consumers’ direct support, and supervisory staff (such as wages
and benefits). The deadline for completing this study was September 30, 2017
but, as of February 2019, the study had not been finalized.
Although the study itself had not been finalized, in November 2017 DDA
submitted a report to the General Assembly which identified preliminary rates to
be paid to providers. According to this report, DDA estimated that the
implementation of these preliminary rates (which were based on fiscal year 2018
consumers’ service budgets) would require an additional appropriation of
approximately $74.8 million (including general funds totaling $38.3 million), with
increased appropriations likely required in future fiscal years. DDA management
advised us that, after the study is finalized, it plans to present the rates during the
2020 Session of the General Assembly. Since DDA’s provider rates are
established by State regulations, implementation of these revised rates will require
the promulgation of new regulations and approval by the Joint Committee on
Administrative, Executive, and Legislative Review.
10

--- Page 13 ---
Federal Liability
DDA has a federal liability of approximately $34.2 million for which State
general funds may be needed. In June 2015, DDA was notified by the federal
Department of Health and Human Services – Office of Inspector General (DHHS
OIG) that DDA did not implement its Community Pathways Waiver program in
accordance with federal requirements. Specifically, between July 1, 2010 and
June 30, 2013, DDA claimed and received federal reimbursement for $34.2
million in provider payments for add-on services for consumers who did not meet
the waiver program’s level-of-need requirement. DDA had not considered the
consumer’s level of need when approving these add-on services.
The DHHS OIG recommended that DDA refund the overbilled amount to the
federal government. DDA did not concur with the recommendation and, in
September 2015, MDH, on behalf of DDA, issued a letter to the federal Centers
for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS) contesting the findings and
recommendations. CMS notified MDH in June 2018 that it was disallowing the
full amount of these claims, and MDH subsequently appealed this determination
in August 2018. As of September 30, 2018, CMS had not responded to the MDH
appeal. CMS will assess interest accrued on any amounts it determines were
properly disallowed beginning on the date of initial disallowance (June 2018).
Consequently, the total federal liability may exceed $34.2 million.
Although DDA is disputing the disallowed claims, during the fiscal year 2019
closeout process, MDH reported the potential federal liability to the Comptroller
of Maryland – General Accounting Division. As of October 4, 2018, DDA had
not identified funding sources for the liability.
Monitoring of Coordination of Community Services Agencies
Performance Audit
Our past three fiscal compliance audits of DDA contained findings regarding
DDA’s inadequate monitoring of its Coordination of Community Services (CCS)
agencies (previously referred to as resource/service coordinators) to ensure that
consumers received the required services from providers. As a result, we
conducted a performance audit of DDA’s monitoring of its CCS agencies to
assess whether consumers received the required services, and issued the related
report dated January 2, 2019.
In that report, regarding service delivery we concluded that while we were able to
obtain sufficient documentation from the service providers to support the delivery
of services to consumers selected for testing, we determined that DDA was not
11

--- Page 14 ---
adequately monitoring the CCS agencies’ efforts to ensure the consumers
received these services. In addition, DDA did not provide the CCS agencies with
appropriate guidance on their responsibilities with regard to quarterly consumer
face-to-face monitoring visits. Finally, information provided by CCS agencies on
consumer monitoring forms was insufficient to document the delivery of services.
In response, DDA agreed with the findings and related recommendations.
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report
Our audit, as well as the aforementioned Monitoring of Coordination of
Community Services Agencies performance audit, included a review to determine
the status of the 10 findings contained in our preceding audit report dated
November 18, 2016. As disclosed in the following table, we determined that
DDA satisfactorily addressed 5 of these findings. The remaining 5 findings are
repeated in this report, 2 of which were combined and presented as 1 finding in
this report.
12

--- Page 15 ---
Status of Preceding Findings
Preceding Implementation
Finding Description
Finding Status
DDA incorrectly directed providers to collect an estimated $4.2
million annually from consumers for services that should have
Repeated
Finding 1 been paid for with State and federal funds. DDA believes that
(Current Finding 7)
its administrative and financial costs to remedy this situation
outweigh the potential benefits to the affected consumers.
DDA did not adequately monitor the resource/service
coordinators’ efforts to determine whether they were ensuring
Repeated1
Finding 2 that consumers received the required services from providers
(Current Finding 8)
and that Medicaid eligibility reassessments were conducted
timely.
DDA did not compare hours billed by the resource/service
Finding 3 coordinators with hours worked as recorded in its PCIS2 to Not repeated
ensure payments were proper.
DDA did not negotiate the contract rates for either contract,
and DDA procured the second contract as an emergency
Finding 4 procurement even though certain services ultimately provided Not repeated
under the contract did not appear to be emergencies as defined
by regulation.
DDA lacked an effective means to monitor payments for
Finding 5 contract deliverables and similar deliverables were noted in Not repeated
both contracts and certain contract modifications.
DDA did not effectively monitor the contracts and the related
payments. Certain deliverables were not received, vendor
Finding 6 invoices were not effectively reviewed, and DDA authorized Not repeated
the contractor to perform work outside the scope of the
contracts.
Federal fund reimbursement requests were not made timely,
Repeated
Finding 7 resulting in lost interest income totaling approximately
(Current Finding 8)
$210,000.
DDA did not conduct audits of Community Supported Living Repeated
Finding 8
Arrangement providers to identify and recover overpayments. (Current Finding 3)
DDA did not verify critical adjustments that were processed in
PCIS2, resulting in errors such as overpayments going Repeated
Finding 9
undetected, and did not adequately restrict access to the (Current Finding 9)
system.
The PCIS2 database contained 58,022 unique social security
Finding 10 numbers with associated names, dates of birth, and addresses Not repeated
without adequate safeguards.
1 This preceding finding is repeated, in part, in current finding 8 in this report and was also
repeated, in part, in Finding 2 of the aforementioned Monitoring of Coordination of Community
Services Agencies performance audit.
13

--- Page 16 ---
Findings and Recommendations
Consumer Budgets
Finding 1
The Developmental Disabilities Administration (DDA) did not ensure level-
of-need scores used to determine consumers’ service budgets were assigned
in accordance with DDA’s established criteria and were properly recorded in
its Provider Consumer Information System II (PCIS2). Our testing disclosed
that certain scores could not be supported.
Analysis
DDA did not ensure level-of-need scores used to determine consumers’ annual
service budgets were assigned in accordance with DDA’s established criteria and
were properly recorded in PCIS2. DDA sends consumer medical information to a
vendor to perform a level-of-need assessment using DDA’s Individual Indicator
Rating Scale (IIRS). The vendor uses the IIRS to assign each consumer a score
for each approved service from his or her individual plan (based on individual
medical needs) and forwards the scores to the applicable DDA regional office
where it is manually entered into PCIS2. PCIS2 automatically calculates the
consumer’s service budget using the scores and the corresponding rates provided
in State regulations. For example, the fiscal year 2018 daily rate for residential
services ranged from $86.73 to $237.16 based on the consumer’s level-of-need
score.
Our review disclosed that DDA did not ensure the vendor properly assigned the
scores in accordance with the IIRS by performing an independent verification of a
selection of scores in PCIS2. In addition, DDA did not require the regional
offices to establish verification procedures to ensure that scores were properly
recorded in PCIS2. Our test of 10 consumers’ fiscal year 2018 budgets totaling
$704,640, which included 14 services, disclosed that neither DDA nor the vendor
could provide support for the level-of-need scores used to determine 5 consumers’
budgets for 8 services totaling $405,710. Consequently, we were unable to verify
that the scores recorded in PCIS2 for these consumers and the resulting budgets
were proper. The scores for the remaining 5 consumers we tested appeared to be
properly supported. Accurately establishing consumers’ service budgets is critical
to ensure that DDA’s annual community-based services funding is allocated in the
most efficient manner and to maximize the number of consumers served.
14

--- Page 17 ---
Recommendation 1
We recommend that DDA
a. perform documented, independent reviews (on a test basis) to ensure that
level-of-need scores were properly assigned and accurately recorded in
PCIS2; and
b. ensure that documentation of the vendor’s assigned level-of-need scores is
retained.
Provider Payments
Finding 2
DDA did not identify recurring overpayments made over several years
totaling at least $1.7 million that were later self-reported by a provider. In
addition, DDA did not subsequently determine the full extent of the
overpayments to this provider and whether similar overpayments were made
to other providers.
Analysis
DDA did not identify recurring overpayments made over several years to one
provider totaling at least $1.7 million. Rather, the overpayments were self-
reported by the provider in April 2017. In addition, DDA did not determine the
full extent of the overpayments to this provider and whether similar overpayments
were made to other providers.
The overpayment was the result of the improper designation in PCIS2 for 36
consumers as receiving residential services rather than shared living services
during the period from December 2014 through February 2017. Because
consumers receiving shared living services reside with and receive certain
services from a family caregiver, the cost is less than consumers receiving full
residential services. Shared living services were funded at the same rate as
residential services until 2000, when the Maryland Department of Health (MDH)
Office of Health Care Quality promulgated new regulations designating
residential and shared living as separate services. However, the individual plans
and related PCIS2 designations for these 36 consumers were not revised to reflect
this new service category until April 2017 after the provider brought the matter to
DDA’s attention.
Although, as of October 4, 2018, DDA had recovered the $1.7 million reported by
the provider, DDA had not determined the total overpayments made to this
provider for periods prior to December 2014 for these 36 consumers and for other
consumers, nor did DDA attempt to determine whether similar overpayments
15

--- Page 18 ---
were made to other providers. Using the same analysis methodology as the
provider, we estimated that additional overpayments totaling $2.4 million were
made to this provider for these 36 consumers during the period from July 2011
through November 2014. We did not attempt to identify other consumers which
should have been billed for shared living services rather than residential services
and to estimate the full extent of overpayments made to this provider or to other
providers. However, our review of DDA’s PCIS2 records disclosed that 2,716
consumers have been receiving residential services since PCIS2 was implemented
on July 1, 2001.
Recommendation 2
We recommend that DDA
a. determine, to the extent possible, the total provider overpayments that
occurred for consumers that were improperly billed, and consult with
legal counsel to determine whether any overpayments identified should
be recovered; and
b. as applicable, for other consumers identified, revise the individual plans
and related PCIS2 designations to reflect the correct service category.
Finding 3
DDA did not conduct audits of providers to ensure payments were consistent
with actual services delivered and in accordance with the consumers’
approved individual plans.
Analysis
DDA did not conduct audits of providers to ensure payments to providers were
consistent with actual services delivered and in accordance with the consumers’
approved individual plans. DDA relied on its Coordination of Community
Services (CCS) agencies to monitor consumer services provided, and also
received an annual cost report from each provider which included an independent
auditor’s attestation that the services reported to DDA by the provider agreed to
the provider’s records. However, our review of the CCS agency monitoring and
auditor attestation processes disclosed that there were no verifications performed
to ensure that the consumers actually received the services or that the services
billed were consistent with the consumers’ approved individual plans.
DDA providers were generally paid in advance for estimated services to be
provided to consumers based on a fixed rate for each unit of service (such as daily
attendance in a facility, hours of service provided). Providers recorded the actual
services provided in PCIS2, which automatically updated subsequent payments
for differences between the estimated and actual services provided. At the end of
16

--- Page 19 ---
each year, providers submitted annual cost reports, which included an
independent auditor’s attestation to the accuracy of the units of services reported.
Although DDA’s CCS agencies were responsible for ensuring that consumers
were receiving their services, CCS agency monitoring efforts were limited to
ensuring consumers’ satisfaction with their services rather than verifying that the
amounts and types of services that the consumers actually received were
commensurate with the amounts billed by the providers and in accordance with
their plans.
Finally, in June 2018, DDA entered into a competitive solicitation for a vendor to
perform provider audit services, which will include reviewing provider
documentation for all DDA providers to ensure that services billed were provided
and were consistent with consumers’ individual plans. As of February 2019, this
procurement was still in progress. Provider audits are a recognized best practice
by the federal Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS) and, in the
past, have been an effective mechanism for identifying overpayments.
Historically, DDA contracted with a vendor to audit personal support providers
(previously referred to as Community Supported Living Arrangement providers).
A similar condition regarding the failure to perform these audits was commented
upon in our preceding audit report, where we disclosed that a preceding auditing
contract had been terminated by DDA in January 2014 due to changes in the
understanding of the expected scope of work.
Recommendation 3
We recommend that DDA conduct audits of providers to ensure payments to
providers were consistent with actual services provided and in accordance
with the consumers’ approved individual plans (repeat).
Procurement of Services and Related Billings
DDA relies on a number of vendors to provide various services, including the
services provided to its consumers. We reviewed and tested several of these
contractual relationships that had a significant impact on DDA operations and
identified similar issues among DDA’s relationship with vendors providing fiscal
management services, services related to the financial restructuring of DDA
operations, and services provided by CCS agencies. Some findings might be
unique to a certain service or occur among several services. These findings,
which broadly relate to the failure to follow State procurement regulations,
include missing required contractual terms and conditions, not using a
competitive procurement process, or not seeking and obtaining required
approvals.
17

--- Page 20 ---
Fiscal Management Services
Finding 4
Fiscal management services contracts were not comprehensive and properly
approved, and DDA did not monitor the related vendors to ensure the
required services were provided and the propriety of payments. In addition,
all related federal reimbursements were not obtained, including federal
funds totaling $4.9 million.
Analysis
DDA obtained fiscal management services (FMS) from two vendors, under
contracts entered into in 2006 that were not comprehensive and for which
required approvals from the Department of Budget and Management (DBM) and
the Board of Public Works (BPW) were not obtained. In addition, DDA did not
adequately monitor the two FMS vendors to ensure the fiscal management
services were properly provided, that consumers received the required services,
that provider payments were proper and accounted for, and that federal
reimbursements were obtained. As a result, we noted a number of discrepancies,
including DDA failing to recover $4.9 million in federal reimbursements and
significant delays in the return of unspent funds by the vendors.
While DDA directs most consumers to appropriate service providers, consumers
may also elect to select their own providers for certain DDA services. DDA used
these two FMS vendors to administer the fiscal activities of consumers who
elected to self-direct their delivery of care. These FMS vendors were responsible
for all fiscal operations, including monitoring consumer budgets, paying for
provider services, and recovering any applicable federal funds. On a quarterly
basis, DDA advanced funds to FMS vendors to cover administrative fees and
provider payments on behalf of these self-directed consumers. According to
DDA records, during fiscal year 2017, DDA paid the FMS vendors approximately
$32.3 million (including FMS administrative fees) to provide services to 695 self-
directed consumers.
FMS Vendor Contracts Were Not Comprehensive and Properly Approved
DDA’s FMS vendor contracts were not approved by State control agencies as
required and did not contain certain critical terms and conditions. Specifically,
DDA did not obtain DBM and BPW approvals as required by State procurement
regulations. In addition, these 2006 contracts do not include critical provisions
such as the fees to be charged and the period to be covered by the agreements,
resulting in a lack of assurance that these services are being provided at the most
advantageous prices.
18

--- Page 21 ---
FMS administrative fees were included in the consumers’ annual overall service
budgets, which were approved by DDA, and generally ranged between 6 and 10
percent of the overall budgets. However, DDA could not provide a breakdown
between the cost of consumer services and administrative fees paid to the FMS
vendors. According to the FMS vendors’ records, DDA paid the two vendors
approximately $2.7 million in administrative fees for fiscal years 2016 and 2017.
State procurement regulations generally require DBM approval for service
contracts in excess of $50,000 and BPW approval for service contracts exceeding
$200,000. DDA management acknowledged that control agency approvals were
not obtained for the contracts. In June 2018, DDA issued a request for proposal
for FMS services but, as of February 2019, the procurement had not been
finalized.
DDA Did Not Monitor the Vendors nor Ensure Related Payments Were Proper
 DDA did not perform annual site visits nor obtain independent financial audits
of the two FMS vendors as required by the Community Pathways Waiver
received from the federal Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS).
The annual site visits and audits are to ensure consumers receive all required
services (including self-directed services), and that related service budgets and
payments are proper. DDA management was unaware of these Waiver
requirements until we brought them to its attention.
 DDA did not ensure that the two FMS vendors timely submitted required
annual accountings that compared their actual costs (administrative fees and
consumer services) to the amounts previously advanced by DDA, and
returned any unspent funds to DDA. We noted that the six accountings that
were required to be submitted for fiscal years 2015 through 2017 (three from
each FMS vendor) either were submitted untimely or were not submitted at
all, and unspent funds were not returned timely. Specifically, as of August
2018, one FMS vendor had not submitted accountings for two fiscal years, nor
returned any unspent funds. The four remaining accountings were submitted
between 5 and 18 months late, delaying the return of the associated unspent
funds totaling $7.1 million. For example, one vendor’s fiscal year 2016
accounting was not submitted until June 2018, and the related unspent funds
totaling $1.8 million were not returned until August 2018. We estimated that
the delays in recovering the funds associated with these four accountings
(which would have been otherwise available for investment) resulted in lost
interest income to the State of approximately $92,000.
 DDA did not verify that the service provider payments reported on the annual
FMS vendor accountings were accurate based on supporting documentation
19

--- Page 22 ---
nor did DDA ensure payments for consumer services were consistent with
established DDA rates. Our review of documentation obtained directly from
the service providers for 10 consumers to support fiscal year 2017
expenditures totaling $1.2 million disclosed that the provider payments
reported by the FMS vendors were supported; however, the rates paid were
not consistent with DDA established rates in all cases. For example, for 2
consumers, FMS vendors paid service providers $27 per hour for services for
which the maximum hourly DDA-approved rate was $23. As a result, we
determined these providers were paid an additional $19,553 for the services
provided to these 2 consumers during fiscal year 2017.
Federal Funds Were Not Recovered for All Vendor Provider Payments
DDA did not ensure the FMS vendors recorded all provider payments into the
MDH Maryland Medicaid Information System II (MMIS II) so that federal
reimbursement could be obtained for the cost of the services. Specifically, DDA
did not compare the claims entered into MMIS II by the FMS vendors with the
provider expenditures separately reported to DDA by the vendors to ensure all
claims had been recorded.
Our comparison of DDA’s fiscal year 2016 and 2017 self-directed services
expenditures with the related provider payments recorded in MMIS II identified
$4.9 million in related federal fund reimbursement requests that had not been
made as of June 2018 because the provider payments had not been recorded in
MMIS II. As a result, State general funds were used to finance federal fund
expenditures. Since claims must be submitted within two years of the service, a
portion of these claims may no longer be eligible for federal reimbursement.
Recommendation 4
We recommend that DDA
a. ensure control agency approvals are obtained for fiscal management
services, and contracts are executed that include all relevant contract
provisions (including the contract term and authorized administrative
fees);
b. monitor vendor activity and compliance to ensure that all key
requirements and terms are complied with, including site visits and
audits, and timely submission of annual accountings and return of
unspent funds, and that FMS vendor payments are proper and
supported;
c. ensure FMS vendors record all provider payments into MMIS II timely;
and
d. take appropriate corrective action to obtain federal reimbursement for
any outstanding claims (including the aforementioned $4.9 million), any
20

--- Page 23 ---
annual accountings not received, and identified overpayments, and
consider recovering any lost investment income resulting from untimely
vendor actions.
Financial Restructuring Contract
Finding 5
DDA did not adequately justify a $2.7 million sole source contract awarded
to an incumbent vendor to continue assisting in the financial restructuring of
DDA operations, and could not support a significant increase in the contract
rates for one vendor employee.
Analysis
DDA did not comply with State procurement requirements when awarding a $2.7
million sole source contract to an incumbent vendor to continue assisting in the
financial restructuring of DDA operations, and could not support a significant
increase in the contract rates for one vendor employee. The contract covered the
period from March 1, 2016 to February 28, 2018 and was subsequently modified
three times, extending the services through August 31, 2018, for a total contract
cost of $3.6 million. The contract was fully paid as of October 2018.2
DDA’s sole source justification stated that the services were not competitively
procured to avoid the delays and additional costs associated with transitioning the
services to a new vendor. However, this justification does not comply with State
procurement regulations, which provide that a sole source procurement is not
permissible unless the goods or services are available from only a single vendor.
Subsequent actions taken by DDA indicate that numerous vendors likely could
have provided DDA with the same services. Specifically, in March 2018, DDA
competitively procured another contract for financial restructuring services to
commence after the expiration of the current contract in August 2018. For this
subsequent procurement, DDA received bids from five vendors and ultimately
awarded a $3.9 million contract to the incumbent vendor for the period from
September 1, 2018 through August 31, 2020.
2 We noted that DBM has expressed concerns with DDA’s continued use of the vendor, which
dates back to January 2013, and in February 2016 requested a written plan from DDA for
ending the use of the vendor. MDH (on behalf of DDA) submitted a plan to DBM, which stated
that DDA would secure agency resources to gradually assume the vendor’s roles and
responsibilities, with an anticipated completion date of May 2016. However, as of July 2018,
DDA advised DBM that it had been unable to fill these positions and, consequently, processed
the aforementioned three contract modifications to extend the term of the contract through
August 31, 2018.
21

--- Page 24 ---
We further noted that DDA could not support a contract modification for
approximately $110,000 that combined the classification of “Project Director”
and “Subject Matter Expert,” and that increased one vendor employee’s hourly
billing rate from $250 to $375. DDA could not explain the difference in services
to be provided by this employee or the employee’s area of expertise that justified
the change.
Recommendation 5
We recommend that DDA
a. comply with State procurement regulations by competitively procuring
services unless the services are only available from one vendor and an
adequate sole source justification is prepared, and
b. ensure future modifications to contract rates are properly supported.
Coordination of Community Services Agency Billings
Finding 6
DDA did not have an adequate process to ensure that amounts invoiced by
Coordination of Community Services (CCS) agencies properly reflected
consumer services provided.
Analysis
DDA did not have an adequate process to ensure that amounts invoiced by CCS
agencies were proper. The CCS agencies meet with each consumer to develop an
individual plan that describes the services the consumer is to receive, facilitate
finding appropriate service providers, and monitor consumers to ensure the
individual plan is implemented. According to MDH’s records, payments to CCS
agencies totaled $39.7 million for fiscal year 2017.
On a monthly basis, CCS agencies billed DDA for the number of units of service
provided to consumers (15-minute intervals) to fulfill its responsibilities, and the
number of comprehensive assessments (evaluations performed during the initial
application process to determine the individual’s eligibility) completed. When
reviewing the invoices submitted by CCS agencies, DDA ensured that the total
units and quantities billed agreed with the totals the CCS agencies had recorded in
PCIS2. However, this process was insufficient to provide an independent
verification of the propriety of amounts billed, since both were self-reported by
the CCS agencies. Specifically, DDA should also review the PCIS2 case notes,
which are entered by CCS agency staff, to determine whether the number of units
billed is consistent with the consumer services provided, and should also obtain
copies of completed assessments to compare against the quantities billed.
22

--- Page 25 ---
During fiscal years 2017 and 2018, the established billing rates were $17.99 and
$18.61 per unit of service, respectively, and $450 for each comprehensive
assessment completed by the CCS providers. Our review of select invoices using
this recommended process did not identify any discrepancies in the number of
units of service and quantities of assessments billed.
Recommendation 6
We recommend that DDA establish a process to review, at least on a test
basis, the supporting details in PCIS2 and copies of completed assessments to
ensure that CCS provider billings are proper.
Contribution to Care
Finding 7
DDA had not taken sufficient action to identify and return improper
contribution to care (CTC) collections identified during our preceding audit.
Analysis
DDA had not fully determined the amount of CTC (copayments) improperly
collected from consumers prior to July 2014 and had not taken any action to
return such funds to the affected consumers. In our preceding audit report we
commented that, prior to fiscal year 2015, DDA incorrectly directed service
providers to collect CTC payments from consumers for services that should have
been paid for with State and federal funds. CTC is the monthly amount that
certain consumers in residential care are required to pay providers, based on the
consumer’s ability to pay. Previously, DDA estimated that, based on its records
for calendar year 2013, the improper CTC collected from consumers could have
approximated $4.2 million annually.
During our preceding audit, DDA advised us that, while it maintained records of
the CTC that providers were supposed to collect, it did not know the amounts
actually collected by the providers for Improper CTC Collections in Calendar
each of the affected consumers. Year 2013
Subsequent to that audit, DDA Count and Total
Collections Percentage of Improper
requested each of its providers to
per Consumer Consumers Collections
confirm the amount of CTC collected
Less than $300 1,000 45.6% $ 111,658
from consumers during calendar year
$300 to $2,000 584 26.6% 450,851
2013. According to this information,
$2,000 + 610 27.8% 2,992,868
providers improperly collected $3.6
Totals 2,194 $3,555,377
million from 2,194 consumers during Source: DDA Records
this period (see table).
23

--- Page 26 ---
In our preceding audit, we recommended that DDA determine, to extent practical,
the amount of improperly collected CTC and present this issue and the basis for
its decision (not to return any funds to affected consumers) to the General
Assembly for its consideration. In this regard, DDA advised the General
Assembly’s Joint Audit Committee in January 2017 that it would submit a request
to CMS to waive the financial eligibility restrictions for a period of time, to avoid
adversely affecting the individuals involved in this situation. DDA also advised
the Committee that, based upon the response from CMS, it would develop
repayment plans to avoid the loss of Medicaid eligibility for the affected
individuals and would send a letter to the affected individuals outlining the
situation, the amount to be repaid, and the repayment plan.
However, DDA had not taken any of these actions as of July 2018. Specifically,
DDA had not contacted CMS, had not developed repayment plans, and had not
contacted affected individuals. Furthermore, for 1,000 of the aforementioned
2,194 consumers, the amount owed to each (totaling approximately $112,000)
was less than $300. DDA advised us these funds could have been returned to the
consumers without approval from CMS because the small amounts were unlikely
to affect their Medicaid eligibility statuses; nevertheless, DDA did not refund
these overpayments.
We believe DDA should have refunded the improperly collected CTC from 2013
that it identified. In addition, we believe that DDA’s decision to limit its review
to one year was not reasonable considering the duration of the improper CTC
collections and the significant amount that DDA identified as having been
improperly collected during calendar year 2013. Our review of PCIS2 records
disclosed that 80 percent of the aforementioned 2,194 consumers (1,754) received
DDA-funded services for at least five years prior to calendar year 2013, during
which time CTC was likely improperly collected from them.
Recommendation 7
We recommend that DDA
a. determine the extent of the improperly collected CTC, as practical,
(repeat); and
b. in consultation with CMS, determine the feasibility of returning any
improperly collected funds to consumers in a manner that does not
adversely impact their Medicaid eligibility.
24

--- Page 27 ---
Federal Funds
Finding 8
DDA did not recover certain federal funds timely, resulting in lost interest
income of approximately $126,000. These delays were due, in part, to
untimely Medicaid eligibility redeterminations.
Analysis
DDA did not recover certain federal funds timely which, based on our calculation,
resulted in lost interest income to the State of approximately $126,000 related to
expenditures incurred during the period from May 2015 through February 2018.
In accordance with DDA’s procedures, reimbursement requests should be made
within two months of the service date.
Our test of 34 federal fund reimbursement requests made between May 2015 and
February 2018, totaling approximately $1.2 billion, disclosed that portions of each
request were not made timely, which we calculated resulted in lost interest
income totaling approximately $126,000. Specifically, portions of the 34
reimbursement requests tested, collectively totaling $155 million, were made
from 1 to 21 months after the claims could have been submitted in accordance
with DDA’s procedures. For example, in July 2016, DDA’s reimbursement
request contained $12.1 million in claims that were for services dating back to
July 2015. The recovery of these funds was up to 10 months late, resulting in a
calculated loss of interest income totaling $58,000. In this regard, State general
funds, which would have been otherwise available for investment, were used to
finance federal fund expenditures.
DDA management explained that the submissions were not timely for a number
of reasons, including untimely Medicaid eligibility redeterminations. In this
regard, our review disclosed that DDA did not have a process to ensure consumer
redeterminations were completed before the end of each consumer’s annual
eligibility period. Although the eligibility periods had ended, consumers
nevertheless continued to receive services, which were paid for entirely with State
general funds. Once the redeterminations were completed and eligibility restored,
federal reimbursements were requested. Federal regulations require annual
redetermination of consumer eligibility under the Community Pathways Waiver.
Our test of 10 consumers whose Medicaid eligibility lapsed during our audit
period disclosed that redeterminations for 8 consumers were performed between 3
and 25 months after the consumers’ eligibilities lapsed. For all 8 consumers,
eligibility was subsequently restored, and we estimated that DDA paid $340,000
in State funds for services provided to these consumers during the lapse in their
25

--- Page 28 ---
eligibility periods. We could not readily determine whether DDA subsequently
recovered federal funds for any of these consumers after eligibility was restored
or the amount of lost investment income resulting from the delay. For the
remaining 2 consumers tested, eligibility had been lapsed for 28 and 36 months as
of August 29, 2018, and redeterminations had not yet been performed. We
estimated that DDA paid approximately $113,000 in State funds for services
provided to these two consumers.
DDA’s failure to timely recover federal funds and to conduct timely eligibility
redeterminations were commented upon in our three preceding audit reports.
Recommendation 8
We recommend that DDA
a. take steps to ensure that future requests for federal fund reimbursement
are submitted timely (repeat); and
b. establish a process to ensure that annual eligibility redeterminations of
consumers are performed, as required by federal regulations (repeat).
Provider Consumer Information System II (PCIS2)
Background
DDA operates PCIS2, which provides a mechanism to pay providers by allowing
providers to access and enter program information into a centralized database
using an Internet connection. For example, providers use the PCIS2 application
to enter consumer attendance information, which, in conjunction with approved
payment rates previously posted in PCIS2 by DDA, is used to calculate provider
payments. As previously mentioned, providers are paid in advance for estimated
services to be provided and these payments are reconciled at year-end with the
cost of actual services provided. DDA employees also access PCIS2 via local
area networks to perform critical provider and consumer activities, such as
modifying consumer services, and to process provider payments. According to
DDA’s records as of April 10, 2018, there were 2,133 system users of which
1,941 were providers. Fiscal year 2017 provider expenditures processed through
PCIS2 totaled approximately $903 million.
26

--- Page 29 ---
Finding 9
DDA did not verify the accuracy and completeness of critical adjustments
that were processed in PCIS2, resulting in errors such as overpayments going
undetected, and did not adequately restrict user access in the system.
Analysis
DDA did not have a process to independently verify that critical adjustments
processed in PCIS2 were proper, resulting in errors going undetected, and did not
ensure all required adjustments were processed. DDA also did not adequately
restrict user access in the system.
 DDA had not established online or manual controls over critical adjustments
to provider accounts to ensure that all required adjustments had been entered
in PCIS2 and to verify that the adjustments entered were proper. These
adjustments were manually processed by DDA employees without any
independent review and, therefore, erroneous or improper transactions could
go undetected. Our test of eight attendance payment adjustments processed in
PCIS2 during fiscal year 2017 totaling $2 million disclosed three payment
errors totaling $24,800. For example, one provider was overpaid by $1,207 as
a result of an erroneous adjustment. Additionally, our test of 16 adjustment
requests (to correct consumers’ attendance) disclosed two adjustment requests
totaling $27,845 that had not been recorded in PCIS2. DDA management
took corrective action after we notified them of these five errors.
 DDA did not adequately review user access to ensure critical PCIS2
capabilities (such as to adjust provider payments, to modify consumer
eligibility, and to add consumer services) were restricted to appropriate users.
Our test of access capabilities as of April 10, 2018 for 15 DDA users
disclosed that 13 users had unnecessary access, including 8 we had previously
identified as having unnecessary access during our preceding audit. For
example, two of the 13 employees (one of whom was noted during our
preceding audit) had the capability to modify provider payments even though
this capability was not required to perform their job duties. The State of
Maryland Information Security Policy provides that agencies must support the
“least possible privilege” security strategy in which users are only granted the
access needed to perform assigned tasks.
Similar conditions were noted in our preceding audit report. In response to that
report, DDA indicated procedures would be established to ensure adjustments
were proper and user access would be periodically reviewed.
27

--- Page 30 ---
Recommendation 9
We recommend that DDA
a. establish independent review procedures to ensure the propriety, at least
on a test basis, of critical adjustments in PCIS2 (repeat);
b. establish procedures to ensure that all required adjustments have been
entered in PCIS2 accurately;
c. perform a documented comprehensive periodic review of user access
capabilities to ensure that users are assigned only those capabilities
needed to perform job duties (repeat); and
d. eliminate unnecessary access, including those noted above (repeat).
Finding 10
The PCIS2 database and its supporting server were running on outdated
software versions.
Analysis
The PCIS2 database and its supporting server were running on outdated software
versions.
 The PCIS2 database was operating on a software version that was no longer
supported by the database software vendor. Specifically, the system database
software version in use as of July 2018 had not been supported by the vendor
since August 2015. As a result, the database software vendor was no longer
monitoring or issuing patches for newly discovered security vulnerabilities for
the database version in use. This out-of-date database software may expose
DDA to security vulnerabilities discovered since the date the vendor stopped
supporting the software, which could create security and control issues.
 The operating system software for the PCIS2 database server also had not
been updated for the most current software patches. Specifically, as of August
1, 2018, we noted that operating system software updates were last applied on
June 22, 2017. Additionally, we identified 48 available security-related
operating system software updates which had been released since that date but
had not been applied. Subsequent to our review, these 48 security-related
updates were applied on November 5, 2018. Accordingly, the numerous
uninstalled operating system software security-related updates exposed
PCIS2’s operations and data to increased security risks.
The State of Maryland Information Security Policy states that system hardening
procedures shall be created and maintained to ensure up-to-date security best
28

--- Page 31 ---
practices are deployed at all levels of IT systems (operating systems, applications,
databases, and network devices).
Recommendation 10
We recommend that DDA, for PCIS2, ensure that
a. all databases are fully supported by the database software vendor and
kept current for all critical security-related updates; and
b. the database server’s operating system software is kept updated timely
for all critical security-related software updates.
Finding 11
PCIS2 database and application backups were not stored offsite, and DDA
did not have a complete information technology disaster recovery plan for
recovering computer operations.
Analysis
PCIS2 database and application backups were not stored offsite and DDA did not
have a complete information technology disaster recovery plan (DRP) for
recovering computer operations.
 Backups of the PCIS2 database and application software were not taken to an
offsite location. Specifically, our review on August 16, 2018 determined that
backups of the PCIS2 database and application had been created, but had not
been taken offsite from the DDA computer room since January 11, 2018.
Accordingly, if the DDA computer room and backup files were destroyed by a
disaster, these backups would not be available to help in restoring the PCIS2
database and application.
 DDA did not have a complete information technology DRP for recovering
computer operations from disaster scenarios (for example a fire). The State of
Maryland Information Technology Disaster Recovery Guidelines establish the
minimum required elements needed for a DRP. DDA’s DRP did not address
certain of these minimum requirements. For example, the DRP did not
contain adequate details on the contact information for the alternate site and
key disaster recovery personnel, restoring network connectivity, and DRP
copies were not distributed off-site for ready availability. Additionally, as of
August 2018, the DRP had not been updated since August 2015, and the DRP
had not been tested. Without a current, complete and tested DRP, a disaster
could cause significant delays (for an undetermined period of time) in
restoring information systems operations above and beyond the expected
delays that would exist in a planned recovery scenario.
29

--- Page 32 ---
Recommendation 11
We recommend that DDA
a. ensure that backup copies of the PCIS2 database and application
software are stored at an offsite location,
b. develop and implement a current and comprehensive DRP that is in
accordance with the aforementioned Information Technology Disaster
Recovery Guidelines; and
c. perform and document periodic DRP testing and retain the
documentation for future reference.
30

--- Page 33 ---
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the Developmental Disabilities
Administration (DDA) of the Maryland Department of Health for the period
beginning April 13, 2015 and ending April 30, 2018. The audit was conducted in
accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards. Those
standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient,
appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and
conclusions based on our audit objectives. We believe that the evidence obtained
provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit
objectives.
As prescribed by the State Government Article, Section 2-1221 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, the objectives of this audit were to examine DDA’s financial
transactions, records, and internal control, and to evaluate its compliance with
applicable State laws, rules, and regulations.
In planning and conducting our audit, we focused on the major financial-related
areas of operations based on assessments of significance and risk. The areas
addressed by the audit included federal funds, provider fee payment systems,
contract procurement and monitoring, and disbursements for consumer services.
During the course of this audit, as well as during a recently completed audit of
DDA’s monitoring of its coordination of community services agencies, we also
determined the status of the findings contained in our preceding audit.
Our audit did not include certain support services provided to DDA by the
Maryland Department of Health. These support services (such as payroll,
maintenance of accounting records, and related fiscal functions) are generally
included within the scope of our audit of the Department’s Office of the Secretary
and Other Units. In addition, our audit did not include an evaluation of internal
controls over compliance with federal laws and regulations for federal financial
assistance programs and an assessment of DDA’s compliance with those laws and
regulations because the State of Maryland engages an independent accounting
firm to annually audit such programs administered by State agencies, including
DDA.
To accomplish our audit objectives, our audit procedures included inquiries of
appropriate personnel, inspections of documents and records, observations of the
DDA’s operations, and tests of transactions. Generally, transactions were
selected for testing based on auditor judgement, which primarily considers risk.
Unless otherwise specifically indicated, neither statistical nor non-statistical audit
sampling was used to select the transactions tested. Therefore, the results of the
31

--- Page 34 ---
tests cannot be used to project those results to the entire population from which
the test items were selected.
We also performed various data extracts of pertinent information from the State’s
Financial Management Information System (such as revenue and expenditure
data). The extracts are performed as part of ongoing internal processes
established by the Office of Legislative Audits and were subject to various tests to
determine data reliability. We also extracted data from the Medicaid
Management Information System (MMIS II) and from DDA’s Provider
Consumer Information System II (PCIS2) for the purpose of selecting test items
and assessing user access. We performed various tests of the relevant data and
determined that the data were sufficiently reliable for the purposes the data were
used during the audit. Finally, we performed other auditing procedures that we
considered necessary to achieve our objectives. The reliability of data used in this
report for background or informational purposes was not assessed.
DDA’s management is responsible for establishing and maintaining effective
internal control. Internal control is a process designed to provide reasonable
assurance that objectives pertaining to the reliability of financial records,
effectiveness and efficiency of operations including safeguarding of assets, and
compliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations are achieved.
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate.
Our reports are designed to assist the Maryland General Assembly in exercising
its legislative oversight function and to provide constructive recommendations for
improving State operations. As a result, our reports generally do not address
activities we reviewed that are functioning properly.
This report includes findings relating to conditions that we consider to be
significant deficiencies in the design or operation of internal control that could
adversely affect DDA’s ability to maintain reliable financial records, operate
effectively and efficiently, and/or comply with applicable laws, rules, and
regulations. Our report also includes findings regarding significant instances of
noncompliance with applicable laws, rules, or regulations. Other less significant
findings were communicated to DDA that did not warrant inclusion in this report.
As a result of our audit, we determined that DDA’s accountability and compliance
level was unsatisfactory. The primary factors contributing to the unsatisfactory
32

--- Page 35 ---
rating were the significance of our audit findings, and the number of repeat
findings from the preceding report. Our rating conclusion has been made solely
pursuant to State law and rating guidelines approved by the Joint Audit
Committee. The rating process is not a practice prescribed by professional
auditing standards.
The Department’s response, on behalf of DDA, to our findings and
recommendations is included as an appendix to this report. As prescribed in the
State Government Article, Section 2-1224 of the Annotated Code of Maryland,
we will advise the Department regarding the results of our review of its response.
33

--- Page 38 ---
Maryland Department of Health
Developmental Disabilities Administration
Agency Response Form
Consumer Budgets
Finding 1
The Developmental Disabilities Administration (DDA) did not ensure level-of-need scores
used to determine consumers’ service budgets were assigned in accordance with DDA’s
established criteria and were properly recorded in its Provider Consumer Information
System II (PCIS2). Our testing disclosed that certain scores could not be supported.
We recommend that DDA
a. perform documented, independent reviews (on a test basis) to ensure that level-of-need
scores were properly assigned and accurately recorded in PCIS2; and
b. ensure that documentation of the vendor’s assigned level-of-need scores is retained.
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 1a Choose an item Estimated Completion Date: October 2019
Please provide details of The DDA concurs. The DDA will develop a sampling process to be
corrective action or conducted by the regional offices to ensure the level of need scores are
explain disagreement. properly assigned and recorded correctly in PCIS2 and LTSS. The
Matrix score process will be phased out in July 2020 when the DDA
fully implements the Person-Centered Plan, new services, and a new rate
structure.
Recommendation 1b Choose an item Estimated Completion Date: October 2019
Please provide details of The DDA concurs. The regional offices now retain copies of the level of
corrective action or need scores electronically on a shared drive. The DDA will develop a
explain disagreement. sampling process to be conducted by the regional offices to verify that
the level of need scores is retained.
Page 1 of 17

--- Page 39 ---
Maryland Department of Health
Developmental Disabilities Administration
Agency Response Form
Provider Payments
Finding 2
DDA did not identify recurring overpayments made over several years totaling at least $1.7
million that were later self-reported by a provider. In addition, DDA did not subsequently
determine the full extent of the overpayments to this provider and whether similar
overpayments were made to other providers.
We recommend that DDA
a. determine, to the extent possible, the total provider overpayments that occurred for
consumers that were improperly billed, and consult with legal counsel to determine
whether any overpayments identified should be recovered; and
b. as applicable, for other consumers identified, revise the individual plans and related
PCIS2 designations to reflect the correct service category.
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 2a Choose an item Estimated Completion Date: Complete
Please provide details of The DDA concurs. The DDA and the service provider in question
corrective action or executed a settlement agreement in July 2017 which covered Fiscal
explain disagreement. Years 2015, 2016, and 2017. In 2018, the DDA reviewed 969 records,
of which 525 were for residential services provided by the agency. The
review revealed that the provider agency did not bill for any
unauthorized days of service. The DDA also conducted site visits to
confirm that services were delivered in accordance with each
individual’s plan.
Recommendation 2b Choose an item Estimated Completion Date: Complete
Please provide details of The DDA concurs. The DDA corrected the erroneous service
corrective action or designations identified by the service provider and will correct any
explain disagreement. erroneous service designations identified in future reviews of services.
Page 2 of 17

--- Page 40 ---
Maryland Department of Health
Developmental Disabilities Administration
Agency Response Form
Finding 3
DDA did not conduct audits of providers to ensure payments were consistent with actual
services delivered and in accordance with the consumers’ approved individual plans.
We recommend that DDA conduct audits of providers to ensure payments to providers
were consistent with actual services provided and in accordance with the consumers’
approved individual plans (repeat).
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 3 Choose an item Estimated Completion Date: December
2019
Please provide details of The DDA concurs. DDA issued a Request for Proposal for a Quality
corrective action or Improvement Organization to conduct utilization reviews of DDA
explain disagreement. funded services. The DDA is finalizing its selection of a vendor and
expects to have a contract in place by October 2019.
Page 3 of 17

--- Page 41 ---
Maryland Department of Health
Developmental Disabilities Administration
Agency Response Form
Procurement of Services and Related Billings
Fiscal Management Services
Finding 4
Fiscal management services contracts were not comprehensive and properly approved, and
DDA did not monitor the related vendors to ensure the required services were provided
and the propriety of payments. In addition, all related federal reimbursements were not
obtained, including federal funds totaling $4.9 million.
We recommend that DDA
a. ensure control agency approvals are obtained for fiscal management services, and
contracts are executed that include all relevant contract provisions (including the
contract term and authorized administrative fees);
b. monitor vendor activity and compliance to ensure that all key requirements and terms
are complied with, including site visits and audits, and timely submission of annual
accountings and return of unspent funds, and that FMS vendor payments are proper
and supported;
c. ensure FMS vendors record all provider payments into MMIS II timely; and
d. take appropriate corrective action to obtain federal reimbursement for any outstanding
claims (including the aforementioned $4.9 million), any annual accountings not
received, and identified overpayments, and consider recovering any lost investment
income resulting from untimely vendor actions.
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 4a Choose an item Estimated Completion Date: Dec 2019
Please provide details of The DDA concurs. The DDA and the Office of Medicaid Provider
corrective action or Services (MPS) issued a Request for Proposals (RFP) on June 12, 2019
explain disagreement. to provide the establishment and implementation of a statewide contract
for Financial Management and Counseling Services to include billing
and claims, quality assurance, consulting and training for individuals
self-directing their services. The solicitation has been written to
address the findings and recommendations. Participants will be able to
hire, fire, and supervise their chosen Provider(s) as the sole employer.
Page 4 of 17

--- Page 42 ---
Maryland Department of Health
Developmental Disabilities Administration
Agency Response Form
The FMS vendors will record all provider payments into MMIS timely
and take appropriate corrective action to obtain federal reimbursement
for any outstanding claims. They will also be required to track and report
of Individual/Participant budget balances and expenditures; processing
of invoices for goods and services with DDA’s established usual and
customary rates for the services and take appropriate action for any
overpayment.
The DDA will ensure the resulting contract obtains the requisite
approvals.
Recommendation 4b Choose an item Estimated Completion Date: Dec 2019
Please provide details of The DDA concurs. The DDA issued a Request for Proposals to
corrective action or contract with a Quality Improvement Organization (QIO)/QIO-like to
explain disagreement. conduct utilization reviews. The FMS vendor will be subject to the
utilization reviews.
DDA received the FY’16 and FY’17 year-end reconciliations from both
FMS agencies and the return of unspent funds.
Recommendation 4c Choose an item Estimated Completion Date: Complete
Please provide details of The DDA concurs. DDA Federal Billing unit tracks self-directed
corrective action or services claims submission monthly using the monthly HMFM8211-
explain disagreement. R001 reports. Any anomalies discovered in the claim’s submission
process are brought to the provider’s attention, so they may address any
claims transmission issues or submission lapses.
Recommendation 4d Choose an item Estimated Completion Date: Complete
Please provide details of The DDA concurs. DDA Federal Billing tracks self-directed services
corrective action or
claims submission monthly using the monthly HMFM8211-R001
explain disagreement.
reports. Any anomalies discovered in the claim’s submission process are
brought to the provider’s attention, so they may address any claims
transmission issues or submission lapses. A review of FY17 claims
submissions showed a large discrepancy between the total claims
submitted and the total expenditures for an FMS provider. It was
immediately brought to their attention and it was determined that the
computer crashed during a claims transmission to MMIS. The provider
addressed the issue immediately and the claims were subsequently
resubmitted and paid.
The DDA received federal reimbursement of $4,948,184 in June and
July 2018.
Page 5 of 17

--- Page 43 ---
Maryland Department of Health
Developmental Disabilities Administration
Agency Response Form
Financial Restructuring Contract
Finding 5
DDA did not adequately justify a $2.7 million sole source contract awarded to an
incumbent vendor to continue assisting in the financial restructuring of DDA operations,
and could not support a significant increase in the contract rates for one vendor employee.
We recommend that DDA
a. comply with State procurement regulations by competitively procuring services unless
the services are only available from one vendor and an adequate sole source
justification is prepared, and
b. ensure future modifications to contract rates are properly supported.
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide The title of the sole source contract is Management Consulting Support
additional comments as for the DDA’s Transformation and Adoption of the Long Term Services
deemed necessary. and Supports (LTSS System).
Recommendation 5a Choose an item Estimated Completion Date: Complete
Please provide details of The DDA concurs. The contract for management consulting support
corrective action or
services was reviewed and approved by the Department of Budget and
explain disagreement.
Management, the control agency, and approved by the Board of Public
Works without discussion. An approved justification for the sole source
contract was included in the paperwork
Recommendation 5b Choose an item Estimated Completion Date: Upon
occurrence
Please provide details of The DDA concurs. The DDA will ensure that contract rates in future
corrective action or contract modifications will be properly supported.
explain disagreement.
Auditor’s Comment: DDA, with the concurrence of DBM, disputes that the sole source
justification it provided to the BPW was inadequate. However, the written sole source
justification stated that the incumbent vendor who was awarded the contract was uniquely
qualified to perform the work and that transitioning the services to a new vendor would result
Page 6 of 17

--- Page 44 ---
Maryland Department of Health
Developmental Disabilities Administration
Agency Response Form
in significant costs, risk, and time delays. These conditions are not provided for in State
procurement regulations as sole source justification.
Specifically, State procurement regulations provide that sole source procurement is not
permissible “unless a requirement is available from only a single vendor”. In this case, we
understand that neither DDA nor DBM dispute that there were other vendors who could have
provided the services, albeit with certain time and development concerns; and we note that
the services were put out for bid at a later time, receiving multiple bids. Consequently, we
continue to believe the use of the sole source method in this instance does not appear to be
proper. Finally, DDA’s and DBM’s position, if accepted, appears to set a lower threshold for
future sole source procurement justifications, which could provide undue preference to
incumbent vendors.
Page 7 of 17

--- Page 45 ---
Maryland Department of Health
Developmental Disabilities Administration
Agency Response Form
Coordination of Community Services Agency Billings
Finding 6
DDA did not have an adequate process to ensure that amounts invoiced by Coordination of
Community Services (CCS) agencies properly reflected consumer services provided.
We recommend that DDA establish a process to review, at least on a test basis, the
supporting details in PCIS2 and copies of completed assessments to ensure that CCS
provider billings are proper.
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 6 Choose an item Estimated Completion Date: December
2019
Please provide details of The DDA concurs. The DDA is finalizing the selection of a vendor to
corrective action or conduct utilization reviews. These reviews will include CCS agencies.
explain disagreement. Additionally, the DDA transitioned CCS activities and billings from
PCIS2 to the Long-Term Support Services system (LTSS) on August 1,
2018. The functionality in LTSS is more robust than in PCIS2 and
supports DDA’s effort to improve accountability. DDA can see in real
time CCS progress notes, activities, and billing. DDA is reviewing a
sample of activity and progress notes, as well as completed
comprehensive assessments to verify submitted invoices.
Page 8 of 17

--- Page 46 ---
Maryland Department of Health
Developmental Disabilities Administration
Agency Response Form
Contribution to Care
Finding 7
DDA had not taken sufficient action to identify and return improper contribution to care
(CTC) collections identified during our preceding audit.
We recommend that DDA
a. determine the extent of the improperly collected CTC, as practical, (repeat); and
b. in consultation with CMS, determine the feasibility of returning any improperly
collected funds to consumers in a manner that does not adversely impact their Medicaid
eligibility.
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 7a Choose an item Estimated Completion Date: January 2020
Please provide details of DDA does not concur. The DDA determined the extent of improperly
corrective action or collected CTC in Calendar Year 2013, the year analyzed and reported in
explain disagreement. the 2016 OLA audit report. The DDA sent files to affected residential
providers for verification of amounts owed to individuals for CY 2013.
Simultaneously the DDA worked with the Maryland Medicaid office to
mitigate any adverse impact on individuals such as a loss of waiver
services. To protect MA eligibility and eligibility for waiver services,
the Eligibility Determination Division (EDD) can apply a remedial rule
based on the Social Security Program Operations Manual System
(POMS) procedure for SSI back payments to allow affected recipients
nine (9) months following the month of receipt to spend or otherwise
dispose of retroactive payments that would otherwise become excess
resource amounts and thus affect eligibility beginning the month after
the month of receipt.
The DDA sent a letter to all affected individuals with an explanation, an
opportunity to dispute the amount and included an invoice to facilitate
the payments. In December 2018, the DDA began disbursements as
invoices were submitted. As of June 17, 2019, 551 people have received
payments totaling $1,143,242.19.
Page 9 of 17

--- Page 47 ---
Maryland Department of Health
Developmental Disabilities Administration
Agency Response Form
DDA is preparing to send a second letter to those individuals who did
not respond to the initial letter.
DDA providers are also Medicaid providers. Medicaid regulations
require providers to retain records for six years. At this point, there is no
guarantee that providers will have the records to verify the amount of
CTC collected prior to CY 2013.
Recommendation 7b Choose an item Estimated Completion Date: Complete
Please provide details of The DDA does not concur. The DDA consulted with the Eligibility
corrective action or Determination Division (EDD) to determine if approval from the Centers
explain disagreement. for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS) to mitigate the loss of
waiver eligibility was needed. Based on their research of similar
repayment issues, there was no written approval from CMS for the
application of the SSI program “lump sum” rules to protect Medicaid
waiver recipients from losing eligibility based on excess resources due to
receipt of a repayment through no fault of their own.
Consequently, no written approval from CMS was required.
Auditor’s Comment: While citing a disagreement, DDA’s comments do not conflict with
the audit finding. Specifically, DDA cites actions either already mentioned in the report or
those taken after the July 2018 date highlighted in the audit report. Ultimately, while certain
efforts may have been initiated during the audit period, DDA had not made any
reimbursements as of the time of our most recent audit testing. In addition, the DDA efforts
to date appear limited to calendar year 2013 activity whereas the improper collections had
been occurring for many years and continued through July 2014. We continue to believe that
DDA needs to develop a plan to identify and reimburse the consumers for amounts
improperly collected, as practical.
Page 10 of 17

--- Page 48 ---
Maryland Department of Health
Developmental Disabilities Administration
Agency Response Form
Federal Funds
Finding 8
DDA did not recover certain federal funds timely, resulting in lost interest income of
approximately $126,000. These delays were due, in part, to untimely Medicaid eligibility
redeterminations.
We recommend that DDA
a. take steps to ensure that future requests for federal fund reimbursement are submitted
timely (repeat); and
b. establish a process to ensure that annual eligibility redeterminations of consumers are
performed, as required by federal regulations (repeat).
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 8a Choose an item Estimated Completion Date: July 2020
Please provide details of The DDA concurs. However, this issue will continue until the DDA is
corrective action or able to transition from a legislatively mandated prospective payment
explain disagreement. system for community-based providers to a fee-for-service
reimbursement model.
This transition is dependent on changes to DDA’s statute, the completion
of the rate setting study, the operation of a new IT platform to support
the new payment structure, and the simultaneous implementation of new
services under the Community Pathways Waiver. DDA estimates the full
implementation of these initiatives on or about July 2020
In the interim, the DDA will continue its efforts to submit claims timely
which have dramatically reduced lost interest. In FY 2002, the OLA
cited the potential loss of $4 million. The November 2009 audit cited
the potential loss amount to $421,000. The amount was further reduced
in October 2013 to $262,000 and in November 2016, was reduced to
$210,000. The amount estimated in this finding is $125,000, or less than
0.009% of all federal revenue collected during the audit period.
Page 11 of 17

--- Page 49 ---
Maryland Department of Health
Developmental Disabilities Administration
Agency Response Form
Recommendation 8b Choose an item Estimated Completion Date: Complete
Please provide details of The DDA concurs. Release 1.0 of the DDA functionality for CCS
corrective action or activities and billing in LTSS became operational in August 2018. The
explain disagreement. system is more robust than PCIS2 and generates alerts to the CCS 90,
60, and 30 days prior to the due date for the financial redetermination.
Page 12 of 17

--- Page 50 ---
Maryland Department of Health
Developmental Disabilities Administration
Agency Response Form
Provider Consumer Information System II (PCIS2)
Finding 9
DDA did not verify the accuracy and completeness of critical adjustments that were
processed in PCIS2, resulting in errors such as overpayments going undetected, and did
not adequately restrict user access in the system.
We recommend that DDA
a. establish independent review procedures to ensure the propriety, at least on a test basis,
of critical adjustments in PCIS2 (repeat);
b. establish procedures to ensure that all required adjustments have been entered in
PCIS2 accurately;
c. perform a documented comprehensive periodic review of user access capabilities to
ensure that users are assigned only those capabilities needed to perform job duties
(repeat); and
d. eliminate unnecessary access, including those noted above (repeat).
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 9a Choose an item Estimated Completion Date: Complete
Please provide details of The DDA does not concur. The DDA does not agree that this is a
corrective action or repeat finding / recommendation. The 2016 OLA audit report
explain disagreement. recommended that review procedures of adjustments in PCIS2 that were
related to manual adjustments made at the request of the Division of
Cost Accounting and Reconciliation. DDA established a review
procedure with DCAR. Documentation of the procedure was provided
during the audit review.
Recommendation 9b Choose an item Estimated Completion Date: June 2019
Please provide details of The DDA concurs. Effective June 2019, as part of the Q1 FY 20
corrective action or payment process, a report was generated showing all adjustments made
explain disagreement. in the quarterly payment. Fiscal staff then compare the report to the
ticket system to ensure the adjustments were done correctly. This
process will be done for each quarterly payment process.
Page 13 of 17

--- Page 51 ---
Maryland Department of Health
Developmental Disabilities Administration
Agency Response Form
Recommendation 9c Choose an item Estimated Completion Date: Complete
Please provide details of The DDA does not concur. DDA does not agree that this is a repeat
corrective action or finding/recommendation. The DDA implemented and provided
explain disagreement. documentation showing the periodic review of user access capabilities.
Lists were sent to supervisors to review the access of randomly selected
staff. Supervisors responded by indicating the access was appropriate or
it was not.
There is defined access for fiscal staff that differs from program staff.
Although one or two staff may be primary users of certain functionality
in a system, there needs to be other staff that have access as a back-up in
case of absence, especially long-term absence or in the case of a
vacancy. DDA believes it is following Section 7.0 Access Control
Requirements of the Department of Information Technology Security
Policy in that the roles established support the concepts of “least possible
privilege” and “need to know” and the separation of duties.
Recommendation 9d Choose an item Estimated Completion Date: Complete
Please provide details of The DDA concurs. The DDA again reviewed the chart of the 13 people
corrective action or identified with the rights assigned to them with their current roles. Only
explain disagreement. one appears to be an inappropriate role assignment. The role for this
employee was changed to better align with their job responsibilities
Auditor’s Comment: DDA disagrees that this finding is a repeat because it established
reviews of critical adjustments in PCIS2 and user access. However, the reviews referenced
in their response were not sufficient to ensure the propriety of critical adjustments or the
appropriateness of user access. For example, this conclusion is supported by our audit
finding, in which we identified improper access that should have been detected had sufficient
reviews been conducted. Finally, although DDA disputes the number of individuals with
improper access, this position is not consistent with prior audit discussions, and as of July 2,
2019, has not been supported.
Page 14 of 17

--- Page 52 ---
Maryland Department of Health
Developmental Disabilities Administration
Agency Response Form
Finding 10
The PCIS2 database and its supporting server were running on outdated software versions.
We recommend that DDA, for PCIS2, ensure that
a. all databases are fully supported by the database software vendor and kept current for
all critical security-related updates; and
b. the database server’s operating system software is kept updated timely for all critical
security-related software updates.
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 10a Choose an item Estimated Completion Date: Sept 2019
Please provide details of The DDA concurs. DDA recently initiated a Purchase Order Request
corrective action or For Proposals (PORFP) to purchase current database licenses for its
explain disagreement. PCIS2 database. Once the licenses are secured, DDA will migrate to the
upgraded database software version and will ensure that all security
patches issued will be tested and applied to the database as they are
released.
Recommendation 10b Choose an item Estimated Completion Date: Sept 2019
Please provide details of The DDA concurs. Upon discovery, DDA immediately updated the
corrective action or operating system for the PCIS2 database server on November 5, 2018.
explain disagreement. All critical security-related patches have been installed since and the
operating system is currently up to date with most recent releases. In
preparation for the end of support of this operating system in January of
2020, DDA has submitted a PORFP for new servers to include newer
operating system versions which will be monitored regularly for security
related patches
Page 15 of 17

--- Page 53 ---
Maryland Department of Health
Developmental Disabilities Administration
Agency Response Form
Finding 11
PCIS2 database and application backups were not stored offsite, and DDA did not have a
complete information technology disaster recovery plan for recovering computer
operations.
We recommend that DDA
a. ensure that backup copies of the PCIS2 database and application software are stored at
an offsite location,
b. develop and implement a current and comprehensive DRP that is in accordance with
the aforementioned Information Technology Disaster Recovery Guidelines; and
c. perform and document periodic DRP testing and retain the documentation for future
reference.
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 11a Choose an item Estimated Completion Date: Complete
Please provide details of The DDA concurs. DDA has reinstated the practice of sending
corrective action or encrypted backups off site weekly. A record of each backup is included
explain disagreement. with MDH Office of Enterprise Technology. The vendor picks up the
media each week with other backups created by other units in the
Department.
Recommendation 11b Choose an item Estimated Completion Date: Sept 2019
Please provide details of The DDA concurs. The DDA recently hired a Network Specialist.
corrective action or Plans to create an updated Disaster Recovery Plan are underway.
explain disagreement. Weekly backups that would allow recovery from a disaster are already
stored offsite. DDA has submitted a PORFP to purchase new database
and web application servers to be housed at an alternative location.
These machines will be used along with the backup media to restore
PCIS2 in the event a disaster recovery is necessary. Our IT Security
Group has reviewed the DoIT Disaster Recovery Guidelines and plans to
complete our own documented plan with all relevant instruction and
personnel by the end of the summer 2019.
Page 16 of 17

--- Page 54 ---
Maryland Department of Health
Developmental Disabilities Administration
Agency Response Form
Recommendation 11c Choose an item Estimated Completion Date: Dec 2019
Please provide details of The DDA concurs. Once the DDA Disaster Recovery Plan has been
corrective action or completed, DDA will implement documented testing on a quarterly basis
explain disagreement. to ensure continuity of operations should a disaster strike.
Page 17 of 17

--- Page 55 ---
A T
UDIT EAM
Edward A. Rubenstein, CPA
Audit Manager
Richard L. Carter, CISA
Information Systems Audit Manager
Lisa M. Beers, CFE
Senior Auditor
Matthew D. Walbert, CISA
Information Systems Senior Auditor
Thomas L. Allen III
Amanda M. Jones
Kush C. Patel
James J. Podhorniak, CPA, CFE
Staff Auditors
Michael A. Kirschbaum
Information Systems Staff Auditor
Matthew Varani
Staff Auditor Intern