Title: Presentation to the Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee - Family Investment Administration


Related Report Dated (10/21/2022)

Video Presentation (Department of Human Services - Family Investment Administration starts at 13:05)
Date: 11/15/2022
Type: Presentations to the Legislature
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=6373bfffa1ce5811344b9ae9
Extracted: 2025-06-20T00:26:30.255001
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Department of Human Services (DHS)
Family Investment Administration (FIA)
Report Dated October 21, 2022
Presentation to Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Gregory A. Hook, CPA
Joshua S. Adler, CPA, CFE
Catherine M. Clarke, CPA, CIA, CFE
Robert J. Smith, CPA
November 15, 2022

--- Page 2 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Report Overview
 FIA oversees a number of public assistance programs administered by the 24
local departments of social services (LDSS) including Supplemental Nutrition
Assistance Program (SNAP), Temporary Cash Assistance (TCA), Temporary
Disability Assistance Program (TDAP), and the home energy assistance
programs.
 According to DHS’ records, payments made for programs under FIA’s
oversight totaled approximately $2.3 billion in fiscal year 2021. These
expenditures were significantly greater than FIA’s expenditures in the past
due to an influx of federal funds related to the COVID-19 pandemic.
 The audit report covers FIA activity during the period from May 1, 2017 and
ending May 31, 2021. The report contains 10 findings of which 5 findings are
repeated from the prior audit report.
Family Investment Administration Page 2

--- Page 3 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Key Findings
 FIA inadvertently disabled a system control resulting in SNAP benefits being
awarded to applicants whose income exceeded federally-established
thresholds.
 FIA allowed numerous recipients to continue receiving TCA benefits beyond
the five years allowed by federal and State regulations.
 FIA did not conduct comprehensive quality assurance reviews.
 FIA did not ensure that LDSSs maintained application documentation to
support the propriety of benefit eligibility determinations.
 FIA did not always determine whether TCA applicants received
unemployment income.
 FIA did not ensure that system alerts of information from third parties
potentially impacting benefits were properly dispositioned.
 FIA did not conduct monitoring reviews of certain local administering
agencies who processed energy assistance applications.
 FIA did not adequately administer certain contracts and agreements and did
not obtain supporting documentation for grant funds spent.
Family Investment Administration Page 3

--- Page 4 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program (SNAP) (Finding 1)
In April 2020, FIA inadvertently disabled a critical system control which resulted in
SNAP benefits being awarded to applicants whose income exceeded federally-
established thresholds. The programming change was not readily detected until
March 2021.
 Our analysis of SNAP data for April 2021 disclosed that 86,479 of the 465,038
households receiving benefits had income exceeding the federal thresholds.
Although recipients legitimately could be exempt from the income thresholds,
FIA was unable to determine if any of these households qualified for an
exemption.
 FIA advised that it does not intend on implementing any collection actions for
payments made in error because it interprets a notice on the United States
Department of Agriculture (USDA) website as a permanent waiver of
overpayments made during the COVID-19 pandemic. However, the notice does
not address the waiver as permanent and FIA could not provide clarifying
documentation from the USDA to support its interpretation.
Family Investment Administration Page 4

--- Page 5 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Temporary Cash Assistance (TCA) (Finding 2) Repeat Finding
FIA allowed numerous households to continue receiving TCA benefits beyond the
five years allowed by federal and State regulations.
 Federal and State regulations limit TCA benefits to a five-year lifetime period
unless a recipient has a documented hardship exemption.
 According to FIA records as of May 2021, there were 3,273 TCA recipients
receiving benefits beyond the five-year period with monthly benefits totaling
$2.1 million.
 Our test of 15 recipients disclosed that 9 received benefits from 4 to 12 years
beyond the five-year limit without having a documented hardship exemption.
For example, one recipient had continuously received benefits totaling
$150,826 for 12 years beyond the five-year limit.
Family Investment Administration Page 5

--- Page 6 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Quality Assurance Reviews (Finding 3)
FIA did not conduct comprehensive quality assurance reviews of TCA cases to
ensure that eligibility determinations and related benefits were proper. In
addition, FIA did not ensure that errors identified through its TDAP quality
assurance reviews were corrected timely.
 Our test of 10 of the 1,494 TCA “reviews” performed between July 2019 and
May 2021 by FIA, disclosed that reviewers did not ensure the eligibility
determinations were proper and the benefit amount was accurate. Rather,
they only documented improper payments that had been previously identified
and corrected by the case manager.
 Our test of 10 TDAP quality assurance review cases during January 2020 and
January 2021 found that 4 were not corrected timely. Consequently,
payments continued for 5 to 9 months after the reviews had concluded that
the payments should stop.
Family Investment Administration Page 6

--- Page 7 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
SNAP, TCA, and TDAP Eligibility (Finding 4)
FIA did not ensure the LDSSs maintained application documentation to support
the propriety of SNAP, TCA, and TDAP eligibility determinations and other
requirements.
 We tested SNAP, TCA, and TDAP cases which were approved during fiscal years
2020 and 2021 and requested the supporting documentation from the system
and the LDSS. After we could not find the information on the system as
required; over the subsequent five-month period, FIA could not provide us with
a significant number of the requested documents. For example, we tested 60
TCA cases and FIA did not have documentation for 26 social security number
verifications and 22 income verifications.
 State regulations require an applicant to submit an application for benefits
and the LDSS to perform certain reviews, such as a social security number and
income verifications. FIA policy requires LDSSs to scan these documents into
its document management system.
Family Investment Administration Page 7

--- Page 8 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
SNAP, TCA, and TDAP Eligibility (Finding 5)
FIA did not always determine whether TCA applicants received unemployment
income. Federal regulations require verification of unemployment income at the
time of application and for each of the first three months benefits are received.
 Our test of 30 TCA applications disclosed that FIA could not document that it
performed a verification of unemployment income for 15 applications; and for
the other 15 applications FIA could only document it verified unemployment
benefits for the initial application, but not the subsequent three months.
 We obtained unemployment income records from the Maryland Department of
Labor’s Division of Unemployment Insurance for these 30 applicants and noted
two received $9,613 in unemployment income during the first three months
TCA benefits were issued, which may have resulted in an overpayment of TCA
benefits.
Family Investment Administration Page 8

--- Page 9 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Follow-up on Computer Matches (Findings 6 & 7)
 Finding 6 - FIA did not ensure that all social security number (SSN) alerts were
properly recorded in FIA’s system for follow-up purposes. Our review of the
May 2021 match of SSNs in FIA’s system to the SSNs in the federal Social
Security Administration system disclosed that 188 of 681 match results were
not recorded as alerts in FIA’s system as of December 2021. (Repeat Finding)
 Finding 7 - FIA did not ensure that the LDSSs conducted timely and
appropriate follow-up on data from other state or federal government
agencies received via the Public Assistance Reporting Information System
alerts. Our test of 46 alerts found that timely and/or appropriate action had
not been taken for 43 alerts. For example, for 29 alerts related to households
receiving concurrent benefits in another state, the LDSSs did not perform
appropriate follow-up. (Repeat Finding)
Family Investment Administration Page 9

--- Page 10 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Energy Assistance Programs (Finding 8)
FIA did not conduct monitoring reviews of certain local administering agencies
(LAAs) in accordance with its Operations Manual and did not always execute
agreements with energy suppliers. The LAAs are responsible for determining
applicant eligibility and FIA’s policies require a review of each of the 30 LAAs
every three years.
 During the three-year period ending June 2021, FIA did not review 3 of the 20
LAAs which accounted for $40.9 million of $130.4 million in benefits issued in
fiscal year 2021. For 11 other LAAs, FIA did not review case files or issue a
final report, as required by its Operations Manual.
 As of September 2021, FIA did not have a current energy agreement with 4 of
15 energy suppliers that received payments totaling $12.9 million in fiscal
year 2021. At the time of our testing, 3 of the 4 agreements had been expired
between a month (August 2021) and 28 months (April 2019), and FIA was
unable to provide any prior agreement for 1 energy supplier.
Family Investment Administration Page 10

--- Page 11 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Contract Monitoring (Finding 9) Repeat Finding
FIA did not adequately administer certain contracts and agreements related to
its public assistance programs. FIA was responsible for monitoring contracts and
agreements procured centrally by DHS (for FIA’s use) and by the LDSSs.
Centralized Contracts
FIA did not obtain documentation to support that deliverables were received and
amounts invoiced were proper for nine invoices totaling $5.6 million, as required
by its policy. FIA also made significant modifications to the terms of a contract to
assist TCA and TDAP recipients in obtaining federal benefits without formally
determining the practicality or appropriateness of conducting a new
procurement. For one invoice reviewed, this change resulted in a payment of
$189,695, which would have been $1,698 under the original payment terms.
LDSS Contracts
FIA did not have an established process to oversee and approve LDSS contracts
and agreements. FIA did not have a record of contracts and agreements for two
LDSSs, which accounted for 40 percent of benefits issued. We found that the
specific contracts and agreements we tested were not monitored by FIA.
Family Investment Administration Page 11

--- Page 12 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Grants Management (Finding 10) Repeat Finding
FIA did not always obtain documentation to support that grant funds were spent
as intended. FIA made grant payments to 578 grantees totaling $52.4 million
during fiscal years 2020 and 2021.
 Our test of eight payments totaling $12.1 million to four grantees disclosed
that FIA did not verify that grant funds were spent as intended for five of the
payments made to three grantees, which totaled $2.1 million. While FIA did
obtain certain quarterly and annual reports from grantees, it did not obtain
documentation such as timesheets or receipts to support grantee
expenditures.
 A similar condition was commented upon in four prior audit reports dating
back to January 2011.
Family Investment Administration Page 12

--- Page 13 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Conclusions
FIA should:
• establish sufficient procedures to ensure critical programming changes are
subject to independent review and approval;
• terminate TCA benefits to all recipients after five years in accordance with
regulations, unless there is a documented hardship;
• develop comprehensive quality assurance policies and ensure that errors
identified are corrected timely;
• ensure LDSSs scan all documentation to support eligibility determinations;
• verify unemployment compensation as required by federal regulations;
• conduct timely and appropriate follow-up of computer matches;
• conduct energy assistance monitoring reviews in accordance with its policy;
• obtain adequate documentation to verify billings and ensure contract
modifications are adequately supported and justified; and
• obtain and review documentation to support the propriety of grant payments.
Family Investment Administration Page 13