Title: Presentation to the Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee - Maryland Department of Health - Behavioral Health Administration and Medical Care Programs Administration - Administrative Service Organization for Behavioral Health Services


Related Report Dated (10/25/2022)

Video Presentation (Maryland Department of Health - Behavioral Health Administration and Medical Care Programs Administration - Administrative Service Organization for Behavioral Health Services starts at 1:21:00)
Date: 11/15/2022
Type: Presentations to the Legislature
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=6373bfffa1ce5811344b9aeb
Extracted: 2025-06-20T00:26:54.169097
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Maryland Department of Health (MDH)
Behavioral Health Administration (BHA) and Medical Care Programs
Administration (MCPA)
Administrative Service Organization (ASO) for Behavioral Health Services
Report Dated October 25, 2022
Presentation to Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Gregory A. Hook, CPA
Joshua S. Adler, CPA, CFE
Catherine M. Clarke, CPA, CIA, CFE
James J. Podhorniak, CPA, CFE
November 15, 2022

--- Page 2 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Report Overview
 BHA operates the Public Behavioral Health System to provide mental health
and substance-related disorder services to the citizens of Maryland. BHA is
responsible for community-based services financed through a combination of
grants and contracts. The majority of the behavioral health activity is
processed by a third party Administrative Service Organization (ASO) under
contract to MCPA.
 To promote consistency and a more comprehensive review of audit issues
related to BHA activities, we consolidated our audit to include BHA and
MCPA’s ASO which previously were audited separately.
 BHA’s fiscal year 2021 expenditures totaled $356.6 million and ASO
behavioral health claims disbursements totaled $1.8 billion.
 Our report contains 9 findings of which 2 non-cybersecurity findings are
repeated from the prior audit reports. We determined that MDH’s
accountability and compliance level was unsatisfactory in accordance with
the rating system we established in conformity with State law.
MDH - Behavioral Health Administration and Medical Care Programs Administration Page 2
Administrative Service Organization for Behavioral Health Services

--- Page 3 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Key Findings
 MCPA did not perform a comprehensive evaluation of the ASO technical
proposals.
 MCPA did not ensure the ASO’s claim processing system functioned prior to
launch, which ultimately required the ASO to make $1.06 billion in estimated
payments to providers.
 MDH did not conduct certain audits of the ASO, and MCPA and BHA did not
ensure the ASO performed a sufficient number of provider audits.
 MCPA was unable to obtain $28.8 million in federal funding because the ASO
did not comply with certain contract requirements.
 MCPA did not timely investigate unresolved claims totaling $106.7 million
that were paid by the ASO, but were denied federal reimbursement.
 MDH did not assess up to $20.5 million in liquidated damages permitted in
the ASO contract.
 MDH circumvented State procurement regulations to obtain information
technology consulting services totaling $19.8 million from a single vendor.
MDH - Behavioral Health Administration and Medical Care Programs Administration Page 3
Administrative Service Organization for Behavioral Health Services

--- Page 4 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Administrative Service Organization (ASO)
Background
 MCPA’s ASO is responsible for determining behavioral health recipient
eligibility, authorizing recipient services, paying provider claims, and performing
oversight of providers.
 In November 2018, MCPA solicited proposals for a new ASO contract and
responses were received from two vendors, including the incumbent ASO.
 The proposals were evaluated by a three-member committee and MDH
awarded the contract to the non-incumbent vendor whose proposal was rated
“excellent”, while the incumbent vendor’s proposal was rated “very good”.
 The ASO contract term was January 1, 2020 to December 31, 2024 with one
additional two-year option and it had a cumulative value of $198.2 million.
 The new ASO uses the services of seven subcontractors to meet various
contract requirements.
MDH - Behavioral Health Administration and Medical Care Programs Administration Page 4
Administrative Service Organization for Behavioral Health Services

--- Page 5 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Administrative Service Organization (ASO) (Finding 1)
MCPA’s evaluation of the ASO technical proposals was not sufficiently
comprehensive or documented.
 MCPA did not perform an independent comprehensive review of the past
experience and qualifications of subcontractors responsible for performing
critical work under the contract. In addition, MCPA did not obtain references or
contact the proposed subcontractors, including the subcontractor responsible
for the claims processing system.
 Evaluations of ASO Bidders’ Experience Were Not Sufficiently Comprehensive
 MDH did not document that it considered the nature of the winning bidder’s
past experience. Only one of four references had used the vendor for similar
services to those needed by MDH.
 MDH did not document that it considered concerns by one reference that
the winning bidder struggled to manage detailed patient claim data and had
recommended assessing daily penalties for missed deadlines.
MDH - Behavioral Health Administration and Medical Care Programs Administration Page 5
Administrative Service Organization for Behavioral Health Services

--- Page 6 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Administrative Service Organization (ASO) Cont. (Finding 1)
 Evaluation Forms Were Not Sufficiently Documented or Were Not Supported
 MCPA’s evaluations of the ASO did not consider whether the ASO had
sufficient controls over its information systems required by the Request for
Proposals (RFP).
 The winning vendor’s transition plan had a longer transition period than that
provided for in the RFP.
 The Board of Public Works questioned MDH about the winning vendor’s
experience as an ASO and its ability to perform satisfactorily considering the
financial proposal was $72.1 million lower than the incumbent ASO’s proposal.
MDH responded to the Board that it had done “a lot of due diligence” of the
winning vendor.
 OLA concluded that it was possible that the anticipated savings from awarding
the contract to the ASO may have been negated by various subsequent events,
such as overpayments to providers and lost federal income.
MDH - Behavioral Health Administration and Medical Care Programs Administration Page 6
Administrative Service Organization for Behavioral Health Services

--- Page 7 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Administrative Service Organization (ASO) (Finding 2)
MCPA did not ensure the ASO’s claims processing system was functioning prior
to its January 2020 launch, resulting in numerous system deficiencies.
 MCPA Did Not Ensure the ASO System Was Functional Prior to Launch
 The system could not process provider service authorization requests to
ensure requested services were medically necessary, Providers were
required to maintain documentation supporting the medical necessity
requests, but the ASO has not reviewed the support.
 The system improperly denied valid claims submitted by providers. MCPA
was unable to document the number and dollar value of the improperly
denied claims.
 The system was unable to generate accurate claim payment information
using the healthcare industry standard report form and was unable to
process retroactive claims.
 Deficiencies with the system required the ASO to make $1.06 billion in
estimated payments to providers, of which approximately $223.5 million has
still not been supported or recovered as of December 2021.
MDH - Behavioral Health Administration and Medical Care Programs Administration Page 7
Administrative Service Organization for Behavioral Health Services

--- Page 8 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Administrative Service Organization (ASO) (Finding 3 & 4)
 Finding 3 - MDH did not conduct audits to verify the propriety of ASO behavioral
health services authorizations. Specifically, BHA only performed one audit that
covered calendar years 2017, 2018 and the first two quarters of 2019, instead
of the annual audits required by MDH written procedures. As of September
2021, the audit had not been finalized and no corrective action had been
initiated to address the deficiencies identified. (Repeat Finding)
 Finding 4 - MCPA and BHA did not ensure the ASO performed a sufficient
number of provider audits, that the audits included financially material and
current transactions, and that overpayments were recovered and deficiencies
corrected. (Repeat Finding)
 MCPA and BHA did not ensure the ASO completed 370 provider audits
annually as required by the contract, or require that current transactions
were audited.
 Overpayments of $2.1 million identified by audits were not recovered.
 BHA did not verify that deficiencies (such as, failure to comply with State
regulations) identified during provider audits were resolved.
MDH - Behavioral Health Administration and Medical Care Programs Administration Page 8
Administrative Service Organization for Behavioral Health Services

--- Page 9 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Cybersecurity (ASO) (Finding 5)
Redacted cybersecurity-related finding.
See confidential addendum.
MDH - Behavioral Health Administration and Medical Care Programs Administration Page 9
Administrative Service Organization for Behavioral Health Services

--- Page 10 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Administrative Service Organization (ASO) (Finding 6) (Policy Issue)
The ASO failed to implement certain information technology requirements
specified in its contract, which prevented MCPA from obtaining enhanced federal
funding.
 The ASO developed an information technology plan, but failed to fully
implement it as required by the contract. As a result, MCPA could not recover
an estimated $28.8 million in enhanced federal funds.
 In January 2022, MCPA decided it would no longer pursue the enhanced
federal funding, which will require the return of prior enhanced federal funding
totaling $5.8 million.
 Although, MDH withheld $4.4 million from the ASO, this amount would not
compensate for the full loss of the enhanced federal funding.
MDH - Behavioral Health Administration and Medical Care Programs Administration Page 10
Administrative Service Organization for Behavioral Health Services

--- Page 11 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Administrative Service Organization (ASO) (Finding 7)
MCPA did not have a process to timely investigate and resolve claims paid by the
ASO for which federal reimbursement was denied or approved for a different
amount than the amount paid.
 As of September 2021, there were approximately 292,000 unresolved denied
claims totaling approximately $106.7 million and 388,000 claims totaling
$17.8 million that were approved for a different amount.
 MCPA management advised that it relied on reports generated by the ASO to
resolve these claims. However, these reports were not always reliable and
sometimes included incorrect data.
 We were advised by MDH management that resolving these claims was not a
priority because MDH was focused on more significant issues, such as
recouping provider overpayments.
MDH - Behavioral Health Administration and Medical Care Programs Administration Page 11
Administrative Service Organization for Behavioral Health Services

--- Page 12 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Administrative Service Organization (ASO) (Finding 8)
MDH had not developed a formal policy on liquidated damages to aid in
determining the appropriateness of assessing such damages (such as conditions
requiring damages and how to determine the amount of damages to be pursued).
Furthermore, MCPA had not assess liquidated damages permitted by the ASO
contract, despite the vendor’s ongoing failure to provide an operational system or
comply with certain contract requirements.
 Based on our calculations, MDH could have assessed liquidated damages of
$16.7 million for the ASO’s failure to provide a functional system from January
1, 2020 until October 2021, and an additional $3.8 million in liquidated
damages (as of January 2022) for the ASO not following the approved
implementation plan for compliance with specified contract requirements.
 MDH executive management advised that it had not assessed liquidated
damages because it was concerned that such actions would discourage the
ASO from resolving noted defects and may lead to litigation with an uncertain
outcome.
MDH - Behavioral Health Administration and Medical Care Programs Administration Page 12
Administrative Service Organization for Behavioral Health Services

--- Page 13 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Procurement (Finding 9)
MDH circumvented State procurement regulations by obtaining information
technology (IT) consulting services totaling $19.8 million from one vendor
without competition.
 MDH used four interagency agreements with two Core Service Agencies to
obtain IT consulting services from the same vendor, circumventing State
procurement regulations and the competitive procurement process.

 MCPA paid the vendor $1.6 million using a grant process to develop certain
dashboards, rather than competitively procuring the services.
 MDH awarded a two-year sole source contract for $2.3 million to the vendor
for ASO-related assistance, without documenting that no other vendors could
provide this service as required by State procurement regulations.
 MDH directed a contractor under a Statewide master contract to use the
vendor for IT services on behalf of MDH. The process circumvented State
procurement regulations, and if all contract options are exercised, will result in
MDH paying administrative fees of $2.8 million to the statewide contractor.
MDH - Behavioral Health Administration and Medical Care Programs Administration Page 13
Administrative Service Organization for Behavioral Health Services

--- Page 14 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Conclusions
MDH should:
• ensure that evaluations of technical proposals are sufficiently comprehensive
and documented;
• ensure the ASO corrects system deficiencies;
• conduct required annual audits of ASO authorizations and ensure the ASO
performs timely and comprehensive provider audits;
• address cybersecurity related issues;
• pursue completion of the ASO implementation plan and the related enhanced
federal funding;
• take action to ensure denied claims and claims approved for a different
amount are investigated and resolved, and that federal reimbursement is
recovered;
• develop a formal policy on the assessment of liquidated damages, and in
accordance with that policy assess liquidated damages as provided for in the
ASO contract for long-standing performance issues; and
• comply with State procurement regulations when procuring IT consulting
services.
MDH - Behavioral Health Administration and Medical Care Programs Administration Page 14
Administrative Service Organization for Behavioral Health Services