Title: Presentation to the Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee - Maryland Department of Labor - Division of Unemployment Insurance - Part 2


Related Report Dated (11/15/2022)

Video Presentation (Maryland Department of Labor - Division of Unemployment Insurance - Part 2 starts at 1:18:35)
Date: 12/06/2022
Type: Presentations to the Legislature
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=6390c766a1ce581aa0053d69
Extracted: 2025-06-19T23:01:25.095126
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Maryland Department of Labor (MDL)
Division of Unemployment Insurance (DUI)
Part 2 – Unemployment Benefits
Report Dated November 15, 2022
Presentation to Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Gregory A. Hook, CPA
Paul R. Denz, CPA
Michael J. Murdzak, CPA
Lauren E. Franchak, CPA
December 6, 2022

--- Page 2 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Report Overview
 DUI administers the State’s Unemployment Insurance Program that includes
the following primary responsibilities:
• Collecting unemployment insurance tax contributions from employers
• Processing applications for, and disbursing unemployment benefits
 This segment of our presentation addresses our report on Part 2 of our audit,
which examined the processing of claimant applications and the
disbursement of unemployment benefits.
 Our Part 2 report contains 13 findings, of which 3 from the prior report are
repeated in the current report as 4 findings. Based on the findings included
in our Part 1 and Part 2 reports, we determined that DUI’s accountability and
compliance level was unsatisfactory in accordance with the rating system we
established in conformity with State law.
MDL - Division of Unemployment Insurance Page 2
Part 2 – Unemployment Benefits

--- Page 3 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
COVID–19 Impact and Response
 According to DUI records, in fiscal year 2021, unemployment insurance benefit
payments totaling approximately $8.8 billion were made to more than 642,000
claimants. The vast majority of these funds came from federal programs, such
as those provided under the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security Act.
 DUI awarded two emergency staffing contracts to assist with the increased
volume of unemployment insurance claims resulting from the COVID-19
pandemic:
• Augmenting DUI’s claims centers (amended to ultimately provide 1,975
staff totaling $356 million).
• Augmenting DUI’s adjudication staff (up to 675 supplemental staff based on
a contract totaling $70.9 million).
MDL - Division of Unemployment Insurance Page 3
Part 2 – Unemployment Benefits

--- Page 4 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Key Findings
 DUI did not conduct certain critical matches used to identify potentially
fraudulent or improper claims.
 DUI did not have comprehensive procedures to ensure the eligibility of
individuals filing claims from foreign Internet Protocol addresses (Repeat).
 DUI did not have procedures to help prevent and detect duplicate benefit
payments.
 DUI did not conduct timely verifications of income reported by applicants for
Pandemic Unemployment Assistance benefits; a temporary federal program
providing benefits to normally ineligible individuals, such as the self-
employed.
 DUI did not conduct required supervisory reviews of regular claims and
adjudications (Repeat), and did not have procedures to ensure that claims
processed by staffing vendor employees were subject to review.
MDL - Division of Unemployment Insurance Page 4
Part 2 – Unemployment Benefits

--- Page 5 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Key Findings (continued)
 DUI did not establish sufficient controls over reissued benefit debit cards,
and did not ensure the proper disposition of funds remaining on expired
cards (Repeat).
 DUI did not properly account for potentially fraudulent benefits totaling
$493.9 million that were removed from claimants’ benefit debit cards.
 DUI did not ensure that amounts disbursed from the Unemployment
Insurance Trust Fund were properly transferred to the bank account used to
make benefit payments, since a reconciliation between Fund and bank
records had not been performed since August 2020.
MDL - Division of Unemployment Insurance Page 5
Part 2 – Unemployment Benefits

--- Page 6 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Benefit Payments (Finding 1)
DUI did not conduct certain monthly or quarterly critical data matches it has
historically conducted between its records and other available independent
records to help detect benefit payments made to ineligible claimants and to
identify potential fraud; such as:
• active State employees from the State’s Central Payroll Bureau
• incarcerated individuals from the State’s Department of Public Safety and
Correctional Services
• deceased individuals from the Maryland Department of Health
 Between September 2020 and January 2021, DUI only performed one of nine
matches it has historically performed, and as of December 2021, two matches
had not been performed since March 2020.
 Matches that were performed between April 2020 and September 2020 used
incomplete data, which accounted for just $1.3 billion of the $8.4 billion in
claim payments for the period.
MDL - Division of Unemployment Insurance Page 6
Part 2 – Unemployment Benefits

--- Page 7 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Benefit Payments (Finding 1 continued)
 DUI management advised us that they could not conduct the aforementioned
matches at the time because of BEACON system deficiencies. Although DUI
was subsequently able to restart certain matches in BEACON, there was no
plan to retroactively conduct matches for the periods matches were not
performed.
 We conducted three matches for periods during which the matches were either
not performed by DUI, or the matches were performed, but did not include all
claims paid. We found:
• at least $22.6 million in payments to over 6,200 named recipients that
were active State employees when the benefits were paid.
• at least $7.1 million in payments to over 1,200 named recipients that were
incarcerated when the benefits were paid.
• at least $2.6 million in payments to 402 named recipients who were
deceased when the benefits were paid.
In all cases the named recipient did not necessarily receive the payment, but
may have been, for example, a victim of identify theft.
MDL - Division of Unemployment Insurance Page 7
Part 2 – Unemployment Benefits

--- Page 8 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Benefit Payments (Finding 2)
DUI did not have comprehensive procedures in place to ensure that individuals
filing for claims using a foreign IP address were eligible to receive benefits.
(Repeat Finding)
 Based on DUI records for the period from September 2017 through April
2020 (prior to implementation of BEACON), there were 3,724 claimants with
benefit payments totaling $3.6 million, whose weekly certifications were filed
from a foreign IP address.
 Although with the implementation of BEACON automated controls were added
to block certain foreign IP addresses, these controls did not block all foreign IP
addresses. Our analysis disclosed that, of the 3,724 claimants identified
above, the added controls in place as of March 2021 would not have blocked
988.
 At a minimum, individuals filing from a foreign IP address may be residing
outside the country and unavailable for work, which could affect their eligibility
for benefits.
MDL - Division of Unemployment Insurance Page 8
Part 2 – Unemployment Benefits

--- Page 9 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Benefit Payments (Finding 3)
DUI did not ensure claimants who were full-time students were eligible for
benefits, and that all claimants were enrolled in the Maryland Workforce
Exchange System, as required. (Repeat Finding)
 DUI did not obtain data to identify claimants who may not be eligible for
benefits because they were full-time students and were not available for work.
 DUI did not use available data in MABS to ensure that claimants had enrolled
in the Maryland Workforce Exchange System. Specifically, no verification was
performed from April 2017 until the Secretary of Labor suspended the
requirement in March 2020 due to COVID-19.
MDL - Division of Unemployment Insurance Page 9
Part 2 – Unemployment Benefits

--- Page 10 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Claims Processing (Finding 4)
DUI did not have procedures to help prevent and detect duplicate benefit
payments. Our analysis of BEACON records disclosed $43.3 million in potentially
duplicate payments made to 12,500 claimants between April 2020 and
December 2021. We could not determine that DUI had identified or investigated
these payments.
 Our further analysis of certain of these payments disclosed, for example, one
claimant who received 19 payments for one benefit week totaling $5,210,
and another who received 16 payments for one benefit week totaling $7,616.
These claimants should have received only $374 and $476, respectively, for
the applicable benefit week.
 Our analysis also disclosed that certain data in BEACON appeared to indicate
that duplicate payments had been made, but these results were not always
supported by other evidence. Consequently, we could not readily determine
how much of the aforementioned $43.3 million represented actual duplicate
payments.
MDL - Division of Unemployment Insurance Page 10
Part 2 – Unemployment Benefits

--- Page 11 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Claims Processing (Finding 5)
DUI did not conduct timely verifications of income reported by applicants for
Pandemic Unemployment Assistance (PUA) benefits. DUI paid benefits based on
the reported income, but required support from the applicant for subsequent
verification.
 According to DUI records, as of January 31, 2021, DUI had not verified
income for 40,265 of the 198,990 individuals who received PUA benefits
between May and November 2020, even though supporting documentation
had been submitted by the applicant.
 Most cases were verified by January 2022, but the delays resulted in certain
overpayments because of adjustments caused by discrepancies between the
reported income and the verified income. For example, the verification of
one claimant’s income 281 days after claim submission resulted in an
adjustment of the weekly benefit from $430 to $278. DUI could not readily
provide us with the total amount of overpayments identified as a result of
delayed verifications.
In addition, DUI did not ensure that manual adjustments processed by DUI and
contract employees were proper.
MDL - Division of Unemployment Insurance Page 11
Part 2 – Unemployment Benefits

--- Page 12 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Claims Processing (Finding 6)
Finding 6 - Required supervisory reviews of regular claims and adjudications
processed were not always performed. (Repeat Finding)
 One claims center had not conducted required reviews of adjudications since
December 2016, or required reviews of manual claims since October 2019.
 DUI did not ensure that claims processed by staffing vendor employees were
subject to review to ensure propriety.
 Output reports of manual wage entries could not be generated from BEACON
for verification purposes. Consequently, DUI was unable to ensure all manual
wage entries were subject to review, and we were unable to quantify the extent
of manual wage entries since the system was implemented.
MDL - Division of Unemployment Insurance Page 12
Part 2 – Unemployment Benefits

--- Page 13 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Claims Processing (Finding 7)
Finding 7 - DUI did not establish sufficient controls over reissued benefit debit
cards, and did not ensure the proper disposition (return to DUI or report as
unclaimed property) of funds remaining on expired cards. (Repeat Finding)
 354,445 debit cards were reissued during the period July 2017 through
January 2021.
 The reissued cards included 1,970 relating to 1,170 claimants, which were
reissued to an address not included in DUI’s unemployment insurance system.
 As of October 2020, there were approximately 30,000 cards that were expired
or never activated with a remaining value of $23.1 million.
MDL - Division of Unemployment Insurance Page 13
Part 2 – Unemployment Benefits

--- Page 14 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Claims Processing (Finding 8)
DUI did not properly account for potentially fraudulent benefits totaling $493.9
million that were removed from claimants’ benefit debit cards.
 In July 2020, DUI canceled debit cards for 46,986 claimants with benefits
totaling $493.9 million because the claims originated from out of State, and
accordingly were considered potentially fraudulent. 1 Applicable claimants
were instructed to provide documentation to support their identify and the
validity of their claim to have the claim reprocessed and repaid.
 DUI did not update BEACON to reflect the cancelation of these payments. As
a result, claimants who did not submit the requested documentation
received overpayment notices even though they never received the funds. In
addition, DUI was unable to provide documentation of how much, if any, of
the $493.9 million was subsequently repaid to claimants.
1 – Amount deemed potentially fraudulent pending receipt of claimant documentation. Due to incomplete records, we were
unable to determine the existence or amount of actual losses.
MDL - Division of Unemployment Insurance Page 14
Part 2 – Unemployment Benefits

--- Page 15 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Unemployment Insurance Trust Fund (Finding 9)
DUI did not ensure amounts disbursed from the Unemployment Insurance Trust
Fund were properly transferred to the bank account used to make benefit
payments. Specifically, as of May 2021, DUI had not performed a reconciliation
of its record of Trust Fund activity to the corresponding bank records since
August 2020.
 Disbursements from the Trust Fund totaled approximately $5.0 billion during
the period from October 2020 through May 2021 and are generally made
daily.
 In response to our inquiries, in May 2021 DUI prepared the reconciliation for
September 2020, which showed unresolved reconciling items totaling
approximately $81.4 million dating back to 2019.
MDL - Division of Unemployment Insurance Page 15
Part 2 – Unemployment Benefits

--- Page 16 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Cybersecurity (Findings 10 - 13)
Redacted cybersecurity-related findings.
See confidential addendum.
MDL - Division of Unemployment Insurance Page 16
Part 2 – Unemployment Benefits

--- Page 17 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Conclusions
DUI should:
• Require the BEACON vendor to promptly resolve system deficiencies noted in
our report;
• Conduct all matches for periods not performed to identify improper benefit
payments;
• Continue to develop automated controls to block foreign IP addresses;
• Identify and take corrective action for all duplicate payments, including those
noted in our report;
• Ensure that critical applicant data, such as income, is verified and accurately
adjusted if necessary in a timely manner;
• Ensure that all required supervisory reviews of claims processed and
adjudications completed are conducted on a timely basis;
• Ensure the propriety of all reissued benefit payments and the proper
disposition of funds remaining on expired cards and cards never activated;
• Ensure that all transactions impacting claimant accounts are properly
recorded in BEACON; and
• Prepare periodic reconciliations on a timely basis of its record of Trust Fund
activity to the corresponding bank records, with resolution of any differences.
MDL - Division of Unemployment Insurance Page 17
Part 2 – Unemployment Benefits