Title: Maryland Technology Development Corporation
Date: 01/06/2023
Type: Fiscal Compliance
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=63b854dda1ce580cfc8bd955
Extracted: 2025-06-19T23:02:26.717881
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Audit Report
Maryland Technology Development Corporation
January 2023
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Senator Clarence K. Lam, M.D. (Senate Chair) Delegate Mark S. Chang (House Chair)
Senator Malcolm L. Augustine Delegate Steven J. Arentz
Senator Adelaide C. Eckardt Delegate Nicholas P. Charles II
Senator George C. Edwards Delegate Andrea Fletcher Harrison
Senator Katie Fry Hester Delegate Trent M. Kittleman
Senator Cheryl C. Kagan Delegate Carol L. Krimm
Senator Benjamin F. Kramer Delegate David Moon
Senator Cory V. McCray Delegate Julie Palakovich Carr
Senator Justin D. Ready Delegate Elizabeth G. Proctor
Senator Craig J. Zucker Delegate Geraldine Valentino-Smith
To Obtain Further Information
Office of Legislative Audits
The Warehouse at Camden Yards
351 West Camden Street, Suite 400
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Phone: 410-946-5900
Maryland Relay: 711
TTY: 410-946-5401 · 301-970-5401
E-mail: OLAWebmaster@ola.state.md.us
Website: www.ola.state.md.us
To Report Fraud
The Office of Legislative Audits operates a Fraud Hotline to report fraud, waste, or abuse involving State
of Maryland government resources. Reports of fraud, waste, or abuse may be communicated anonymously
by a toll-free call to 1-877-FRAUD-11, by mail to the Fraud Hotline, c/o Office of Legislative Audits, or
through the Office’s website.
Nondiscrimination Statement
The Department of Legislative Services does not discriminate on the basis of age, ancestry, color, creed,
marital status, national origin, race, religion, gender, gender identity, sexual orientation, or disability in the
admission or access to its programs, services, or activities. The Department’s Information Officer has been
designated to coordinate compliance with the nondiscrimination requirements contained in Section 35.107
of the United States Department of Justice Regulations. Requests for assistance should be directed to the
Information Officer at 410-946-5400 or 410-970-5400.

--- Page 3 ---
January 6, 2023
Senator Clarence K. Lam, M.D., Senate Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Delegate Mark S. Chang, House Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Members of Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Annapolis, Maryland
Ladies and Gentlemen:
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the Maryland Technology
Development Corporation (TEDCO) for the period beginning April 11, 2018 and
ending March 31, 2022. TEDCO provides certain financial assistance to early-
stage technology businesses, funds development and patenting of new
technologies at research universities, and promotes State-funded stem cell
research and cures through grants to private and public entities in the State.
Additionally, TEDCO manages the Maryland Venture Fund, which provides
financial assistance to early-stage technology businesses through equity
investments for the purpose of encouraging the growth of the Maryland
technology sector and the Maryland economy as a whole. TEDCO also provides
research and mentoring resources to entrepreneurs trying to establish start-up
companies in Maryland.
Our audit did not disclose any findings that warrant mention in this report.
We wish to acknowledge TEDCO’s efforts to satisfactorily address the three
findings contained in our preceding audit report. We also wish to acknowledge
the cooperation extended to us during the audit by TEDCO.
Respectfully submitted,
Gregory A. Hook, CPA
Legislative Auditor

--- Page 4 ---
2

--- Page 5 ---
Background Information
Agency Responsibilities
The Maryland Technology Development Corporation (TEDCO) is a public
instrumentality of the State that helps businesses get started and grow through the
commercialization of technology developed in Maryland by university
researchers, the private sector, and federal laboratories. TEDCO seeks to create
and sustain businesses, and create jobs in technology-related industry throughout
all regions of the State. In addition, TEDCO’s responsibility was expanded in
fiscal year 2016 when the Maryland Venture Fund, which provides capital
through equity investments to qualifying early-stage technology companies, was
transferred to TEDCO from the Department of Commerce. TEDCO is governed
by a 19-member1 Board of Directors, which includes the Secretary of the
Department of Commerce. Four of the members are appointed by the President of
the Maryland Senate and the Speaker of the Maryland House of Delegates (2
each). The remaining 14 members are appointed to the Board by the Governor
with the advice and consent of the Maryland Senate.
To achieve its goals, TEDCO uses several available financing initiatives and
programs, which according to its fiscal year 2022 Annual Report, were broadly
categorized as Technology Transfer and Commercialization, Technology
Incubator Program, Entrepreneur and Ecosystem Empowerment, Federal
Laboratory Technology Initiatives, Maryland Stem Cell Research Fund, and
Maryland Venture Fund. Each of these functional categories includes various
purpose specific initiatives and programs, which provide, for example, financial
assistance to early-stage technology businesses, funding to promote the
development and patenting of new technologies at research universities, and
funding to private and public entities in the State to promote State-funded stem
cell research and cures. In addition, beginning in October 2017, TEDCO
implemented a program with the specific purpose of making and managing
certain investments on behalf of the Board of Trustees of the Maryland State
Retirement and Pension System (MSRPS).
1 Legislation passed during the audit period added an additional four members, which are included
in this total.
3

--- Page 6 ---
Financial Statement Audits and Financial Activity
In accordance with the Economic Development Article, Section 10-414 of the
Annotated Code of Maryland, TEDCO engaged an independent certified public
accounting firm to perform audits of its financial statements for the fiscal years
ended June 30, 2019, 2020, 2021, and 2022. In the related audit reports, the firm
stated that TEDCO’s financial statements presented fairly, in all material respects,
the financial position of TEDCO, its changes in financial position, and its cash
flows for the years then ended in accordance with accounting principles generally
accepted in the United States of America.
According to its audited
financial statements,
TEDCO’s fiscal year 2022
expenses, primarily funded
with State general funds,
totaled approximately $22.7
million (see Figure 1).
TEDCO’s fiscal year 2022
net operating income
totaled $3.2 million and, as
of June 30, 2022, its net
position was $118.3
million, an increase of $3.7
million since fiscal year
2018.
In addition, TEDCO maintains separate financial statements for investments made
and managed on behalf of MSRPS, which are subject to a separate independent
audit conducted by TEDCO’s certified public accounting firm. According to this
program’s audited financial statements, TEDCO was managing investments for
MSRPS with an estimated value totaling $6.5 million as of June 30, 2022.
4

--- Page 7 ---
Referral of Former Management Employee to the State Ethics
Commission
TEDCO advised us that a management employee who resigned effective July
2019 was subsequently hired as a senior manager by a third party consulting firm,
which, prior to the employee’s resignation, was under contract with TEDCO for
advisory services. Prior to resigning, this employee terminated the contract
between TEDCO and the firm effective on the employee’s resignation date.
There was no documentation that the employee informed TEDCO’s remaining
management or legal counsel that the contract would be terminated.
Although no significant financial impact to TEDCO was identified as a result of
the termination of this contract, we considered this situation questionable since
the related contract with this third-party consultant had been executed in January
2018 by the same employee without being subject to a competitive procurement
process. In October 2019, TEDCO’s legal counsel, at the request of TEDCO’s
management at that time, referred this matter to the State Ethics Commission.
Referral of a matter to the Commission does not mean that a violation took place.
Any final decision as to whether violations of State ethics laws did or did not
occur would ultimately be made by the Commission.
Security Incident and Theft
TEDCO was the victim of an information technology (IT) security incident which
resulted in the theft of $75,000 through the improper redirection of two electronic
payments ($37,500 each) in April and May of 2021. These funds were intended
as investments awarded to recipients under the Maryland Innovation Initiative
(MII)2. When the intended recipients notified TEDCO that the funds were not
received, TEDCO contacted the applicable bank and was able to recover
approximately $5,000 of the $75,000.
In response to this theft, TEDCO contracted with an IT consultant to perform an
investigation to determine the conditions and causes that resulted in the breach
and theft. The consultant identified and reported to TEDCO the cause and the
methodology used to perpetuate the theft. TEDCO also conducted a review of
certain other payments, and concluded that the theft was limited to these two
payments. In addition, TEDCO created a corrective action plan that included a
number of measures intended to strengthen its information technology controls.
2 MII was created as a partnership between the State of Maryland and Maryland academic research
institutions. The program is designed to promote commercialization of research conducted in the
partnership universities and leverage each institution’s strengths.
5

--- Page 8 ---
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report
Our audit included a review to determine the current status of the three findings
contained in our preceding audit report dated February 5, 2019. As disclosed in
Figure 2 below, we determined that TEDCO satisfactorily addressed these
findings.
Figure 2
Status of Preceding Findings
Preceding Implementation
Finding Description
Finding Status
TEDCO had not adopted regulations for direct equity investments
through the Maryland Venture Fund (MVF), as required by State
Finding 1 Not repeated
law, and documentation was lacking to support how certain
investments promoted economic development in the State.
TEDCO created a three member advisory committee related to the
MVF to provide investment advice without establishing adequate
policies and procedures regarding the committee’s membership to
Finding 2 Not repeated
prevent potential conflicts of interest. We found that the
committee included members associated with certain venture firms
that received funding from the MVF.
TEDCO’s monitoring of third-party venture firms receiving
Finding 3 funding through the MVF’s Invest Maryland Program was not Not repeated
sufficient.
Findings and Recommendations
Our audit did not disclose any significant deficiencies in the design or operation
of TEDCO’s internal controls. Our audit also did not disclose any significant
instances of noncompliance with applicable laws, rules, or regulations. Findings
that did not warrant inclusion in this report were separately communicated to
TEDCO.
A draft copy of this report was provided to TEDCO. Since there are no
recommendations in this report, a written response was not necessary.
6

--- Page 9 ---
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the Maryland Technology
Development Corporation (TEDCO) for the period beginning April 11, 2018 and
ending March 31, 2022. The audit was conducted in accordance with generally
accepted government auditing standards. Those standards require that we plan
and perform the audit to obtain sufficient, appropriate evidence to provide a
reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives.
We believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings
and conclusions based on our audit objectives.
As prescribed by the State Government Article, Section 2-1221 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, the objectives of this audit were to examine TEDCO’s
financial transactions, records, and internal control, and to evaluate its compliance
with applicable State laws, rules, and regulations.
In planning and conducting our audit, we focused on the major financial-related
areas of operations based on assessments of significance and risk. The areas
addressed by the audit included administration of certain grants and investments
(primarily related to the Maryland Innovation Initiative, the Maryland Stem Cell
Research Fund, and the Maryland Venture Fund), disbursements, and payroll.
We also determined the status of the findings contained in our preceding audit
report.
Our audit did not include an evaluation of internal controls over compliance with
federal laws and regulations for federal assistance programs and an assessment of
TEDCO’s compliance with those laws and regulations because TEDCO engages
an independent certified public accounting firm to audit such programs as
appropriate.
Our assessment of internal controls was based on agency procedures and controls
in place at the time of our fieldwork. Our tests of transactions and other auditing
procedures were generally focused on the transactions occurring during our audit
period of April 11, 2018 to March 31, 2022, but may include transactions before
or after this period as we considered necessary to achieve our audit objectives.
To accomplish our audit objectives, our audit procedures included inquiries of
appropriate personnel, inspections of documents and records, tests of transactions,
and to the extent practicable, observations of TEDCO’s operations. Generally,
transactions were selected for testing based on auditor judgment, which primarily
considers risk, the timing or dollar amount of the transaction, or the significance
of the transaction to the area of operation reviewed. As a matter of course, we do
7

--- Page 10 ---
not normally use sampling in our tests, so unless otherwise specifically indicated,
neither statistical nor non-statistical audit sampling was used to select the
transactions tested. Therefore, unless sampling is specifically indicated in the
finding, the results from any tests conducted or disclosed by us cannot be used to
project those results to the entire population from which the test items were
selected.
We also performed various data extracts of pertinent information from the State’s
Financial Management Information System (such as revenue and expenditure
data). These extracts are performed as part of ongoing internal processes
established by the Office of Legislative Audits and were subject to various tests to
determine data reliability. We determined that the data extracted from this source
were sufficiently reliable for the purposes the data were used during this audit.
We also extracted data from TEDCO’s automated financial accounting system for
the purpose of testing related accounting transactions. We performed various
tests of the relevant data and determined that the data were sufficiently reliable for
the purposes the data were used during this audit. Finally, we performed other
auditing procedures that we considered necessary to achieve our audit objectives.
The reliability of data used in this report for background or informational
purposes was not assessed.
TEDCO’s management is responsible for establishing and maintaining effective
internal control. Internal control is a process designed to provide reasonable
assurance that objectives pertaining to the reliability of financial records;
effectiveness and efficiency of operations, including safeguarding of assets; and
compliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations are achieved. As
provided in Government Auditing Standards, there are five components of
internal control: control environment, risk assessment, control activities,
information and communication, and monitoring. Each of the five components,
when significant to the audit objectives, and as applicable to TEDCO, were
considered by us during the course of this audit.
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate.
Our reports are designed to assist the Maryland General Assembly in exercising
its legislative oversight function and to provide constructive recommendations for
improving State operations. As a result, our reports generally do not address
activities we reviewed that are functioning properly.
8

--- Page 11 ---
AUDIT TEAM
Mark S. Hagenbuch, CPA
Audit Manager
Edward J. Welsh, CFE
Senior Auditor
Benjamin H. Straube
Staff Auditor