Title: Maryland Teachers and State Employees Supplemental Retirement Plans
Date: 01/05/2023
Type: Fiscal Compliance
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=63b82648a1ce580cfc8b3f89
Extracted: 2025-06-19T23:02:43.866684
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Audit Report
Maryland Teachers and State Employees Supplemental
Retirement Plans
January 2023
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Senator Clarence K. Lam, M.D. (Senate Chair) Delegate Mark S. Chang (House Chair)
Senator Malcolm L. Augustine Delegate Steven J. Arentz
Senator Adelaide C. Eckardt Delegate Nicholas P. Charles II
Senator George C. Edwards Delegate Andrea Fletcher Harrison
Senator Katie Fry Hester Delegate Trent M. Kittleman
Senator Cheryl C. Kagan Delegate Carol L. Krimm
Senator Benjamin F. Kramer Delegate David Moon
Senator Cory V. McCray Delegate Julie Palakovich Carr
Senator Justin D. Ready Delegate Elizabeth G. Proctor
Senator Craig J. Zucker Delegate Geraldine Valentino-Smith
To Obtain Further Information
Office of Legislative Audits
The Warehouse at Camden Yards
351 West Camden Street, Suite 400
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Phone: 410-946-5900
Maryland Relay: 711
TTY: 410-946-5401 · 301-970-5401
E-mail: OLAWebmaster@ola.state.md.us
Website: www.ola.state.md.us
To Report Fraud
The Office of Legislative Audits operates a Fraud Hotline to report fraud, waste, or abuse involving State
of Maryland government resources. Reports of fraud, waste, or abuse may be communicated anonymously
by a toll-free call to 1-877-FRAUD-11, by mail to the Fraud Hotline, c/o Office of Legislative Audits, or
through the Office’s website.
Nondiscrimination Statement
The Department of Legislative Services does not discriminate on the basis of age, ancestry, color, creed,
marital status, national origin, race, religion, gender, gender identity, sexual orientation, or disability in the
admission or access to its programs, services, or activities. The Department’s Information Officer has been
designated to coordinate compliance with the nondiscrimination requirements contained in Section 35.107
of the United States Department of Justice Regulations. Requests for assistance should be directed to the
Information Officer at 410-946-5400 or 410-970-5400.

--- Page 3 ---
January 5, 2023
Senator Clarence K. Lam, M.D., Senate Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Delegate Mark S. Chang, House Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Members of Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Annapolis, Maryland
Ladies and Gentlemen:
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the Maryland Teachers and State
Employees Supplemental Retirement Plans (MSRP) for the period beginning
February 12, 2018 and ending May 15, 2022. MSRP is responsible for
supervising and administering the State’s voluntary tax sheltered income deferral
plans for State employees and certain employees of local boards of education and
municipalities.
Our audit disclosed that MSRP did not have sufficient controls over
disbursements made from its custodial bank account, which had a balance totaling
$831.5 million as of December 31, 2021. Two employees had the ability to direct
the bank to make disbursements from the account without independent review and
approval, and MSRP did not verify the propriety of disbursements made from this
account on behalf of investment managers. In addition, MSRP did not reconcile
its employee payroll records generated by the State’s Central Payroll Bureau,
which reflected actual payments made, with the corresponding State Personnel
System reports of the amounts that should have been paid based on employee
time and salary data entered into the system.
Finally, our audit also included a review to determine the status of the two
findings contained in our preceding audit report. We determined that MSRP
satisfactorily addressed one of the findings. The remaining finding is repeated in
this report.
MSRP’s response to this audit is included as an appendix to this report. We

--- Page 4 ---
reviewed the response to our findings and related recommendations, and have
concluded that the corrective actions identified are sufficient to address all audit
issues.
We wish to acknowledge the cooperation extended to us during the audit by
MSRP. We also wish to acknowledge MSRP’s willingness to address the audit
issues and implement appropriate corrective actions.
Respectfully submitted,
Gregory A. Hook, CPA
Legislative Auditor
2

--- Page 5 ---
Background Information
Agency Responsibilities
Title 35 of the State Personnel and Pensions Article of the Annotated Code of
Maryland provides that the Board of Trustees of the Maryland Teachers and State
Employees Supplemental Retirement Plans (MSRP) is responsible for the
supervision and administration of the State’s three voluntary tax sheltered income
deferral plans for State employees and certain employees of local boards of
education and municipalities. The Board consists of nine members appointed by
the Governor. The deferral plans consist of the Deferred Compensation Plan, the
Tax Sheltered Annuity Plan (for employees of State and local educational
institutions), and the Savings and Investment Plan, as permitted under Sections
457, 403(b), and 401(k) of the Internal Revenue Code, respectively.
Title 32 of the State Personnel and Pensions Article of the Annotated Code of
Maryland authorizes employer matching contributions of up to $600 per
participant each fiscal year, if appropriated, for State Employees’ Alternate
Contributory Pension Plan members who elect to contribute to the supplemental
retirement plans. These employer matching contributions are maintained in a
fourth plan administered by MSRP, the Match Plan and Trust, which is a defined
contribution matching plan as permitted under Section 401(a) of the Internal
Revenue Code.
The assets of MSRP’s four plans are held in trust for the plan participants. Except
for Roth contributions, income taxes are not due from participants in these
supplemental retirement plans on amounts deferred, on amounts contributed by
the State, and on income earned on these amounts; rather, distributions are subject
to federal, state, and local income taxes when received. Since Roth contributions
to both the 457 and 401(k) plans are made on an after-tax basis, eligible
distributions of Roth contributions and any earnings are not further taxed. Title
35 also provides that expenses incurred by MSRP for the implementation,
maintenance, and administration of these plans shall be paid from the
contributions to the plans or from the income or assets of the plans.
MSRP has designated a plan administrator for the supplemental retirement plans.
The plan administrator conducts the enrollment of all individuals who elect to
participate in the plans and acts as the agent of record in coordinating deferrals
between the State and the various investment carriers. A contractual agreement
has been executed between MSRP and the plan administrator that specifies the
rates to be assessed against participant account asset balances to cover related
administrative expenses incurred by or on behalf of the plan administrator. The
3

--- Page 6 ---
current contract period extends from August 15, 2019 through August 14, 2024,
which could be renewed through August 14, 2025. This agreement also includes
an option for plan participants to obtain investment advisory services from the
plan administrator for an additional fee.
Financial Statement Audits
MSRP engaged an independent certified public accounting firm to perform audits
of the plans’ financial statements for calendar years 2017, 2018, 2019, 2020 and
2021. In the related audit reports, the firm stated that these financial statements
presented fairly, in all material respects, the respective net position of MSRP and
the respective changes in its net position held in trust for deferred compensation
benefits in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United
States of America.
The audited financial statements of the plans indicate that, during calendar year
2021, amounts deferred by employees participating in the Deferred Compensation
Plan, the Tax Sheltered Annuity Plan, and the Savings and Investment Plan
totaled approximately $91.9 million, $2.6 million, and $95.8 million, respectively.
These financial statements further indicate that, as of December 31, 2021, the
assets available for plan benefits for the Deferred Compensation Plan, the Tax
Sheltered Annuity Plan, the Savings and Investment Plan, and the Match Plan and
Trust totaled approximately $2.4 billion, $131.3 million, $2.8 billion, and $257.8
million, respectively.
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report
Our audit included a review to determine the status of the two findings contained
in our preceding audit report dated July 13, 2018. As disclosed in Figure 1 on the
following page, we determined that MSRP satisfactorily addressed one of these
findings. The remaining finding is repeated in this report.
4

--- Page 7 ---
Figure 1
Status of Preceding Findings
Preceding Implementation
Finding Description
Finding Status
The Maryland Teachers and State Employees
Supplemental Retirement Plans (MSRP)
lacked assurance that the plan administrator
Not repeated
Finding 1 had sufficient protections against operational
and security risks including the security of
sensitive participant data maintained by the
administrator.
Controls had not been established to ensure the Repeated
Finding 2
propriety of MSRP’s payroll. (Current Finding 2)
Findings and Recommendations
Custodial Bank Account
Finding 1
The Maryland Supplemental Retirement Plans (MSRP) did not establish
sufficient controls over disbursements made from the bank account used to
hold certain investments and process related transactions.
Analysis
MSRP did not establish sufficient controls over disbursements made from the
bank account used to hold investments and process transactions for the investment
contract pool.1 The account can be accessed by authorized MSRP personnel and
third party investment managers who instruct the bank to make specified
disbursements, such as for paying bank fees and purchasing investments.
• Two MSRP employees had the ability to direct the bank to make
disbursements without independent review and approval. These employees
also had the ability to modify bank access, such as granting authority to make
disbursement requests.
1 MSRP provides the Investment Contract Pool as an option for participants with an investment
that emphasizes safety through preservation of principal and accrued income.
5

--- Page 8 ---
• MSRP did not verify the propriety of disbursements directed by investment
managers who routinely used the account to purchase and redeem
investments. MSRP management advised us that it did not perform a review
of these disbursements since it relied on the investment managers to perform
their fiduciary duty.
As a result of these conditions, improper disbursements could be made from the
bank account without timely detection. According to bank records, the market
value of the account (investments and cash) totaled $831.5 million as of
December 31, 2021. During calendar year 2021, there were 226 disbursements
totaling $80.0 million from the account.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that MSRP
a. use available bank records to ensure that all disbursements processed by
MSRP and investment managers are subject to independent review and
approval, at least on a test basis; and
b. remove the ability to modify bank access from employees who routinely
process transactions.
Payroll
Finding 2
MSRP did not ensure payroll payments processed by the State’s Central
Payroll Bureau (CPB) were consistent with the related MSRP time records
and salary information maintained within the Statewide Personnel System
(SPS).
Analysis
MSRP did not ensure payroll payments processed by CPB were consistent with
the related time records and salary information maintained within SPS.
Specifically, MSRP did not obtain payroll register reports from CPB and,
consequently, did not reconcile the total biweekly payroll payments from CPB for
its employees with total payroll as reflected in the payroll reports generated from
SPS. According to the State’s records, MSRP’s payroll expenditures totaled
approximately $1.3 million during fiscal year 2021.
Generally, employees recorded their work time directly into SPS for online
approval by their assigned supervisors. Payroll payments were processed by CPB
based on the approved work time for the pay period and the salary information
reflected in SPS. Our review disclosed that MSRP did not obtain the CPB payroll
6

--- Page 9 ---
registers to compare the total payroll paid with the SPS payroll summary reports
reflecting the amounts that should have been paid based on each employee’s
approved work time and salary information.
The reconciliations are important because certain unique SPS design features
often resulted in differences between the CPB and SPS reports. In this regard, we
obtained the CPB payroll register for the pay period ending December 28, 2021
and compared it to the SPS payroll summary report and noted that the total
payroll reflected in the CPB payroll register ($36,786) exceeded the SPS payroll
summary report total ($31,583) by $5,203. MSRP was not aware of the
difference, which we were subsequently able to resolve.
A similar condition was commented upon in our preceding audit report. In
response to that report, MSRP advised us that they obtained biweekly payroll
registers from CPB and reconciled them to the related SPS records, but MSRP
further advised that these reconciliations were discontinued in April 2020.
Recommendation 2
We recommend that MSRP obtain and compare CPB payroll registers for
each pay period with SPS summary reports, reconcile any differences, and
ensure that this reconciliation is documented (repeat).
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the Maryland Teachers and State
Employees Supplemental Retirement Plans (MSRP) for the period beginning
February 12, 2018 and ending May 15, 2022. The audit was conducted in
accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards. Those
standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient,
appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and
conclusions based on our audit objectives. We believe that the evidence obtained
provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit
objectives.
As prescribed by the State Government Article, Section 2-1221 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, the objectives of this audit were to examine MSRP’s financial
transactions, records, and internal control, and to evaluate its compliance with
applicable State laws, rules, and regulations.
In planning and conducting our audit, we focused on the major financial-related
areas of operations based on assessments of significance and risk. The areas
7

--- Page 10 ---
addressed by the audit included plan administration, purchasing and
disbursements, and payroll. We also determined the status of the findings
contained in our preceding audit report.
MSRP engaged an independent certified public accounting firm to perform audits
of the plans’ financial statements for calendar years 2017, 2018, 2019, 2020 and
2021. In the related audit reports, the firm stated that these financial statements
presented fairly, in all material respects, the respective net position of MSRP and
the changes in its net position held in trust for deferred compensation benefits in
accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of
America. This independent certified public accounting firm also performed
certain agreed upon procedures to assist in evaluating the administration of the
plans for calendar years 2018 through 2020. In the related agreed upon
procedures reports, no findings were identified by the firm for the procedures
performed. We have relied on the work of the independent accounting firm to
provide audit coverage of certain aspects of MSRP’s operations (contributions
from participating employees, asset fee collections, benefits paid). Our audit
procedures in these areas were generally limited, therefore, to obtaining a
sufficient basis for that reliance.
Our assessment of internal controls was based on agency procedures and controls
in place at the time of our fieldwork. Our tests of transactions and other auditing
procedures were generally focused on the transactions occurring during our audit
period of February 12, 2018 to May 15, 2022, but may include transactions before
or after this period as we considered necessary to achieve our audit objectives.
To accomplish our audit objectives, our audit procedures included inquiries of
appropriate personnel, inspections of documents and records, tests of transactions,
and to the extent practicable, observations of MSRP’s operations. Generally,
transactions were selected for testing based on auditor judgment, which primarily
considers risk, the timing or dollar amount of the transaction, or the significance
of the transaction to the area of operation reviewed. As a matter of course, we do
not normally use sampling in our tests, so unless otherwise specifically indicated,
neither statistical nor non-statistical audit sampling was used to select the
transactions tested. Therefore, unless sampling is specifically indicated in a
finding, the results from any tests conducted or disclosed by us cannot be used to
project those results to the entire population from which the test items were
selected.
We also performed various data extracts of pertinent information from the State’s
Financial Management Information System (such as revenue and expenditure
data) and the State’s Central Payroll Bureau (payroll data). The extracts are
8

--- Page 11 ---
performed as part of ongoing internal processes established by the Office of
Legislative Audits and were subject to various tests to determine data reliability.
We determined that the data extracted from these sources were sufficiently
reliable for the purposes the data were used during this audit. We also extracted
data from the Statewide Personnel System (SPS) for the purpose of evaluating
certain payroll data. We performed various tests of the relevant data and
determined that the data were sufficiently reliable for the purposes the data were
used during the audit. Finally, we performed other auditing procedures that we
considered necessary to achieve our audit objectives. The reliability of data used
in this report for background or informational purposes was not assessed.
MSRP’s management is responsible for establishing and maintaining effective
internal control. Internal control is a process designed to provide reasonable
assurance that objectives pertaining to the reliability of financial records;
effectiveness and efficiency of operations, including safeguarding of assets; and
compliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations are achieved. As
provided in Government Auditing Standards, there are five components of
internal control: control environment, risk assessment, control activities,
information and communication, and monitoring. Each of the five components,
when significant to the audit objectives, and as applicable to MSRP, were
considered by us during the course of this audit.
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate.
Our reports are designed to assist the Maryland General Assembly in exercising
its legislative oversight function and to provide constructive recommendations for
improving State operations. As a result, our reports generally do not address
activities we reviewed that are functioning properly.
This report includes findings relating to conditions that we consider to be
significant deficiencies in the design or operation of internal control that could
adversely affect MSRP’s ability to maintain reliable financial records, operate
effectively and efficiently, and/or comply with applicable laws, rules, and
regulations. Our audit did not disclose any significant instances of
noncompliance with applicable laws, rules, or regulations. Other less significant
findings were communicated to MSRP that did not warrant inclusion in this
report.
9

--- Page 12 ---
MSRP’s response to our findings and recommendations is included as an
appendix to this report. As prescribed in the State Government Article, Section 2-
1224 of the Annotated Code of Maryland, we will advise MSRP regarding the
results of our review of its response.
10

--- Page 13 ---
APPENDIX

--- Page 15 ---
Maryland Teachers and State Employees
Supplemental Retirement Plans
Agency Response Form
(Audit Period 02/12/2018 – 05/15/2022)
Custodial Bank Account
Finding 1
The Maryland Supplemental Retirement Plans (MSRP) did not establish sufficient controls
over disbursements made from the bank account used to hold certain investments and
process related transactions.
We recommend that MSRP
a. use available bank records to ensure that all disbursements processed by MSRP and
investment managers are subject to independent review and approval, at least on a test
basis; and
b. remove the ability to modify bank access from employees who routinely process
transactions.
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 1a Agree Estimated Completion Date: 10/31/2022
Please provide details of The Board has recently approved updated internal audit procedures to
corrective action or ensure that segregation of functions, quarterly internal testing, and
explain disagreement. compliance reporting are incorporated to ensure that banking
transactions are monitored. MSRP audit staff will perform functions
consistent with separation of approval and payment processes; and
ensure that contract compliance is thoroughly documented and reported
to the Board, at least annually.
Recommendation 1b Agree Estimated Completion Date: 1/31/2023
Please provide details of MSRP is in the process of reprocuring custodial banking services and
corrective action or intends to fully implement a process consistent with the OLA
explain disagreement. recommendation. The contract monitoring responsibilities will be
separate from payment and approval process.
Page 1 of 2

--- Page 16 ---
Maryland Teachers and State Employees
Supplemental Retirement Plans
Agency Response Form
(Audit Period 02/12/2018 – 05/15/2022)
Payroll
Finding 2
MSRP did not ensure payroll payments processed by the State’s Central Payroll Bureau
(CPB) were consistent with the related MSRP time records and salary information
maintained within the Statewide Personnel System (SPS).
We recommend that MSRP obtain and compare CPB payroll registers for each pay period
with SPS summary reports, reconcile any differences, and ensure that this reconciliation is
documented (repeat).
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide At the conclusion of the audit conducted in 2018, MSRP’s Executive
additional comments as Director submitted the agency’s audit response letter dated July 10, 2018, in
deemed necessary. which he addressed this initial finding. The letter indicated that the agency
had established a regular practice of obtaining Central Payroll Bureau
(“CPB”) payroll registers for each pay period and comparing and
reconciling them with the payroll summary reports obtained from the
Statewide Personnel System (“SPS”). In April of 2020, MSRP’s Executive
Director passed away and an Interim Executive Director was appointed and
served in this role from April of 2020 until early January of 2021, at which
time MSRP’s current Executive Director was appointed. The documented
history indicates that MSRP’s former Executive Director was personally
conducting the payroll reconciliations, and the process evidently failed to
continue once he passed away. MSRP notes that this reconciliation process
is necessitated by the inability of CPB’s mainframe system to integrate and
interface with the SPS Workday system.
Recommendation 2 Agree Estimated Completion Date: 5/17/2022
Please provide details of At the beginning of the current audit, this repeat finding was brought to the
corrective action or attention of MSRP’s Executive Director, who immediately contacted CPB
explain disagreement. and set up training for two MSRP staff members. System training was
completed on 5/17/2022. Due to delays within the CPB system, MSRP staff
was without the ability to begin conducting the regular reconciliations until
mid-July of 2022. Since then, the reconciliations have been completed on a
biweekly basis, and this is now a standard MSRP practice that will continue
until MSRP is notified that it is no longer necessary.
Page 2 of 2

--- Page 17 ---
A T
UDIT EAM
Mark S. Hagenbuch, CPA
Audit Manager
Tu N. Vuong
Senior Auditor
Timothy Moon
Staff Auditor