Title: Maryland Department of Labor - Division of Labor and Industry
Date: 01/06/2023
Type: Fiscal Compliance
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=63bed94ba1ce5813e4ef7d2f
Extracted: 2025-06-19T23:03:00.626597
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Audit Report
Maryland Department of Labor
Division of Labor and Industry
January 2023
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Senator Clarence K. Lam, M.D. (Senate Chair) Delegate Mark S. Chang (House Chair)
Senator Malcolm L. Augustine Delegate Steven J. Arentz
Senator Adelaide C. Eckardt Delegate Nicholas P. Charles II
Senator George C. Edwards Delegate Andrea Fletcher Harrison
Senator Katie Fry Hester Delegate Trent M. Kittleman
Senator Cheryl C. Kagan Delegate Carol L. Krimm
Senator Benjamin F. Kramer Delegate David Moon
Senator Cory V. McCray Delegate Julie Palakovich Carr
Senator Justin D. Ready Delegate Elizabeth G. Proctor
Senator Craig J. Zucker Delegate Geraldine Valentino-Smith
To Obtain Further Information
Office of Legislative Audits
The Warehouse at Camden Yards
351 West Camden Street, Suite 400
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Phone: 410-946-5900
Maryland Relay: 711
TTY: 410-946-5401 ꞏ 301-970-5401
E-mail: OLAWebmaster@ola.state.md.us
Website: www.ola.state.md.us
To Report Fraud
The Office of Legislative Audits operates a Fraud Hotline to report fraud, waste, or abuse involving State
of Maryland government resources. Reports of fraud, waste, or abuse may be communicated anonymously
by a toll-free call to 1-877-FRAUD-11, by mail to the Fraud Hotline, c/o Office of Legislative Audits, or
through the Office’s website.
Nondiscrimination Statement
The Department of Legislative Services does not discriminate on the basis of age, ancestry, color, creed,
marital status, national origin, race, religion, gender, gender identity, sexual orientation, or disability in the
admission or access to its programs, services, or activities. The Department’s Information Officer has been
designated to coordinate compliance with the nondiscrimination requirements contained in Section 35.107
of the United States Department of Justice Regulations. Requests for assistance should be directed to the
Information Officer at 410-946-5400 or 410-970-5400.

--- Page 3 ---
January 6, 2023
Senator Clarence K. Lam, M.D., Senate Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Delegate Mark S. Chang, House Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Members of Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Annapolis, Maryland
Ladies and Gentlemen:
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the Maryland Department of
Labor (MDL) – Division of Labor and Industry (DLI) for the period beginning
March 19, 2018 to February 15, 2022. DLI is responsible for the safety
inspections of boilers, pressure vessels, elevators, amusement rides, and railroads.
It also enforces certain protective labor laws and administers the Maryland
Occupational Safety and Health Act.
Our audit disclosed that DLI had not established adequate accountability and
control over certain collections. Specifically, these collections were not endorsed
prior to deposit, nor were they recorded and deposited in a timely manner.
Our audit also included a review to determine the status of the five findings
contained in our preceding audit report. While we determined that DLI made
improvement by satisfactorily addressing four of those prior findings, the
remaining finding is repeated in this report.
MDL’s response to this audit, on behalf of DLI, is included as an appendix to this
report. We reviewed the response and noted general agreement to our findings
and related recommendations. While there are other aspects of MDL’s response
which will require further clarification, we do not anticipate that these will require
the Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee’s attention to resolve.

--- Page 4 ---
We wish to acknowledge the cooperation extended to us during the course of this
audit by DLI. We also wish to acknowledge MDL’s and DLI’s willingness to
address the audit issues and implement appropriate corrective actions.
Respectfully submitted,
Gregory A. Hook, CPA
Legislative Auditor
2

--- Page 5 ---
Background Information
Agency Responsibilities
The Division of Labor and Industry (DLI) is a separate unit within the Maryland
Department of Labor.1 The mission of DLI is to protect and promote the health,
safety, and employment rights of Maryland citizens. Specifically, DLI
administers State laws that deal with employment issues, work-related safety and
health issues, and prevailing wages, as well as safety inspections of amusement
rides, boilers and pressure vessels, elevators, and railroads. According to the
State’s records, DLI’s expenditures for fiscal year 2021 totaled approximately
$18.6 million.
Organizational Change
Chapter 673, Laws of Maryland 2018, effective July 1, 2018, transferred the
Maryland Building Codes Administration and related duties from the Department
of Housing and Community Development to DLI, and was renamed the Buildings
Code Unit (BCU). The activities of the BCU since that date were subject to
review in this audit.
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report
Our audit included a review to determine the status of the five findings contained
in our preceding audit report dated November 28, 2018. As disclosed in Figure 1
on the following page, we determined that DLI satisfactorily addressed four of
these findings. The remaining finding is repeated in this report.
1 Chapter 91, Laws of Maryland 2019 renamed the Department of Labor, Licensing, and
Regulation to be the Maryland Department of Labor.
3

--- Page 6 ---
Figure 1
Status of Preceding Findings
Preceding Implementation
Finding Finding Description Status
The Division of Labor and Industry (DLI) did not
have a process to ensure the consistent issuance of
Finding 1
citations to, or assessments of allowed penalties on, Not repeated
entities that failed to obtain and pass the required
elevator, boiler, or pressure vessel inspections.
DLI lacked assurance that the outsourced
Finding 2 Not repeated
management system was protected against
operational and security risks.
DLI did not perform periodic reviews of user access
Finding 3
capabilities for the regulatory management system, Not repeated
resulting in several users with inappropriate access.
DLI was not effectively monitoring and enforcing
Finding 4 Not repeated
contractor compliance with the State’s prevailing
wage requirements.
Repeated
Finding 5 DLI had not established adequate accountability and
(Current Finding 1)
control over certain collections.
Findings and Recommendations
Cash Receipts
Finding 1
The Division of Labor and Industry (DLI) had not established adequate
accountability and control over certain collections.
Analysis
DLI had not established adequate accountability and control over certain
collections. Consequently, errors or other discrepancies could occur without
timely detection. According to its records, DLI receipts totaled approximately
$3.9 million during fiscal years 2021 and 2022. All DLI units use a lockbox for
receiving collections except one, which continues to receive checks directly due
to the submission of numerous documents that frequently accompany checks.
Our review of collections received by that unit, which totaled approximately $2.1
million in fiscal years 2021 and 2022 disclosed the following conditions:
4

--- Page 7 ---
 DLI did not restrictively endorse checks received. Specifically, checks were
processed by two employees and remotely deposited without being endorsed.
 Collections were not recorded immediately upon receipt. Rather, checks were
stored in a safe until the proper disposition of the checks could be determined2
before being recorded on a check log.
 Collections were not always deposited timely. Our review of collections
received for 10 days during fiscal years 2021 and 2022, totaling
approximately $229,000, disclosed that collections from 7 days, totaling
approximately $162,000, were deposited from 2 to 13 business days after
receipt. Collections for 3 of those 7 days totaling approximately $94,000 took
5 to 13 days.
Similar conditions regarding the lack of initial recordation and timely deposits
were commented upon in our two preceding audit reports.
The Comptroller of Maryland’s Accounting Procedures Manual requires the
establishment of sufficient internal controls over collections, including initial
accountability over collections received, timely deposits, and proper verification
of collections to deposit.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that DLI
a. record (repeat) and restrictively endorse checks immediately upon
receipt, and
b. deposit all collections in a timely manner (repeat).
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the Maryland Department of
Labor (MDL) – Division of Labor and Industry (DLI) for the period beginning
March 19, 2018 and ending February 15, 2022. The audit was conducted in
accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards. Those
standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient,
appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and
conclusions based on our audit objectives. We believe that the evidence obtained
2 As noted previously, checks for this unit are often accompanied by other documents. In certain
cases, a review of the check and documents may result in DLI returning the check to the sender
(this is referred to by us as determining the proper disposition of the check).
5

--- Page 8 ---
provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit
objectives.
As prescribed by the State Government Article, Section 2-1221 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, the objectives of this audit were to examine DLI’s financial
transactions, records, and internal control, and to evaluate its compliance with
applicable State laws, rules, and regulations.
In planning and conducting our audit, we focused on the major financial-related
areas of operations based on assessments of significance and risk. The areas
addressed by the audit included accounts receivable, cash receipts, and DLI’s
monitoring of compliance with certain laws pertaining to prevailing wages, as
well as safety inspections for boilers, pressure vessels, and elevators. We also
determined the status of the findings contained in our preceding audit report.
Our audit did not include certain support services provided to DLI by the MDL -
Office of the Secretary. These support services (such as procurement, payroll,
processing of invoices, maintenance of accounting records, and related fiscal
functions) are included in the scope of our audits of the Office of the Secretary.
Our assessment of internal controls was based on agency procedures and controls
in place at the time of our fieldwork. Our tests of transactions and other auditing
procedures were generally focused on the transactions occurring during our audit
period of March 19, 2018 to February 15, 2022, but may include transactions
before or after this period as we considered necessary to achieve our audit
objectives.
To accomplish our audit objectives, our audit procedures included inquiries of
appropriate personnel, inspections of documents and records, tests of transactions,
and to the extent practicable, observations of DLI’s operations. Generally,
transactions were selected for testing based on auditor judgment, which primarily
considers risk, the timing or dollar amount of the transaction, or the significance
of the transaction to the area of operation reviewed. As a matter of course, we do
not normally use sampling in our tests, so unless otherwise specifically indicated,
neither statistical nor non-statistical audit sampling was used to select the
transactions tested. Therefore, unless sampling is specifically indicated in a
finding, the results from any tests conducted or disclosed by us cannot be used to
project those results to the entire population from which the test items were
selected.
We also performed various data extracts of pertinent information from the State’s
Financial Management Information System (such as revenue and expenditure
6

--- Page 9 ---
data). The extracts are performed as part of ongoing internal processes
established by the Office of Legislative Audits and were subject to various tests to
determine data reliability. We determined that the data extracted from this source
were sufficiently reliable for the purposes the data were used during this audit.
We also extracted data from DLI’s automated systems used for monitoring safety
inspections and certified payrolls for prevailing wages for the purpose of testing
compliance with State laws and regulations. We performed various tests of the
relevant data and determined that the data were sufficiently reliable for the
purposes the data were used during the audit. Finally, we performed other
auditing procedures that we considered necessary to achieve our audit objectives.
The reliability of data used in this report for background or informational
purposes was not assessed.
DLI’s management is responsible for establishing and maintaining effective
internal control. Internal control is a process designed to provide reasonable
assurance that objectives pertaining to the reliability of financial records;
effectiveness and efficiency of operations, including safeguarding of assets; and
compliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations are achieved. As
provided in Government Auditing Standards, there are five components of
internal control: control environment, risk assessment, control activities,
information and communication, and monitoring. Each of the five components,
when significant to the audit objectives, and as applicable to DLI, were
considered by us during the course of this audit.
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate.
Our reports are designed to assist the Maryland General Assembly in exercising
its legislative oversight function and to provide constructive recommendations for
improving State operations. As a result, our reports generally do not address
activities we reviewed that are functioning properly.
This report includes a finding relating to conditions that we consider to be
significant deficiencies in the design or operation of internal control that could
adversely affect DLI’s ability to maintain reliable financial records, operate
effectively and efficiently, and/or comply with applicable laws, rules, and
regulations. These conditions are also significant instances of noncompliance
with applicable laws, rules, or regulations. Other less significant findings were
communicated to DLI that did not warrant inclusion in this report.
7

--- Page 10 ---
The response from MDL, on behalf of DLI, to our findings and recommendations
is included as an appendix to this report. As prescribed in the State Government
Article, Section 2-1224 of the Annotated Code of Maryland, we will advise MDL
regarding the results of our review of its response.
8

--- Page 11 ---
APPENDIX
Office of the Secretary
1100 N. Eutaw Street
Baltimore, MD 21201
December 14, 2022
Mr. Gregory A. Hook, CPA
Legislative Auditor
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
The Warehouse at Camden Yards
351 West Camden Street, Suite 400
Baltimore, MD 21201
Dear Mr. Hook,
The Department of Labor respectfully submits the enclosed response to the Office of
Legislative Auditor’s (OLA) report of the Division of Labor and Industry for a period beginning
March 18, 2018 and ending February 15, 2022.
For the one (1) audit finding, the department has initiated measures to strengthen internal
controls and improve processes to mitigate deficiencies identified in the November, 2022 audit
report. We also appreciate the OLA’s determination that the Division of Labor and Industry
satisfactorily addressed the other four findings from the 2018 audit.
The Department of Labor would like to thank the audit staff who conducted the audit of
the Division of Labor and Industry. Their professionalism and respect to our staff and processes
is much appreciated. The audit helped identify deficiencies and we are appreciative of their
diligence and dedication.
Should you have any questions, feel free to contact me or our Commissioner of Labor,
Matthew Helminiak.
Best Regards,
Tiffany P. Robinson
Secretary
LARRY HOGAN, GOVERNOR | BOYD K. RUTHERFORD, LT. GOVERNOR | TIFFANY P. ROBINSON, SECRETARY
1

--- Page 12 ---
Maryland Department of Labor
Division of Labor and Industry
Agency Response Form
Cash Receipts
Finding 1
The Division of Labor and Industry (DLI) had not established adequate accountability and
control over certain collections.
We recommend that DLI
a. record (repeat) and restrictively endorse checks immediately upon receipt, and
b. deposit all collections in a timely manner (repeat).
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 1a Agree Estimated Completion Date: 12/16/2022
Please provide details of We have purchased stamps for endorsement of the checks. The
corrective action or process requires endorsement to take place as soon as the check has
explain disagreement. been opened. Mail received after 2 pm will be processed the
following business day.
Recommendation 1b Agree Estimated Completion Date: 10/1/2022
Please provide details of
corrective action or We have started depositing checks within 24-48 hours of receipt.
explain disagreement.
Page 1 of 1

--- Page 13 ---
A T
UDIT EAM
Michael J. Murdzak, CPA
Audit Manager
Mindy R. Garrett
Senior Auditor
Kareem R. Jackson
Staff Auditor