Title: Maryland Center for School Safety
Date: 01/11/2023
Type: Fiscal Compliance
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=63c6b57fa1ce58177003b3d8
Extracted: 2025-06-19T23:03:18.779656
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Audit Report
Maryland Center for School Safety
January 2023
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Senator Clarence K. Lam, M.D. (Senate Chair) Delegate Jared Solomon (House Chair)
Senator Malcolm L. Augustine Delegate Steven J. Arentz
Senator Katie Fry Hester Delegate Nicholas P. Charles II
Senator Cheryl C. Kagan Delegate Andrea Fletcher Harrison
Senator Benjamin F. Kramer Delegate David Moon
Senator Cory V. McCray Delegate Julie Palakovich Carr
Senator Justin D. Ready Four Vacancies
Senator Craig J. Zucker
Two Vacancies
To Obtain Further Information
Office of Legislative Audits
The Warehouse at Camden Yards
351 West Camden Street, Suite 400
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Phone: 410-946-5900
Maryland Relay: 711
TTY: 410-946-5401 ꞏ 301-970-5401
E-mail: OLAWebmaster@ola.state.md.us
Website: www.ola.state.md.us
To Report Fraud
The Office of Legislative Audits operates a Fraud Hotline to report fraud, waste, or abuse involving State
of Maryland government resources. Reports of fraud, waste, or abuse may be communicated anonymously
by a toll-free call to 1-877-FRAUD-11, by mail to the Fraud Hotline, c/o Office of Legislative Audits, or
through the Office’s website.
Nondiscrimination Statement
The Department of Legislative Services does not discriminate on the basis of age, ancestry, color, creed,
marital status, national origin, race, religion, gender, gender identity, sexual orientation, or disability in the
admission or access to its programs, services, or activities. The Department’s Information Officer has been
designated to coordinate compliance with the nondiscrimination requirements contained in Section 35.107
of the United States Department of Justice Regulations. Requests for assistance should be directed to the
Information Officer at 410-946-5400 or 410-970-5400.

--- Page 3 ---
January 11, 2023
Senator Clarence K. Lam, M.D., Senate Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Delegate Jared Solomon, House Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Members of Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Annapolis, Maryland
Ladies and Gentlemen:
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the Maryland Center for School
Safety (MCSS) for the period beginning June 1, 2018 and ending April 15, 2022.
MCSS is responsible for collaborating with schools, educators, mental health
professionals, law enforcement, students, parents, State/local agencies, and
community and other organizations to provide a coordinated and comprehensive
approach to school safety in Maryland.
Our audit disclosed that MCSS did not ensure School Resource Officer (SRO)
grant payments were properly supported and subject to independent review.
During fiscal years 2020 through 2022, SRO grant payments totaled $8.0 million.
In addition, MCSS had not developed written policies and procedures for the
operation of the Safe Schools Maryland tip line to ensure all tips were addressed
in a timely and comprehensive manner. The tip line provides students, teachers,
school staff members, parents, and the general public with an anonymous method
to report various school safety issues.
MCSS’ response to this audit is included as an appendix to this report. We
reviewed the response to our findings and related recommendations, and have
concluded that the corrective actions identified are sufficient to address all audit
issues.

--- Page 4 ---
We wish to acknowledge the cooperation extended to us during the audit by
MCSS and its willingness to address the audit issues and implement appropriate
corrective actions.
Respectfully submitted,
Gregory A. Hook, CPA
Legislative Auditor
2

--- Page 5 ---
Background Information
Agency Responsibilities
The Maryland Center for School Safety (MCSS) is responsible for collaborating
with schools, educators, mental health professionals, law enforcement, students,
parents, State/local agencies, and community and other organizations to provide a
coordinated and comprehensive approach to school safety in Maryland. MCSS
was created in July 2013 and was originally budgeted within the Department of
State Police. Effective June 1, 2018, Chapter 30, Laws of Maryland 2018
established the MCSS as an independent unit of State government within the
Maryland State Department of Education. MCSS operates under the direction of
a six member governing board (the School Safety Subcabinet).
MCSS shares information on best practices, programs, and resources; provides
grants, technical assistance, and training; collects, analyzes, and integrates
statewide data; and promotes interagency efforts to ensure safe schools across
Maryland. MCSS is also responsible for reviewing and commenting on school
emergency plans, providing training for School Resource Officers and school
security employees, and operating a school safety tip line.1
Furthermore, MCSS administers the Safe Schools Fund, a special non-lapsing
fund, which is used to provide grants to local school systems to enhance school
safety, including the Safe Schools Fund Grant and the School Resource Officer
Grant. MCSS also received general funds to provide other grants such as the Hate
Crimes Grant which funds local school systems, non-public and private schools,
and childcare centers determined to be at risk of hate crime incidents. Beginning
in fiscal year 2022, MCSS also administered the School Safety Grant Program
and the Nonpublic School Security Improvement Grant which were previously
administered by the Interagency Commission on School Construction.
According to the State’s records, during fiscal year 2022, MCSS’ operating
expenditures totaled approximately $14.0 million, including $11.6 million for
grants. A portion of the grant expenditures ($2.8 million) was funded by the Safe
Schools Fund which had a balance of approximately $3.9 million as of June 30,
2022.
1 The tip line can be accessed via several methods, including a website at
https://schoolsafety.maryland.gov and by phone at 833-MD-B-SAFE.
3

--- Page 6 ---
Findings and Recommendations
School Resource Officer Grants
Finding 1
The Maryland Center for School Safety (MCSS) did not ensure that School
Resource Officer (SRO) Grant payments were properly supported and
subject to independent supervisory review.
Analysis
MCSS did not ensure that SRO Grant payments were properly supported and
subject to supervisory review. MCSS began administering the SRO Grant in
fiscal year 2020 to reimburse local education agencies (LEAs) and local law
enforcement agencies for
SRO costs, including Figure 1
certain related costs. As SRO Grant Payments
noted in Figure 1, according Fiscal Year 2020 to 2022
to MCSS’ records, SRO (dollar amounts in millions)
Grant payments totaled $8.0
Fiscal Number of
million during fiscal years Awards Payments
Year Grantees *
2020 through 2022.
2020 25 $7.5 $2.3
2021 23 4.7 3.1
Grant Payments Were Not
2022 22 5.2 2.6
Supported
Total 70 $17.4 $8.0
MCSS did not obtain
documentation to support * Certain jurisdictions received multiple awards (such as
grants to multiple local law enforcement agencies)
the propriety of payments while other jurisdictions did not apply for SRO grants.
made to grantees and to
Source: MCSS Records
ensure the grantees only
claimed allowable costs. MCSS’ agreement for the SRO Grant specified
allowable costs (such as salaries, equipment, and training) and unallowable costs
(such as attending conferences, purchasing weapons and vehicles, and travel).
During fiscal year 2020, grantees submitted reimbursement requests directly to
the Maryland State Department of Education (MSDE) for payment; however,
MCSS did not require grantees to provide supporting documentation, nor did
MCSS approve these payments. Consequently, neither MSDE nor MCSS had
documentation to support the amounts paid. We requested MCSS to obtain
supporting documentation from two grantees for fiscal year 2020 grant payments
totaling $498,670. Our review of the documentation received from these grantees
disclosed that it did not include sufficient specificity to support the amounts paid.
For example, one grantee provided copies of invoices from the local police
4

--- Page 7 ---
department for officer payroll costs totaling $249,512. However, the invoices did
not include, and the grantee did not submit documentation such as the names of
officers who provided the safety coverage and the specific schools where the
coverage was provided supporting that the costs related to SRO Grant activities.
Subsequent to fiscal year 2020, MCSS advised that it started to request support
from grantees; however, we found the documentation provided by grantees did
not consistently include adequate support, as noted above for fiscal year 2020.
Specifically, our test of 18 payments totaling $2.3 million made to 8 grantees
during the period from July, 2021 to April, 2022 disclosed that all 18 lacked
sufficient supporting documentation. For example, for one payment to an LEA
totaling $902,000 MCSS only received payroll reports for 13 employees with
gross earnings totaling $593,000. MCSS was not aware that the remaining
$309,000 in charges were not supported by the reports and it could not explain the
difference. In response to our inquiries, MCSS contacted the LEA and was
advised that the $309,000 represented fringe benefits for the 13 employees, but
the LEA did not provide documentation to support this assertion. In addition,
MCSS did not request or receive timesheets for the 13 employees to ensure the
payroll charges were related to school safety activity.
Grant Payments were not Subject to Independent Supervisory Review
Grant payments were not subject to supervisory review and approval. MCSS
advised us that fiscal year 2020 and subsequent years’ payments generally only
required an independent supervisory review and approval if the grant payment
was in excess of $100,000. Further, when an approval was required, the related
review was limited to ensuring that the total payments to the grantee did not
exceed the grant award, and there was no review of the supporting documentation
submitted by the grantee. Finally, we found that the review and approval process
was not always documented. Specifically, our test of nine payments over
$100,000 disclosed that seven payments totaling $967,000 lacked documentation
of an independent supervisory approval.
Recommendation 1
We recommend MCSS
a. ensure that appropriate and sufficient documentation is received to
support all grant payments, including the payments noted above;
b. perform a documented independent supervisory review to ensure the
propriety of all grant payments; and
c. pursue recovery from grantees for payments that cannot be supported,
including those noted above.
5

--- Page 8 ---
Safe Schools Maryland
Background
MCSS is responsible for Safe Schools Maryland, an anonymous tip line to report
various school safety issues including bullying, assault, planned school attack,
general school accountability, and drugs. Tips can be submitted online, by phone,
or via a mobile application to facilitate anonymous reporting. According to its
records, MCSS
received 1,746
tips from the
inception of the
tip line in
October 2018
through May
2022 (see Figure
2).
MCSS executed
an interagency
agreement with
the Maryland Department of Emergency Management (MDEM) to operate the tip
line. The initial agreement covered the period October 2018 through June 2021,
and a second agreement extended the period through June 30, 2025. Under the
agreement, MDEM personnel are responsible for recording the tips and
forwarding them to the appropriate entities including school systems or law
enforcement agencies, and documenting the actions taken on MCSS’ automated
system. According to MCSS records, MCSS has paid MDEM approximately
$298,000 through June 30, 2022 to operate this tip line.
6

--- Page 9 ---
Finding 2
MCSS had not developed written policies and procedures for the operation
of the Safe Schools Maryland tip line to ensure all tips were addressed in a
timely and comprehensive manner.
Analysis
MCSS had not developed written policies and procedures for the Safe Schools
Maryland tip line to ensure all tips were addressed in a timely and comprehensive
manner. Such procedures2 should include critical processes to be followed by
MCSS and MDEM including:
 MDEM procedures to determine the appropriate entity (for example, school or
law enforcement) to which to communicate tips, including potential issues
that may arise impacting timely reporting of tips for investigation, such as if
the designated contact is not available.
 Methodology to be used by schools for prioritizing the investigation of tips.
 MDEM time and reporting requirements, such as time requirements for
communicating tips to appropriate entities and for following up to determine
the tip investigation status or resolution.
 MCSS and MDEM monitoring policies and procedures, such as requiring a
periodic documented review of the status of all tips, including tips with a
status recorded as closed.
MCSS advised us that it has an informal monitoring process to periodically
review the information recorded on the automated system; however, MCSS could
not document the extent and nature of this review. For example, MCSS did not
perform a documented periodic review of the status of tips received to ensure all
tips were addressed in a timely and comprehensive manner. We judgmentally
selected 12 tips received by MDEM during the period January 2020 through April
2022 that we considered to be critical events such as planned school attacks, child
abuse, or sexual assault. Based on our review of available documentation, these
tips appeared to have been addressed in a timely and comprehensive manner.
2 We reviewed procedures recommended by the Pacific Institute for Research and Evaluation (an
independent, non-profit research organization that focuses on individual and social problems to
improve the health, safety, and well-being of individuals, communities, and nations of the
world) and a 2021 United States Department of Justice study entitled Evaluating a Statewide
Anonymous Reporting System for Students and Multidisciplinary Response Teams: Methods for
a Randomized Trial, which assessed the implementation and outcomes needed for a statewide tip
line. These sources confirmed the need for formal policies and procedures to establish
accountability over tips received.
7

--- Page 10 ---
Recommendation 2
We recommend MCSS develop comprehensive written policies and
procedures for Safe Schools Maryland to ensure all tips are addressed in a
timely and comprehensive manner.
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the Maryland Center for School
Safety (MCSS) for the period beginning June 1, 2018 and ending April 15, 2022.
The audit was conducted in accordance with generally accepted government
auditing standards. Those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to
obtain sufficient, appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our
findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives. We believe that the
evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions
based on our audit objectives.
As prescribed by the State Government Article, Section 2-1221 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, the objectives of this audit were to examine MCSS’ financial
transactions, records, and internal control, and to evaluate its compliance with
applicable State laws, rules, and regulations.
In planning and conducting our audit, we focused on the major financial-related
areas of operations based on assessments of significance and risk. The areas
addressed by the audit included operating and capital grant programs, and
oversight of the Safe Schools Maryland tip line.
Our audit did not include certain support services (such as human resources,
payroll activities, and invoice processing) provided to MCSS by the Maryland
State Department of Education (MSDE). These support services are included
within the scope of our audit of MSDE.
Our assessment of internal controls was based on agency procedures and controls
in place at the time of our fieldwork. Our tests of transactions and other auditing
procedures were generally focused on the transactions occurring during our audit
period of June 1, 2018 to April 15, 2022, but may include transactions after this
period as we considered necessary to achieve our audit objectives.
To accomplish our audit objectives, our audit procedures included inquiries of
appropriate personnel, inspections of documents and records, tests of transactions,
and to the extent practicable, observations of MCSS’ operations. Generally,
transactions were selected for testing based on auditor judgment, which primarily
8

--- Page 11 ---
considers risk, the timing or dollar amount of the transaction, or the significance
of the transaction to the area of operation reviewed. As a matter of course, we do
not normally use sampling in our tests, so unless otherwise specifically indicated,
neither statistical nor non-statistical audit sampling was used to select the
transactions tested. Therefore, unless sampling is specifically indicated in a
finding, the results from any tests conducted or disclosed by us cannot be used to
project those results to the entire population from which the test items were
selected.
We also performed various data extracts of pertinent information from the State’s
Financial Management Information System (such as revenue and expenditure
data) and the State’s Central Payroll Bureau (payroll data). The extracts are
performed as part of ongoing internal processes established by the Office of
Legislative Audits and were subject to various tests to determine data reliability.
We determined that the data extracted from these sources were sufficiently
reliable for the purposes the data were used during this audit. We also extracted
data from various MCSS systems for the purpose of testing certain areas, such as
grants and hotline tips. We performed various tests of the relevant data and
determined that the data were sufficiently reliable for the purposes the data were
used during the audit. Finally, we performed other auditing procedures that we
considered necessary to achieve our audit objectives. The reliability of data used
in this report for background or informational purposes was not assessed.
MCSS’ management is responsible for establishing and maintaining effective
internal control. Internal control is a process designed to provide reasonable
assurance that objectives pertaining to the reliability of financial records;
effectiveness and efficiency of operations, including safeguarding of assets; and
compliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations are achieved. As
provided in Government Auditing Standards, there are five components of
internal control: control environment, risk assessment, control activities,
information and communication, and monitoring. Each of the five components,
when significant to the audit objectives, and as applicable to MCSS, were
considered by us during the course of this audit.
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate.
Our reports are designed to assist the Maryland General Assembly in exercising
its legislative oversight function and to provide constructive recommendations for
9

--- Page 12 ---
improving State operations. As a result, our reports generally do not address
activities we reviewed that are functioning properly.
This report includes a finding relating to a condition that we consider to be a
significant deficiency in the design or operation of internal control that could
adversely affect MCSS’ ability to maintain reliable financial records, operate
effectively and efficiently, and/or comply with applicable laws, rules, and
regulations. Our report also includes a finding regarding a significant instance of
noncompliance with applicable laws, rules, or regulations. Other less significant
findings were communicated to MCSS that did not warrant inclusion in this
report.
MCSS’ response to our findings and recommendations is included as an appendix
to this report. As prescribed in the State Government Article, Section 2-1224 of
the Annotated Code of Maryland, we will advise MCSS regarding the results of
our review of its response.
10

--- Page 13 ---
APPENDIX
January 4, 2023
Mr. Gregory A. Hook, CPA
Legislative Auditor
Office of Legislative Audits
The Warehouse at Camden Yards
351 West Camden Street, Suite 400
Baltimore, MD 21201
Dear Mr. Hook:
Enclosed please find the Maryland Center for School Safety (MCSS) response to the audit
report of MCSS for the period beginning June 1, 2018 and ending April 15, 2022. As a recently
expanded and new granting agency, we appreciate the professionalism and efforts of your
team in helping us improve our processes.
If you have any questions or need additional information, please contact me at 410-281-2335
or kate.bryan@maryland.gov.
Regards,
Kate Bryan
Executive Director
Enclosures
cc: Mohammed Choudhury, State Superintendent of Schools
Gifty Quarshie, Fiscal and Grants Manager
Joseph Pignataro, Deputy Director
Kimberly Buckheit, Policy, Communications, and Engagement Manager

--- Page 14 ---
Maryland Center for School Safety
Agency Response Form
School Resource Officer Grants
Finding 1
The Maryland Center for School Safety (MCSS) did not ensure that School Resource
Officer (SRO) Grant payments were properly supported and subject to independent
supervisory review.
We recommend MCSS
a. ensure that appropriate and sufficient documentation is received to support all grant
payments, including the payments noted above;
b. perform a documented independent supervisory review to ensure the propriety of all
grant payments; and
c. pursue recovery from grantees for payments that cannot be supported, including those
noted above.
Agency Response
Analysis Factually Accurate - with context
Please provide MCSS would like to provide additional context to the analysis.
additional comments as
deemed necessary. Local Education Agency (LEA) grantees determine the location and
hours needed for law enforcement coverage and pay their law
enforcement agency counterparts directly for those services. The LEA in
turn submits a request for reimbursement to the MCSS. The support for
such requests primarily includes the law enforcement agency’s invoice
(to the LEA) and the proof of payment from the LEA. Some LEAs also
include a tally of the SRO or adequate coverage hours provided during
any one period.
Law enforcement agency grantees on the other hand, submit their
reimbursement requests directly to MCSS. The support documentation
for such requests primarily includes timesheets, payroll, and salary
information.
Support documentation is not consistent from applicant to applicant
because applicants use different timekeeping systems.
Specifically, (1) the lack of standardized timekeeping systems among all
twenty-four local jurisdictions may create the perception of incomplete
or insufficient support for SRO grant reimbursements, (2) fringe benefit
rates vary by jurisdiction, and (3) grantees were only reimbursed for
allowable costs as specified in the Notification of Funding Availability
Page 1 of 3

--- Page 15 ---
Maryland Center for School Safety
Agency Response Form
(NOFA) and as approved in their application. No funds were reimbursed
for unallowable costs.
Recommendation 1a Agree Estimated Completion Date: 06/30/2023
Please provide details of MCSS continues to evaluate processes to ensure applicants have
corrective action or provided sufficient supporting documentation prior to reimbursement.
explain disagreement. Since its first year of administering grants in FY19, MCSS has identified
and addressed several reimbursement issues.
In the first fiscal year, MCSS used the existing MSDE grant financial
system, which allows LEAs to draw down funds without providing
supporting documentation. Because of this, MCSS stopped allowing
LEAs to use the MSDE financial system to draw down funds for grants
administered by MCSS. Since this change, all invoices and supporting
documentation must be sent to MCSS for review and processing before
reimbursements are made.
To address inconsistencies in timekeeping systems between
jurisdictions, in FY23, MCSS developed a template that is used by both
the school system and the law enforcement agency that includes
overtime hours, overtime pay, the name of the officer(s), the name of the
school(s) where SRO or adequate coverage was provided, and whether
an SRO has completed the MCSS Model SRO Training Program*.
Reimbursement submissions by law enforcement agencies are validated
with the LEA. Although local agency payroll and accounting systems
differ across the state, this new process will help ensure that MCSS has
records of work times and locations prior to reimbursement.
*An important item of note is that overtime hours for patrol officers that
provide additional (adequate) coverage to schools are eligible under the
grant. However, these officers are not statutorily required to complete
the MCSS SRO training program.
Recommendation 1b Agree Estimated Completion Date: Ongoing
Please provide details of MCSS concurs that robust documented, consistent, and independent
corrective action or supervisory review is necessary to approve grant payments.
explain disagreement.
Over the course of the last few years, MCSS has implemented several
new steps to ensure grant payments receive an independent supervisory
review. These changes include (1) increasing the grant unit from one
grant position to two, which will ensure we have appropriate staffing
levels to conduct independent reviews, (2) implementing a process in our
Page 2 of 3

--- Page 16 ---
Maryland Center for School Safety
Agency Response Form
current invoicing system that triggers tiered supervisory review, and (3)
regular evaluation of workflow processes and staffing levels to ensure
grants payments have independent supervisory review.
Recommendation 1c Agree Estimated Completion Date: 6/30/2023
Please provide details of MCSS concurs with the recommendation and will pursue recovery from
corrective action or grantees for payments that cannot be supported.
explain disagreement.
Safe Schools Maryland
Finding 2
MCSS had not developed written policies and procedures for the operation of the Safe
Schools Maryland tip line to ensure all tips were addressed in a timely and comprehensive
manner.
We recommend MCSS develop comprehensive written policies and procedures for Safe
Schools Maryland to ensure all tips are addressed in a timely and comprehensive manner.
Agency Response
Analysis Factually accurate
Please provide
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 2 Agree Estimated Completion Date: 6/30/2023
Please provide details of Policies and procedures for Safe Schools Maryland are in development
corrective action or and MCSS anticipates completion of both by June 30, 2023.
explain disagreement.
Page 3 of 3

--- Page 17 ---
A T
UDIT EAM
Mark S. Hagenbuch, CPA
Audit Manager
Patrick J. Cavanaugh, CPA
Senior Auditor