Title: Department of Budget and Management - Office of Personnel Services and Benefits
Date: 01/20/2023
Type: Fiscal Compliance
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=63cb175da1ce581980de0f23
Extracted: 2025-06-19T23:03:36.731059
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Audit Report
Department of Budget and Management
Office of Personnel Services and Benefits
January 2023
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Senator Clarence K. Lam, M.D. (Senate Chair) Delegate Jared Solomon (House Chair)
Senator Joanne C. Benson Delegate Steven J. Arentz
Senator Paul D. Corderman Delegate Nicholas P. Charles II
Senator Katie Fry Hester Delegate Andrea Fletcher Harrison
Senator Shelly Hettleman Delegate David Moon
Senator Cheryl C. Kagan Delegate Julie Palakovich Carr
Senator Cory V. McCray Four Vacancies
Senator Justin D. Ready
Senator Bryan W. Simonaire
Senator Craig J. Zucker
To Obtain Further Information
Office of Legislative Audits
The Warehouse at Camden Yards
351 West Camden Street, Suite 400
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Phone: 410-946-5900
Maryland Relay: 711
TTY: 410-946-5401 ꞏ 301-970-5401
E-mail: OLAWebmaster@ola.state.md.us
Website: www.ola.state.md.us
To Report Fraud
The Office of Legislative Audits operates a Fraud Hotline to report fraud, waste, or abuse involving State
of Maryland government resources. Reports of fraud, waste, or abuse may be communicated anonymously
by a toll-free call to 1-877-FRAUD-11, by mail to the Fraud Hotline, c/o Office of Legislative Audits, or
through the Office’s website.
Nondiscrimination Statement
The Department of Legislative Services does not discriminate on the basis of age, ancestry, color, creed,
marital status, national origin, race, religion, gender, gender identity, sexual orientation, or disability in the
admission or access to its programs, services, or activities. The Department’s Information Officer has been
designated to coordinate compliance with the nondiscrimination requirements contained in Section 35.107
of the United States Department of Justice Regulations. Requests for assistance should be directed to the
Information Officer at 410-946-5400 or 410-970-5400.

--- Page 3 ---
January 20, 2023
Senator Clarence K. Lam, M.D., Senate Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Delegate Jared Solomon, House Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Members of Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Annapolis, Maryland
Ladies and Gentlemen:
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the Department of Budget and
Management (DBM) – Office of Personnel Services and Benefits (OPSB) for the
period beginning September 8, 2017 and ending October 31, 2021. OPSB
develops the State’s personnel policies for Executive Branch State agencies
subject to the State Personnel Management System (SPMS), administers the
health care benefit programs for State employees and retirees, and has other
responsibilities, including salary administration and classification, recruitment
and examination, and employee relations. OPSB also provides centralized
support to agencies for the State’s Statewide Personnel System (SPS).
Our audit disclosed that OPSB did not attempt to recover approximately $1.2
million in liquidated damages and invalid claim payments identified during audits
of employee benefit programs, and program audits and claim reviews were not
always completed in a timely manner.
Our audit also disclosed conditions where OPSB, by virtue of its centralized
administrative responsibilities, could enhance monitoring of State agencies’
payroll and personnel actions to ensure compliance with State laws, regulations,
or rules. Specifically, OPSB did not have comprehensive procedures to monitor
and ensure the resolution by SPMS agencies of all outstanding payroll
discrepancies, such as the lack of a completed or approved employee timesheet
for a particular pay period, and we found that discrepancies often remained
unresolved for extended periods. Although the applicable agency bears
responsibility for ensuring the resolution of all discrepancies associated with its

--- Page 4 ---
employees, in our opinion, effective monitoring by OPSB is necessary to help
ensure that all discrepancies are resolved and improper payroll payments have not
been made. We also noted that OPSB did not have comprehensive procedures to
ensure that employees who were terminated or left State service were removed
from the payroll, and we noted that employees were frequently not removed
timely, and that questionable payments were made to certain employees after their
effective termination date.
Another area where we believe that enhanced OPSB engagement would be
beneficial is the centralized monitoring of State agency overtime. We found that
OPSB did not have a comprehensive process to monitor or periodically evaluate
SPMS agency overtime, and did not have guidance for agencies to manage
overtime usage and address excessive overtime levels. Highlighting the
desirability of enhanced OPSB involvement is our identification, using SPS
records, of over 2,500 employees who received overtime payments in calendar
year 2021 that totaled 50 percent or more of their regular base salary, including
549 employees whose overtime earnings exceeded their base salary.
Our audit also disclosed that OPSB did not ensure that employees terminated with
prejudice were properly recorded as such in the State’s database and, as required
by law, were not rehired by SPMS agencies.
Finally, our audit also included a review to determine the status of the six findings
contained in our preceding audit report. We call your attention to our
determination that OPSB satisfactorily address all of the prior audit findings.
DBM’s response to this audit, on behalf of OPSB, is included as an appendix to
this report. We reviewed the response to our findings and related
recommendations, and have concluded that the corrective actions identified are
sufficient to address all audit issues.
We wish to acknowledge the cooperation extended to us during the course of this
audit by OPSB. We also wish to acknowledge DBM’s and OPSB’s willingness to
address the audit issues and implement appropriate corrective actions.
Respectfully submitted,
Gregory A. Hook, CPA
Legislative Auditor
2

--- Page 5 ---
Table of Contents
Background Information 5
Agency Responsibilities 5
Statewide Personnel System 5
Health Care Benefits Administration 6
COVID Administrative Leave 7
Performance Audits 8
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report 10
Findings and Recommendations 11
Audits of Employee Benefit Programs
Finding 1 – The Office of Personnel Services and Benefits (OPSB) did 12
not attempt to recover approximately $1.2 million in liquidated
damages and invalid claim payments identified during certain 2017
and 2018 audits.
Finding 2 – Audits of benefit program plans and claims eligibility were 13
not completed in a timely manner.
Monitoring of State Personnel Management System (SPMS) Agency
Payroll
Finding 3 – (Policy Issue) OPSB did not have comprehensive procedures 15
to monitor and ensure that SPMS agencies addressed all outstanding
payroll discrepancies. Our review disclosed that agencies were not
correcting discrepancies, which resulted in potentially improper
payments going undetected.
Finding 4 – OPSB did not have comprehensive procedures to identify 16
employees who were terminated or left State service, and were not
removed from the payroll timely. Our review disclosed that agencies
were not removing these employees timely and payments were made
after those employees left State service.
Monitoring of Excessive Overtime
Finding 5 – (Policy Issue) OPSB did not have a comprehensive process in 20
place to formally monitor or periodically evaluate SPMS agency
overtime, and did not have guidance for agencies to manage overtime
usage, and justify or prepare a plan to address actions to minimize or
limit excessive overtime levels. We identified high overtime levels at
3

--- Page 6 ---
several agencies, including 549 employees whose overtime earnings
consistently exceeded their regular base salary.
Termination with Prejudice
Finding 6 – OPSB did not ensure that employees terminated with 23
prejudice were properly recorded in the State database and were not
rehired by SPMS agencies.
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology 25
Exhibit A – OPSB Reported Status of Findings from State Employee 28
Performance Evaluation Program and Management Training
Performance Audits as of April 15, 2022
Agency Response Appendix
4

--- Page 7 ---
Background Information
Agency Responsibilities
The Department of Budget and Management (DBM) – Office of Personnel
Services and Benefits (OPSB) directs the development of personnel policies for
Executive Branch State agencies subject to the State Personnel Management
System (SPMS), and performs a variety of other functions for these agencies,
including salary administration and classification, recruitment and examination,
employee relations, and providing centralized support for the State’s Statewide
Personnel System (SPS).
Certain Executive Branch agencies (primarily the Maryland Department of
Transportation and the University System of Maryland) and the Judicial and
Legislative branches of State government maintain their own personnel systems
and related policies, are not subject to SPMS, and for the most part do not use
SPS. OPSB also administers the health care benefits programs for all State
employees and retirees (see comments below), and the flexible spending accounts
for all State employees regardless of which personnel system they are in.
Statewide Personnel System
SPS provides a comprehensive human resource and payroll system through the
use of a commercial off-the-shelf software platform configured for the State by a
contractor. SPS is a cloud-based application hosted and operated by a third-party
service provider; and is used by SPMS agencies to record personnel transactions,
such as appointments, promotions, certain salary adjustments, and for the
recordation and maintenance of time and leave transactions and records. SPS is
used by all State agencies for purposes of health benefits.
Implementation of SPS for the State was divided into three phases. Phase I was
implemented in November 2014 and replaced the former automated human
resource processes (personnel transaction system) maintained by DBM. Phase II
was launched in May 2016 for most agencies and fully implemented in October
2016 and included timekeeping, calculation of gross payroll, and leave
administration. Phase III was implemented in January 2019 and provides a
comprehensive employee benefits administration module. We conducted a
separate review of the application controls over SPS and matters related to its
implementation, and a separate report was issued dated March 7, 2019.
Consequently, our current audit of OPSB did not include an examination of SPS
application controls or matters related to implementation, which will be subject to
audit in a future review.
5

--- Page 8 ---
Health Care Benefits Administration
The State makes health care benefits available for all of its employees and retirees
(including their spouses and dependents). Below is a description of the benefits
and the base period covered by the current contracts.1
 Health care coverage is provided through three major insurance providers that
administer preferred provider organization (PPO), exclusive provider
organization (EPO), and integrated health model (IHM) plans. Mental health
care coverage is included in these health care plans. The current contracts,
which include the original six-year contract term and the first of 2 two-year
renewal options, cover the period from January 1, 2015 to December 31,
2022.
 Dental insurance is provided through two plans offered by two separate
providers that administer a preferred provider organization (DPPO) and a
health maintenance organization (DHMO). The current dental plan contracts
are in effect from January 1, 2020 to December 31, 2024. There are no
renewal options.
 Prescription drug coverage is provided through a pharmacy benefit manager.
The current contract, which includes the base year and the first of 2 two-year
renewal options, is in effect from January 1, 2018 to December 31, 2022.
The State also provides for a Health Care Flexible Spending Account program. In
total, the aforementioned benefits are provided through 12 individual plans or
programs, which are administered (including claims processing) by 7 contracted
vendors or administrators.
The State directly pays claims for the PPO, EPO, prescription drug plan, and
DPPO plans. It self-funds these plans and accepts the risk for all costs associated
with these plans. For the IHM and DHMO plans, the State pays an insurance
premium to the provider and the provider accepts the risk associated with the
benefits. The costs for annual health care benefits have increased from
approximately $1.7 billion for fiscal year 2018 to approximately $2.0 billion for
fiscal year 2021. Health care enrollment and costs paid in fiscal year 2021 for
plan participants, which include State employees, retirees, spouses, dependent
children, direct pay participants, and satellite agency participants (such as covered
employees of local governments) are summarized in Figure 1.
1 The procurement of these contracts for periods after their current expiration dates will be subject
to review during future audits of DBM – Office of the Secretary.
6

--- Page 9 ---
Figure 1
Plan Participants in the State of Ma ryland’s Health Benefits Programs
and the Related Costs for Fiscal Year 2021
Enrollment
Dollar Claims Administrative Premiums Total
Plan Type (as of
Paid Expenses Paid Paid Payments
January 1, 2021)
PPO 54,312 $429,959,235 $31,503,142 N/A $461,462,377
EPO 65,428 679,918,898 27,766,978 N/A 707,685,876
IHM 3,425 N/A N/A $28,676,668 28,676,668
POS
213 1,880,368 102,960 N/A 1,983,328
(Note 1)
Prescription
114,019 685,334,917 9,827,290 N/A 695,162,207
Drug
Dental PPO 100,020 51,516,479 1,723,000 N/A 53,239,479
Dental
14,850 N/A N/A 4,323,601 4,323,601
HMO
Totals $1,848,609,897 $70,923,370 $33,000,269 $1,952,533,536
N/A – not applicable.
Note 1 – The point of service (POS) plan was available only to members of the State Law Enforcement Officers Labor Alliance
bargaining unit.
Source: OPSB records
COVID Administrative Leave
In response to the COVID-19 pandemic, the Governor declared a State of
Emergency during the period from March 5, 2020 through July 1, 2021, and
subsequently ordered DBM to impose a period of mandatory telework for all non-
essential State employees subject to OPSB oversight. Consequently, mandatory
telework was implemented for all SPMS agencies effective March 13, 2020.
Essential employees were still required to report to their workplace and non-
essential employees unable to perform their duties from home were placed on
administrative leave. In this regard, OPSB made available the ‘COVID
Administrative Leave’ code for use between the period of March 15, 2020 and
July 1, 2021 to capture and record time for State employees placed on
administrative leave during this period. According to OPSB’s records, a total of
7

--- Page 10 ---
235,100 days of COVID Administrative Leave was used by employees within
SPMS agencies during this period. According to OPSB, the vast majority of this
leave was taken prior to July 1, 2020 as OPSB directed agencies in June 2020 to
return employees to the office if they were unable to telework. Figure 2 shows
the five units with the highest number of leave days taken, as well as the total
taken by all other agencies within SPMS (note, the dollar value of the leave taken
was not readily available at the time of our audit).
Figure 2
COVID Administrative Leave Taken by SPMS Agencies
(Five Largest Users and All Others)
March 15, 2020 to July 1, 2021
Number of
Employees
Administrative
Agency Using
Leave in Days
Administrative
Leave
Maryland Department of Health 3,160 77,857
Department of Human Services 2,047 44,220
Comptroller of Maryland 1,100 23,449
Department of Public Safety and Correctional
633 18,442
Services
Department of Natural Resources 345 7,538
Other (42 other agencies combined) 3,021 63,594
Total 10,306 235,100
Source: OPSB Records
Performance Audits
During the audit period, we conducted two performance audits related to OPSB
activities.
State Employee Performance Evaluation Program
We issued a performance audit report dated June 27, 2018 on our examination
of the State Employee Performance Evaluation Program (PEP). Our audit
generally included assessments of OPSB’s efforts to ensure performance
evaluations were completed for all employees, evaluations were completed
properly in accordance with pre-established requirements, and evaluation
results were accurately reported to the Governor and the General Assembly.
The report contained eight findings, five of which were directed to OPSB as
follows:
8

--- Page 11 ---
 Finding 1 - Many employees had not received required evaluations during a
five-year period and OPSB had not established a comprehensive strategy to
improve agency compliance or ensure agencies monitored their efforts.
 Finding 2 - OPSB did not disclose certain information in the Annual Personnel
Report needed to better interpret and clarify the performance evaluation results.
In addition, complete records supporting the Report were not maintained and
controls were not established to ensure the accuracy of the underlying data.
 Finding 3 - OPSB had not established a process to ensure performance
evaluations were based on measurable standards and their content met legal
requirements.
 Finding 4 - OPSB did not clearly set the expectations for required mandatory
PEP-related training for supervisory and managerial employees, require the
maintenance of agency-based training records, or monitor agency training
efforts.
 Finding 5 - OPSB had not developed approaches to formally evaluate the
effectiveness of the PEP and the training courses for managers and supervisors.
Management Training
We issued a performance audit report dated September 25, 2018 on our
examination of training offered to management employees of agencies under
the authority of DBM. The primary focus of this audit was on the actions and
responsibilities of DBM and OPSB as they related to management training.
The performance audit included the following two findings:
 Finding 1 - DBM had not established a formal Statewide training program for
management employees in SPMS to help them develop their skills and perform
their duties efficiently.
 Finding 2 - DBM had not established regulations or policies that would
provide guidance to and oversight of State agencies that separately established
training programs, to help ensure their managers had access to quality training.
DBM, on behalf of OPSB, provided a status of corrective actions taken as of April
15, 2022 in response to the aforementioned seven findings. The findings included
22 recommendations, and as depicted in Exhibit A, DBM reported that 19 of the
22 recommendations had been “completed”, with the remaining 3 being “in
progress”. Our current audit of OPSB did not include an evaluation of the
sufficiency or accuracy of these assertions by DBM due to the timing of these
reports and our assessment of the significance and risk associated with these
assertions relative to our current audit objectives.
9

--- Page 12 ---
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report
Our audit included a review to determine the status of the six findings contained
in our preceding audit report dated May 14, 2019. We determined that OPSB
satisfactorily addressed these findings.
10

--- Page 13 ---
Findings and Recommendations
Audits of Employee Benefit Programs
Background
The Department of Budget and Management (DBM) – Office of Personnel
Services and Benefits (OPSB) contracts with two vendors to conduct annual
audits of the State’s Medical, Dental, Prescription Drug Benefits, and Flexible
Spending Account employee benefit programs. A separate audit is required for
each of the programs’ 12 plans which are administered by 7 different vendors or
plan administrators. The scope of these audits includes, administrative and
operational procedures, claims processing (accuracy, timing, and compliance),
and compliance with performance guarantees and other contract requirements.
The results of these audits are communicated to OPSB and plan administrators,
and may require corrective action
including changes in procedures and Figure 3
payment of liquidated damages. Audit Deficiencies by Area
Audits conducted for the 2018 plan (Plan year 2018 Audit Results)
year (the most current completed as of Count of
Audit Area
the time of our audit) identified 74 Deficiencies
findings as depicted in Figure 3, and Administrative and
3
resulted in approximately $565,000 in Operational Procedures
liquidated damages being collected
Claims Processing 30
from six plan administrators.
Performance
23
Guarantees
In addition, OPSB personnel perform
Compliance with
2
annual claims eligibility audits to
Contract Terms
ensure that claims processed and paid
Clinical Processes 16
by plan administrators and reimbursed
Internal Audits 0
by OPSB are for valid and eligible
Total 74
participants. These audits review
Source: OPSB audit records
selected payment activity during a
plan year to identify instances where invalid claims were paid, such as claims paid
for individuals whose coverage had lapsed. Depending on the cause of the invalid
claim and payment, OPSB will seek reimbursement from the plan administrator or
the plan participant.
11

--- Page 14 ---
Finding 1
OPSB did not attempt to recover approximately $1.2 million in liquidated
damages and invalid claim payments identified during certain 2017 and 2018
audits.
Analysis
OPSB did not attempt to recover approximately $1.2 million in liquidated
damages and invalid claim payments identified during certain 2017 and 2018
audits of the employee benefit programs. As noted above, OPSB has collected
liquidated damages from certain plan administrators; however, we found that
OPSB did not have a formal policy on the collection of liquidated damages and
that liquated damages identified by audits were not always collected.
 OPSB did not pursue the liquidated damages identified during the audit of the
former Prescription Drug Benefits program administrator for plan year 2017.
The draft audit report was presented to OPSB management in July 2020 and
recommended liquidated damages totaling approximately $860,000. The
administrator disputed $555,000 of the liquidated damages because, in
general, it believed it either met the performance guarantees cited as being
missed, or the impact of missing the guarantees did not merit a liquidated
damage. OPSB did not pursue the disputed damages or collect the $305,000
in undisputed damages. We were advised by OPSB that it had meetings with
the vendor to resolve the disputed claims, however due to the COVID-19
pandemic; these discussions had stopped and were not resumed due to an
oversight. After bringing this to OPSB’s attention, it reopened negotiations of
this matter with the prior administrator. Subsequently, the aforementioned
audit was finalized, and all parties agreed to liquidated damages of $378,200,
which OPSB collected in March 2022.
 OPSB had not attempted to recover approximately $302,000 due from
program participants for invalid payments identified during its claims
eligibility audits for plan year 2018, which were completed in February 2020.
In April 2020, OPSB suspended billing program participants because of the
Governor’s financial relief initiatives implemented because of the COVID-19
pandemic. Although those initiatives, including the suspension of billings
were lifted in July 2021, as of March 2022, OPSB had not billed for the
aforementioned $302,000. According to OPSB management, turnover in key
management positions within the unit responsible for this process and changes
in operations have delayed billings, but they still plan to pursue the amounts
due.
12

--- Page 15 ---
Recommendation 1
We recommend that OPSB
a. implement a formal policy on the collection of liquated damages,
including when to pursue damages and a formal approval process when
declining to collect damages due the State; and
b. ensure that amounts due from plan participants identified in claims
eligibility audits are billed in a timely manner, including the claims noted
above.
Finding 2
Audits of benefit program plans and claims eligibility were not completed in
a timely manner.
Analysis
Audits of benefit program plans and claims eligibility were not being completed
within the timeframes required by the applicable contracts or OPSB policy.
Consequently, potential program deficiencies and any related amounts due the
State, such as liquidated damages, were not being identified in a timely manner.
 OPSB did not ensure that all benefit program plan audits were conducted as
required. OPSB contracted with two vendors to audit the 12 employee benefit
plans within one year of the end of each plan year (or December 31 since all
plans operate on a calendar year basis). Our review disclosed that as of
January 2022, no audits had been completed for the 2019 and 2020 plan years
and 1 of the 12 audits was not completed for the 2018 plan year.
Although OPSB was aware of these delays and worked with the vendors to
facilitate completion and avoid additional delays, the vendors did not
complete all the required audits. We were advised by OPSB management that
the delays were due primarily to the COVID-19 pandemic and a change in
audit vendors. The audit vendors were paid approximately $2.2 million
between fiscal years 2018 and 2021. The contracts did not provide for
damages for failure to complete audits on time, limiting OPSB options to
address the delays.
 As of January 2022, OPSB had not completed claims eligibility audits of the
State’s Medical, Dental, and Prescription Drug Benefits employee benefit
programs for plan years 2019 (due December 2020) and 2020 (due December
2021). We were advised by OPSB management that its unwritten policy is
that claims eligibility audits are to be completed within one year of the end of
the plan year. OPSB management advised that it generally performs six
13

--- Page 16 ---
audits for each plan year, and that the delays noted were mostly due to lack of
staffing. We were further advised that the overdue audits were in progress but
no estimate for completion was provided.
Recommendation 2
We recommend that OPSB
a. ensure that all audits are completed within the required timeframe,
b. complete the past due audits of plan administrators and claims eligibility
noted in this finding,
c. consider including in future audit contracts a provision for financial
penalties or liquidated damages for failure to meet established deadlines,
and
d. formalize in writing the required timeframe for completing claims
eligibility audits.
Monitoring of State Personnel Management System Agency
Payroll
Background
OPSB is responsible for receiving and consolidating payroll activity from 56 State
Personnel Management System (SPMS) agencies for submission to the State’s
Central Payroll Bureau (CPB) to process employee payroll which totaled
approximately $4.0 billion during fiscal year 2021. Generally, each SPMS
agency is responsible for administering its own payroll activity, including
generating and reviewing system-generated error reports to help them identify,
investigate, and correct discrepancies, such as employee timesheets with no time
entered, no time submitted, or no time approved. Ideally, agencies should correct
all errors prior to OPSB submitting the payroll to CPB to prevent improper
payments. However, if all discrepancies are not corrected prior to the deadline for
payroll submission, SPMS agencies still submit their payroll to OPSB for
processing. OPSB advised that it requires SPMS agencies to certify that they are
submitting accurate payroll information for the employees of their agency, and
they are responsible to resolve any inaccuracies identified or adjustments needed.
OPSB generates similar error reports that are intended to assist agencies in
correcting any discrepancies prior to forwarding the payroll to CPB. OPSB will
normally email copies of these reports to the agencies with outstanding
discrepancies requiring correction. However, the existence of uncorrected
discrepancies will not stop the processing of payroll by CPB. Consequently, in
our opinion, it is critical that all outstanding discrepancies be investigated and
14

--- Page 17 ---
resolved, regardless of the specific agency involved, to ensure that all payroll
payments were valid.
Finding 3 (Policy Issue)
OPSB did not have comprehensive procedures to monitor and ensure that
SPMS agencies addressed all outstanding payroll discrepancies. Our review
disclosed that agencies were not correcting discrepancies, which resulted in
potentially improper payments going undetected.
Analysis
OPSB did not have comprehensive procedures to monitor and ensure that SPMS
agencies addressed all outstanding State payroll discrepancies. Specifically,
OPSB did not monitor and address the unresolved discrepancies with applicable
agencies, even though State Personnel System (SPS) reports of Statewide
unresolved discrepancies remaining after the payroll was processed were
available. Consequently, our review of the No Time Entered reports (report of
employees who did not prepare a timesheet) as of August 2022 for the three pay
periods between January 12, 2022 and February 22, 2022, identified 113
employees at 26 different SPMS agencies who still remained on one or more of
the reports (including 18 that were on all three reports) because no timesheet had
been prepared. These employees received compensation totaling approximately
$470,500 for the three pay periods reviewed (see Figure 4).2
Figure 4
Agencies with Unresolved Employees on the No Time Entered Reports
as of August 2022 that Received Compensation
January 12, 2022 to February 22, 2022
Number of
Regular
Agency/Department Employees without
Earnings Paid
a Timesheet
Maryland Department of Health 39 $202,475
Maryland Department of Labor 21 36,104
Department of Public Safety and
9 21,956
Correctional Services
Department of Human Services 8 15,803
State Board of Elections 7 23,588
21 other agencies 29 170,566
Totals 113 $470,492
Source: Statewide Personnel System Workday and State Payroll Records
2 OLA did not research the causes of these discrepancies or the actions taken by the various State
agencies to resolve the conditions.
15

--- Page 18 ---
State regulations generally require a time record signed by the applicable
employee and approved by supervisory personnel unless a written exemption is
obtained. The temporary absence of a timesheet does not necessarily mean that
the employee did not work during the applicable pay period (for example, an
employee may have been on leave and/or forgot to submit a timesheet).
However, a timesheet should be submitted upon return to work and certainly by
six months after the employee appeared on the report.
Recommendation 3
We recommend that OPSB
a. develop comprehensive procedures to effectively ensure SPMS agencies
resolve all outstanding payroll processing discrepancies timely, including
the aforementioned 113 employees for whom no timesheet was submitted;
and
b. establish and take appropriate corrective action for agencies that fail to
resolve the discrepancies timely.
Finding 4
OPSB did not have comprehensive procedures to identify employees who
were terminated or left State service, and were not removed from the payroll
timely. Our review disclosed that agencies were not removing these
employees timely and payments were made after those employees left State
service.
Analysis
OPSB did not have comprehensive procedures to identify employees who were
terminated or left State service and were not removed from the payroll in a timely
manner. If the agency fails to timely remove employees from the payroll, the
employee may continue to be paid.
We obtained a report of all terminations processed in SPS for fiscal year 2022 and
compared the effective date of the termination to the date it was processed in SPS.
Our review disclosed that 1,556 terminations were processed in SPS more than
five days after the employee’s actual effective date of termination. For example,
in many of these cases we noted that the employee received no payments after
termination or the employee received payments associated only with the last pay
period worked. However, we noted 68 employees within eight agencies who
received regular earnings totaling approximately $222,500 for time after their
effective date of termination (Figure 5).
16

--- Page 19 ---
Figure 5
Agencies that Did Not Timely Process Terminations in SPS Resulting in
Employees with Questionable Payments After Their Effective Termination Date
Fiscal Year 2022
Number of
Employees With Regular
Agency/Department
Questionable Earnings Paid
Payments
Department of Public Safety and Correctional 19
$70,064
Services
Maryland Department of Health 17 49,673
Department of Human Services 12 33,252
State Department of Education 9 35,611
4 other agencies 11 33,863
Totals 68 $222,463
Source: SPS Workday and State Payroll Records
Terminations for the aforementioned 68 employees were processed and recorded
in SPS between 2 and 121 days after their effective date of termination. Our test
of 12 of these employees disclosed 11 payments totaling $44,100 after the
employees were terminated that appeared to be improper.3 The applicable agency
or OPSB had already detected and recovered 4 of these improper payments, but
there was no documentation in SPS that the remaining 7 with payments totaling
$35,200 were detected and resolved.
OPSB advised us that, other than providing certain instruction and guidance to
agencies, it does not have the authority or means to require and ensure compliance
and correction of these conditions. However, our review of the memorandum of
understanding between CPB and OPSB disclosed that DBM certifies and is
responsible for the transactions that fall under its authority, which include the
potentially erroneous payroll charges. At a minimum, OPSB should work in a
collaborative manner with SPS agencies to establish an acceptable mechanism to
detect and recover any improper payments, and at the same time identify and
provide additional guidance to those agencies that incur improper payments
because terminations are not processed in SPS on a timely basis.
3 The remaining employee was paid for accumulated leave days after the final termination date.
17

--- Page 20 ---
Recommendation 4
We recommend that OPSB
a. develop comprehensive procedures to identify employees who were
terminated or left State service and were not removed from the payroll in
a timely manner;
b. use that data to identify any regular earnings paid after an employee left
State service, and investigate and recover any amounts improperly paid,
including those noted above; and
c. provide additional guidance to agencies that consistently fail to remove
terminated employees from the payroll in a timely manner, and as a
result increase the potential for invalid payroll payments.
Monitoring of Excessive Overtime
Background Information
The State Personnel and Pensions Article of the Annotated Code of Maryland
provides that an employee who works more than the normal workweek is entitled
to compensation in the form of payment or compensation time. In general,
payment for time worked in excess of 40 hours in a workweek is one and one-half
times the employee’s regular hourly rate of pay. Certain employees with
modified workdays, such as law enforcement employees, calculate overtime
based on the greater of time worked in excess of 40 hours in a workweek or time
worked in excess of an established workday. As depicted in Figure 6, SPMS
agency overtime has increased significantly from approximately $113.5 million in
2014 to $231.3 million in 2021.
Figure 6
SPMS Agency Overtime
Calendar Years 2014 to 2021
$300,000,000
$250,000,000
$200,000,000
$150,000,000
$100,000,000
$50,000,000
$0
2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021
Source: Central Payroll Bureau Payroll Records
18

--- Page 21 ---
OPSB advised that each SPMS agency is responsible for employees’ schedules,
managing the workload for the agency, overseeing overtime, and ensuring they
are within budget. During this period, five departments consistently had the
majority of overtime within SPMS agencies. For example, as depicted in Figure
7, these departments made up approximately 97 percent of SPMS agency
overtime in calendar year 2021.
Figure 7
Overtime in Select SPMS Agencies
Calendar Year 2021
(in millions)
Maryland
Department of
Health, $39.3
Department of Department of
Public Safety State Police,
and Correctional $30.4
Services, $137.3
Department of
Juvenile
Services, $11.0
Department of
Human Services,
Other, $8.0 $5.3
Source: Central Payroll Bureau Payroll Records
According to OPSB personnel, overtime at the five departments is higher than other
State agencies due in part to high vacancy rates, minimum staffing level
requirements (such as for prison guards), and scheduling challenges. Vacancy rates
have increased statewide, and the aforementioned departments had vacancy rates
of between 12.7 percent and 14.7 percent as of January 2022 (see Figure 8 on the
following page). Intuitively, vacancies compound the need for overtime at these
agencies and also increase the risk of abuse.
19

--- Page 22 ---
Figure 8
Vacancy Rates as of January 2022
for Select SPMS Agencies
Vacancy Rate
Agency/Department (as of January
2022)
Department of Public Safety and Correctional
14.1%
Services (DPSCS)
Maryland Department of Health (MDH) 12.9
Department of State Police 13.1
Department of Juvenile Services 12.7
Department of Human Services 14.7
Average Vacancy Rate for Remaining
11.2
Executive Agencies
Source: Central Payroll Bureau Payroll and the Department of Legislative Services
Due to the significance of overtime charges throughout the State, we analyzed
overtime data available from OPSB and reviewed actions taken by OPSB to
identify the causes, monitor agencies’ overtime practices, and suggest or
coordinate corrective actions to lessen the State’s reliance on overtime usage.
Based on that review, we believe that certain additional efforts on the part of
OPSB could help address persistent significant overtime use.
Finding 5 (Policy Issue)
OPSB did not have a comprehensive process in place to formally monitor or
periodically evaluate SPMS agency overtime, and did not have guidance for
agencies to manage overtime usage, and justify or prepare a plan to address
actions to minimize or limit excessive overtime levels. We identified high
overtime levels at several agencies, including 549 employees whose overtime
earnings consistently exceeded their regular base salary.
Analysis
OPSB did not monitor or periodically evaluate SPMS agency overtime in a formal
and comprehensive manner; and did not prepare guidance for agencies to manage
overtime usage, and justify or prepare a plan to address excessive overtime levels.
We identified high overtime levels at several agencies including 549 employees
whose overtime earnings consistently exceeded their regular base salary; yet there
was no formal analysis or follow up by OPSB to determine the cause(s) or ensure
it was justified (that is, necessary).
20

--- Page 23 ---
OPSB Did Not Effectively Monitor SPMS agency Overtime Usage
OPSB did not effectively monitor SPMS agency overtime usage. For
example, OPSB sent agencies a report of individuals receiving compensation
of more than $10,000 in a given pay period (which could be due to large
amounts of overtime) for additional review. Additionally, DBM personnel
maintained year-to-date overtime statistics by employee and agency that it
primarily used for agency budget analysis purposes. However, these
procedures were not comprehensive and were not focused on identifying the
cause(s) and corrective action(s) for potentially excessive overtime usage.
For example, OPSB did not analyze payroll data to identify employees who
earned excessive overtime (such as more than 50 percent of their regular base
salary), or consistently had material overtime for extended periods. Our
analysis of SPMS payroll data between calendar years 2014 and 2021
disclosed that certain employees consistently received significant amounts of
overtime. For example, 2,537 employees received overtime payments in
calendar year 2021 that totaled 50 percent or more of their regular base salary,
including 549 employees whose overtime earnings exceeded their base salary.
Many of these 549 employees also received overtime pay that exceeded their
regular base salary in more than one year during calendar years 2017 through
2020. See Figure 9 for examples of five employees who received overtime
pay well in excess of their regular earnings for calendar years 2019 through
2021, including two cases in which overtime exceeded twice the employee’s
base salary.
Figure 9
Examples of Employees with Significant Overtime Earnings in
Excess of Regular Salary for Multiple Years
2021 2020 2019
Example Agency
Regular Overtime Regular Overtime Regular Overtime
Employee 1 DPSCS $89,000 $134,700 $83,000 $166,900 $63,200 $118,300
Employee 2 MDH 106,100 181,500 91,300 143,800 78,400 139,400
Employee 3 MDH 68,700 117,500 53,000 101,800 47,700 66,700
Employee 4 MDH 82,500 134,600 63,900 96,000 46,000 100,800
Employee 5 MDH 103,800 174,400 74,900 131,800 62,900 96,600
Source: Central Payroll Bureau Payroll Records
OPSB also did not analyze payroll data to identify employees who
consistently earned overtime while also using paid leave. SPMS regulations
and the State’s collective bargaining agreements include paid leave in
worktime. Therefore, employees’ personal, annual, sick, and other types of
21

--- Page 24 ---
paid leave usage is counted towards meeting the aforementioned 40-hour
workweek requirement. For example, if an employee’s normal workday is 8
hours, and they took 4 hours of annual leave one day, but then worked 8 hours
the same day, they would earn 4 hours of overtime for that day since the
annual leave would be considered work time.
We analyzed calendar year 2021 payroll records of one large Executive
Branch department and noted there were 2,417 employees with one or more
instances where they received over $1,000 in gross overtime earnings in the
same pay period in which they used at least three full days of paid leave. As
noted above, this practice is not prohibited, but could be indicative of potential
abusive overtime usage, and if appropriately analyzed may disclose
opportunities to modify scheduling to reduce overtime.
Lack of Overtime Guidance
OPSB had not established sufficient policies and procedures to ensure
agencies properly monitored and controlled overtime usage. When questioned
on OPSB’s role in overtime guidance and monitoring, DBM management
advised us that each respective agency is responsible for developing its own
overtime policy consistent with its needs and statutory requirements.
Consequently, DBM had not required OPSB to take action to ensure that all
agencies implemented an overtime policy or provide guidance to agencies as
to what basic requirements should be included, such as pre-approval of
overtime and a review by agency management of material and unusual
overtime usage for propriety.
State law requires DBM to adopt regulations to prevent unnecessary overtime at
agencies under SPMS. Also, DBM regulations establish requirements that an
appointing authority or the appointing authority's designated representative may
authorize an employee to work periods of time in excess of the employee's regular
workweek, dependent upon workload demands, and shall assure that the
authorization is in writing. As the entity responsible for administering the largest
personnel system for Executive Branch agencies, and as required by State Law,
we believe that DBM through OPSB would be in the best position to develop
guidance and policies for SPMS agencies to better manage overtime activity.
Recommendation 5
We recommend that OPSB develop and implement comprehensive
procedures and policies for overtime usage in consultation with SPMS
agencies and other DBM units. Specifically, we recommend that these
procedures and policies include
22

--- Page 25 ---
a. routinely performing data analysis to identify employees with potentially
excessive overtime;
b. requiring documented justifications from the respective agencies for
employees earning excessive overtime and corrective action plans from
the agencies to reduce overtime payments in the future;
c. ensuring that agencies establish appropriate agency-based policies for
managing and monitoring overtime, and providing guidance as to the
basic requirements such policies should include; and
d. working in conjunction with the appropriate DBM units, including those
with budgetary authority, to address agencies with consistently excessive
overtime (such as adding additional positions).
Termination with Prejudice
Finding 6
OPSB did not ensure that employees terminated with prejudice were
properly recorded in the State database and were not rehired by SPMS
agencies.
Analysis
OPSB did not ensure that employees terminated with prejudice (TWP) were
properly recorded in the State database and were not rehired by SPMS agencies.
TWP is reserved for the most egregious violations of performance or conduct
standards, and State law prohibits TWP employees from future State service.
SPMS agencies are required to record the employee as TWP in SPS. OPSB
submits these TWP employees into the Pre-Offer Check (POC) database
maintained by the Department of Information Technology (DoIT) which is to be
checked by all State agencies prior to hiring an employee.4 As of December 15,
2021, the POC had a total of 843 SPMS and 75 non-SPMS employees recorded
since the program inception in 2012.
Our review disclosed that OPSB did not periodically reconcile SPS and POC data
to ensure that all TWP employees were accurately recorded on the POC and that
SPMS agencies did not hire TWP employees recorded on the POC. As a result,
we noted that POC data was not complete and accurate and agencies hired
employees listed on the POC.
 Our comparison of the POC database to corresponding termination data
recorded in SPS between September 2017 and December 2021 disclosed that
4 Non-SPMS agencies also need to submit TWP employees to DoIT for recordation in the POC.
23

--- Page 26 ---
11 of the 152 TWP employees on SPS were not recorded in the POC.
According to OPSB management, this situation occurred because the
terminating agency did not fill out all of the required termination information
in SPS to trigger the process that updates the POC database. As of April
2022, OPSB could not readily determine if these 11 individuals needed to be
added to the POC database without further investigation. We determined that
none of the 11 individuals were rehired by another SPMS agency after their
termination, but could not readily determine if they were rehired by a non-
SPMS agency.
 Another comparison of the POC database as of December 2021 to State
payroll records between July 2014 and November 2021 disclosed that eight
TWP employees were rehired by a SPMS agency. These individuals received
a total of $1.4 million in salary payments as of November 2021 after being
added to the POC database.5 The SPMS agencies that hired these individuals
did not follow OPSB’s guidance to check the POC database prior to hiring
employees. At our request, OPSB investigated these eight individuals and
found that six were deemed to be improperly included in the POC database
(for example, employee was placed on POC due to a clerical error when
processing the termination) while the terminating agencies could not provide
documentation or an explanation for the other two TWP employees.
Periodic comparisons of the POC database to SPS termination data and State
payroll records would assist OPSB to identify agencies that are not complying
with State law, and instances of improper or inaccurate information being
recorded in SPS or the POC.
Recommendation 6
We recommend that OPSB
a. periodically compare the SPS termination data to POC and State payroll
records to ensure that all TWP employees are properly recorded in the
POC and were not rehired by a SPMS agency,
b. investigate and resolve the 19 identified discrepancies and inaccuracies
noted in this finding, and
c. take steps to help ensure that agencies review the POC database prior to
hiring such as providing additional direction and guidance to agencies.
5 As of April 2022, seven of the eight individuals were currently employed by the State.
24

--- Page 27 ---
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the Department of Budget and
Management (DBM) – Office of Personnel Services and Benefits (OPSB) for the
period beginning September 8, 2017 and ending October 31, 2021. The audit was
conducted in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards.
Those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient,
appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and
conclusions based on our audit objectives. We believe that the evidence obtained
provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit
objectives.
As prescribed by the State Government Article, Section 2-1221 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, the objectives of this audit were to examine OPSB’s financial
transactions, records, and internal control, and to evaluate its compliance with
applicable State laws, rules, and regulations.
In planning and conducting our audit, we focused on the major financial-related
areas of operations based on assessments of significance and risk. The areas
addressed by the audit included OPSB’s payment of State employees and retirees
health insurance and prescription drug benefit claims, monitoring of health care
and prescription drug benefit administrators, monitoring prescription drug
discounts and rebates, processing of personnel and payroll transactions for certain
State agencies, information system security, and cash receipts. We also
determined the status of the findings contained in our preceding audit report.
Our audit also included certain support services (such as payroll) provided by
OPSB to DBM’s - Office of the Secretary. Conversely, our audit did not include
certain support services provided to OPSB by the Office of the Secretary. These
support services (such as procurements and maintenance of certain accounting
records) are included within the scope of our audit of the Office of the Secretary.
Our assessment of internal controls was based on agency procedures and controls
in place at the time of our fieldwork. Our tests of transactions and other auditing
procedures were generally focused on the transactions occurring during our audit
period of September 8, 2017 to October 31, 2021, but may include transactions
before or after this period as we considered necessary to achieve our audit
objectives.
To accomplish our audit objectives, our audit procedures included inquiries of
appropriate personnel, inspections of documents and records, tests of transactions,
and to the extent practicable, observations of OPSB’s operations. Generally,
25

--- Page 28 ---
transactions were selected for testing based on auditor judgment, which primarily
considers risk, the timing or dollar amount of the transaction, or the significance
of the transaction to the area of operation reviewed. As a matter of course, we do
not normally use sampling in our tests, so unless otherwise specifically indicated,
neither statistical nor non-statistical audit sampling was used to select the
transactions tested. Therefore, unless sampling is specifically indicated in a
finding, the results from any tests conducted or disclosed by us cannot be used to
project those results to the entire population from which the test items were
selected.
We also performed various data extracts of pertinent information from the State’s
Financial Management Information System (such as revenue and expenditure
data) and the State’s Central Payroll Bureau (payroll data). These extracts are
performed as part of ongoing internal processes established by the Office of
Legislative Audits and were subject to various tests to determine data reliability.
We determined that the data extracted from these sources were sufficiently
reliable for the purposes the data were used during this audit. We also extracted
data from the Statewide Personnel System, Pre-Offer Check database, and the
Benefits Administration System for the purpose of selecting test items, such as
new hires and rate changes, determining the accuracy and completeness of the
POC database, and for assessing user access. We performed various tests of the
relevant data and determined that the data were sufficiently reliable for the
purposes the data were used during the audit. Finally, we performed other
auditing procedures that we considered necessary to achieve our audit objectives.
The reliability of data used in this report for background or informational
purposes was not assessed.
OPSB’s management is responsible for establishing and maintaining effective
internal control. Internal control is a process designed to provide reasonable
assurance that objectives pertaining to the reliability of financial records;
effectiveness and efficiency of operations, including safeguarding of assets; and
compliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations are achieved. As
provided in Government Auditing Standards, there are five components of
internal control: control environment, risk assessment, control activities,
information and communication, and monitoring. Each of the five components,
when significant to the audit objectives, and as applicable to OPSB, were
considered by us during the course of this audit.
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate.
26

--- Page 29 ---
Our reports are designed to assist the Maryland General Assembly in exercising
its legislative oversight function and to provide constructive recommendations for
improving State operations. As a result, our reports generally do not address
activities we reviewed that are functioning properly.
This report includes findings relating to conditions that we consider to be
significant deficiencies in the design or operation of internal control that could
adversely affect OPSB’s ability to maintain reliable financial records, operate
effectively and efficiently, and/or comply with applicable laws, rules, and
regulations. Our report also includes findings regarding significant instances of
noncompliance with applicable laws, rules, or regulations. Finally, this report
includes findings, which are identified as a “Policy Issue”. Such findings
represent significant operational or financial-related issues for which formal
criteria may not necessarily exist, and for which management has significant
discretion in addressing, but the recommendation represents prudent and or
practical actions, which we believe should be implemented by the agency to
improve outcomes. Other less significant findings were communicated to OPSB
that did not warrant inclusion in this report.
The response from DBM, on behalf of OPSB, to our findings and
recommendations is included as an appendix to this report. As prescribed in the
State Government Article, Section 2-1224 of the Annotated Code of Maryland,
we will advise DBM regarding the results of our review of its response.
27

--- Page 30 ---
Exhibit A
OPSB Reported Status of Findings from State Employee
Performance Evaluation Program and Management Training
Performance Audits as of April 15, 2022
State Employee Performance Evaluation Program
Status as of
4/15/2022 Based
Prior Recommendations
on OPSB
Update
1. We recommend that OPSB
a. develop comprehensive strategies for addressing
Completed
agency non-compliance with employee performance
evaluation requirements.
b. amend existing PEP Guidelines to specify that all
applicable Executive Branch agencies use SPS to
record evaluations and track evaluation activity, as Completed
well as to institute appropriate internal follow-up to
improve evaluation completion performance.
c. monitor SPS evaluation data to identify trends to
Completed
target follow-up efforts.
2. We recommend that OPSB
a. disclose the methodology used to prepare the APR Completed
and consider reporting evaluation data for an entire
fiscal year.
b. obtain and report employee performance evaluation
results for all Executive Branch agencies in the Completed
APR as required by law.
c. expand the number of agencies individually listed
on the APR (for example, individually list principal
Completed
agencies and other agencies with greater than 50
employees).
d. develop an automated capability to compile
evaluation data for the preparation of the APR to
eliminate the need for manual records, otherwise Completed
establish appropriate manual controls and
recordkeeping to support APR data.
e. establish procedures to verify that agencies
In Progress
accurately recorded evaluations in SPS.
28

--- Page 31 ---
State Employee Performance Evaluation Program
Status as of
4/15/2022 Based
Prior Recommendations
on OPSB
Update
f. require agencies to establish controls to ensure all
evaluations given were properly and accurately In Progress
recorded in SPS.
3. We recommend that OPSB
a. establish procedures for reviewing completed
Completed
evaluations and position descriptions, at least on a
test basis, for sufficiency of content.
b. ensure that applicable agencies are notified of
In Progress
deficiencies and take appropriate corrective actions.
c. enhance and clarify the PEP Guidelines to require
the establishment of measurable performance
standards in position descriptions and to require that
Completed
end-of-cycle evaluations include written specific
tasks to be achieved by employees during the next
rating period as required by State law.
d. ensure consistency in its PEP Guidelines and MS-22
Completed
instructions.
4. We recommend that OPSB ensure compliance with
State law requiring it to provide PEP training to agency
supervisors. Specifically OPSB should
Completed
a. clearly communicate its training expectations to state
agencies, including the need to ensure all supervisors
and managers are properly trained.
b. require State agencies to maintain detail PEP records
to track PEP training provided to each supervisor and
Completed
manager to substantiate the requirements of State law
have been met.
c. monitor state agency PEP training efforts, including
employee attendance/participation by requiring Completed
periodic reports on training activities.
5. We recommend that OPSB
a. develop approaches, such as employee surveys, for
Completed
evaluating the effectiveness of the PEP and the OPSB
training.
b. reassess the appropriateness of PEP Guidelines
pertaining to evaluating employee work quality for Completed
those rated satisfactory or better.
29

--- Page 32 ---
Management Training Report
Status as of
4/15/2022 Based
Prior Recommendations
on OPSB
Update
1. We recommend that DBM
a. establish and oversee a statewide management
training program to help ensure management
employees in the State Personnel Management
Completed
System receive consistent and appropriate training to
aid in the development of management skills. This
program could be administered either centrally or by
individual SPMS agencies.
b. consider consulting with other governments and
State of Maryland agencies to help identify best
practices concerning management training program Completed
content and participation.
c. consider addressing the aforementioned core
subjects, decide whether participation should be
Completed
mandatory or voluntary, offer a variety of delivery
methods, and require attendance records.
2. We recommend that DBM establish policies and
regulations that address and define its responsibilities
Completed
and the responsibilities of State agencies in connection
with offering management training.
30

--- Page 33 ---
APPENDIX
LARRY HOGAN DAVID R. BRINKLEY
Governor Secretary
BOYD K. RUTHERFORD MARC L. NICOLE
Lieutenant Governor Deputy Secretary
January 9, 2023
Mr. Gregory A. Hook, CPA
Legislative Auditor
Office of Legislative Audits
The Warehouse at Camden Yards, Suite 400
315 West Camden Street
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Dear Mr. Hook:
The Department of Budget and Management (DBM) has reviewed your draft audit report on the DBM –
Office of Personnel Services and Benefits for the period beginning September 8, 2017 and ending
November 1, 2021. As requested, attached are our responses to the findings in the report.
If you have any questions or need additional information, you may contact Marc Nicole at 410-260-7288
or Joan Peacock, Director of the Audit and Finance Compliance Unit, at 410-260-7079.
Sincerely,
David R. Brinkley
Secretary
cc: Marc Nicole, Deputy Secretary, DBM
Clifton Gray, Assistant Attorney General, DBM
Cindy Kollner, Executive Director, OPSB
Catherine Hackman, Deputy Executive Director, OPSB
Christina Kuminski, Director, Employee Benefits Division, OPSB
Sherreon Washington, Director, Contract Administration Division, OPSB
Jennifer Hines, Director, Personnel Services Division, OPSB
Joan Peacock, Director, Audit and Finance Compliance Unit, DBM
45 Calvert Street  Annapolis, MD 21401‐1907
Tel: 410‐260‐7041  Fax: 410‐974‐2585  Toll Free: 1‐800‐705‐3493  TTY Users: Call via Maryland Relay
http://dbm.maryland.gov

--- Page 34 ---
Department of Budget and Management
Office of Personnel Services and Benefits
Response to Legislative Audits Findings and Recommendations - January 2023
Audits of Employee Benefit Programs
Finding 1
OPSB did not attempt to recover approximately $1.2 million in liquidated damages and invalid
claim payments identified during certain 2017 and 2018 audits.
We recommend that OPSB
a. implement a formal policy on the collection of liquidated damages, including when to pursue
damages and a formal approval process when declining to collect damages due the State; and
b. ensure that amounts due from plan participants identified in claims eligibility audits are billed
in a timely manner, including the claims noted above.
Agency Response
Analysis
OPSB would like to ensure that the external administrative audits and internal
eligibility audits are characterized accurately by clarifying that:
● Administrative audits are managed through and by external contracted
auditors and then presented to the combined account management team
from Contract Administration Division (CAD) and the Employee
Benefit Division (EBD);
● Eligibility audits are managed internally by the EBD; and
● Each is subject to various and unique timelines and procedures.
We respectfully would like to acknowledge that the Employee Benefits
Division (EBD) experienced the departure of key staff during the time period
referenced, which additionally contributed to delays and the timeliness related
to both types of audits. Specifically,
● The EBD Director left employment in June 2019 and the position was
vacant until the new Director was hired in October of 2019;
● The EBD Contract Manager left employment shortly after the
departure of the Director; and
● A new EBD Director joined in October 2019.
Finally, we would like to recognize that in an effort to increase oversight of
OPSB contracts, OPSB created the CAD in August of 2019 and has steadily
increased its staffing levels.
Recommendation 1a Agree Estimated Completion Date: February 2023
OPSB attempts to collect all liquidated damages identified by our external
auditors, unless the plan administrator provides sufficient evidence to support
that the performance guarantee was met or if evidence is provided to support
that the missed performance guarantee was due to factors beyond the control
of the plan administrator. The oversight in following up on the Prescription
1

--- Page 35 ---
Department of Budget and Management
Office of Personnel Services and Benefits
Response to Legislative Audits Findings and Recommendations - January 2023
Drug Benefits program administrator audit of plan year 2017 was due to
several reasons, including the following:
● Plan year 2017 was the final year of that specifical administrator’s
contract with the State. If the administrator’s contract extended to plan
year 2018, it would have been followed up (and any oversight would
have been realized) as that is a requirement and included in the scope
of the audit of each benefit plan administrator.
● Discussions were being held with the administrator in March 2020
when COVID-19 shut down State activities. This not only disrupted
discussions but required resources to be focused on items that needed
attention related to the pandemic situation, including delays with
vendors and required contract modifications.
● The limited resources and turn-over in EBD, the Contract Manager and
CAD further added to the oversight related to this specific
administrator audit for plan year 2017.
EBD and CAD will work together in the development of a formal policy on
the collection of liquidated damages, including when to pursue and the
approval process when declining to collect damages due to the State.
Recommendation 1b Agree Estimated Completion Date: Completed
As mentioned in the analysis, the billing for amounts due from plan
participants for plan year 2018 eligibility audits was suspended due to the
emergency declaration in 2020. EBD collection efforts resumed the summer
of 2022, and all outstanding debts are in the process of being referred to
Central Collection Unit (CCU). EBD found that the referral process was
entirely manual and is creating a fully automated process to expedite all
collection efforts. Automation will be live by January 2023.
Going forward, EBD will ensure that amounts due from plan participants that
are identified in the claims eligibility audits are billed in a timely manner.
Finding 2
Audits of benefit program plans and claims eligibility were not completed in a timely manner.
We recommend that OPSB
a. ensure that all audits are completed within the required timeframe,
b. complete the past due audits of plan administrators and claims eligibility noted in this finding,
c. consider including in future audit contracts a provision for financial penalties or liquidated
damages for failure to meet established deadlines, and
d. formalize in writing the required timeframe for completing claims eligibility audits.
2

--- Page 36 ---
Department of Budget and Management
Office of Personnel Services and Benefits
Response to Legislative Audits Findings and Recommendations - January 2023
Agency Response
Analysis
OPSB and specifically the Contract Administration Division (CAD) in
coordination with the Employee Benefits Division (EBD) were delayed due to
mitigating circumstances outlined above. (See Finding 1 response.)
Recommendation 2a Agree Estimated Completion Date: December 2023
In 2022, EBD revised processes and produced formal SOPs with milestone
deadlines for the claims eligibility audits to ensure these audits are completed
per identified deadlines.
EBD and CAD will work together to develop a formal SOP, as needed, to
ensure benefit program plan audits are conducted as required. As noted in the
finding analysis, delays occurred due to several factors, including:
● COVID-19 and the related effects in the change in the operations of the
State, the benefit program plans, and the audit vendors;
● the change in the audit vendors which resulted in various follow up
needed with the new audit vendors to ensure the State received audits
that met expectations; and
● turn-over and limited resources within the CAD.
Additionally, CAD became aware that the audit vendors were advised by a
certain benefit program that audits of different plan years could not be worked
on simultaneously. CAD addressed this issue as soon as they were advised by
the auditors.
Going forward, we anticipate less delays and for the audit vendors to be able
to complete the benefit program plan audits as required per their contract.
During regular meetings with the audit vendors, CAD will discuss a plan to
get audits on track and in compliance with contract deadlines.
Recommendation 2b Agree Estimated Completion Date: December 2023
The claims eligibility audits for plan years 2019 and 2020 have been
completed. Plan year 2019 is currently in the collection process, and billings
for plan year 2020 will begin in early January 2023. The claims eligibility
audit for plan year 2021 will be completed by the end of calendar year 2022.
CAD is working with the audit vendors to facilitate completion of the benefit
program plan audits for the 2019 and 2020 plan years, and to ensure audits for
plan year 2021 and going forward are completed in compliance with contract
deadlines.
Recommendation 2c Agree Estimated Completion Date: June 2023
A Request for proposal (RFP) is currently in development for external audit
services. The development committee will include performance guarantees
specific to liquidated damages and failure to meet established deadlines.
3

--- Page 37 ---
Department of Budget and Management
Office of Personnel Services and Benefits
Response to Legislative Audits Findings and Recommendations - January 2023
Recommendation 2d Agree Estimated Completion Date: Completed
An SOP for the claims eligibility audit process was created on 3/8/2021. Since
then, SOPs have been revised as processes are enhanced and streamlined. The
SOP was updated 11/9/22 to include the timeframe for completing these
audits. We will continue to update the SOP related to this process, as
improvements and enhancements are identified.
Monitoring of State Personnel Management System Agency Payroll
Finding 3 (Policy Issue)
OPSB did not have comprehensive procedures to monitor and ensure that SPMS agencies
addressed all outstanding payroll discrepancies. Our review disclosed that agencies were not
correcting discrepancies, which resulted in potentially improper payments going undetected.
We recommend that OPSB
a. develop comprehensive procedures to effectively ensure SPMS agencies resolve all outstanding
payroll processing discrepancies timely, including the aforementioned 113 employees for
whom no timesheet was submitted; and
b. establish and take appropriate corrective action for agencies that fail to resolve the
discrepancies timely.
Agency Response
Analysis
OPSB had provided agencies with comprehensive procedures to monitor and
correct payroll discrepancies. OPSB currently has in place certain procedures
to identify potential errors which need agency follow up. OPSB runs certain
reports for irregularities and notifies agencies that corrective actions are
needed. However, OPSB agrees that these procedures could be enhanced to
ensure that the agencies were performing these tasks.
Recommendation 3a Agree Estimated Completion Date: February 2023
OPSB has comprehensive procedures for agency time and payroll staff to
follow to ensure accurate timekeeping and payroll results, but OPSB has
increased efforts to ensure that agencies are aware of these procedures
including instituting regular meetings with agencies. OPSB began performing
periodic reviews of the No Time Entered report. Agencies are notified of
discrepancies and advised of their responsibility to resolve those
discrepancies. OPSB requires agencies to notify us when corrections have
been made and, as necessary, to provide correct actions to ensure similar
4

--- Page 38 ---
Department of Budget and Management
Office of Personnel Services and Benefits
Response to Legislative Audits Findings and Recommendations - January 2023
discrepancies do not continue to occur. Additionally, we will be implementing
training to ensure that agencies understand and use the reporting tools
available in the SPS.
OPSB has worked with agencies to resolve the payroll processing
discrepancies for the 113 employees for whom no timesheet was submitted.
Recommendation 3b Agree Estimated Completion Date: April 2023
Persistent failure to identify and correct such issues at the agency level will be
brought to the attention of the agency head for appropriate action. These
notifications will be sent out on a quarterly basis, with the first quarterly report
of findings to be sent to the agency head on 4/1/23.
Finding 4
OPSB did not have comprehensive procedures to identify employees who were terminated or left
State service, and were not removed from the payroll timely. Our review disclosed that agencies
were not removing these employees timely and payments were made after those employees left
State service.
We recommend that OPSB
a. develop comprehensive procedures to identify employees who were terminated or left State
service and were not removed from the payroll in a timely manner;
b. use that data to identify any regular earnings paid after an employee left State service, and
investigate and recover any amounts improperly paid, including those noted above; and
c. provide additional guidance to agencies that consistently fail to remove terminated employees
from the payroll in a timely manner, and as a result increase the potential for invalid payroll
payments.
Agency Response
Analysis
The Finding block states “OPSB did not have comprehensive procedures to
ensure that employees who were terminated or left State service and were not
removed from the payroll timely.” OPSB would have no knowledge of when
an agency employee separates from State service until the agency processes
the resignation in Workday. Additionally, OPSB cannot monitor or evaluate
whether employees are removed from the payroll in a timely manner, until the
agency processes the resignation in Workday. These matters should be caught
by the agency, using processes and guidance provided by OPSB to SPMS
agencies, to reconcile payroll and reviewing reports, such as the SPMS Hires
and Terminations report.
5

--- Page 39 ---
Department of Budget and Management
Office of Personnel Services and Benefits
Response to Legislative Audits Findings and Recommendations - January 2023
OLA has mentioned the memorandum of understanding between CPB and
OPSB and noted that DBM certifies and is responsible for the transactions that
fall under its authority, which include erroneous payroll charges. This is
because DBM submits a file from SPS to CPB that is required for processing
payroll. However, OSPB requires agencies to certify that they confirm, have
verified and are submitting accurate payroll information for the employees of
their Agency. The agency certification also confirms acknowledgement that
they are responsible to resolve any inaccuracies identified or adjustments
needed. DBM OPSB must rely on the State agencies to provide this
certification for their agency’s employees under their authority as they provide
direct oversight of their agency’s employees and are in the best position to
make needed adjustments in SPS and/or follow up on any erroneous payroll
charges.
Recommendation 4a Agree Estimated Completion Date: April 2023
OPSB will issue guidance to agencies to indicate that terminations must be
processed within the same pay period of the effective date and to reiterate to
agencies the responsibility to address all HR transactions that are processed by
SPMS agencies, specifically for transactions that have downstream impacts on
payroll, benefits, etc.
In recent efforts to better ensure appropriate annual leave payouts, OPSB
began running a final payout report each pay period. This report also
identifies back dated terminations. As a part of the follow up related to
reviewing this report, OPSB reaches out to agencies with backdated
terminations to resolve errors in pay or leave. This effort provides the basis to
resolve employees paid past their termination date and to manually adjust
leave balances for appropriate annual leave payouts. Follow up is done to
ensure collection of overpayments along with application of retirement and
benefit contribution, subsidies, and applicable taxes.
Recommendation 4b Agree Estimated Completion Date: April 2023
Agree with Reservation
To the extent that OPSB can aid in the investigation of improper payments,
OPSB has and will continue to do so; this includes providing reports, training,
and guidance to agencies. However, the employing agency is the agency that
is required to investigate and recover overpayments or refer such matters, as
appropriate, for collections.
OPSB will contact and work with the applicable agencies to investigate and
recover any amounts properly paid related to the 7 payments totaling $35,200
noted in the Analysis.
6

--- Page 40 ---
Department of Budget and Management
Office of Personnel Services and Benefits
Response to Legislative Audits Findings and Recommendations - January 2023
Recommendation 4c Agree Estimated Completion Date: June 2023
OPSB will continue to address this issue in all SPMS agency training as
applicable; and will notify the agency HR Director and Agency Head of
improper payments due to late terminations and recommend appropriate
remedial or administrative action for persistent overpayment issues. Agency
HR has been receiving notices; however, the first notices to the Agency Head
will be sent June 2023.
Monitoring of Excessive Overtime
Finding 5 (Policy Issue)
OPSB did not have a comprehensive process in place to formally monitor or periodically evaluate
SPMS agency overtime, and did not have guidance for agencies to manage overtime usage, and
justify or prepare a plan to address actions to minimize or limit excessive overtime levels. We
identified high overtime levels at several agencies, including 549 employees whose overtime
earnings consistently exceeded their regular base salary.
We recommend that OPSB develop and implement comprehensive procedures and policies for
overtime usage in consultation with SPMS agencies and other DBM units. Specifically, we
recommend that these procedures and policies include
a. routinely performing data analysis to identify employees with potentially excessive overtime;
b. requiring documented justifications from the respective agencies for employees earning
excessive overtime and corrective action plans from the agencies to reduce overtime payments
in the future;
c. ensuring that agencies establish appropriate agency-based policies for managing and
monitoring overtime, and providing guidance as to the basic requirements such policies should
include; and
d. working in conjunction with the appropriate DBM units, including those with budgetary
authority, to address agencies with consistently excessive overtime (such as adding additional
positions).
Agency Response
Analysis
Recommendation 5a Agree Estimated Completion Date: April 2023
7

--- Page 41 ---
Department of Budget and Management
Office of Personnel Services and Benefits
Response to Legislative Audits Findings and Recommendations - January 2023
“Excessive Overtime” will be difficult to define across agencies that may have
very different staffing requirements and limitation, but we will work with
agencies to define this and develop a process, in consultation with their Budget
and HR staff, that the agencies may use to perform data analysis to identify
employees with potentially excessive overtime. While OPSB can develop a
process and provide guidance and various reports, agencies are in the best
position to perform the analysis to identify excessive overtime.
Recommendation 5b Agree Estimated Completion Date: April 2023
As part of our work with the agencies to assist in the development of agency-
specific overtime review processes, OPSB will ensure that the process
includes documented justifications for employees who earn high amounts of
overtime and will ask agencies to submit their corrective action plans for
review by OPSB.
Recommendation 5c Agree Estimated Completion Date: April 2023
DBM will develop a standard policy for managing and monitoring overtime,
which will include basic requirements and from which agencies can establish
an agency specific policy. DBM will request agencies establish their own,
agency specific policy.
Recommendation 5d Agree Estimated Completion Date: June 2023
OPSB will work with DBM’s Office of Budget Analysis to address agencies
with consistently high overtime by taking actions, such as: reviewing
minimum qualifications for positions, assisting with recruitment efforts, and/or
considering whether additional positions are warranted to address persistent
overtime issues.
Termination with Prejudice
Finding 6
OPSB did not ensure that employees terminated with prejudice were properly recorded in the
State database and were not rehired by SPMS agencies.
We recommend that OPSB
a. periodically compare the SPS termination data to POC and State payroll records to ensure
that all TWP employees are properly recorded in the POC and were not rehired by a SPMS
agency,
b. investigate and resolve the 19 identified discrepancies and inaccuracies noted in this finding,
and
c. take steps to help ensure that agencies review the POC database prior to hiring such as
providing additional direction and guidance to agencies.
8

--- Page 42 ---
Department of Budget and Management
Office of Personnel Services and Benefits
Response to Legislative Audits Findings and Recommendations - January 2023
Agency Response
Analysis
Recommendation 6a Agree Estimated Completion Date: January 2023
On at least a quarterly basis, OPSB will compare hiring and termination with
prejudice data in the Statewide Personnel System (SPS) to information
contained in the POC to ensure agencies are not rehiring individuals who have
been terminated with prejudice as well as to ensure all TWP employees are
properly recorded in the POC. Yearly, OPSB will send reminders to SPMS
agencies on the proper processing of termination with prejudice actions. We
are also developing training to enhance guidance and agency knowledge on
the processes related to this issue which will be incorporated into future
training schedules.
Recommendation 6b Agree Estimated Completion Date: Completed
For all SPMS agencies with discrepancies or inaccuracies identified in this
finding, OPSB will investigate and resolve the issues. Additionally, OPSB
will make recommendations for resolving discrepancies or inaccuracies
pertaining to former employees to non-SPMS agencies.
Recommendation 6c Agree Estimated Completion Date: Completed
OPSB has addressed this finding by communicating to both SPMS and non-
SPMS agencies the obligation to ensure employees who have been terminated
with prejudice are included in the POC and to review the POC prior to hiring.
We will send similar reminders to SPMS agencies on a yearly basis.
9

--- Page 43 ---
A T
UDIT EAM
Adam J. Westover, CPA
Audit Manager
Edwin L. Paul, CPA, CISA
Information Systems Audit Manager
Adam M. Auerback
Senior Auditor
Peter W. Chong
Information Systems Senior Auditor
Mariyum Gill
Ibijoke O. Owolabi, CPA
John B. Wachter, CFE
Staff Auditors
David R. Fahnestock, CPA
Data Analytics Manager
Charles H. Hinds IV, CPA
Data Analytics Senior Auditor