Title: Charles County Public Schools


CORRECTION:  Subsequent to the issuance of the Charles County Public Schools report dated January 10, 2023, a correction was made to the description of the y-axis in Figure 2 on page 6.
Date: 01/10/2023
Type: Local School Systems
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=63cec5aaa1ce5817e838b8e1
Extracted: 2025-06-19T23:03:09.927407
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Financial Management Practices Audit Report
Charles County Public Schools
January 2023
Public Notice
In compliance with the requirements of the State Government Article Section
2-1224(i), of the Annotated Code of Maryland, the Office of Legislative
Audits has redacted cybersecurity findings and related auditee responses
from this public report.
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Senator Clarence K. Lam, M.D. (Senate Chair) Delegate Jared Solomon (House Chair)
Senator Malcolm L. Augustine Delegate Steven J. Arentz
Senator Adelaide C. Eckardt Delegate Nicholas P. Charles II
Senator George C. Edwards Delegate Andrea Fletcher Harrison
Senator Katie Fry Hester Delegate Trent M. Kittleman
Senator Cheryl C. Kagan Delegate Carol L. Krimm
Senator Benjamin F. Kramer Delegate David Moon
Senator Cory V. McCray Delegate Julie Palakovich Carr
Senator Justin D. Ready Delegate Elizabeth G. Proctor
Senator Craig J. Zucker Delegate Geraldine Valentino-Smith
To Obtain Further Information
Office of Legislative Audits
The Warehouse at Camden Yards
351 West Camden Street, Suite 400
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Phone: 410-946-5900
Maryland Relay: 711
TTY: 410-946-5401 ꞏ 301-970-5401
E-mail: OLAWebmaster@ola.state.md.us
Website: www.ola.state.md.us
To Report Fraud
The Office of Legislative Audits operates a Fraud Hotline to report fraud, waste, or abuse involving State
of Maryland government resources. Reports of fraud, waste, or abuse may be communicated anonymously
by a toll-free call to 1-877-FRAUD-11, by mail to the Fraud Hotline, c/o Office of Legislative Audits, or
through the Office’s website.
Nondiscrimination Statement
The Department of Legislative Services does not discriminate on the basis of age, ancestry, color, creed,
marital status, national origin, race, religion, gender, gender identity, sexual orientation, or disability in the
admission or access to its programs, services, or activities. The Department’s Information Officer has been
designated to coordinate compliance with the nondiscrimination requirements contained in Section 35.107
of the United States Department of Justice Regulations. Requests for assistance should be directed to the
Information Officer at 410-946-5400 or 410-970-5400.

--- Page 3 ---
January 10, 2023
Senator Clarence K. Lam, M.D., Senate Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Delegate Jared Solomon, House Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Members of Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Annapolis, Maryland
Ladies and Gentlemen:
We conducted an audit of the financial management practices of the Charles
County Public Schools (CCPS) in accordance with the requirements of the State
Government Article, Section 2-1220(e) of the Annotated Code of Maryland. The
objectives of this audit were to evaluate whether CCPS’ procedures and controls
were effective in accounting for and safeguarding its assets and whether its
policies provided for the efficient use of financial resources.
Our audit disclosed that CCPS’ procurement policies were not sufficiently
comprehensive and were not always consistently used when obtaining goods and
services under intergovernmental cooperative purchasing agreements.
Furthermore, certain components of the payments to bus contractors did not
reflect actual costs or could not be supported.
Our audit also disclosed that CCPS needs to improve internal controls and
accountability in certain areas, including corporate purchasing cards (CPC),
payroll, and human resource processing. For example, CCPS allowed multiple
employees to share a CPC and did not make use of Level-3 detailed purchasing
data to help ensure the propriety of purchases. Additionally, CCPS did not ensure
critical human resources and payroll transactions were independently reviewed
for propriety in a timely manner.
In addition, significant risks existed within CCPS’ computer network. However
in accordance with the State Government Article, Section 2-1224(i) of the
Annotated Code of Maryland, we have redacted these findings from this audit

--- Page 4 ---
report. Specifically, State law requires the Office of Legislative Audits to redact
cybersecurity findings in a manner consistent with auditing best practices before
the report is made available to the public. The term “cybersecurity” is defined in
the State Finance and Procurement Article, Section 3A-301(b), and using our
professional judgment we have determined that the redacted findings fall under
the referenced definition. The specifics of the cybersecurity findings were
previously communicated to CCPS as well as those parties responsible for acting
on our recommendations.
Finally, our audit included a review to determine the status of 15 findings
contained in our preceding audit report. For the non-cybersecurity-related
findings, we determined that CCPS satisfactorily addressed 8 of those 11 findings.
The remaining 3 findings are repeated in this report.
CCPS’ response to this audit is included as an appendix to this report. In
accordance with State law, we have reviewed the response and, while CCPS
agrees with the recommendations in this report, we identified an instance in which
statements in the response required clarification. In this instance, we reviewed
and reassessed our audit documentation, and reaffirmed the validity of our
finding. In accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards,
we have included an “auditor’s comment” within CCPS’ response to explain our
position. We will advise the Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee of any
outstanding issues that we cannot resolve with CCPS. Consistent with the
requirements of State law, we have redacted the elements of CCPS’ response
related to cybersecurity audit findings.
We wish to acknowledge the cooperation extended to us during our audit by
CCPS and its willingness to address the audit issues and to implement appropriate
corrective actions.
Respectfully submitted,
Gregory A. Hook, CPA
Legislative Auditor
2

--- Page 5 ---
Table of Contents
Background Information 5
Statistical Overview 5
Oversight 6
External Audits 7
Status of Findings from Preceding Audit Report 8
Findings and Recommendations 10
Revenue and Billing Cycle 10
Federal Funds 11
Procurement and Disbursement Cycle
Finding 1 – Charles County Public Schools’ (CCPS’) procurement 13
policies did not incorporate certain recognized best practices when
participating in intergovernmental cooperative purchasing agreements.
 Finding 2 – CCPS allowed multiple employees to share corporate 14
purchasing cards and did not make use of Level-3 detailed purchasing
data to help ensure the propriety of purchases.
Human Resources and Payroll
 Finding 3 – CCPS did not ensure critical human resources and payroll 16
transactions were independently reviewed for propriety in a timely
manner.
Equipment Control and Accountability 17
Information Technology
Finding 4 – Redacted cybersecurity-related finding 18
Finding 5 – Redacted cybersecurity-related finding 18
Finding 6 – Redacted cybersecurity-related finding 18
Finding 7 – Redacted cybersecurity-related finding 18
* Denotes item repeated in full or part from preceding audit report
3

--- Page 6 ---
Finding 8 – Redacted cybersecurity-related finding 18
Facilities Construction, Renovation, and Maintenance 18
Transportation Services
 Finding 9 – CCPS did not ensure amounts paid to bus contractors were 21
reasonable and properly supported.
Food Services 22
School Board Oversight 23
Management of Other Risks 23
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology 25
Agency Response Appendix
* Denotes item repeated in full or part from preceding audit report
4

--- Page 7 ---
Background Information
Statistical Overview
Enrollment
According to student enrollment records compiled by the Maryland State
Department of Education (MSDE), Charles County Public Schools (CCPS)
ranked 9th in student enrollment among the 24 public school systems in Maryland.
Fiscal year 2021 full-time student enrollment was 26,768 students. CCPS had 39
schools, consisting of 22 elementary schools, 8 middle schools, 7 high schools,
and 2 other types of schools (vocational and special education).
Funding
CCPS revenues consist primarily of funds received from the State, Charles
County, and the federal government. According to CCPS’ audited financial
statements, revenues from all sources totaled approximately $498.1 million in
fiscal year 2021; including approximately $244.3 million from the State. See
Figure 1 below for CCPS’ revenue sources per enrolled student in fiscal year
2021 according to its audited financial statements.
Figure 1
CCPS Revenue Sources Per Enrolled Student
Fiscal Year 2021
Miscellaneous
Federal
$155
$1,000
1%
5%
State
Local $9,127
$8,327 49%
45%
Source: CCPS’ Fiscal Year 2021 Audited Financial Statements and MSDE Data
5

--- Page 8 ---
Expenditures
According to CCPS’ audited financial statements, fiscal year 2021 expenditures
were approximately $483 million. The largest expenditure category was salaries
and wages, including benefits, which accounted for approximately 64 percent of
total expenditures during fiscal year 2021. According to MSDE records, during
the 2020-2021 school year, CCPS had 3,666 full-time equivalent positions, which
consisted of 2,650 instructional and 1,016 non-instructional positions. Instruction
accounted for over half of CCPS’ expenditures on a categorical basis (see Figure
2).
Figure 2
CCPS Expenditures by Category and Selected Statistical Data
Fiscal Year 2021
(amounts in millions)
Instruction 1 1 $27$22 $2 7 7 2 1.9
56%
56% 56%
Facilities & Capital $92
$$9922.4
Projects 2 2 19%
191%9%
Administration & $45
$$4455.4
Support 3 3 10% 190%% E E nrE n o r nl o lrm l o lm lelmn e t n en t t
26,768
$42 26,72668,768
Special Education 4 4 9% $ $ 9 9 4 4 % % 1 2 .8 Em E E m pml p o l py o le y oe e ys e e s es
3,666
Transportation $25 3,6636,666
5 $24.5
5 5%$25
5% Cost per Pupil
5% CosCt opsetr p Peru pPiulpil
$7
Food Service 6 $7.0 $1 $ 8 1 $, 8 01 , 48 0 9, 4 0 9 49
1%$7
6 1%
1%
Source: CCPS’ Fiscal Year 2021 Audited Financial Statements and MSDE Data
Oversight
CCPS is governed by a local school board, consisting of seven elected voting
members and one non-voting student member. In accordance with State law,
MSDE exercises considerable oversight of CCPS through the establishment and
monitoring of various financial and academic policies and regulations, in
accordance with certain provisions of the Annotated Code of Maryland. MSDE
also works with CCPS to comply with the requirements and mandates of federal
6

--- Page 9 ---
law. The Charles County government exercises authority over CCPS primarily
through review and approval of CCPS’ annual operating and capital budgets.
External Audits
CCPS engages a certified public accounting firm to independently audit its annual
financial statements. The firm performs procedures to verify the amounts and
disclosures in the financial statements. The firm also evaluates the
appropriateness of accounting policies used and the reasonableness of significant
accounting estimates made by management. In the related audit reports, the firm
stated that the financial statements presented fairly, in all material respects, the
financial position of CCPS as of June 30, 2016, 2017, 2018, 2019, 2020 and 2021,
and the changes in its financial position and its cash flows for the years then
ended in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United
States of America.
Additionally, in accordance with Government Auditing Standards, as part of the
audited financial statements the accounting firm also issued separate reports on
CCPS’ control over financial reporting and its tests of CCPS’ compliance with
certain provisions of laws, regulations, contracts, grant agreements and other
matters. This report is an integral part of the annual independent audited financial
statements. Furthermore, the accounting firm also conducts the Single Audit of
CCPS’ federal grant programs. The Single Audit is intended to provide assurance
to the federal government that adequate internal controls are in place, and the
entity is generally in compliance with program requirements.
We reviewed the aforementioned financial statement audits and Single Audit
reports for fiscal years 2016 through 2021, and examined the related work papers
for the fiscal year 2020 audits, which were the latest available during our audit
fieldwork.
Certain work of the independent certified public accounting firm, which we
determined was reliable, covered areas included in the scope of our audit. As a
result, we did not conduct any audit work related to the following areas:
 State and local government revenues received via wire transfer
 Accounts receivables
 Federal grant activity
 Student Activity Funds
The independent accounting firm did not disclose any material deficiencies in
these areas.
7

--- Page 10 ---
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report
Our audit included a review to determine the status of the 15 findings contained in
our preceding audit report dated February 13, 2017. As disclosed in Figure 3, for
the non-cybersecurity-related findings, we determined that CCPS satisfactorily
addressed 8 of those 11 findings. The remaining 3 non-cybersecurity-related
findings are repeated in this report.
Figure 3
Status of Preceding Findings
Preceding Implementation
Finding Description
Finding Status
CCPS did not adequately restrict user access capabilities on its automated
Finding 1 Status Redacted 1
procurement and accounts payable system.
CCPS did not assess the benefits of using intergovernmental cooperative
purchasing agreements (ICPA) as required by State law, nor in most
Finding 2 Not repeated
cases did it establish that the ICPA contracts were awarded through a
competitive procurement process.
Certain contracts were awarded as sole source procurements without
Finding 3 appropriate justification, were not properly approved, or were not Not repeated
published in eMaryland Marketplace, as required.
CCPS allowed certain corporate purchasing cards (CPC) to be used by Repeated
Finding 4
multiple employees and CPCs were used to purchase gift cards. (Current Finding 2)
Human resources and payroll system user access capabilities were not
Repeated
Finding 5 adequately restricted. In addition, independent documented reviews of
(Current Finding 3)2
personnel and payroll transactions were not performed.
CCPS did not perform a complete annual physical inventory of
Finding 6 computers as required and access to the automated inventory records was Not repeated
not adequately restricted.
Numerous users had unnecessary modification access to critical files and
Finding 7 Status Redacted 1
programs.
Numerous third parties and students had unnecessary network level
Finding 8 Status Redacted 1
access to the entire CCPS internal network.
Publicly accessible servers were improperly located on the internal
Finding 9 network and intrusion detection prevention system coverage for Status Redacted 1
encrypted traffic did not exist.
1 Specific information on cybersecurity findings has been redacted from this publicly available
audit report in accordance with State Government Article, Section 2-1224(i) of the Annotated
Code of Maryland.
2 Specific information on the current status of the cybersecurity-related portion of this finding,
related to restricting access capabilities to the human resources and payroll system, has been
redacted from this publicly available audit report in accordance with State Government Article,
Section 2-1224(i) of the Annotated Code of Maryland.
8

--- Page 11 ---
Figure 3
Status of Preceding Findings
Preceding Implementation
Finding Description
Finding Status
CCPS lacked documentation it advised the Board that the price paid for
Finding 10 land purchased for a new school was significantly higher than the land’s Not repeated
appraised value.
CCPS did not base certain elements used to determine the per vehicle
Finding 11 Not repeated
allotment on market conditions or actual costs.
CCPS could not substantiate the basis for certain amounts paid to bus Repeated
Finding 12
contractors and those payments were higher than necessary. (Current Finding 9)
CCPS did not ensure the accuracy of data used to compute certain
Finding 13 payments to the bus contractors and lacked sufficient internal controls Not repeated
over the automated payment system.
Stop-loss coverage for employee and retiree health care was not
Finding 14 Not repeated
competitively procured.
CCPS did not ensure the propriety of certain claim payments for
Finding 15 Not repeated
employee and retiree health care costs.
9

--- Page 12 ---
Findings and Recommendations
Revenue and Billing Cycle
Background
Charles County Public Schools (CCPS) revenues consist primarily of funds
received from the State, Charles County, and the federal government. According
to CCPS’ audited financial statements, revenues from all sources totaled
approximately $498.1 million in fiscal year 2021; including approximately $244.3
million (or 49 percent) from the State.
External Audits
There were similarities between the work of the independent certified public
accounting firm (CPA) that audited the CCPS financial statements and the
objectives of our audit of certain revenue activities. As a result, we relied on this
work to provide audit coverage for State and local government revenues received
via wire transfer and accounts receivable, for which the auditor’s procedural
review and testing disclosed no material weaknesses or significant deficiencies.
School Activity Funds
Schools collect funds for other purposes such as student activities, clubs, and
school publications. Because they are not considered school revenue, these
school activity funds are accounted for separately by each school, and reported in
summary in the audited financial statements. During fiscal year 2021, school
activity collections totaled $1.7 million and the June 30, 2021 fund balance was
$2.7 million.
CCPS’ Board of Education has a fiduciary responsibility to ensure that school
activity funds were used only for intended purposes. CCPS contracts with a CPA
to conduct reviews of all schools’ activity funds, on an annual rotating basis. The
results of the CPA’s reviews were provided to CCPS management to be
addressed. Our review of the CPA’s findings during fiscal years 2016 through
2020 disclosed that the management of these funds was generally adequate and
that any control weaknesses identified were not prevalent. The CPA’s testing did
not identify any improprieties in regards to the use of funds.
Conclusion
Based on our current assessment of significance and risk relative to our audit
objectives, we relied on the work of others to provide audit coverage in this area
including procedures and controls related to the accounting for and safeguarding
of material revenue and billing activity.
10

--- Page 13 ---
Federal Funds
Background
CCPS receives funds pertaining to federal government programs that are
generally restricted for use for a specific program (such as the School Lunch
Program or Special Education). According to CCPS’ Single Audit, fiscal year
2020 federal expenditures totaled $18.5 million, excluding federally funded fee-
for-service programs such as Medicaid reimbursement for special education
services totaling $1.3 million.
According to CCPS’ records, CCPS was awarded federal COVID-19 pandemic
grant funds totaling $63 million to be distributed over federal fiscal years 2020 to
2024 under the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security Act; Coronavirus
Response and Relief Supplemental Appropriations Act; and American Recovery
Plan Act. Reported CCPS expenditures related to these COVID-19 grant
programs totaled $20.6 million, from March 2020 to March 2022, and were
primarily comprised of personal protection equipment, sanitary supplies, and
student laptops. CCPS initially funded the expenditures with State and local
funds and intends to pursue reimbursement from the aforementioned programs to
the extent allowed.
Single Audit Reports Disclosed No Material Weaknesses
There were similarities in the work performed by the independent certified public
accounting firm that conducted the Single Audits of CCPS’ federal grants and the
objectives of our audit in this area. In addition to expressing an opinion on
CCPS’ compliance with the terms of several grant programs, the auditor also
considered the existing internal control structure’s impact on compliance and
audited the required Schedules of Expenditures of Federal Awards (which
includes claimed and reported grant expenditures) for fiscal years 2016 to 2020.
The aforementioned Single Audits conducted through fiscal year 2020 did not
include COVID-19 grant funds.
The related reports stated that CCPS complied, in all material respects, with the
requirements applicable to its major federal programs. With respect to internal
controls over compliance with, and the operation of major federal programs, the
auditor did not identify significant deficiencies or material weaknesses.
Medicaid Funds for Eligible Services
CCPS has established a procedure to identify children eligible for Medicaid-
subsidized services and the services rendered. Medicaid is an entitlement
program for which certain service costs can be reimbursed to CCPS. Medicaid
activity is not covered by the Single Audit of federal grants.
11

--- Page 14 ---
The Maryland State Department of Education’s Interagency Medicaid Monitoring
Team issued a report on August 27, 2020 of the results of its review of 47 student
case files for 68 criteria (including the correct billing of Medicaid for eligible
services). The report found that CCPS was 100 percent compliant with 57 criteria
and between 50 to 99 percent compliant with the remaining 11 criteria.
According to CCPS records, fiscal year 2020 state and federal reimbursements for
Medicaid-subsidized services totaled approximately $937,000, which was 34
percent lower than the previous year. We were advised by CCPS that this
decrease was due to the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic health crisis, as
certain services could not be provided or did not qualify for reimbursement in a
virtual environment.
Conclusion
Based on our current assessment of significance and risk relative to our audit
objectives, our audit did not include a review of Medicaid subsidized services.
Further, we relied on the work of the independent certified public accounting firm
that conducted the Single Audits for all other work in the federal funds area,
including policies, procedures, and controls with respect to federal grants and
expenditures.
Procurement and Disbursement Cycle
Background
According to the audited financial statements and CCPS records, disbursements
(excluding payroll) totaled $173.2 million during fiscal year 2021. CCPS uses an
automated system for purchases and disbursements. Requisitions are created in
paper copy by departments and are subject to departmental approvals. Purchase
orders are prepared on the system as a result of the departmental requisition
approvals. The purchasing department generally handles the solicitation, bid
evaluation, and establishment of contracts. The receipt of goods and services is
confirmed by the receiving school or department. Payments are processed by the
finance department through the automated system, which either prints vendor
checks or transfers the funds electronically, and then posts the payment to the
financial records.
CCPS’ written procurement policies require that procurements exceeding $25,000
be competitively bid in accordance with Section 5-112 of the Education Article of
the Annotated Code of Maryland. Contracts and agreements exceeding $25,000
are to be approved by the Board.
12

--- Page 15 ---
Finding 1
CCPS procurement policies did not incorporate certain recognized best
practices when participating in intergovernmental cooperative purchasing
agreements (ICPA).
Analysis
Certain recognized best practices were not incorporated into CCPS procurement
policies and were not used consistently by CCPS when participating in an ICPA.
State law, which legal counsel to the Maryland General Assembly advised us is
applicable to local education agencies, allows the use of ICPAs only after the
using entity has determined (or assessed) in writing that the use of such
arrangements will provide cost benefits, promote administrative efficiencies, or
promote intergovernmental cooperation3.
Our review of CCPS procurement policies disclosed that the following critical
best practices for the use of ICPAs were not included.
 Analyze all costs of conducting competitive solicitations
 Research, compare, and evaluate available ICPAs
 Verify the ICPA solicitation was competitively bid and publicly advertised
and obtain originating agency’s competitive procurement documentation
(including public advertisements and proposal evaluations)
 Verify terms, scope of services, specifications, and price meet its needs
We tested CCPS’ participation in three ICPAs (selected based on significance)
during fiscal years 2019 to 2021, with contract awards totaling approximately
$3.8 million. Our review disclosed that three of the four best practices (analyzing
the costs of conducting competitive solicitations; researching, comparing, and
evaluating other available ICPAs; and verifying terms, scope of services,
specifications and price meet its needs) were not performed for the three ICPAs
tested. However, we did find that other best practices were performed despite not
being included in CCPS’ policies. Specifically, CCPS verified that the ICPA had
a clause allowing utilization by other parties, executed an addendum of
participation with the lead contract, and obtained a copy of the ICPA and related
3 Section 13-110 of the State Finance and Procurement Article, of the Annotated Code of
Maryland, in part, defines an ICPA as a contract that is entered into by at least one governmental
entity in a certain manner, that is available for use by the governmental entity entering the
contract and at least one additional governmental entity, and that is intended to promote
efficiency and savings that can result from intergovernmental cooperative purchasing. The
aforementioned law applies to all ICPAs regardless of the services, goods, or commodities
purchased. In addition, Section 5-112(a)(3) of the Education Article, of the Code provides that
local education agencies do not need to conduct competitive procurements for goods and
commodities if they use a contract awarded by public agencies or intergovernmental purchasing
organizations and the originating procuring agency followed public bidding procedures.
13

--- Page 16 ---
price lists for invoice verification for the three ICPAs we reviewed. Incorporating
ICPA best practices into CCPS procurement policies could help ensure they are
consistently used.
The Institute for Public Procurement, formerly known as the National Institute of
Government Purchasing, as well as other public and educational organizations
have published ICPA best practices. These practices include comprehensive
multi-step checklists that require, among other things (as per the list above), that
prospective ICPA users verify that the contract allows other entities to participate.
In addition, ICPA users should ensure that the contract was awarded through a
competitive procurement process, and requires that addendums be executed
documenting their participation and incorporating local required terms and
conditions.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that CCPS incorporate the aforementioned best practices
into its procurement policies, and ensure that the performance of the best
practices is documented when evaluating and participating in ICPAs.
Finding 2
CCPS allowed multiple employees to share corporate purchasing cards
(CPC) and did not make use of Level-3 detailed purchasing data to help
ensure the propriety of purchases.
Analysis
CCPS allowed multiple employees to share certain CPC and did not make use of
Level-3 purchasing data to help ensure the propriety of the purchases. According
to CCPS records, as of August 3, 2021, there were 204 active cards and related
expenditures totaled approximately $2.4 million during fiscal year 2021.
 CCPS issued shared CPCs (known as “site” cards) to specific departments or
schools that were used by multiple employees to process transactions. During
fiscal year 2021, CCPS had 84 active “site” cards that had monthly credit
limits ranging from $1,000 to $50,000 and were used to process transactions
totaling approximately $687,000. Although CCPS policy required the
maintenance of logs recording who used the cards, it would be difficult to
identify the employee responsible for any unauthorized transactions.
Specifically, employees using the card could maintain the card’s information
and make online purchases at a later date, negating the accountability of the
CPC log. Additionally, the bank’s card holder agreement provides that
accounts that are not issued to an individual (such as site cards) will be the
14

--- Page 17 ---
sole responsibility of CCPS, and no claims or requests can be made of the
bank with respect to any unauthorized use. Consequently, CCPS would
assume liability for improper use of site cards.
 Supervisors did not use available detailed Level-3 data to ensure the propriety
of purchases. CCPS management advised that Level-3 data is not available
for all transactions and the supervisor’s monthly review of detail receipts and
invoices is satisfactory. CCPS further advised that Level-3 data can be
reviewed by supervisors at their discretion if a transaction is deemed
questionable, but is not required to be used. Incorporating a required review
of Level-3 data is important for reviewing propriety of transactions, and has
been required of State CPC users. In this regard, the Comptroller of
Maryland’s Corporate Purchasing Card Program Policy and Procedures
Manual requires State agencies to verify Level-3 data to transaction logs and
document monthly reviews of Level-3 data as part of transaction monitoring.
Level-3 data, which are provided by certain merchants, consist of detailed
descriptions of items purchased and provide supervisory personnel with
additional information to help detect questionable purchases. Our review of
the available Level-3 data and related testing did not identify any improper
transactions.
A similar condition regarding the use of “site” cards was commented upon in our
prior audit report. In response to the prior finding, CCPS acknowledged the
validity of our finding and related recommendation, but felt that its policies and
procedures provided controls to address the added risk involved with using site
cards. Since the credit card company advised that CCPS would assume risk for
any fraudulent transactions on these cards, we continue to believe the site cards
should be discontinued.
Recommendation 2
We recommend that CCPS
a. establish individual accountability for CPC procurement transactions by
assigning a separate purchasing card to each authorized user (repeat);
and
b. require supervisors to use Level-3 data, when available, as a part of the
monthly supervisory review to aid in the assessment of the propriety of
purchases.
15

--- Page 18 ---
Human Resources and Payroll
Background
Payroll expense represents the largest single cost component in the CCPS budget.
According to CCPS’ records, fiscal year 2021 salary, wage, and benefit costs
totaled $309.9 million, representing approximately 64 percent of the total
expenditures. According to Maryland State Department of Education reports,
during the 2020-2021 school year, CCPS had 3,666 full-time equivalent positions,
which consisted of 2,650 instructional and 1,016 non-instructional positions.
CCPS uses automated systems to maintain human resources information, record
employee time, track leave usage, and process and record payroll transactions.
Leave for full time employees is approved by supervisors in a time management
system which is then uploaded to the payroll system to create electronic bi-weekly
time records, and any adjustments are processed by central payroll personnel.
Manual timesheets are used to record overtime hours, which are approved by
supervisors prior to processing by central payroll personnel.
Finding 3
CCPS did not ensure critical human resources and payroll transactions were
independently reviewed for propriety in a timely manner.
Analysis
CCPS did not ensure critical human resources and payroll transactions were
independently reviewed for propriety in a timely manner. Specifically, the
employee who performed the manual review of transactions (such as personnel
additions and salary changes) prior to system entry also had access to make
critical changes to human resources and payroll transactions. Furthermore, while
CCPS advised us that the Internal Audit unit routinely performed an independent
review, on a test basis, of critical human resources and payroll transactions at the
conclusion of each pay period, the reviews were not always conducted timely.
For example, our test of the reviews for 12 pay periods during fiscal year 2021
disclosed that the reviews for 5 pay periods were conducted 59 to 107 days after
the related payments.
As a result, improper or erroneous additions and salary changes could be
processed without timely detection. Our testing did not disclose any such
improper transactions. According to CCPS records, during fiscal year 2021, 351
employees were added to the payroll and salary increases totaling $3.4 million.
A similar condition regarding the lack of an independent review of human
resources and payroll transactions was commented upon in our two preceding
16

--- Page 19 ---
audit reports dating back to July 2010. In response to our prior report, CCPS
indicated that procedures had been implemented to ensure critical transactions
were subject to independent review. As noted above, while a procedure was in
place, the verifications were not independent and/or timely.
Recommendation 3
We recommend that CCPS independently review critical human resources
and payroll transactions recorded in the system (such as, personnel additions
and salary changes) in a timely manner (such as, within 30 days) (repeat).
We advised CCPS on using existing personnel to review critical human
resources and payroll transactions independently.
Equipment Control and Accountability
Background
According to CCPS’ audited financial statements, the undepreciated value of its
capital equipment inventory was $32.9 million as of June 30, 2020. CCPS
maintains centralized automated inventory records for equipment with a cost of
$5,000 or more (including assets capitalized for financial statement purposes). In
addition, CCPS’ Department of Information Technology maintains inventory
records of certain computer hardware assigned to schools, students, and
employees. CCPS has established comprehensive written equipment policies and
has processes to perform annual inventories.
Conclusion
Based on our current assessment of significance and risk relative to our audit
objectives, our audit did not include a review of policies, procedures, and controls
with respect to the equipment area of operations.
Information Technology
We determined that Findings 4 through 8 related to “cybersecurity”, as defined by
the State Finance and Procurement Article, Section 3A-301(b) of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, and therefore are subject to redaction from the publicly
available report in accordance with the State Government Article, Section 2-
1224(i). Consequently, the specifics of the following findings, including the
analysis, related recommendations, along with CCPS’ responses, have been
redacted from this report copy.
17

--- Page 20 ---
Finding 4
Redacted cybersecurity-related finding.
Finding 5
Redacted cybersecurity-related finding.
Finding 6
Redacted cybersecurity-related finding.
Finding 7
Redacted cybersecurity-related finding.
Finding 8
Redacted cybersecurity-related finding.
Facilities Construction, Renovation, and Maintenance
Background
CCPS employs a staff of 347 employees to maintain 39 schools (including
vocational and special education) and a number of other facilities (such as
administrative and support offices). According to its fiscal year 2021 Capital
Improvement Plan, necessary construction, major renovations, and systemic
improvements to CCPS’ facilities over the next six years are estimated to cost
approximately $292 million.
CCPS Capital Projects Were Properly Approved and Related Expenditures
Were Generally Properly Supported
Our review of five high dollar value construction-related procurements awarded
during fiscal years 2017 through 2021 totaling $86.4 million disclosed that the
contracts were competitively procured and properly approved by the Board. In
addition, our test of four invoices totaling $1.5 million for these contracts
disclosed that they were properly supported and in accordance with contract
terms.
18

--- Page 21 ---
Processes are in Place to Promote Ongoing Facility Maintenance and to
Minimize Energy Costs
Our review disclosed that CCPS has processes in place to promote ongoing
facility maintenance and to minimize energy costs. For example, CCPS provides
preventive maintenance of its buildings and equipment with the goal of
preventing emergency repairs. In addition, CCPS reviews utility billings to
monitor energy usage and related costs. CCPS participates in various programs
with the local utility companies such as the Demand Response Program that
reduces energy usage during various non-peak periods, like the summer months.
Conclusion
Our audit did not disclose any significant deficiencies in the design or operation
of CCPS’ internal control over the facilities construction, renovation, and
maintenance financial-related areas of operations reviewed. Our audit also did
not disclose any significant instances of noncompliance with applicable laws,
rules, or regulations.
Transportation Services
Background
According to statistics compiled by the Maryland State Department of Education
(MSDE), CCPS has approximately 25,700 students eligible to receive student
transportation service. CCPS reported that 7.2 million route miles were traveled
to transport students for the 2019-2020 school year4 using 381 contractor-owned
buses. CCPS bus contracts are for the 15-year service life of the contractor’s bus,
subject to the Board’s right to terminate the contract for various reasons (such as,
available funding, cause, contractor insolvency, termination of routes to reduce or
consolidate routes). According to CCPS financial records, fiscal year 2020
transportation costs totaled $30.1 million, of which $28.5 million (95 percent)
were payments for the contracted bus services for various costs. The cost
components for contractor bus payments for fiscal year 2019 are summarized in
Figure 4.
4 Due to the COVID-19 pandemic, student transportation stopped on March 13, 2020 and did not
resume until March 22, 2021. During this time, CCPS continued to pay its bus contractors at its
agreed-upon rates. CCPS advised us that it used its bus contractors to deliver food to students’
homes.
19

--- Page 22 ---
Figure 4
Cost Components for Bus Contractor Payments
Fiscal Year 2019*
(dollar amounts in millions)
Cost Component Amount
Reimbursements for Drivers Hourly Rates $ 10.70 39%
Maintenance Fee and Fuel Costs 8.16 30%
Per-Vehicle Allotment (PVA) – reimbursement for the
4.12 15%
cost of purchasing a bus
School Activities (Field Trips, Athletics), Out-of-
2.31 8%
County Transportation, and Summer School
Other Costs – (such as Spare Buses, Benefit Trust
Contribution, Driver Sick Leave, Administrative Costs, 2.19 8%
Sales Tax, Insurance)
Operations Fee - reimbursement of certain
0.08 0%
administrative costs (such as rent and utilities)
Total $ 27.56
* Fiscal year 2019 was used for our analysis since it represented a full year of bus
operations, whereas bus operations for fiscal year 2020 were shortened due to the onset of
the COVID-19 pandemic in March 2020 that led to school closures, virtual learning, and
the decline in student transportation services.
Source: CCPS Records
School Bus Safety Cameras
As allowed by State and County law, school bus safety cameras are used to monitor
drivers who illegally pass a stopped CCPS school bus. CCPS advised us that it was
not involved in selecting the vendor or negotiating the terms and conditions of the
contract, and the decision to install cameras and implement this monitoring process
was collectively taken by CCPS, the Charles County Government, and the Charles
County Sheriff’s Department. Further, the vendor was selected by Charles County
Government based on its procurement process (which was not included in the scope
of this audit).
A five-year contract was awarded to a vendor in July 2021 (with five one-year
renewal options) to install and operate cameras on CCPS’ school buses, and the
cameras would be owned and maintained by the vendor. The cameras take images
of vehicles (including a specific image of the vehicle license plate) illegally passing
a bus that is operating its alternating flashing red lights. The contract also provided
for cameras inside the bus to monitor the conduct of drivers and students, along
with global positioning units to track the buses.
20

--- Page 23 ---
Vendor employees identify the registered owner(s) of the vehicles using access
provided to MVA databases. The Charles County Sherriff’s Department verifies
the image of the event constitutes a violation and a citation is printed and mailed
to the registered owner and related payments are processed by the vendor. As of
the date of the contract, vehicles that are caught on camera illegally passing a bus
are assessed a $250 violation. The contract provided that the vendor would
receive a monthly technology fee of $85 per bus and citation revenue would be
disbursed 60 percent to the vendor and 40 percent to the County.
As noted above, CCPS’ role in the procurement and monitoring of the externally
mounted cameras to take images of motorists illegally passing a school bus is
extremely limited, and therefore we did not perform audit work in this area
(including cybersecurity over the vendor’s system). Although CCPS does have a
monitoring role with the cameras inside the buses, it has no discernable financial
impact, and was not reviewed during this audit.
Finding 9
CCPS did not ensure amounts paid to bus contractors were reasonable and
properly supported.
Analysis
CCPS did not ensure amounts paid to bus contractors were reasonable and
properly supported.
 CCPS could not document how it determined the reasonableness of the annual
operations fee paid to bus contractors beginning in school year 2017-20185.
The operations fee is intended to reimburse the bus contractors for
administrative costs, such as rent and utilities. Operation fee payments for all
contractors for the 161 buses purchased from 2017 through 2021 will total
$27.8 million over the 15 year lives of these buses.
 CCPS could not support the propriety of the estimated $6 million paid to bus
contractors for per-mile bus maintenance costs ($0.93 per mile) during fiscal
year 2019. The per-mile bus maintenance cost is intended to fund the
expenses incurred by the bus contractors for maintaining the bus. A similar
condition was commented upon in our preceding report. In response to that
report, CCPS indicated that it would establish a work group with a goal to
produce actual bus operating cost and payroll costs to associate with its
5 Contractors receive differing annual operations fee payments based on the year that their bus was
placed into service. For example, for school year 2021-2022, the annual operations fee payments
were $11,600 per bus.
21

--- Page 24 ---
payment schedule by fiscal year 2018. However, as noted above, procedures
had not been implemented during our current audit.
 The standard contract language used by CCPS for its bus contracts did not
include a right to audit provision. Such a provision would allow CCPS to
verify the contractors’ actual costs of purchasing and maintaining the buses to
support the PVA, the hourly reimbursements for drivers, per-mile
maintenance fee, fuel costs, and the annual administrative fees. The State of
Maryland has established a preference in regulation that all contracts require
contractors to make their records available for audit by authorized
representatives of the State at all reasonable times.
Recommendation 9
We recommend that CCPS
a. document the reasonableness of the operations fee paid to contractors;
b. use actual documented maintenance costs, cost studies, or independently
derived estimates for establishing contractor rates for per-mile
maintenance costs (repeat); and
c. include provisions to audit the bus contractors in future contracts and use
it, as deemed appropriate, to determine the actual cost of operating
contractor buses.
Food Services
Background
According to CCPS’ audited financial statements, food service operating
expenditures totaled $11.0 million in fiscal year 2020 and were primarily funded
with federal funds totaling $6.9 million and food sales totaling $3.6 million.
According to MSDE records, in fiscal year 2020 CCPS had 111 food service
positions for its 39 schools, consisting of 106 cafeteria positions and 5
administrative positions.
Similar to other Maryland Local Education Agencies, CCPS continued to serve
meals from certain schools during the COVID-19 pandemic health crisis by
distributing food through the use of refrigerated food trucks and backpack food
sacks.
Conclusion
Based on our current assessment of significance and risk relative to our audit
objectives, our audit did not include a review of policies, procedures, and controls
with respect to the Food Service financial area of operations.
22

--- Page 25 ---
School Board Oversight
Background
The Charles County Board of Education (the Board) is composed of seven elected
members and one non-voting student member. The Board contracts with a
certified public accounting firm to conduct independent audits of the CCPS
financial statements and federal programs. To assist in its oversight of various
areas of CCPS operation and governance, the Board established several
committees, such as a citizen advisory board and an ethics panel.
CCPS Adopted an Ethics Policy that Met the Requirements of State Law
The CCPS Board has adopted a detailed ethics policy that conforms to State Law
and was approved by the State Ethics Commission. The policy is applicable to
both Board members and CCPS employees and includes provisions for conflicts
of interest and financial disclosures by Board members and certain employees.
Specifically, annual financial disclosure statements are required to be filed by
Board members, candidates for the Board, the Superintendent, and other
administrators (assistant superintendents, executive directors, directors, and
school principals) by April 30th of each year.
In accordance with the policy, CCPS established an Ethics Panel consisting of
five members (a combination of Board members and public citizens) appointed by
the Board to interpret ethics policies and provide advice on policy
implementation. The Panel also reviews and rules on any reported complaints of
ethics violations. Our review of the records for Board members and CCPS
employees required to submit financial disclosure forms for calendar year 2020
disclosed that all forms were submitted as required.
Conclusion
Our audit did not disclose any reportable conditions related to school board
oversight.
Management of Other Risks
Healthcare Background
CCPS is self-insured and covers the cost of the medical services received by its
employees, dependents, and retirees. CCPS negotiates contracts with a third-
party administrator (TPA) firm to process health care claims for employee and
retiree medical, vision, dental, pharmacy costs, and for stop-loss insurance
coverage.
23

--- Page 26 ---
CCPS reimburses the TPA for claims paid on behalf of employees, dependents,
and retirees in the prior month. In addition, CCPS pays a monthly administrative
fee that includes stop-loss insurance to indemnify CCPS against health insurance
claims that exceed $250,000 per participant per plan year (as of the 2021 plan
year). As of November 2021, CCPS health insurance benefits were provided to
approximately 4,200 enrolled employees, dependents, and retirees. According to
CCPS records, during calendar year 2021 CCPS paid the TPA $45.6 million,
including $40.9 million for reimbursement of claim payments, $2.2 million for
administrative fees, and $2.5 million for stop-loss insurance coverage.
CCPS hired an independent firm to audit the propriety of the medical claims paid
on its behalf by the TPA in calendar year 2019 to ensure that the services were
actually provided, were covered by the health plans, and were appropriately
priced. The audit concluded that claims payments were reasonable and disclosed
no significant discrepancies. CCPS management advised us that it plans to
perform claims audits every three years.
Conclusion
Our audit did not disclose any reportable conditions related to the management of
other risks area of operations reviewed, including health care insurance.
24

--- Page 27 ---
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We conducted a performance audit to evaluate the effectiveness and efficiency of
the financial management practices of the Charles County Public Schools
(CCPS). We conducted this audit under the authority of the State Government
Article, Section 2-1220(e) of the Annotated Code of Maryland, and performed it
in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards. Those
standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient,
appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and
conclusions based on our audit objectives. We believe that the evidence obtained
provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit
objectives.
We had two broad audit objectives:
1. Evaluate whether the CCPS procedures and controls were effective in
accounting for and safeguarding its assets.
2. Evaluate whether the CCPS policies provided for the efficient use of
financial resources.
In planning and conducting our audit of CCPS, we focused on 11 major financial-
related areas of operations as approved on December 6, 2016 by the Joint Audit
and Evaluation Committee of the Maryland General Assembly in accordance with
the enabling legislation. The scope of the work performed in each of these areas
was based on our assessments of significance and risk. Therefore, our follow-up
on the status of findings included in our preceding audit report on CCPS dated
February 13, 2017, was limited to those findings that were applicable to the
current audit scope for each of the 11 areas.
The audit objectives excluded reviewing and assessing student achievement,
curriculum, teacher performance, and other academic-related areas and functions.
Also, we did not evaluate the CCPS Comprehensive Education Master Plan or
related updates, and we did not review the activities, financial or other, of any
parent teacher association, group, or funds not under the local board of
education’s direct control or management.
To accomplish our objectives, we reviewed applicable State laws and regulations
pertaining to public elementary and secondary education, as well as policies and
procedures issued and established by CCPS. We also interviewed personnel at
CCPS and the Maryland State Department of Education (MSDE), and staff at
other local school systems in Maryland (as appropriate). Our audit procedures
25

--- Page 28 ---
included inspections of documents and records, and to the extent practicable,
observations of CCPS operations. We also tested transactions and performed
other auditing procedures that we considered necessary to achieve our objectives,
generally for the period from July 1, 2018 to July 8, 2021.
Generally, transactions were selected for testing based on auditor judgment,
which primarily considers risk, the timing or dollar amount of the transaction, or
the significance of the transaction to the area of operation reviewed. As a matter
of course, we do not normally use sampling in our tests, so unless otherwise
specifically indicated, neither statistical nor non-statistical audit sampling was
used to select the transactions tested. Therefore, unless sampling is specifically
indicated in a finding, the results from any tests conducted or disclosed by us
cannot be used to project those results to the entire population from which the test
items were selected. For certain areas within the scope of the audit, we relied on
the work performed by the independent accounting firm that annually audits
CCPS’ financial statements and conducts the federal Single Audit.
We used certain statistical data—including financial and operational—compiled
by MSDE from various informational reports submitted by the Maryland local
school systems. This information was used in this audit report for background or
informational purposes, and was deemed reasonable.
We also extracted data from the CCPS automated financial management system
for the purpose of testing expenditure and payroll transactions. We performed
various audit procedures on the relevant data and determined the data were
sufficiently reliable for the purposes the data were used during the audit.
CCPS’ management is responsible for establishing and maintaining effective
internal control. Internal control is a process designed to provide reasonable
assurance that objectives pertaining to the reliability of financial records;
effectiveness and efficiency of operations including safeguarding of assets; and
compliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations are achieved. As
provided in Government Auditing Standards, there are five components of
internal control: control environment, risk assessment, control activities,
information and communication, and monitoring. Each of the five components,
when significant to the audit objectives, and as applicable to CCPS, were
considered by us during the course of this audit.
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate. In addition,
26

--- Page 29 ---
to the conditions included in this report, other findings were communicated to
CCPS that were not deemed significant and, consequently, did not warrant
inclusion in this report.
We conducted our audit fieldwork from July 8, 2021 to February 10, 2022. On
March 16, 2020, due to the COVID-19 pandemic health crisis, the State
Superintendent of Schools decided to close school and administrative buildings to
employees and the public for a two-week period. This was eventually extended
for the remainder of the 2019-2020 school year with limited access by certain
employees. All CCPS buildings were open during the entire period of our
fieldwork, so the objectives and scope of our audit were not impacted.
State Government Article Section 2-1224(i) requires that we redact in a manner
consistent with auditing best practices any cybersecurity findings before a report
is made available to the public. This results in the issuance of two different
versions of an audit report that contains cybersecurity findings – a redacted
version for the public and an unredacted version for government officials
responsible for acting on our audit recommendations.
The State Finance and Procurement Article, Section 3A-301(b), states that
cybersecurity is defined as “the processes or capabilities wherein systems,
communications, and information are protected and defended against damage,
unauthorized use or modification, and exploitation”. Based on that definition, and
in our professional judgement, we concluded that certain findings in this report
fall under that definition. Consequently, for the publicly available audit report all
specifics as to the nature of cybersecurity findings and required corrective actions
have been redacted. We have determined that such aforementioned practices, and
government auditing standards, support the redaction of this information from the
public audit report. The specifics of these cybersecurity findings have been
communicated to CCPS and those parties responsible for acting on our
recommendations in an unredacted audit report.
CCPS’s response to our findings and recommendations is included as an appendix
to this report. Depending on the version of the audit report, responses to any
cybersecurity findings may be redacted in accordance with State law. As
prescribed in the State Government Article, Section 2-1224 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, we will advise CCPS regarding the results of our review of its
response.
27

--- Page 30 ---
APPENDIX

--- Page 31 ---
Charles County Public Schools
Agency Response Form
Procurement and Disbursement Cycle
Finding 1
CCPS procurement policies did not incorporate certain recognized best practices when
participating in intergovernmental cooperative purchasing agreements (ICPA).
We recommend that CCPS incorporate the aforementioned best practices into its
procurement policies, and ensure that the performance of the best practices is documented
when evaluating and participating in ICPAs.
Agency Response
Analysis Factually Accurate
Please provide CCPS purchasing department addressed this concern by adding a
additional comments as checklist to the back of Requisitions for use by requesting parties and
deemed necessary. Purchasing Staff. A Purchasing Review/Cost Price Analysis Template is
also a part of the process. These additions were made after 2015,
however, the policy manual was not updated. We have included the
templates that we use to satisfy this requirement.
Recommendation 1 Agree Estimated Completion Date: 8/12/2022
Please provide details of Procurement Manager provided OLA with an updated CCPS Policy
corrective action or Manual including the requested "Best Practices" that were applicable.
explain disagreement.
Page 1 of 8

--- Page 32 ---
Charles County Public Schools
Agency Response Form
Finding 2
CCPS allowed multiple employees to share corporate purchasing cards (CPC) and did not
make use of Level-3 detailed purchasing data to help ensure the propriety of purchases.
We recommend that CCPS
a. establish individual accountability for CPC procurement transactions by assigning a
separate purchasing card to each authorized user (repeat); and
b. require supervisors to use Level-3 data, when available, as a part of the monthly
supervisory review to aid in the assessment of the propriety of purchases.
Agency Response
Analysis Factually Accurate
Please provide Review of CCPS P-card program by OLA is not complete. Written
additional comments as controls are in place to manage the program and to mitigate the risk.
deemed necessary. Users of the shared corporate purchasing cards must get pre-approval for
the purchase, sign check-out log once purchase is approved, and return
the card with the receipt that shows the purchase matches the pre-
approved item. Since the receipts are turned in and are used by the
supervisor to reconcile the statement and match the charges with the pre-
approval forms and the receipts turned in, the Level 3 data isn’t
necessary. In addition, Level 3 data is not supported by most
vendors/merchants used by CCPS.
Recommendation 2a Agree Estimated Completion Date: 09/2023
Please provide details of The current controls in place mitigate the risk. The controls referenced
corrective action or are: Pre-approval of purchase, sign-out log, return of the card and the
explain disagreement. receipt that verifies the pre-approved item was purchased, but we will
transition to individual cards.
Recommendation 2b Agree Estimated Completion Date: 09/2023
Please provide details of Level 3 data is not available by most vendors. CCPS requires all receipts
corrective action or for purchases to be turned in and used to reconcile the statement, but we
explain disagreement. will add the requirement to use level 3 data when available.
Page 2 of 8

--- Page 33 ---
Charles County Public Schools
Agency Response Form
Human Resources and Payroll
Finding 3
CCPS did not ensure critical human resources and payroll transactions were
independently reviewed for propriety in a timely manner.
We recommend that CCPS independently review critical human resources and payroll
transactions recorded in the system (such as, personnel additions and salary changes) in a
timely manner (such as, within 30 days) (repeat).
We advised CCPS on using existing personnel to review critical human resources and
payroll transactions independently.
Agency Response
Analysis Factually Accurate
Please provide An independent audit is done after each payroll. Every attempt will be
additional comments as made to perform it in a timelier manner based on staffing availability.
deemed necessary.
Prior to processing payroll payments, the steps below are performed to
ensure critical transactions are reviewed.
1. All personnel and salary change requests (adding new
employees, changes in salary) are processed and reviewed by
Human Resources staff and a PAR is created by the HR assistant.
2. After approved PAR changes are entered into the system,
changes are calculated by a payroll analyst, and reviewed and
approved by the head of payroll or delegate.
3. The Accounting Manager also performs a final review of critical
personnel changes regarding terminations and leave payouts.
These processes all occur prior to the pay run.
Each of the three (3) controls above occur prior to payroll runs.
Separate from the controls listed above, CCPS completes an additional
backend control where an independent auditor performs a payroll audit
on every payroll. This review verifies system output reports including
exception reports and adjustments.
Formal written procedures for the review of payroll are part of
documented processes.
Recommendation 3 Agree Estimated Completion Date: Completed
Page 3 of 8

--- Page 34 ---
Charles County Public Schools
Agency Response Form
Please provide details of Independent audits are done after each pay run. Every attempt is made to
corrective action or utilize existing personnel to conduct these audits in a timely manner.
explain disagreement.
Page 4 of 8

--- Page 35 ---
Charles County Public Schools
Agency Response Form
Information Technology
The Office of Legislative Audits (OLA) has determined that Findings 4 through 8 related to
“cybersecurity”, as defined by the State Finance and Procurement Article, Section 3A-301(b) of
the Annotated Code of Maryland, and therefore are subject to redaction from the publicly
available audit report in accordance with State Government article 2-1224(i). Although the
specifics of the findings, including the analysis, related recommendations, along with CCPS’
responses, have been redacted from this report copy, CCPS’ responses indicated agreement with
the findings and recommendations.
Finding 4
Redacted cybersecurity-related finding.
Agency Response has been redacted by OLA.
Finding 5
Redacted cybersecurity-related finding.
Agency Response has been redacted by OLA.
Finding 6
Redacted cybersecurity-related finding.
Agency Response has been redacted by OLA.
Finding 7
Redacted cybersecurity-related finding.
Agency Response has been redacted by OLA.
Finding 8
Redacted cybersecurity-related finding.
Agency Response has been redacted by OLA.
Page 5 of 8

--- Page 36 ---
Charles County Public Schools
Agency Response Form
Transportation Services
Finding 9
CCPS did not ensure amounts paid to bus contractors were reasonable and properly
supported.
We recommend that CCPS
a. document the reasonableness of the operations fee paid to contractors;
b. use actual documented maintenance costs, cost studies, or independently derived
estimates for establishing contractor rates for per-mile maintenance costs (repeat); and
c. include provisions to audit the bus contractors in future contracts and use it, as deemed
appropriate, to determine the actual cost of operating contractor buses.
Agency Response
Analysis Factually Accurate
Please provide See explanation below
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 9a Agree Estimated Completion Date: Completed
Please provide details of The operational fee is paid to contractors as an additional annual
corrective action or payment that was restructured beginning in 2017-2018. Prior to 2017-18
explain disagreement. the operational fee was included in the annual PVA. As a result of a
previous finding in the audit, the operational fee was removed from the
PVA for new buses and stated as standalone item so it could be better
distinguished. The financial support for the contractor to operate his/her
business on a daily basis is provided through this operational fee.
Examples of expense that a contractor would use to support the
contracted operation are: Utilities, Mortgage / Lease, Accounting, Legal,
Sub Drivers, Management Staff, Company Auto Security, Bank fees and
dues, Abuse and Molestation Insurance, Liability Insurance, Collision
Insurance, General Liability Insurance, Excess Liability Insurance,
Building & Property Insurance, Comprehensive Insurance, Umbrella
Policy, Property & Buildings Maintenance/Upkeep, Cleaning supplies,
City Water, Septic, Internet, Phone - Cell and Landline, Computers /
Printers, IT Support, Software Subscriptions, Office Supplies, Property
Taxes, Personal Property Taxes, Retirement Fund Audit, Uninsured
Motorist Coverage, Tags, Dumpster / Trash Service, Health / Life
/Retirement Contribution, Parking Lot Repair, and upkeep.
Charles County Public School will attempt to compare our bus contract
to other bus contracts with other Maryland LEA’s for reasonableness.
Page 6 of 8

--- Page 37 ---
Charles County Public Schools
Agency Response Form
Recommendation 9b Agree Estimated Completion Date: Completed
Please provide details of Determination of the maintenance rate paid to contractors each year is
corrective action or based upon multiple factors. Those factors include but are not limited
explain disagreement. to: data from publications including the Consumer Price Index (CPI).
The CPI amount is based on the annual one-year change from the
previous calendar year of the Washington-Arlington-Alexandria region
transportation CPI (not seasonally adjusted). The annual CPI adjustment
shall not increase in excess of 5%. Annual comparisons are made to the
rates used by other Maryland LEAs, new school bus specification
requirements, experience with school system owned buses, and available
funding. The contractor payment formula for each school year, which
includes the per mile maintenance rate for that year, receives final
approval by CCPS executive staff.
As formula specifically for school buses was not available, the index
used was for commercial diesel vehicles with similar amounts of miles
traveled. According to Government Fleet Magazine, the “Average
Maintenance Cost Per Mile” for a similar Class B vehicle was:
Government Fleet Magazine Rate
Charles County Rate
2015 $0.84 per mile
FY15 $.8074 per mile
2016 $0.96 per mile
FY16 $.8236 per mile
2017 $0.91 per mile
FY17 $.8236 per mile
2018 $1.10 per mile
FY18 $. 9078 per mile
2019 $1.26 per mile
FY19 $.9305 per mile
In an October 2020 comparison to 15 other LEAs which use the formula
payment, maintenance rates ranged from the lowest of $.70 per mile to
the highest of $1.06 while the Charles County rate was $.9621.
While considering all the available information, Charles County believes
the maintenance rate paid to school bus contractors is appropriate,
reasonable, and fair. The CCPS Transportation Department will ensure
this annual review and analysis is documented for future audits.
Page 7 of 8

--- Page 38 ---
Charles County Public Schools
Agency Response Form
Auditor’s Comment: Although CCPS agrees with recommendation 9b, its response
cited a $.9621 maintenance cost per mile that was based on the average maintenance cost
of a commercial diesel vehicle that was not a school bus, due to the fact that a formula
specifically for school buses was not available. Consequently, we are unsure of the
comparability of the two vehicle types or the validity of the resultant cost per mile.
CCPS then uses this rate for comparison with other LEAs. We believe that this
comparison over-simplifies the issue and does not yield a valid conclusion, as this rate-
setting practice at other LEAs is often the subject of a similar audit finding regarding
unsupported maintenance costs. Finally, we had multiple meetings with CCPS during the
course of the audit wherein we advised CCPS that the information it used could not
reasonably justify the $.9621 cost per mile and recommended, as stated in our report, that
CCPS should use documented maintenance costs, cost studies, or independently derived
estimates. To date, CCPS has not been able to provide any additional support for its
position.
Recommendation 9c Agree Estimated Completion Date: In Progress
Please provide details of Staff from the Transportation Department will work with all stake
corrective action or holders including bus contractors, staff attorney and senior leadership
explain disagreement. regarding verbiage to be included in the 2022-2023 Master School Bus
Contract regarding future audits of school bus contractors to determine
their actual operating costs. The verbiage will be included, if agreed to,
through contract negotiations.
Page 8 of 8

--- Page 39 ---
A T
UDIT EAM
Bekana Edossa, CPA, CFE
Audit Manager
R. Brendan Coffey, CPA, CISA
Edwin L. Paul, CPA, CISA
Information Systems Audit Managers
Mindy R. Garrett
Senior Auditor
Matthew D. Walbert, CISA
Malcolm J. Woodard
Information Systems Senior Auditors
Dianne P. Ramirez
Benjamin H. Straube
Staff Auditors
Vickey K. Micah
Information Systems Staff Auditor