Title: Statewide Review of Budget Closeout Transactions for Fiscal Year 2022
Date: 01/26/2023
Type: Special Reports and Letters
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=63d822faa1ce580c7c6e9564
Extracted: 2025-06-19T23:03:55.087579
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Special Report
Statewide Review of
Budget Closeout Transactions for
Fiscal Year 2022
January 2023
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Senator Clarence K. Lam, M.D. (Senate Chair) Delegate Jared Solomon (House Chair)
Senator Joanne C. Benson Delegate Steven J. Arentz
Senator Paul D. Corderman Delegate Nicholas P. Charles II
Senator Katie Fry Hester Delegate Andrea Fletcher Harrison
Senator Shelly Hettleman Delegate David Moon
Senator Cheryl C. Kagan Delegate Julie Palakovich Carr
Senator Cory V. McCray Four Vacancies
Senator Justin D. Ready
Senator Bryan W. Simonaire
Senator Craig J. Zucker
To Obtain Further Information
Office of Legislative Audits
The Warehouse at Camden Yards
351 West Camden Street, Suite 400
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Phone: 410-946-5900
Maryland Relay: 711
TTY: 410-946-5401 ꞏ 301-970-5401
E-mail: OLAWebmaster@ola.state.md.us
Website: www.ola.state.md.us
To Report Fraud
The Office of Legislative Audits operates a Fraud Hotline to report fraud, waste, or abuse involving State
of Maryland government resources. Reports of fraud, waste, or abuse may be communicated anonymously
by a toll-free call to 1-877-FRAUD-11, by mail to the Fraud Hotline, c/o Office of Legislative Audits, or
through the Office’s website.
Nondiscrimination Statement
The Department of Legislative Services does not discriminate on the basis of age, ancestry, color, creed,
marital status, national origin, race, religion, gender, gender identity, sexual orientation, or disability in the
admission or access to its programs, services, or activities. The Department’s Information Officer has been
designated to coordinate compliance with the nondiscrimination requirements contained in Section 35.107
of the United States Department of Justice Regulations. Requests for assistance should be directed to the
Information Officer at 410-946-5400 or 410-970-5400.

--- Page 3 ---
January 26, 2023
Senator Clarence K. Lam, M.D., Senate Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Delegate Jared Solomon, House Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Members of Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Annapolis, Maryland
Ladies and Gentlemen:
We have conducted a review of budget closeout transactions at selected agencies
for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2022. Our review disclosed general compliance
with applicable laws, regulations, and policies. However, we determined that
certain transactions pertaining to the following agencies were either not in
compliance, or otherwise represented significant conditions that warrant
disclosure in this report:
Maryland Department of Health (MDH)
Maryland Health Benefit Exchange (MHBE)
Maryland Insurance Administration (MIA)
State Department of Assessments and Taxation (SDAT)
A summary of our findings, by agency, is included in Exhibit 1.
One agency (MDH) could not support the propriety of accrued federal fund
revenue totaling approximately $3.5 billion as of June 30, 2022 and did not
identify and recover $862.5 million in federal fund revenue until we brought the
matter to its attention. For the past several months we have been unable to obtain
support for the federal revenue accrual from MDH, despite repeated requests.
Specifically, our initial request for support was made in October 2022 and MDH
repeatedly denied the existence of support for accruals as MDH stated they were
the result of automated journal entries. Late in the day on January 20, 2023,
MDH senior management advised that the respective units may have support for
the recorded revenue, despite repeated earlier assertions to the contrary. Due to

--- Page 4 ---
the time constraints involved in issuing this report, we did not pursue the matter
further during this review. However, if MDH ultimately is able to research and
support the recorded revenue, we will review any information forthcoming from
MDH during our ongoing fiscal compliance audit of the MDH Office of the
Secretary and Other Units, where such accounting transactions are also subject to
audit.
In addition, MDH has still not recovered $127.5 million of the $1.06 billion in
estimated payments made to behavioral health service providers between January
2020 and August 2020. The estimated payments were the result of system errors
and have been reported in our two preceding closeout reports. MDH and another
agency (MHBE) also had potential liabilities to the federal government totaling
$86.2 million and $28.4 million, respectively. The MDH liability relates to
certain disallowed claims for federal funds and unfulfilled spending requirements
and the MBHE liability relates to certain misallocated expenditures. These
potential liabilities represent longstanding unresolved conditions, and were
disclosed in one or more of our preceding closeout reports. Depending on the
resolution of these matters with the federal government, the expenditures related
to these liabilities may have to be funded with subsequent year appropriations, or
through a deficiency appropriation.
Finally, two other agencies (SDAT and MIA) had special fund deficit balances of
$7.9 million and $836,956, respectively, at fiscal year-end.
The primary objective of this annual review is to alert the Maryland General
Assembly to significant financial and budgetary closeout transactions that do not
comply with applicable laws, regulations, and policies or otherwise represent
significant matters relating to closeout that we noted and which we believe
warrant disclosure in this report. The issues identified during this review will be
fully addressed, as appropriate, in our fiscal compliance audit reports on the
applicable agencies, which will include relevant recommendations. We wish to
acknowledge the cooperation extended to us during the course of our review by
the Comptroller of Maryland’s General Accounting Division and by the various
State agencies.
Respectfully submitted,
Gregory A. Hook, CPA
Legislative Auditor
2

--- Page 5 ---
Table of Contents
Background Information 4
Introduction, Objectives, and Scope 5
Findings 6
Revenue Transactions
Finding 1 – The Maryland Department of Health (MDH) could not 6
support the propriety of federal fund revenue totaling approximately
$3.5 billion and did not identify and recover federal fund revenue
totaling approximately $862.5 million.
Expenditure Transactions
Finding 2 – According to a report prepared by MDH, because of certain 7
automated system failures, estimated payments totaling approximately
$1.06 billion were made to behavioral health service providers between
January 2020 and August 2020, resulting in overpayments that, as of
December 12, 2022, totaled approximately $127.5 million.
Other Liabilities
Finding 3 – MDH had potential liabilities to the federal government 8
totaling approximately $86.2 million related to certain disallowed
claims and spending requirements.
Finding 4 – The Maryland Health Benefit Exchange had a longstanding 10
unresolved potential $28.4 million liability to the federal government
related to certain misallocated expenditures.
Special Fund Deficit Balance
Finding 5 – The State Department of Assessments and Taxation had a 10
special fund deficit balance of $7.9 million as of June 30, 2022.
Finding 6 – The Maryland Insurance Administration’s Health Care 11
Regulatory Fund had an unreported special fund deficit balance of
$836,956 as of June 30, 2022.
Exhibit 1 – Summary of Fiscal Year 2022 Closeout Review Findings 12
by State Agency
3

--- Page 6 ---
Background Information
The Comptroller of Maryland – General Accounting Division (GAD) annually
provides State agencies with instructions for completing the fiscal year-end
budget closeout process. State agencies individually report to GAD their fiscal
year-end closeout transactions that have not been previously recorded in the
State’s accounting records. GAD is responsible for closing the State’s accounting
records on a statewide basis and for preparing the State’s Annual Comprehensive
Financial Report.
GAD contracts with an independent accounting firm for the purpose of expressing
an opinion on the State’s basic financial statements contained in the Annual
Comprehensive Financial Report, which, as of January 5, 2023, had not yet been
finalized for fiscal year 2022. The firm will determine whether the State’s
financial statements have been presented fairly, in all material respects, the
respective financial position of the State of Maryland as of June 30, 2022, and the
respective changes in the financial position and cash flows, for the year then
ended in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United
States of America (referred to as GAAP).
4

--- Page 7 ---
Introduction, Objectives, and Scope
We conducted a review of the State’s budget closeout transactions for the fiscal
year ended June 30, 2022. This review was conducted under the authority of the
State Government Article, Section 2-1220 of the Annotated Code of Maryland.
The objective of our review was to determine whether budget closeout
transactions, for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2022, were properly supported and
made in accordance with State budgetary laws, regulations, and accounting
policies and to determine if other significant liabilities or conditions relating to
closeout existed at fiscal year-end.
Our review consisted of tests of significant year-end transactions for 10 agencies,
based on our assessment of risk and materiality, to ascertain if the transactions
were properly supported and made in accordance with State budgetary laws,
regulations, and accounting policies and to determine if other significant liabilities
or conditions relating to closeout existed at fiscal year-end. We reviewed, on a
limited basis, transactions processed subsequent to June 30, 2022 to determine if
the transactions were properly recorded (such as charged or credited to the proper
fiscal year).
As part of our current review, we contacted various officials of State agencies.
Our review excluded public colleges and universities and transactions processed
through the Transportation Trust Fund because the related financial activity does
not involve the State’s General Fund and/or because agencies have the authority
to retain unspent funds at year-end.
We also determined that four of the findings included in this report were
conditions repeated from our January 26, 2022 report entitled Statewide Review of
Budget Closeout Transactions for Fiscal Year 2021 (see Exhibit 1).
Our review was limited to the procedures necessary to accomplish the
aforementioned objective. These procedures did not constitute an audit conducted
in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards (GAGAS).
Had we conducted an audit in accordance with GAGAS, those standards would
require the issuance of recommendations as part of our reporting process. In
addition, other matters may have come to our attention that would have been
reported. We advised the appropriate agencies of our findings. Formal responses
were not requested since this report contains no recommendations. Our fieldwork
was conducted during the period from September 2022 to January 2023.
5

--- Page 8 ---
Findings
Revenue Transactions
Finding 1
The Maryland Department of Health (MDH) could not support the propriety
of accrued federal fund revenue totaling approximately $3.5 billion and did
not identify and recover federal fund revenue totaling approximately $862.5
million.
Analysis
MDH was unable to provide documentation to support the propriety of
approximately $3.5 billion in accrued federal fund revenue. At the end of fiscal
year 2022, MDH recorded 1,416 accrued revenue entries totaling $11.4 billion
including 998 positive accrued revenue entries totaling $7.2 billion (recording a
receivable for anticipated future funds due) and 418 negative accrued revenue
entries totaling $4.2 billion (deferring revenue received to the subsequent year).
The majority of these 1,416 entries were for federal funds.
We selected 16 of the positive journal entries totaling $3.5 billion attributable to
various MDH programs for additional review including a $1.1 billion accrued
revenue journal entry posted to a federal funds clearing account in the Medical
Care Programs Administration (MCPA). MDH senior fiscal management
personnel advised us that many of MDH’s accrued revenue journal entries,
including the 16 we selected for review, were the result of an automated
calculation based on data recorded in the State’s Financial Management
Information System. Specifically, we were advised that MDH’s automated
system “takes carryover cumulative balance (starting balances) plus current fiscal
year expenditures (accrued and actual) less revenues received” to create an
accrual entry.
While this process calculates the balance in each account at year-end and the
related accrued revenue amount needed, it does not identify the age of any
shortfalls nor provide any assurance that the amounts are actually collectable in
the subsequent year. Although the MDH senior fiscal management personnel
advised us that MDH had received more than the amount accrued in the
subsequent year, they could not provide documentation that the amounts received
related to the prior year expenditures. In response to our request for this
information, we were advised that the specific MDH programs (such as MCPA
and the Developmental Disabilities Administration) were responsible for
maintaining this detail. However, our subsequent inquiries determined that
6

--- Page 9 ---
personnel at these programs did not have any additional support for these accrued
revenue journal entries.
An evaluation of the balances at year-end is critical because of the significant
amount of federal funds MDH receives each year, which may mask unrecovered
expenditures. In this regard, we noted that MDH had not identified and recovered
federal fund revenues totaling approximately $862.5 million representing
shortfalls in Medicaid reimbursements during the period from October 2019 to
March 2022. MDH was unaware of these unrecovered funds and did not make
any attempt to recover them from the federal government until we brought this
matter to its attention in August 2022. In response to our notification, MDH
requested and ultimately recovered the funds in September 2022.
As a result of these conditions, there was a lack of assurance that the
aforementioned journal entries we reviewed accurately represented amounts
actually due from the federal government. While some or all of these amounts
may ultimately be recovered, to the extent that the federal funds are not available,
State General funds may be needed to cover any related deficits.1
Expenditure Transactions
Finding 2
According to a report prepared by MDH, because of certain automated
system failures, estimated payments totaling approximately $1.06 billion
were made to behavioral health service providers between January 2020 and
August 2020, resulting in overpayments that, as of December 12, 2022,
totaled approximately $127.5 million.
Analysis
In an October 1, 2021 report to the Senate Budget and Taxation Committee and
the House Appropriations Committee, MDH noted that, because of certain
technical and system failures associated with its January 2020 transition to a new
Administrative Service Organization (ASO) that impacted payments to behavioral
health providers, MDH management directed the ASO to provide weekly
estimated payments to providers beginning January 23, 2020 and continuing
through August 3, 2020 to ensure providers were paid for services rendered.2
1 Due to the time constraints of this review, our Office will analyze any additional support
forthcoming from MDH on these matters during our regular fiscal compliance audit of MDH
Office of the Secretary and Other Units.
2 Estimated weekly payments to each provider were based on that provider’s average weekly
claims for calendar year 2019.
7

--- Page 10 ---
MDH’s report stated that during this period the ASO made estimated payments
totaling $1.06 billion. Estimated payments stopped August 3, 2020, and,
according to MDH, payments have been made based on actual claims submitted
beginning August 13, 2020.
MDH’s October 2021 report also addressed action it was taking with the ASO and
providers to reconcile estimated payments made with actual claims for the
aforementioned period, and to recoup overpayments made. According to MDH,
because of the difficult and time consuming nature of the reconciliation process,
and to provide equity where the reconciliation process may be onerous to
providers, it has included in its recoupment plan a level of debt forgiveness for
certain providers. These actions on the part of MDH were disclosed in our reports
on the Statewide Review of Budget Closeout Transactions for Fiscal Year 2020
and 2021.
Although, as stated in our fiscal year 2021 report, MDH’s initial intention was to
forgive provider debt up to $10,000, that amount was subsequently adjusted to
$25,000 as stipulated and provided for in MDH’s fiscal year 2023 budget.
According to MDH, as of December 12, 2022, 1,507 providers had debt totaling
approximately $14.3 million forgiven, and there was a remaining balance of
approximately $127.5 million due from 845 providers. MDH also advised us that
all remaining providers with debts outstanding are on a repayment plan, are
having a percentage of their current claims withheld by MDH in order to reduce
their balance owed, or have been sent to the Department of Budget and
Management’s Central Collection Unit for further action.
Other Liabilities
Finding 3
MDH had potential liabilities to the federal government totaling
approximately $86.2 million related to certain disallowed claims and
spending requirements.
Analysis
MDH reported potential liabilities to the federal government totaling
approximately $86.2 million as of June 30, 2022. This amount consists of two
different components; $34.2 million in unresolved longstanding disallowed
federal fund claims related to the Developmental Disabilities Administration’s
(DDA’s) residential habilitation add-on services under its Community Pathways
waiver program (a Medicaid funded program), and an additional potential liability
to the federal government of approximately $52 million for an obligation relating
8

--- Page 11 ---
to the Rebalancing Fund Demonstration which is associated with the MCPA
Money Follows the Person (MFP) program.
 Regarding the $34.2 million in disallowed claims, the federal Department of
Health and Human Services (HHS) – Office of the Inspector General (OIG),
in its June 2015 audit report, disallowed these DDA claims and recommended
that DDA refund the overbilled amount to the federal HHS Centers for
Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS).
In MDH’s September 24, 2015 response to the audit report and to CMS, MDH
disagreed with the OIG’s interpretation of waiver requirements and urged
CMS to reconsider requiring MDH to refund the $34.2 million in disallowed
claims. In a letter dated June 26, 2018, CMS issued a formal disallowance
letter requiring the refund of the identified $34.2 million. On August 23,
2018, MDH issued a Request for Reconsideration letter to HHS to begin the
appeals process related to CMS’ determination. In a letter to MDH dated
October 23, 2018, CMS affirmed the decision to disallow the claims, and in
December 2018, the Maryland Office of the Attorney General filed an appeal
of the disallowance with the HHS Departmental Appeals Board. As of
November 2022, MDH had received no further correspondence from HHS
regarding resolution of this matter.
The CMS disallowance letter provided that MDH could elect to either retain
or return the funds in question during the appeals process; however, should
HHS confirm CMS’ decision, any amount retained by MDH would be subject
to interest. MDH’s Request for Reconsideration stated that it had elected to
retain the funds during the appeals process; therefore, depending on HHS’
final determination, MDH could be required to pay the federal government the
original $34.2 million in disallowed claims and any accrued interest.
Comments regarding this matter have been made in our seven preceding
Statewide Review of Budget Closeout Transactions reports.
 MDH also reported a potential liability to the federal government of
approximately $52 million for an obligation relating to the Rebalancing Fund
Demonstration which is associated with the MCPA MFP program. By
participating in the Rebalancing Demonstration, the State agreed to accept
federal funds covering 75 percent of its MFP program expenditures, with the
remaining 25 percent supported by State funds, instead of the more traditional
50 percent federal and 50 percent State funding arrangement used in many
other federal assistance programs. However, the 25 percent savings that the
State realized from the enhanced federal reimbursement rate is required to be
spent on additional MFP program expenditures. The aforementioned $52
9

--- Page 12 ---
million represents this enhanced funding for which the required additional
MFP expenditures had not been made as of June 30, 2022. The Rebalancing
Fund Demonstration was to end September 30, 2020, however CMS extended
the program until September 30, 2025. This potential liability was also
addressed in our Statewide Review of Budget Closeout Transactions for Fiscal
Year 2021, at which time the amount was $49.3 million.
Finding 4
The Maryland Health Benefit Exchange (MHBE) had a longstanding
unresolved potential $28.4 million liability to the federal government related
to certain misallocated expenditures.
Analysis
MHBE had a $28.4 million potential liability to the federal government related to
a previous audit finding by the HHS – OIG of certain misallocated expenditures.
This issue was also addressed in our four preceding Statewide Review of Budget
Closeout Transactions reports. In a letter dated September 1, 2019 to the Chairs
of the Senate Budget and Taxation and House Appropriations Committees,
MHBE noted that the HHS – Office of General Counsel had recommended that
MHBE rely on a previous determination by HHS’ CMS that MHBE followed
CMS’ guidance when allocating establishment grant expenditures. In
correspondence dated July 27, 2022, CMS informed MHBE that there was no
change to that recommendation, but also that no formal resolution of the audit
finding was yet available. We were informed by MHBE that, as of November 14,
2022, there still had been no formal resolution of the federal audit finding.
Special Fund Deficit Balance
Finding 5
The State Department of Assessments and Taxation (SDAT) had a special
fund deficit balance of $7.9 million as of June 30, 2022.
Analysis
SDAT had a special fund deficit balance of $7.9 million as of June 30, 2022.
Specifically, SDAT made a journal entry at the end of fiscal year 2022
transferring expenditures totaling $7.9 million, for tax credit payments made to
homeowners, from general funds to specials funds. These payments related to the
recalculation of tax credits for certain homeowners in accordance with Chapter
717, Laws of Maryland 2021. SDAT received a general fund deficiency
appropriation to ultimately cover the cost of these payments. However, those
10

--- Page 13 ---
funds were mistakenly reverted back to the General Fund, leaving SDAT with a
special fund deficit balance. According to SDAT management, they are working
with the Department of Budget and Management to resolve the deficit balance.
Finding 6
The Maryland Insurance Administration’s (MIA) Health Care Regulatory
Fund had an unreported special fund deficit balance of $836,956 as of June
30, 2022.
Analysis
MIA had an unreported deficit balance of $836,956 in the Health Care Regulatory
Fund as of June 30, 2022. MIA administers the Fund, which consists of
assessments on specified providers of health insurance in the State. State law
provides that annual assessments are to cover all costs relating to activities of
MIA’s Appeals and Grievances Unit. This condition was also commented upon
in our reports on the Statewide Review of Budget Closeout Transactions for Fiscal
Year 2020 and 2021. In our report for fiscal year 2021, we noted that the Fund
had a deficit balance of approximately $250,000 at June 30, 2017, which
increased to approximately $1.4 million as of June 30, 2020 before declining to
$1 million as of June 30, 2021.
Our current review initially disclosed that the Fund had a surplus balance at June
30, 2022 of $414,520. However, based on our inquiries, MIA determined that it
had erroneously recorded Fund revenue totaling $1,251,476 twice. Consequently,
the actual Fund balance at June 30, 2022 was a deficit of $836,956. Because of
this error, MIA did not report a year-end deficit balance for the Fund to the
General Accounting Division as required. As noted in our closeout report for
fiscal year 2021, MIA management advised us that based on consultation with its
legal counsel, a plan was developed to reduce the deficit balance with elimination
to occur by fiscal year 2025.
11

--- Page 14 ---
Exhibit 1
Summary of Fiscal Year 2022 Closeout Review
Findings by State Agency
Finding
Agency Finding Description
Number
1 Support could not be provided for accrued
federal fund revenue totaling approximately
$3.5 billion, and $862.5 million was not
identified and recovered.
2* Reported overpayment to behavioral health
Maryland Department of service providers totaled $127.5 million as
Health of December 12, 2022.
3* Potential liabilities to the federal
government of approximately $86.2 million
may have to be funded with State general
funds.
4* A potential federal liability of
Maryland Health Benefit
approximately $28.4 million exists.
Exchange
5 A special fund deficit balance totaling
State Department of
approximately $7.9 million existed as of
Assessments and Taxation
June 30, 2022.
6* An unreported special fund deficit balance
Maryland Insurance
totaling $836,956 existed as of June 30,
Administration
2022.
 Denotes item repeated in full or part from preceding report
12

--- Page 15 ---
A T
UDIT EAM
Bekana Edossa, CPA, CFE
Audit Manager
W. Thomas Sides
Mindy R. Garrett
Menachem Katz, CPA
Edward J. Welsh, CFE
Senior Auditors
Thomas J. Kraemer
Owen M. Long-Grant
Timothy Moon
Stacey D. Streett
Staff Auditors