Title: Maryland Environmental Service
Date: 03/10/2023
Type: Fiscal Compliance
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=6411c6a8a1ce5817c000fb2a
Extracted: 2025-06-19T23:04:12.818482
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Audit Report
Maryland Environmental Service
March 2023
Public Notice
In compliance with the requirements of the State Government Article Section
2-1224(i), of the Annotated Code of Maryland, the Office of Legislative
Audits has redacted cybersecurity findings and related auditee responses
from this public report.
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Senator Clarence K. Lam, M.D. (Senate Chair) Delegate Jared Solomon (House Chair)
Senator Joanne C. Benson Delegate Steven J. Arentz
Senator Paul D. Corderman Delegate Nicholas P. Charles II
Senator Katie Fry Hester Delegate Andrea Fletcher Harrison
Senator Shelly L. Hettleman Delegate Steven C. Johnson
Senator Cheryl C. Kagan Delegate Mary A. Lehman
Senator Cory V. McCray Delegate David Moon
Senator Justin D. Ready Delegate Julie Palakovich Carr
Senator Bryan W. Simonaire Delegate Stephanie M. Smith
Senator Craig J. Zucker Delegate M. Courtney Watson
To Obtain Further Information
Office of Legislative Audits
The Warehouse at Camden Yards
351 West Camden Street, Suite 400
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Phone: 410-946-5900
Maryland Relay: 711
TTY: 410-946-5401 · 301-970-5401
E-mail: OLAWebmaster@ola.state.md.us
Website: www.ola.state.md.us
To Report Fraud
The Office of Legislative Audits operates a Fraud Hotline to report fraud, waste, or abuse involving State
of Maryland government resources. Reports of fraud, waste, or abuse may be communicated anonymously
by a toll-free call to 1-877-FRAUD-11, by mail to the Fraud Hotline, c/o Office of Legislative Audits, or
through the Office’s website.
Nondiscrimination Statement
The Department of Legislative Services does not discriminate on the basis of age, ancestry, color, creed,
marital status, national origin, race, religion, gender, gender identity, sexual orientation, or disability in the
admission or access to its programs, services, or activities. The Department’s Information Officer has been
designated to coordinate compliance with the nondiscrimination requirements contained in Section 35.107
of the United States Department of Justice Regulations. Requests for assistance should be directed to the
Information Officer at 410-946-5400 or 410-970-5400.

--- Page 3 ---
March 10, 2023
Senator Clarence K. Lam, M.D., Senate Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Delegate Jared Solomon, House Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Members of Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Annapolis, Maryland
Ladies and Gentlemen:
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the Maryland Environmental
Service (MES) for the period beginning March 11, 2019 and ending March 31,
2022. MES provides water supply, wastewater treatment, and waste management
services to public and private entities. As of July 19, 2022, MES administered
655 projects, of which 271 projects were operated at State-owned facilities.
Our audit disclosed that MES had not established formal written agreements with
State agencies to clarify its responsibilities for services it performed for 78 of the
79 reimbursable projects, which includes 76 State-owned water and wastewater
facilities, as required by a 1979 Board of Public Works advisory. During fiscal
year 2021, MES had collected approximately $29.9 million from State agencies to
operate and maintain these 79 projects.
Additionally, our audit disclosed certain risks in MES’ financial management
system. However in accordance with the State Government Article, Section 2-
1224(i) of the Annotated Code of Maryland, we have redacted the finding from
this audit report. Specifically, State law requires the Office of Legislative Audits
to redact cybersecurity findings in a manner consistent with auditing best
practices before the report is made available to the public. The term
“cybersecurity” is defined in the State Finance and Procurement Article, Section
3A-301(b), and using our professional judgment we have determined that the
redacted finding falls under the referenced definition. The specifics of the
cybersecurity finding were previously communicated to MES as well as those
parties responsible for acting on our recommendations.

--- Page 4 ---
Our audit also included a review to determine the status of the six findings
contained in our preceding audit report. For the non-cybersecurity-related
findings, we determined that MES satisfactorily addressed four of those five
findings. The remaining finding is repeated in this report.
MES’ response to this audit is included as an appendix to this report. We
reviewed the response to our findings and related recommendations, and have
concluded that the corrective actions identified are sufficient to address all audit
issues. Consistent with State law, we have redacted the elements of MES’
response related to the cybersecurity audit finding.
We wish to acknowledge the cooperation extended to us during the course of this
audit by MES. We also wish to acknowledge MES’ willingness to address the
audit issues and implement appropriate corrective actions.
Respectfully submitted,
Gregory A. Hook, CPA
Legislative Auditor
2

--- Page 5 ---
Background Information
Agency Responsibilities
The Maryland Environmental Service (MES) was created as an instrumentality of
the State and a public corporation to provide water supply, wastewater treatment,
and waste management services to public and private entities. MES constructs,
operates, and maintains various water, sewer, and solid waste plant facilities
under contracts with the State of Maryland, its political subdivisions, and private
enterprises.
According to its records, MES administered 655 projects as of July 19, 2022, of
which 271 projects were operated at State-owned facilities, including 79 projects
that were related to reimbursable State projects. According to its fiscal year 2021
audited financial statements, MES’ operating expenditures (including salaries,
wages, and fringe benefits) totaled approximately $186.5 million and MES
received revenue totaling approximately $186.5 million, of which approximately
$175.3 million was received from State and local government entities.
Investigation of the Former Director Resulted in Significant Law
Change Impacting MES
During the audit period, the Joint Committee on Fair Practices and State
Personnel Oversight (Joint Committee) initiated an investigation and held several
hearings concerning a $233,600 severance payment and certain expense
reimbursements made to the former MES director. The former director had
resigned to serve as the Governor’s Chief of Staff. The Joint Committee
subsequently hired a law firm to assist in its investigation, which included
testimony from multiple witnesses, interviews with additional individuals, and the
analysis of documents.
As a result of the Joint Committee’s investigation, the Maryland General
Assembly passed Chapter 72, Laws of Maryland 2021, effective July 1, 2021,
(known as the Maryland Environmental Service Reform Act) that made
significant changes to MES and its operations.
1. Governance – The Act changed the composition, appointment process, and
qualifications of the Board of Directors. The Act decreased the number of
Board members from nine to eight; and removed the MES executive director
as the presiding officer of the Board, designating the executive director as a
non-voting member. The remaining Board members include the State
3

--- Page 6 ---
Treasurer (or designee) and six members appointed to the Board by the
Governor with the advice and consent of the Maryland Senate.
The Board is now required to observe the same standard of care as corporate
directors, receive annual training, adopt a conflict of interest policy, and
annually evaluate the executive director based on Board approved criteria.
The Board also must adopt policies on severance packages, bonuses, tuition
reimbursements, expense reimbursements, workforce diversity, whistleblower
complaints, travel, and the vehicles and equipment owned by MES.
2. Administration – The Act required the MES executive director to appoint a
diversity officer to coordinate the development and implementation of a
diversity policy for MES and to assist employees in resolving grievances
related to alleged violations of the diversity policy or State or federal anti-
discrimination law. MES is also required to submit certain contracts with a
value of $250,000 or more to the Board of Public Works for approval.
Furthermore, the MES administration is required to notify its Board of any
nonemergency expenditure that exceeds $25,000 and receive Board approval
for nonemergency expenditures greater than $200,000. Finally, MES is
required to submit a full and detailed operating and capital budget each year to
the Department of Budget and Management, and the budget must specify
MES’ revenue sources.
3. Audit – The Act required MES to obtain an annual audit that focuses on
unauthorized spending, misallocated expenses, lack of conformity with State
law or Board policies, and other accounting errors. The required annual audit
could either be performed by MES’ independent accounting firm that audits
its financial statements or be performed separately. MES obtained the
required audit report dated June 21, 2022 (a draft copy of this report
previously had been submitted to the Board on May 26, 2022). The report,
which was issued after the conclusion of our audit fieldwork, disclosed that
transactions tested were appropriate and adequately documented. The report
also disclosed that certain employee expense reimbursements tested were not
submitted timely in accordance with MES procedures.
Additionally, the Act required an assessment of the Board’s operations by
December 31, 2021 and every five years thereafter. MES obtained the
required Board assessment and presented it to the Board on December 16,
2021. The report identified opportunities for continued improvement and
included recommendations for the Board’s consideration, such as developing
an onboarding process, requiring cyber awareness training, and self-evaluation
4

--- Page 7 ---
of Board performance. As of September 2022, MES and the Board were in
the process of implementing the recommended improvements.
On May 16, 2022, the Joint Committee issued a report to the Legislative Policy
Committee on its findings, conclusions, and recommendations regarding MES
personnel and Board practices during the tenure of the former director.
According to the report, federal and State prosecutors conducted investigations of
the former MES director’s activities simultaneously with the Committee’s
investigations. On October 5, 2021 the U.S. Attorney’s Office for the District of
Maryland indicted the former director, and on the same date the Maryland State
Prosecutor’s Office filed a criminal information1 against the former director in the
Circuit Court for Anne Arundel County. As of September 2022, the disposition
of these criminal charges had not been finalized.
Our audit of MES took into account the aforementioned law changes.
Financial Statement Audits
In accordance with the Natural Resources Article, Section 3-126 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, MES engaged an independent accounting firm to audit its
financial statements annually. In the related audit reports, the firm stated that the
financial statements presented fairly, in all material respects, the financial position
of MES as of June 30, 2019, 2020, and 2021, and the respective changes in its
financial position and, where applicable cash flows thereof for the years then
ended, in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United
States of America.
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report
Our audit included a review to determine the status of the six findings contained
in our preceding audit report dated January 31, 2020. As disclosed in Figure 1 on
the following page, for the non-cybersecurity-related findings, we determined that
MES satisfactorily addressed four of those five findings. The remaining non-
cybersecurity-related finding is repeated in this report.
1 A filing of a criminal information is similar to an indictment except that it does not require a vote
by a grand jury. Instead, the information is presented to a judicial officer who examines it and
decides whether there is probable cause that a crime occurred.
5

--- Page 8 ---
Figure 1
Status of Preceding Findings
Preceding Implementation
Finding Description
Finding Status
MES lacked formal written agreements with State
Repeated
Finding 1 agencies for 69 facilities to clarify responsibilities of
(Current Finding 1)
the services it performed, as required.
MES obtained services from two vendors totaling
approximately $8.4 million using a sole source
procurement method without necessary MES Board
Finding 2 Not Repeated
approval to waive its competitive procurement
procedures. Furthermore, MES did not have a
written contract with one of the vendors.
MES had not established effective controls over the
Finding 3 Not Repeated
processing of invoice payments.
MES check receipt and deposit procedures were
Finding 4 inadequate and duties related to cash receipts and Not Repeated
accounts receivable were not properly segregated.
Human resources and payroll system user
capabilities were not adequately restricted, and
Finding 5 Not Repeated
independent documented reviews of personnel and
payroll transactions were not performed.
MES did not ensure that user access capabilities
Finding 6 assigned to employees on its financial management Status Redacted2
systems were adequately restricted.
Findings and Recommendations
State Projects
Background
Maryland Environmental Service (MES) performs project services (such as
environmental cleanup and recycling program management) for State agencies.
MES enters into a contract with each agency for these projects. During fiscal year
2021, expenditures related to 180 State-related contractual projects totaled
approximately $80.7 million. As provided for in the contracts, MES may require
2 Specific information on the current status of this cybersecurity–related finding has been redacted
from this publicly available report in accordance with State Government Article, Section 2-
1244(i) of the Annotated Code of Maryland.
6

--- Page 9 ---
advance payments from agencies to cover project expenditures. Any interest
earned on the advances is credited to the individual projects to offset
expenditures. According to MES, the necessity and amount of an advance are
based on the duration and size of the project. As of June 30, 2021, MES was
holding 54 advances for contractual projects totaling $5.9 million.
In addition to project services, other MES projects represent long-term
operational commitments by MES, in accordance with an Executive Order issued
in 1971, to operate and maintain all State-owned water, wastewater, and solid
waste management facilities. The funding for these State reimbursable projects is
established through the State budgetary process, during which annual estimates of
costs for the projects are submitted by MES to the Department of Budget and
Management for inclusion in the annual budget request. MES is reimbursed by
State agencies on a monthly basis consistent with the annual estimate. During
fiscal year 2021, MES collected approximately $29.9 million from State agencies
for 79 reimbursable projects, of which 76 were State-owned water and wastewater
facilities and 3 were steam plant facilities.
Finding 1
MES lacked required formal written agreements with State agencies for 78
of the 79 reimbursable projects at State-owned facilities to clarify
responsibilities of services it performed.
Analysis
MES lacked formal written agreements with State agencies for 78 of the 79
reimbursable projects at State-owned facilities to clarify responsibilities of
services it performed, as required. A 1979 Board of Public Works (BPW)
advisory required State agencies to prepare detailed working agreements and
descriptions of the scope of responsibility assigned to MES and the other State
agency for each project. Our review disclosed that MES only had a written
agreement for 1 of the 79 reimbursable projects active during 2021 totaling
$79,839.
A similar condition was noted in our prior audit report. In response to our prior
report, MES indicated it would implement formal written agreements by
December 2020. However, MES management advised us that they had not made
progress on this issue because it was addressing other matters (such as
implementing changes resulting from the MES Reform Act) and MES advised us
it would execute the required agreements by December 2023.
7

--- Page 10 ---
Recommendation 1
We recommend MES comply with the BPW advisory and enter into formal
written agreements with agencies for all reimbursable projects that it
operates. The agreements should clarify the various responsibilities of each
party (repeat).
Information Systems Security and Control
We determined that the Information Systems Security and Control section,
including Finding 2, related to “cybersecurity”, as defined by the State Finance
and Procurement Article, Section 3A-301(b) of the Annotated Code of Maryland,
and therefore are subject to redaction from the publicly available report in
accordance with the State Government Article, Section 2-1224(i). Consequently,
the specifics of the cybersecurity-related information as well as the following
finding, including the analysis, related recommendations, along with MES’
response, have been redacted from this report copy.
Finding 2
Redacted cybersecurity-related finding.
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the Maryland Environmental
Service (MES) for the period beginning March 11, 2019 and ending March 31,
2022. The audit was conducted in accordance with generally accepted
government auditing standards. Those standards require that we plan and perform
the audit to obtain sufficient, appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis
for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives. We believe that
the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and
conclusions based on our audit objectives.
As prescribed by the State Government Article, Section 2-1221 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, the objectives of this audit were to examine MES’ financial
transactions, records, and internal control, and to evaluate its compliance with
applicable State laws, rules, and regulations.
In planning and conducting our audit, we focused on the major financial-related
areas of operations based on assessments of significance and risk. The areas
addressed by the audit included cash receipts, procurements and disbursements,
8

--- Page 11 ---
payroll, and state projects. We also determined the status of the findings
contained in our preceding audit report.
MES engaged an independent accounting firm to audit its financial statements
annually. In the related audit reports, the firm stated that the financial statements
presented fairly, in all material respects, the financial position of MES as of June
30, 2019, 2020, and 2021, and the respective changes in its financial position and,
where applicable, cash flows thereof for the years then ended in accordance with
accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America.
We have relied on the work of the independent accounting firm to provide audit
coverage of certain aspects of MES’ operations (such as, internal controls and
testing for debt financing, and certain accounts receivable activities). Our audit
procedures in these areas were generally limited, therefore, to obtaining a
sufficient basis for that reliance.
Our assessment of internal controls was based on agency procedures and controls
in place at the time of our fieldwork. Our tests of transactions and other auditing
procedures were generally focused on the transactions occurring during our audit
period of March 11, 2019 and ending March 31, 2022, but may include
transactions before or after this period as we considered necessary to achieve our
audit objectives.
To accomplish our audit objectives, our audit procedures included inquiries of
appropriate personnel, inspections of documents and records, tests of transactions,
and to the extent practicable, observations of MES’ operations. Generally,
transactions were selected for testing based on auditor judgment, which primarily
considers risk, the timing or dollar amount of the transaction, or the significance
of the transaction to the area of operation reviewed. As a matter of course, we do
not normally use sampling in our tests, so unless otherwise specifically indicated,
neither statistical nor non-statistical audit sampling was used to select the
transactions tested. Therefore, unless sampling is specifically indicated in a
finding, the results from any tests conducted or disclosed by us cannot be used to
project those results to the entire population from which the test items were
selected.
We also performed various data extracts of pertinent information from MES’
financial management system (such as revenue and expenditure data). We
performed various tests of the relevant data and determined that the data were
sufficiently reliable for the purposes the data were used during the audit. Finally,
we performed other auditing procedures that we considered necessary to achieve
9

--- Page 12 ---
our objectives. The reliability of data used in this report for background or
informational purposes was not assessed.
MES’ management is responsible for establishing and maintaining effective
internal control. Internal control is a process designed to provide reasonable
assurance that objectives pertaining to the reliability of financial records;
effectiveness and efficiency of operations, including safeguarding of assets; and
compliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations are achieved. As
provided in Government Auditing Standards, there are five components of
internal control: control environment, risk assessment, control activities,
information and communication, and monitoring. Each of the five components,
when significant to the audit objectives, and as applicable to MES, were
considered by us during the course of this audit.
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate.
Our reports are designed to assist the Maryland General Assembly in exercising
its legislative oversight function and to provide constructive recommendations for
improving State operations. As a result, our reports generally do not address
activities we reviewed that are functioning properly.
This report includes findings relating to conditions that we consider to be a
significant deficiencies in the design or operation of internal control that could
adversely affect MES’ ability to maintain reliable financial records, operate
effectively and efficiently, and/or comply with applicable laws, rules, and
regulations. Our report also includes findings regarding significant instances of
noncompliance with applicable laws, rules, or regulations. Other less significant
findings were communicated to MES that did not warrant inclusion in this report.
State Government Article Section 2-1224(i) requires that we redact in a manner
consistent with auditing best practices any cybersecurity findings before a report
is made available to the public. This results in the issuance of two different
versions of an audit report that contains cybersecurity findings – a redacted
version for the public and an unredacted version for government officials
responsible for acting on our audit recommendations.
The State Finance and Procurement Article, Section 3A-301(b), states that
cybersecurity is defined as “processes or capabilities wherein systems,
communications, and information are protected and defended against damage,
10

--- Page 13 ---
unauthorized use or modification, and exploitation”. Based on that definition, and
in our professional judgment, we concluded that certain findings in this report fall
under that definition. Consequently, for the publicly available audit report all
specifics as to the nature of cybersecurity findings and required corrective actions
have been redacted. We have determined that such aforementioned practices, and
government auditing standards, support the redaction of this information from the
public audit report. The specifics of these cybersecurity findings have been
communicated to MES and those parties responsible for acting on our
recommendations in an unredacted audit report.
MES’ response to our findings and recommendations is included as an appendix
to this report. Depending on the version of the audit report, responses to any
cybersecurity findings may be redacted in accordance with State law. As
prescribed in the State Government Article, Section 2-1224 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, we will advise MES regarding the results of our review of its
response.
11

--- Page 14 ---
APPENDIX

--- Page 15 ---
Maryland Environmental Service
Agency Response Form
State Projects
Finding 1
MES lacked required formal written agreements with State agencies for 78 of the 79
reimbursable projects at State-owned facilities to clarify responsibilities of services it
performed.
We recommend MES comply with the BPW advisory and enter into formal written
agreements with agencies for all reimbursable projects that it operates. The agreements
should clarify the various responsibilities of each party (repeat).
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 1 Agree Estimated Completion Date: 12/31/2023
Please provide details of MES will continue to establish omnibus agreements with additional
corrective action or State agencies where appropriate, and applicable, to ensure there
explain disagreement. are clearly defined scopes of work. The agreements will include
descriptions, responsibilities, and specific services offered by MES
for each entity.
Page 1 of 2

--- Page 16 ---
Maryland Environmental Service
Agency Response Form
Information Systems Security and Control
The Office of Legislative Audits (OLA) has determined that Finding 2 related to
“cybersecurity”, as defined by the State Finance and Procurement Article, Section 3A-301(b) of
the Annotated Code of Maryland, and therefore is subject to redaction from the publicly
available audit report in accordance with State Government Article 2-1224(i). Although the
specifics of the finding, including the analysis, related recommendations, along with MES’
responses, have been redacted from this report copy, MES’ responses indicated agreement with
the finding and recommendations.
Finding 2
Redacted cybersecurity-related finding.
Agency Response has been redacted by OLA.
Page 2 of 2

--- Page 17 ---
A T
UDIT EAM
Bekana Edossa, CPA, CFE
Audit Manager
Amanda M. Jones
Senior Auditor
Tari J. Covington
Timothy Moon
John B. Wachter, CFE
Staff Auditors