Title: Maryland Transportation Authority - Data Analysis of Electronic Tolling and Customer Service Processes
Date: 03/22/2023
Type: Special Reports and Letters
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=641b6de4a1ce581720f566da
Extracted: 2025-06-19T23:04:31.499497
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Special Review
Maryland Transportation Authority
Data Analysis of Electronic Tolling and
Customer Service Processes
March 2023
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Senator Clarence K. Lam, M.D. (Senate Chair) Delegate Jared Solomon (House Chair)
Senator Joanne C. Benson Delegate Steven J. Arentz
Senator Paul D. Corderman Delegate Nicholas P. Charles II
Senator Katie Fry Hester Delegate Andrea Fletcher Harrison
Senator Shelly L. Hettleman Delegate Steven C. Johnson
Senator Cheryl C. Kagan Delegate Mary A. Lehman
Senator Cory V. McCray Delegate David Moon
Senator Justin D. Ready Delegate Julie Palakovich Carr
Senator Bryan W. Simonaire Delegate Stephanie M. Smith
Senator Craig J. Zucker Delegate M. Courtney Watson
To Obtain Further Information
Office of Legislative Audits
The Warehouse at Camden Yards
351 West Camden Street, Suite 400
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Phone: 410-946-5900
Maryland Relay: 711
TTY: 410-946-5401 · 301-970-5401
E-mail: OLAWebmaster@ola.state.md.us
Website: www.ola.state.md.us
To Report Fraud
The Office of Legislative Audits operates a Fraud Hotline to report fraud, waste, or abuse involving State
of Maryland government resources. Reports of fraud, waste, or abuse may be communicated anonymously
by a toll-free call to 1-877-FRAUD-11, by mail to the Fraud Hotline, c/o Office of Legislative Audits, or
through the Office’s website.
Nondiscrimination Statement
The Department of Legislative Services does not discriminate on the basis of age, ancestry, color, creed,
marital status, national origin, race, religion, gender, gender identity, sexual orientation, or disability in the
admission or access to its programs, services, or activities. The Department’s Information Officer has been
designated to coordinate compliance with the nondiscrimination requirements contained in Section 35.107
of the United States Department of Justice Regulations. Requests for assistance should be directed to the
Information Officer at 410-946-5400 or 410-970-5400.

--- Page 3 ---
March 22, 2023
Senator Clarence K. Lam, M.D., Senate Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Delegate Jared Solomon, House Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Members of Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Annapolis, Maryland
Ladies and Gentlemen:
We have conducted a special review of certain Maryland Transportation
Authority (MDTA) electronic tolling and customer service processes. This
review was initiated based on various allegations and concerns we received
through our fraud, waste, and abuse hotline and from constituent concerns
conveyed to us by several members of the Maryland General Assembly. As of
April 2, 2022, 74 complainants had contacted our fraud, waste, and abuse hotline,
many of whom had multiple complaints, including being charged for a toll they
did not incur, charged an incorrect rate (such as charged full price when they had
an E-ZPass or commuter plan), or charged multiple times for the same trip.
Our review had two specific objectives based on an analysis of MDTA tolling and
customer data. The first objective was to determine if MDTA improperly charged
tolls to Thomas J. Hatem Memorial Bridge discount plan customers. The second
objective was to determine if, at all toll facilities, MDTA improperly charged
customers for the same toll twice.
To enable us to perform this analysis, we requested electronic data extracts of
MDTA tolling data and customer service data for the ten-month period from April
13, 2021 to February 13, 2022, from which we performed specialized data
analysis tests and queries. The requested extracts included over 430 million
detailed transactions, representing over 115 million unique tolling transactions
related to over 5 million customer accounts. Our objectives did not include a
review and assessment of MDTA customer service relations or interactions with
customers about tolling complaints and inquiries.

--- Page 4 ---
Hatem Bridge Discount Plan Customers Improperly Charged Tolls
Based on our data analysis, we identified approximately $435,000 in potentially
improper toll charges related to 10,474 Thomas J. Hatem Memorial Bridge
discount plan customers that warrant further follow-up by MDTA. Under the
discount plan, customers pay $20 annually for unlimited trips by a two-axle
vehicle and should not be charged tolls if the vehicle has a properly mounted E-
ZPass transponder.
Our detailed analysis of these discount plan customers’ accounts disclosed a
significant spike in toll charges during the three-week period from December 24,
2020 to January 15, 2021. During this period, 4,465 customers were charged
7,813 tolls totaling $62,595.
Based on our review of the related vehicle images taken by tolling cameras for 37
judgmentally selected tolls during the spike period, we believe MDTA should
have dismissed 25 of these tolls relating to 23 customers since the vehicle images
showed a properly mounted transponder or the image was insufficient to
determine if the transponder was properly mounted. For 11 of those 25 tolls
where the photographic image was insufficient to determine if a transponder was
properly mounted, since the license plate number was associated with the E-ZPass
account we believe the burden should have been on MDTA to prove user error by
a discount plan customer before charging a toll.
Customers Improperly Charged Tolls Twice
Based on our data analysis for all MDTA toll facilities, we identified 82,847
customers that were potentially charged more than once for a single trip through a
toll facility. The toll charges (including both potential duplicate tolls and correct
tolls) for these customers totaled approximately $645,000. A majority of these
tolls (80 percent) occurred at three toll facilities – the Intercounty Connector
(ICC), the William Preston Lane Jr. Memorial (Bay) Bridge, and the Fort
McHenry Tunnel.
Our test of 65 of these customers determined that 62 customers were improperly
charged. Specifically, 36 customers were improperly charged at least twice based
on the same information for one unique toll transaction (vehicle, time of day, and
toll facility) and another 26 customers were improperly charged because MDTA
misapplied a separate, unrelated vehicle’s toll transaction to the customer.
Our further review of the vehicle images taken by tolling cameras for the 65
customers disclosed various examples of customers being charged twice for a
single trip through the toll facility. For example, a customer traveling on the I-95
Express Toll Lanes was charged twice based on tolling equipment cameras in two
2

--- Page 5 ---
lanes mistakenly reading the same vehicle twice and another customer was
improperly charged twice for the same trip on the ICC.
Although not a formal objective of the review, using the electronic data extracts,
we also attempted to determine the timeliness of transaction postings to customer
accounts. Untimely transaction posting had been a source of frustration expressed
by the motoring public when we initiated our review. Our analysis showed a
marked improvement in timeliness of transaction posting from an average of 279
days pre-April 2021 to a 20-day average after that date.
Since this special review was not an audit conducted in accordance with
Government Auditing Standards, we did not include recommendations for our
observations. Nevertheless, we believe MDTA should proactively perform
similar data analysis periodically to ensure the continued accuracy of its systems
and processes and the appropriateness of customer toll charges.
We provided MDTA with the necessary information to follow-up on the
customers identified through our data analysis who were potentially charged
improper tolls. Finally, we shared with MDTA the criteria used in our data
analysis so that, in conjunction with the tolling contractors, MDTA could perform
similar analyses in the future. Any corrective actions taken by MDTA regarding
customer tolling accuracy will be subject to review during our next fiscal
compliance audit of MDTA.
We shared our observations with the Maryland Department of Transportation
(MDOT) and MDTA in March 2023. Although this report contains no
recommendations, we provided a draft copy of the report to MDOT and MDTA
for review and comment. MDTA has provided a written response to our findings,
which we believe demonstrates its agreement and describes an appropriate
corrective action plan. This response has been included as an Appendix to this
report.
We wish to acknowledge the cooperation extended to us during the review by
MDOT, MDTA, and its tolling contractors.
Respectfully submitted,
Gregory A. Hook, CPA
Legislative Auditor
3

--- Page 6 ---
4

--- Page 7 ---
Table of Contents
Background Information 7
Maryland Transportation Authority (MDTA) Responsibilities 7
Customer Discount Plans 8
Tolling Contractors 9
Electronic Toll Collection Process 9
Scope, Objectives, and Methodology 12
Scope 12
Objectives and Methodology 13
Office of Legislative Audits’ (OLA) Observations 15
Objective 1 – To determine if MDTA improperly charged tolls to Thomas
J. Hatem Memorial Bridge discount plan customers
Background 15
Methodology 15
Conclusion 16
OLA Data Analysis 16
Objective 2 – To determine if MDTA improperly charged customers for
the same toll twice
Background 23
Methodology 23
Conclusion 24
OLA Data Analysis 26
Additional Issue Reviewed – Delays in Posting Tolls to Customer
Accounts Appear to Have Been Resolved
Background 33
OLA Data Analysis and Observations 33
Exhibit 1 – Toll Collection Finding and Response from OLA’s Fiscal 38
Compliance Audit Report of MDTA dated September 13, 2021
Exhibit 2 – Summary of Allegations Received through OLA’s Fraud, 46
Waste, and Abuse Hotline
5

--- Page 8 ---
Exhibit 3 – Summary of Duplicate Tolls Tested with Estimated 47
Overcharges
Agency Response Appendix
6

--- Page 9 ---
Background Information
Maryland Transportation Authority (MDTA) Responsibilities
Title 4 of the Transportation Article, Annotated Code of Maryland, establishes
MDTA as an agency of the State, to act on behalf of the Maryland Department of
Transportation with regard to the supervision, financing, construction, operation,
maintenance, and repair of the State’s toll facilities. The governing board of
MDTA consists of eight members who are appointed by the Governor with the
advice and consent of the Senate. The Secretary of Transportation serves as the
Chairman.
MDTA is responsible for the collection of toll revenue at the State’s nine toll
collection facilities (see Figure 1). Effective March 5, 2020, the State
discontinued the collection of cash tolls. Since that time, customers can pay tolls
electronically through E-ZPass, through video tolling billing notices, or by credit
card using the Pay-by-Plate program.1
Figure 1
Map of MDTA’s Nine Toll Collection Facilities
Source: MDTA Fiscal Year 2022 Financial Statements
1 Pay-by-Plate is similar to video tolling except the tolls are charged to a customer’s credit card
on file with MDTA.
7

--- Page 10 ---
During fiscal year 2022, toll collections totaled $702.6 million, which were
mainly comprised of E-ZPass collections totaling $562.4 million (see Figure 2).
MDTA also operates twelve walk-in Customer Service Centers (five at selected
MDTA toll facilities and seven at Motor Vehicle Administration offices) and one
Customer Service Call Center.
Figure 2
Toll Collections and Transactions by Facility
Fiscal Year 2022
(collections expressed in millions of dollars and transactions expressed in thousands)
E-ZPass Tolls Video Tolls Pay-by-Plate Tolls Total
Toll Facility
Collections Transactions Collections Transactions Collections Transactions Collections Transactions
Fort McHenry Tunnel $169.4 35,452 $42.6 5,968 $.570 139 $212.6 41,559
John F. Kennedy
152.1 12,544 24.5 1,644 .214 25 176.8 14,213
Memorial Highway/I-95
Baltimore Harbor Tunnel 67.4 21,103 23.4 3,780 .404 100 91.2 24,983
Intercounty Connector 51.9 27,150 11.4 3,826 .297 134 63.6 31,110
William Preston Lane Jr.
40.7 10,936 13.0 1,935 .202 48 53.9 12,919
Memorial (Bay) Bridge
Francis Scott Key Bridge 41.5 10,038 11.4 1,723 .180 44 53.0 11,805
Governor Harry W. Nice
Memorial / Senator
14.9 2,393 5.8 574 .097 15 20.8 2,982
Thomas “Mac”
Middleton (Nice) Bridge
Thomas J. Hatem
12.5 4,089 5.2 396 .037 5 17.7 4,490
Memorial Bridge
I-95 Express Toll Lanes 12.0 7,752 0.9 384 .013 8 13.0 8,144
Total $562.4 131,457 $138.2 20,230 $2.014 518 $702.6 152,205
Note: Numbers may not sum to total due to rounding.
Source: MDTA Fiscal Year 2022 Financial Statements
Customer Discount Plans
MDTA has six customer discount plans for two-axle vehicles available to E-
ZPass Customers – the Baltimore Region plan, the Governor Harry W. Nice
Memorial / Senator Thomas “Mac” Middleton (Nice) Bridge plan, two plans for
the William Preston Lane Jr. Memorial (Bay) Bridge, and two plans for the
Thomas J. Hatem Memorial Bridge. Each discount plan provides customers with
reduced toll charges due to frequent usage at certain toll facilities. For example,
8

--- Page 11 ---
the Baltimore Region discount plan costs customers $70 for 50 discounted trips
within 45 days ($1.40 per trip) at three tolls facilities (Fort McHenry Tunnel,
Baltimore Harbor Tunnel, and Francis Scott Key Bridge). At John F. Kennedy
Memorial Highway and Thomas J. Hatem Memorial Bridge two trips are
deducted for each trip ($2.80) under the Baltimore Region discount plan because
tolls are only collected in one direction. Additionally, for the two Hatem Bridge
plans, customers pay $20 annually for unlimited trips by a two-axle vehicle.
MDTA also has two discount plans for vehicles with five or more axles at seven
of the nine toll facilities (does not apply to the Intercounty Connector or the I-95
Express Toll Lanes).
Tolling Contractors
In February 2018, the Board of Public Works (BPW) approved two separate
contracts totaling $359.4 million to replace MDTA’s prior contractor that
provided both the toll collection system (hardware and software for toll facilities
to record transactions) and the customer service center (including related software
to process recorded toll transactions to individual customers). One contractor was
awarded a nine-year contract for the customer service center totaling $200.4
million, with two renewal options valued at an additional $72.4 million. A second
contractor was awarded a nine-year contract for the toll collection system totaling
$71.9 million, with two renewal options valued at an additional $14.7 million.
The transition to the new toll collection system began in May 2019 and involved
installing new tolling system equipment and software. Although the installation
of the equipment and software was completed in July 2020, MDTA had a lengthy
process of testing and calibrating the toll collection system, and the transition to
the new customer service center contractor took more time than planned. In order
to maintain continuity of services, MDTA obtained BPW approval in January
2021 to extend the contract of the previous tolling contractor until March 2022 at
a cost of $38 million. In April 2021, MDTA made the final transition to the new
tolling system and customer service center.
Electronic Toll Collection Process
In the new All Electronic Tolling system, images of the front and rear license
plates are taken for all vehicles driving through a toll facility. E-ZPass
transactions are recorded when a vehicle with a transponder travels through a toll
facility. Video tolling occurs when a customer drives through a toll facility
without using an E-ZPass transponder (the customer does not have their E-ZPass
transponder in the vehicle, the customer does not have an E-ZPass account, the
customer did not register their license plate on their E-ZPass account, or the
9

--- Page 12 ---
tolling equipment did not read the transponder), and the images are used to
identify the vehicle, whose owner is sent a bill at an increased toll rate to cover
processing fees. Pay-by-Plate is similar to a video tolling except the tolls are
charged to a customer’s credit card on file with MDTA.
For video tolling and Pay-by-Plate, MDTA’s system attempts to automatically
determine the license plate from the image and assigns a confidence percentage as
to the certainty that the license plate was captured accurately. Images for which
the system reflects a low degree of confidence in the accuracy are manually
reviewed and verified before being billed to the vehicle owners. See Figure 3 for
a summary of how MDTA’s two tolling contractors work together to process
electronic tolls.
Figure 3
Electronic Toll Collection Process
Customer
Tolling
Service
Contractor
Contractor
Collect Tolling Post Toll to Handle Customer
Prepare Toll
Information Customer Account Payments
Detect transponder Assemble raw tolling Identify existing Collect customer
data into billable tolls account to post toll or payments and apply
Capture front and rear create an account if to customer account
images of vehicle Manually review one does not exist
issues with images or Provide customer
Capture video incomplete / invalid Calculate and apply service, handle
tolls the final toll amount, customer complaints,
Identify vehicle including applying and research issues to
characteristics (such Transfer prepared customer discount determine if tolls
as axle count) tolls to the Customer plans should be dismissed
Service Contractor
In response to concerns raised in the 2022 Joint Chairman’s Report regarding the
accuracy of tolling equipment, MDTA issued a report, dated January 2023, which
concluded that the tolling system has a high degree of accuracy with a low error
rate. MDTA based its conclusions on a review of tolling transactions for the
seven-day period from September 22, 2022 to September 28, 2022. MDTA
detailed that many issues perceived by the public as tolling errors were not system
10

--- Page 13 ---
errors, and provided examples of customer-generated activities that will result in
perceived errors:
 Customer fails to properly mount their transponder.
 Customer does not add their vehicle license plates to their E-ZPass
account.
 Customer does not maintain a positive account balance by not keeping
their credit card or bank account information current.
 Customer does not renew a discount plan or prepay for the Hatem Bridge
discount plan.
MDTA explained that the following system errors rarely occur:
 A vehicle was over classified (miscounted the number of axles).
 An applicable discount was not given.
 A toll was processed twice or split into two separate trips.
 A toll is charged to the wrong customer.
We did not review MDTA’s report in detail or determine the accuracy of the
conclusions. Our special review analyzed tolling and customer data for the ten-
month period from April 13, 2021 to February 13, 2022, which did not include the
seven-day period in September 2022 that MDTA used for its analysis. Our
special review determined that system errors did occur, in some cases with great
frequency (for example, many system errors were identified over a certain time
period for Hatem Bridge discount plan holders), and duplicate charges occurred
that were not attributable to customer errors.
11

--- Page 14 ---
Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
Scope
This review was initiated based on various allegations and concerns received
through our fraud, waste, and abuse hotline and from certain members of the
Maryland General Assembly subsequent to the issuance of our fiscal compliance
audit report of Maryland Transportation Authority (MDTA) dated September 13,
2021. However, similar concerns, but to a lesser extent, were initially raised
during our recent fiscal compliance audit of MDTA at which time we received
allegations that MDTA was not taking sufficient action to detect and address the
overbilling of customers for electronic tolling due to issues with its new toll
equipment.
During that audit, we reviewed MDTA’s processes to monitor its electronic
tolling system and the actions taken to address any deficiencies it had identified.
Based on our review, we were able to substantiate the allegations regarding
certain insufficient MDTA actions. See Exhibit 1 for the toll collection finding
and MDTA’s response published in our fiscal compliance audit report of MDTA
dated September 13, 2021. We presented the MDTA audit finding to the
Maryland General Assembly’s Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee on
December 1, 2021 and to the Appropriation Committee’s Transportation and the
Environment Subcommittee on February 2, 2022.
As of April 2, 2022 (shortly after we initiated this special review), 74
complainants had contacted our fraud, waste, and abuse hotline, many of whom
had multiple complaints. See Exhibit 2 for a summary of the allegations and
concerns we received. For example, 29 complainants stated they were charged
for a toll they did not incur (such as being charged for a toll on a vehicle they did
not own). Additionally, 24 complainants stated they were charged an incorrect
rate (such as charged full price when they had an E-ZPass or commuter plan) or
were charged multiple times for the same trip.
In addition, in February 2022, we met with several legislators to discuss
constituent concerns with the accuracy of E-ZPass, video tolling, and the Hatem
Bridge discount plan. Based on the allegations we received and legislator
concerns, we initiated a special review to analyze certain E-ZPass and video
tolling transactions.
Our special review was conducted during the period from February 17, 2022
through January 20, 2023 and the results herein reflect information we were able
to obtain during this period. Other information relevant to our review may exist
12

--- Page 15 ---
and should be used by MDTA to correct the issues noted in the report and provide
the appropriate restitution to any customers improperly charged.
We conducted this review under the authority of State Government Article,
Section 2-1220 of the Annotated Code of Maryland. Our review did not
constitute an audit conducted in accordance with generally accepted government
auditing standards. The items tested were judgmentally selected. Neither
statistical nor non-statistical sampling was used to select the items tested.
Therefore, the results from any tests conducted or disclosed by us cannot be used
to project those results to the entire population from which the test items were
selected. Finally, while our review found certain tolling errors similar to the
complaints we received through our fraud, waste, and abuse hotline, we did not
identify any issues that warranted a referral to the Office of the Attorney General
– Criminal Division.
Since this was not an audit conducted in accordance with Government Auditing
Standards, we did not include recommendations for our findings/observations.
Nevertheless, we believe the analysis we performed should be undertaken
periodically by MDTA to ensure the continued accuracy of its systems and
processes and the appropriateness of customer toll charges. Any corrective
actions taken by MDTA regarding customer tolling accuracy will be subject to
review during our next fiscal compliance audit of MDTA scheduled to begin in
2024.
Objectives and Methodology
The objectives of our review were:
1. to determine if MDTA improperly charged tolls to Thomas J. Hatem
Memorial Bridge discount plan customers, and
2. to determine if MDTA improperly charged customers for the same toll
twice.
Our review included data analysis and related tests, observations, and discussions
with MDTA personnel and individuals at its electronic tolling contractors, as we
deemed necessary to accomplish our objectives. Specifically, to accomplish our
objectives, our Data Analytics Unit met with representatives from the Maryland
Department of Transportation, MDTA, and the two tolling contractors (the tolling
system contractor and the customer service center contractor) to gain an
understanding of the available tolling data and file structure. Our objectives did
13

--- Page 16 ---
not include a review and assessment of MDTA customer service relations or
interactions with customers about tolling complaints and inquires.
Between March 2022 and May 2022, we requested various information (such as
data tables, examples of standard reports, and read-only access to tolling and
customer service systems) to determine the specific tolling and customer data
needed to accomplish our objectives. By
Data Extracts Subject to
August 2022, we received all requested
Our Analysis
electronic data extracts of tolling data and
customer data for the ten-month period from
 Included over 430 million
April 13, 2021 to February 13, 20222 in order to
detailed transactions
perform specialized data analysis tests and
 Representing over 115 million
queries. The requested extracts included over
unique tolling transactions
430 million detailed transactions, representing  Related to over 5 million
over 115 million unique tolling transactions customer accounts
related to over 5 million customer accounts.
Although by August 2022 we determined that we had received complete data sets,
the process to obtain this information took many months. Specifically, our Data
Analytics Unit reviewed the data sets, which resulted in the need to meet with
MDTA and the contractors to clarify and occasionally modify the requests.
Additionally, the tolling contractors and MDTA had to balance our requests with
other competing priorities to maintain the continuity of services at MDTA tolling
facilities. The analysis of these records was time consuming to ensure the results
we obtained were complete and accurate, which accounted for the majority of the
effort during our review period.
Although not a formal objective of this special review, given our access to
millions of MDTA tolling records, we performed some limited work to assess if
posting of tolling transactions was timely from April 2021 to January 2022. In
addition to tolling errors, customers had complained about past delays in posting
transactions to customer accounts, which MDTA acknowledged occurred. Our
limited review of the records was intended to assess if timely postings were now
occurring.
2 We performed certain procedures to provide reasonable assurance that the extracts received were
reliable and contained the requested information.
14

--- Page 17 ---
Office of Legislative Audits’ (OLA) Observations
Objective 1 – Thomas J. Hatem Memorial Bridge Discount Plan
Objective: To determine if the Maryland Transportation Authority
(MDTA) improperly charged tolls to Thomas J. Hatem Memorial Bridge
discount plan customers.
Background
According to MDTA records, as of February 1, 2022, there were 57,615 Hatem
Bridge discount plan customers. MDTA provides two discount plans for the
Thomas J. Hatem Memorial (Hatem) Bridge under which customers pay $20 per
year for unlimited trips over the Hatem Bridge for two-axle vehicles.3 If the
customer transponder associated with the plan is properly mounted in the vehicle
and read by the tolling equipment, no toll will be charged. Therefore, if a Hatem
Bridge discount plan customer is charged a toll, it represents a problem with
either the tolling equipment (MDTA error), the customer not having the
transponder properly mounted in the vehicle and/or maintaining a positive
account balance (customer error), or a combination of both.
As of April 2, 2022, our fraud, waste, and abuse hotline received four complaints
related to Hatem Bridge discount plan customers being incorrectly charged tolls.
Additionally, our fiscal compliance audit report of MDTA dated September 13,
2021 disclosed that MDTA identified an overbilling issue due to tolling
equipment miscounting axles at the Hatem Bridge. In response to the overbilling
issue, MDTA reviewed transactions for Hatem Bridge discount plan customers
between October 21, 2019 and November 26, 2019 and identified 5,646
transactions for two-axle vehicles that may have been overbilled. MDTA’s
review resulted in it crediting the related accounts $67,000.
Methodology
To accomplish our objective, we performed the following:
 Obtained an understanding of the Hatem Bridge discount plans and the
requirements for customers to receive the discount.
3 MDTA provides two discount plans for the Hatem Bridge – Choice A and Choice B. The
Choice A plan uses a transponder that only works at the Hatem Bridge toll facility and the
Choice B plan uses a transponder that works at all toll facilities accepting E-ZPass (meaning the
customer receives the E-ZPass tolling rate at all other MDTA toll facilities). The Choice B plan
also includes savings on 3 and 4 axle vehicle tolls at the Hatem Bridge. Under both plans, the
unlimited trips only applies to the Hatem Bridge.
15

--- Page 18 ---
 Obtained and gained an understanding of MDTA account data and Hatem
Bridge tolling data that occurred or were posted to customer accounts from
April 2021 through January 2022.
 Developed criteria (detailed below) to identify potential high-risk instances
where customers with the Hatem Bridge discount plan did not receive the
discount.
 Conducted data analysis for the period of review that identified tolls meeting
the criteria.
 Reviewed the results of our analysis for unusual trends or patterns that could
be indicative of tolling problems (such as time periods with unusual increases
in customers not receiving the discount).
 Performed testing of the analysis results and reviewed detailed account
information for a selection of tolls in MDTA’s source systems (such as
reviewing the related images and customer account details) to confirm
whether or not a toll was proper.
Conclusion as of January 20, 2023
Based on our analysis of the Hatem Bridge tolling data during the period from
April 13, 2021 through January 30, 2022,4 we identified approximately $435,000
in potentially improper charges related to 10,474 customers that we concluded
warrant further follow-up by MDTA. We also determined that MDTA did not
determine the full impact (duration and impacted customer accounts) of a tolling
equipment malfunction at the Hatem Bridge that it had previously identified in
January 2021. As of March 2023, we provided MDTA with the necessary
information to follow-up on the customers identified through our data analysis
who were potentially charged improper tolls. Additionally, we shared with
MDTA the criteria used in our data analysis so that, in conjunction with the
tolling contractors, MDTA could perform similar analyses in the future.
OLA Data Analysis
As noted above, customers with a discount plan should not be charged a toll if the
transponder is properly mounted in the vehicle and the tolling equipment correctly
reads the transponder. In order to identify Hatem Bridge discount plan customers
with potentially improper transactions, we filtered the Hatem Bridge toll
transactions that met all four of the following criteria:
 The customer had an active Hatem Bridge discount plan at the time of the toll.
 The vehicle was two-axle based on the tolling data.
4
This includes all tolls that occurred, were sent to the customer service contractor, and/or were
posted to customer accounts from April 13, 2021 through January 30, 2022. This also includes
tolls as far back as July 21, 2020 due to MDTA’s backlog in posting toll transactions.
16

--- Page 19 ---
 The same vehicle, based on the license plate, received the discount on other
tolls at the Hatem Bridge on the same customer account.
 The discount plan customer did not receive the expected zero dollar toll
transaction when traveling the Hatem Bridge, as would be the case if MDTA
properly applied the discount plan.
Based on our analysis, we identified 11,488 Hatem Bridge discount plan
customers5 that were charged for approximately 68,000 potentially improper tolls
totaling $545,000. Our analysis of these tolls disclosed that 2,645 customers (23
percent) were charged tolls on multiple occasions (more than 5 instances),
including 686 customers that were charged tolls in more than 20 instances.
MDTA had not initiated any proactive analysis to identify if Hatem Bridge
discount plan customers were erroneously charged tolls and we were advised that
MDTA had only addressed overbillings for specific customers who complained
about their charges. As a result, MDTA had not investigated and dismissed
potentially improper tolls totaling $435,000 related to 10,474 customers. For the
remaining $110,000 in tolls related to 2,194 customers,6 MDTA had determined
the tolls were, in fact, improper and had dismissed the tolls based on customer-
initiated disputes (see Figure 4).
Figure 4
A Majority of Potentially Improper Hatem Bridge Discount
Plan Tolls Were Not Dismissed or Addressed by MDTA
Tolls Dismissed
Tolls Not
$110,000
Dismissed or
Addressed by
MDTA
$435,000
Source: OLA Analysis of MDTA Tolling Data
5 A majority of the customers were longstanding Hatem Bridge discount plan holders with over 78
percent having the plan for two or more years previously.
6 At least 1,180 customers had certain improper tolls dismissed by MDTA while other potentially
improper tolls were not dismissed.
17

--- Page 20 ---
The proactive analysis of tolling and customer data by MDTA is critical to
identify and correct potential tolling issues similar to the overbilling issue that
occurred between October 21, 2019 and November 26, 2019, which was the
subject of a prior OLA audit report finding. Since MDTA was not performing
this type of analysis, certain irregularities continued to occur and MDTA had not
identified the full extent of these irregularities.
For instance, our analysis identified a significant spike in tolls charged to Hatem
Bridge discount plan customers during the three-week period from December 24,
2020 to January 15, 2021.7 During this period, 4,465 of the 11,488 customers
were charged 7,813 tolls totaling $62,595 for which MDTA had only dismissed
$12,552 based on customer-initiated disputes (see Figure 5).
Figure 5
Spike in Tolls for Hatem Discount Plan Customers
December 24, 2020 to January 15, 2021
Not Dismissed Dismissed
3,000
Spike Period
2,500  4,465 Customers
 7,813 Tolls Totaling $62,595
 80% Not Dismissed
s2,000
llo
T
f
o1,500
t
n
u
o
C1,000
500
0
Week Start Date
Source: OLA Analysis of MDTA Tolling Data
In order to determine if the tolls charged to Hatem Bridge discount plan
customers during the spike period were proper or whether the tolls should have
been dismissed by MDTA, we reviewed 37 judgmentally selected tolls (related to
27 customers). We confirmed that the tolling equipment did not record a reading
7 These tolls were included in our data analysis period from April 13, 2021 through January 30,
2022 due to MDTA’s backlog in posting toll transactions. See Footnote 4 for further details.
18

--- Page 21 ---
of the customers’ transponders for any of these 37 tolls and we also reviewed the
vehicle images taken by tolling cameras for these tolls. Our review disclosed that
7 of these tolls had already been dismissed by MDTA and we concluded that
another 25 tolls (related to 23 customers) should have been dismissed by MDTA
but were not (see Figure 6). For 14 of these 25 tolls, the related vehicle image
showed a properly mounted transponder, which if working properly, should have
been read by the tolling equipment and no toll should have been charged.
For the other 11 tolls, the related vehicle image was insufficient to determine if
the transponder was in the vehicle and therefore the toll charge was questionable.
For those cases where the photographic image was insufficient to determine if a
transponder was properly mounted, we believe the burden should have been on
MDTA to prove user error by a discount plan customer before charging a toll.
Specifically, a review of our Customer Account Vehicle Registration Data
confirmed that all 11 of these vehicles were registered to the corresponding
customer account as of the time MDTA provided us with the data. See Figure 7
on pages 20 to 22 for examples of the vehicle images we reviewed.
In response to our inquiries regarding the spike in tolls, MDTA advised us that it
had identified a tolling equipment malfunction on January 14, 2021, which it
believed had been fully resolved the following day. MDTA also believed it had
dismissed all improper charges to customer accounts. However, as noted above,
the tolling issues extended beyond the one day identified by MDTA and most of
the improper charges had not been refunded.
Figure 6
Results of OLA’s Review of Tolling Images
Tolls Tolls Not
Conclusions Based on our review of
Tested Dismissed
the toll images, we believe
Transponder was visible and properly MDTA would have
mounted based on tolling images 18 14 dismissed 25 tolls relating
(MDTA error). to 23 customers if the
customer disputed them
Image did not capture some or all of the
since the transponder was
vehicle, or quality was insufficient to
visible or the image was
make a clear determination if a 14 11
insufficient to determine
transponder was present and properly
if the transponder was
mounted (MDTA error). properly mounted.
Transponder was not visible or was not
properly mounted in the vehicle based 5 5
on the tolling images (customer error).
Total 37 30
Source: OLA Analysis of MDTA Tolling Data
19

--- Page 22 ---
Figure 7
Examples of Thomas J. Hatem Memorial Bridge Toll Images
Example 1
Transponder Properly Mounted
Example 2
Insufficient Image to Determine if Transponder was Properly Mounted
20

--- Page 23 ---
Figure 7
Examples of Thomas J. Hatem Memorial Bridge Toll Images
Example 3
Insufficient Image Quality to Determine if Transponder
Was Properly Mounted
Example 4
Insufficient Image to Determine if Transponder was Properly Mounted
Since a Vehicle is Not Identified in Front Image
21

--- Page 24 ---
Figure 7
Examples of Thomas J. Hatem Memorial Bridge Toll Images
Example 5
Transponder Not Properly Mounted
22

--- Page 25 ---
Objective 2 – Duplicate Toll Analysis
Objective: To determine if MDTA improperly charged customers for the
same toll twice.
Background
As of April 2, 2022, our fraud, waste, and abuse hotline had received seven
complaints related to potential duplicate tolls at four MDTA tolling facilities
(Baltimore Harbor Tunnel, Fort McHenry Tunnel, Bay Bridge, and the
Intercounty Connector or ICC). Additionally, our fiscal compliance audit report
of MDTA dated September 13, 2021 disclosed that customers were being billed
twice due to cameras misreading vehicles in other toll lanes at the Fort McHenry
Tunnel and the Francis Scott Key Bridge. Also, the audit report identified issues
with tolling equipment at the ICC that resulted in vehicle misreads, which could
have caused incorrect toll charges or overbillings.
For all tolling facilities except the ICC, the customers are charged tolls based on
traveling through a single toll facility. For the ICC, customers are charged tolls
based on a constructed toll trip, which takes into account the customers starting
and ending toll gantry points. The entire length of the ICC includes 12 toll
gantries (6 gantries in each direction) from I-370 to US 1.8 MDTA stated that it
has multiple system controls to prevent customers from receiving duplicate
billings, such as filters that are supposed to detect multiple trips that are within
short time intervals or meet other criteria and prevent customers from being
improperly charged for multiple trips.
Methodology
To accomplish our objective, we performed the following:
 Identified scenarios based on consideration of the complaints received through
our fraud, waste, and abuse hotline, review of the data, and developing an
understanding of related tolling processes that could be indicative of duplicate
tolls being charged to customers.
 Developed specific criteria to apply for each scenario to identify potential
duplicate tolls.
 Conducted data analysis for the period of review that identified specific
groups of tolls meeting the criteria.
8 The toll rates for the ICC vary depending on peak hours (Mon - Fri: 6am - 9am; 4pm - 7pm
excluding federal holidays), off-peak hours (Mon - Fri: 5am - 6am; 9am - 4pm; 7pm - 11pm; Sat
and Sun: 5am - 11pm), and overnight (Sun - Sat: 11pm - 5am). As of the date of this report, to
travel the entire length of the ICC, drivers of cars and light trucks with E-ZPass pay $3.86 during
peak hours, $2.98 off-peak, and $1.23 overnight.
23

--- Page 26 ---
 Reviewed the analysis results for unusual trends or patterns that could be
indicative of tolling problems, such as significant increases in the potential
duplicates during certain periods of time or at certain MDTA facilities.
 Performed testing of the potential duplicate toll groups and reviewed detailed
account and related information for each toll tested in MDTA’s source
systems. This included reviewing the related images from each toll and
reviewing related customer account details to make a determination if the tolls
were duplicates/overcharges or if there were other factors involved.
Conclusion as of January 20, 2023
We determined that potential duplicate tolls occurred and MDTA’s processes did
not prevent the toll charges from being applied to customer accounts. Based on
our data analysis for all toll facilities, we identified 82,847 customers, during the
period from April 13, 2021 to January 30, 2022,9 that were potentially charged
more than once for a single trip through a toll facility. The toll charges (including
both potential duplicate tolls and correct tolls) for these customers totaled
approximately $645,000. A majority of these tolls (80 percent) occurred at three
toll facilities – the ICC, the William Preston Lane Jr. Memorial (Bay) Bridge, and
the Fort McHenry Tunnel (see Figure 8 on the following page). Our subsequent
test of 65 of these customers determined that 62 were improperly charged. As of
March 2023, we provided MDTA with the necessary information to follow-up on
the customers identified through our data analysis who were potentially charged
improper tolls. Additionally, we shared with MDTA the criteria used in our data
analysis so that, in conjunction with the tolling contractors, MDTA could perform
similar analyses in the future.
9
This includes all tolls that occurred, were sent to the customer service contractor, and/or were
posted to customer accounts from April 13, 2021 through January 30, 2022. This also includes
tolls as far back as July 21, 2020 due to MDTA’s backlog in posting toll transactions.
24

--- Page 27 ---
Figure 8
Breakdown of the $645,000 Tolls Charges by Facility
(dollar amounts in thousands)
ICC
Bay Bridge $124 $329
Fort McHenry Tunnel $60
Key Bridge $44
Approximately $513,000
JFK Memorial Highway $27 of the $645,000 tolls
(80%) occurred at three
I-95 Express Toll Lanes $26
facilities - ICC, the Bay
Harbor Tunnel $17 Bridge, and the Fort
McHenry Tunnel
Nice Bridge $10
Hatem Bridge $8
Source: OLA Analysis of MDTA Tolling Data
25

--- Page 28 ---
OLA Data Analysis
We analyzed tolling data to identify instances in which customers were
improperly charged multiple times for the same trip, either in entirety or in part.
We conducted our analysis based on three scenarios we developed, each with its
own set of criteria (see Figure 9).
Figure 9
Data Analysis Scenarios and Criteria
Analysis
Criteria that Must be Met by Two or More Tolls
Scenario
Customer was Charged Twice at the Same Facility
 The tolls were within 6 seconds of each other for the same customer at the same MDTA tolling
Scenario A facility/gantry. For ICC tolls, this included tolls within 6 seconds at the entry gantry and/or the
exit gantry.
 The license plate and/or the transponder were the same.
Customer was Charged for Their Vehicle and Another Vehicle at the Same Facility
 The tolls were within 6 seconds of each other for the same customer at the same MDTA tolling
facility/gantry. For ICC tolls, this included tolls within 6 seconds at the entry gantry and/or the
exit gantry.
Scenario B  The license plate and the transponder (when applicable) were different between the vehicles in
the toll group.
 One of the tolls was for a vehicle, based on license plate, that was not registered to the
customer account nor appeared on any other tolls on that customer account during our review
period.
Customer was Charged for Multiple Trips on the ICC at the Same Time
 The tolls were charged to the same customer at the ICC.
Scenario C
 The license plate and/or the transponder were the same.
 The tolls overlapped in terms of time.
Based on our analysis, we identified approximately $645,000 in tolls comprised
of 135,495 transaction groupings (for example, one correct transaction and one
apparently incorrect transaction for the same customer at a facility) with potential
duplicate tolls related to 82,847 customers across all MDTA tolling facilities (see
Figure 10 on the following page). A majority of the customers (88 percent) had
either one or two instances of potential duplicate tolls. The remaining 12 percent
of customers had more than two instances of potential duplicate tolls, including
526 customers with more than 10 instances. For all analysis scenarios, we
included only toll groups (two or more tolls charged to the same vehicle) in which
no tolls were dismissed by MDTA. All MDTA toll facilities were included in
Analysis Scenarios A and B, while Analysis Scenario C was unique to the ICC.
26

--- Page 29 ---
Figure 10
Summary of Analysis Scenarios with Potential Duplicate Tolls
Transaction
Groupings
with Number Number of Tolls
Analysis Scenario
Potential of Tolls Customers1 Charged2
Duplicate
Tolls
Scenario A (all toll facilities) 42,791 85,810 31,786 $198,000
Scenario B (all toll facilities) 66,016 132,049 46,633 329,000
Scenario C (only ICC toll facility) 26,688 53,376 16,075 118,000
Total 135,495 271,235 82,847 $645,000
1 The total number of customers is actually 94,494 but this includes 11,647 customers that were in more than one of
the scenarios. The total number of customers in the figure reflects the number of unique customers.
2 The tolls charged includes both the correct toll and the potential duplicate toll(s).
Source: OLA Analysis of MDTA Tolling Data
We randomly selected 65 customers with tolls totaling $380.52 for review and
testing from the analysis scenario population of potential duplicate tolls (50
customers selected from Analysis Scenario A or B and 15 customers selected
from Analysis Scenario C). This testing included inspection of tolling images,
related customer accounts, billing records, etc. to make a determination if the tolls
were, in fact, duplicates.
Our test disclosed that 62 of the customers (95 percent) were improperly charged
more than once for a single trip through a toll facility and 3 customers were
correctly charged only one time. Specifically, 36 customers were improperly
charged at least twice based on the same information for one unique toll
transaction (vehicle, time of day, and toll facility) and 26 were improperly
charged because MDTA misapplied a separate, unrelated vehicle’s toll transaction
to the customer (see Figure 11 on the following page).
27

--- Page 30 ---
Figure 11
Summary of Test Results of Customers with Duplicate Tolls
(see Exhibit 3 for a detailed listing of customers with duplicate tolls)
Duplicate Tolls
Customers Total with Two or More Tolls from a
Analysis
Tested Duplicate Tolls for Same Different Vehicle
Scenario
Tolls Vehicle Misapplied
Scenario A 25 25 22 3
Scenario B 25 22 0 22
Scenario C 15 15 14 1
Total 65 62 36 26
Source: OLA Analysis of MDTA Tolling Data
Our detailed review of the tolling facility images disclosed several conditions that
resulted in duplicate billings caused by MDTA system errors and not due to any
fault of the customer (see Figure 12 on pages 29 to 31). For example, we noted
that customers were improperly:
 charged twice for unknown reasons (MDTA believes this was due to a
mistake by its customer service contractor during a manual review of the
tolling images) (Example 1);
 charged for an unrelated vehicle traveling in close proximity including one
instance where a customer was billed for an MDTA police vehicle
(Examples 2 and 5);
 charged twice because their vehicle was picked up by transponder readers
and/or cameras in two lanes due to poor calibration (Example 3);
 charged for an unrelated vehicle in another lane due to poor camera focus
(Example 4); and
 charged twice for the same trip on ICC due to the system improperly
identifying multiple starting and exiting points for the same vehicle
(Example 6).
28

--- Page 31 ---
Figure 12
Examples of Duplicate Toll Images
Example 1 - Fort McHenry Tunnel
Customer Charged Twice Based on the Same Information for the Toll
(vehicle, time of day, and toll facility)
Example 2 - Fort McHenry Tunnel
Customer Charged Twice Based on MDTA Misapplying a
Separate Vehicle’s Toll Transaction to the Customer
29

--- Page 32 ---
Figure 12
Examples of Duplicate Toll Images
Example 3 - I-95 Express Toll Lanes
Customer Charged Twice Based on the Same Information for the Toll
(vehicle, time of day, and toll facility)
Example 4 - Intercounty Connector
Customer Charged Twice Based on MDTA Misapplying a Separate Vehicle’s Toll
Transaction to the Customer
30

--- Page 33 ---
Figure 12
Examples of Duplicate Toll Images
Example 5 – Francis Scott Key Bridge
Customer Charged Twice Based on MDTA Misapplying a Separate
Vehicle’s Toll Transaction to the Customer
Example 6 – Intercounty Connector
Customer Charged Twice Based on MDTA Overlapping Toll for a
Single Trip in One Direction
31

--- Page 34 ---
Our testing also identified that the overcharges related to the duplicate tolls can
vary on a case-by-case basis and can result in the customer being charged more
than twice the proper amount. For example, for non-ICC tolls tested, 13 of the 25
customers were charged more than twice the proper amount. This means the
customer was properly charged for a toll at the E-ZPass or discounted toll rate but
was also charged a toll at a higher video toll rate.
Conversely, there were also instances where the resulting charges were less than
twice the proper amount. For example, the overcharge amount for the ICC tolls
was generally for the overlapping portion of the two tolls, which is shorter than
the full distance travelled by the customer. Specifically, ICC tolls are based on
both the starting and ending gantry points located at various sections of the ICC.
As a result, a customer could be improperly charged twice for an overlapping
portion of the ICC trip, but not for the entire distance of the trip.
32

--- Page 35 ---
Additional Issue Reviewed - Delays in Posting Tolls to Customer
Accounts Appear to Have Been Resolved
Background
As noted in the Electronic Toll Collection Process section of the Background
Information found on pages 9 to 11 of this report, each toll transaction results in a
toll trip constructed by the tolling contractor. The tolling contractor then sends
the constructed trips to the customer service contractor in order to post the tolls to
customer accounts. Based on MDTA’s contract documents, MDTA expected the
tolling contractor to send toll transactions to the customer service contractor
within 30 days of the toll transaction. Once the customer service contractor
receives the toll transactions, E-ZPass transactions are posted to customer
accounts. The video toll and Pay-by-Plate transactions can take longer to process
if there are issues with the images associated with the vehicle.
MDTA’s issues with delays in posting tolls to customer accounts had been well-
documented (both with MDTA press releases and during testimony at legislative
hearings). In addition, our fraud, waste, and abuse hotline also received various
complaints about significant delays in tolls being posted to customer accounts.
For example, some customers complained that because of undue delays in posting
tolls, they were not able to review their tolling history to the extent necessary to
ensure their tolls were valid. Delays in posting tolls can also impact a customer’s
ability to take timely action to correct issues that result in higher toll charges, such
as not being aware that the customer’s E-ZPass transponder was not working
properly for an extended period of time.
When MDTA was transitioning to its new tolling contractor and customer service
contractor, the COVID-19 pandemic health crisis impacted its tolling operations.
Specifically, although Maryland tolls remained in effect, a Governor’s Executive
Order effective March 5, 2020 resulted in MDTA closing its Customer Service
Centers, ceasing the collection of cash tolls, suspending notifications of video
tolls due, and suspending collection efforts of unpaid tolls previously billed.
According to MDTA management, on October 15, 2020, MDTA resumed the
mailing of video toll notices and collection efforts on previously unpaid tolls.
This pause in sending notifications of video tolls due, coupled with the transition
to the new contractors resulted in a significant backlog of tolling transactions that
needed to be posted to customer accounts.
OLA Data Analysis and Observations
During our data analysis of tolling and customer data, we noted many instances in
which toll charges were not posted to customer accounts in a timely manner. We
performed a system-wide analysis to determine the length of time between the toll
33

--- Page 36 ---
transaction and the posting to a customer’s account. Our analysis reviewed 115.9
million tolls, relating to approximately 5.3 million customers, which occurred or
the tolling contractor had sent to the customer service contractor for posting to
customer accounts from April 2021 to January 2022.
Our review identified 38.9 million transactions that were posted to customer
accounts 30 days or more after the toll was incurred. This included 23.5 million
tolls posted 120 days or more after the tolls occurred, of which 12.8 million tolls
were posted 360 days or more after the tolls occurred (see Figure 13).
Figure 13
Breakdown of the 38.9 Million Tolls
Posted 30 or More Days after Toll Date
(toll counts in millions)
1144MM 38.9 million tolls posted
12.8
12.8
after 30 days, including
1 1 2 2 M M 11 1 . 1 5 .5 23.5 million posted after
120 days
10M
10M 9.1
9.1
tn
u o tn u 8 8 M M
Co
llo
T
C
llo
6
6
M
M
T
3.9
4M 3.9
4M
2M 1.6
2M 1.6
0M
0M 1 2 3 4 5
30 to 59 60 to 119 120 to 239 240 to 359 360 Days or
Days Days Days Days More
Source: OLA Analysis of MDTA Tolling Data
34

--- Page 37 ---
As noted in Figure 14, for the 115.9 million tolls we reviewed, the average time
between a toll transaction occurring and posting to a customer’s account ranged
from a high of 132 days at the ICC and a low of 48 days at the I-95 Express Toll
Lanes.
Figure 14
Average Days to Post Tolls by MDTA Tolling Facility
IC9C 131232
Nice Bridg8e 8080
Bay Bridg 7 e 79 79
6 78
Fort McHenry Tunnel 78
5 77
JFK Memorial Highway 77
4 65
Key Bridge 65
3 63
Harbor Tunnel 63
2 49
Hatem Bridge 49
1 48
I-95 Express Toll Lanes 48
Source: OLA Analysis of MDTA Tolling Data
Since there was a significant number of tolls posted to customer accounts 30 days
or more after the toll was incurred, we performed a stratification analysis to
determine how many customers experienced these delays with one or more of
their tolls. Our stratification disclosed that approximately 3.4 million customers
of the 5.3 million customers we reviewed (64 percent) experienced one or more
tolls posted to their account after 30 days. This included approximately 2.0
million customers with tolls posted 360 days or more after the tolls occurred (see
Figure 15 on the following page). For example, one customer had 978 tolls
totaling $1,525 from the ICC toll facility posted to their account 360 days after
the toll occurred. Based on the tolling data, this customer routinely travelled
through this toll facility.
35

--- Page 38 ---
Figure 15
Number of Customers Impacted by Toll Posting Delays
Source: OLA Analysis of MDTA Tolling Data
For the 115.9 million tolls we analyzed, 31.2 million tolls related to periods
before MDTA completed its transition to the new contractors in April 2021 and
84.7 million tolls related to period after April 2021. The 31.2 million tolls that
occurred prior to the transition represents tolling activity that was unresolved at
the time of the transition and considered by MDTA to be backlogged due to
pandemic-related factors. Our analysis also disclosed that the average time in
posting tolls significantly improved after transitioning to the new contractors in
April 2021. Specifically, the average time to post tolls to customer accounts was
279 days before April 2021 and 20 days after (see Figure 16 on the following
page).
36

--- Page 39 ---
Figure 16
Improvement in the Average Days for Posting Tolls to Customer
Accounts after MDTA Transitions to New Contractors
Source: OLA Analysis of MDTA Tolling Data
37

--- Page 40 ---
Exhibit 1
Toll Collection Finding and Response from OLA’s Fiscal
Compliance Audit Report of MDTA Dated September 13, 2021
Page 1 of 8
Finding 1
MDTA actions did not determine the impact of electronic toll collection
system issues on its customers and identify and correct certain related
customer overbillings.
Analysis
MDTA did not sufficiently determine the impact of certain issues with its
electronic toll collection system on its customers and identify and correct related
customer overbillings. MDTA began transitioning to the new electronic tolling
contractor in a series of scheduled facility upgrades from approximately May
2019 to July 2020. The tolling system has edits and other processes designed to
proactively detect and automatically correct tolling mischarges (such as,
customers charged twice for the same toll event). MDTA also operates a service
center for customer complaints, and center staff have the ability to correct
customer E-ZPass accounts when tolling errors occur that are not automatically
detected and corrected by the system.
In December 2019, MDTA became aware of issues with its new system
implementation (including overbilling of customers due to tolling equipment or
software failures) through observations of toll transactions and customer
complaints. For example, according to MDTA records, during the period from
December 2019 to October 2020, it documented certain incidents of tolling errors
resulting from problems with tolling equipment at four facilities (the Fort
McHenry Tunnel, Intercounty Connector, the I-95 Express Toll Lanes, and the
Thomas J. Hatem Memorial (Hatem) Bridge). Our review of these incidents also
disclosed an issue at the Francis Scott Key Bridge that MDTA had not previously
documented. Although MDTA worked with its vendor to implement corrective
action, the resultant actions were not always sufficient to determine the impact of
these issues on customers during its investigation of the tolling errors as further
described below.
Fort McHenry Tunnel
In December 2019, MDTA conducted an investigation of a tolling equipment
malfunction that resulted in incorrect axle counts causing customer
overbillings (that is, two axle vehicles being charged for additional axles).
MDTA records indicated it had questioned its new tolling contractor about the
38

--- Page 41 ---
Exhibit 1
Toll Collection Finding and Response from OLA’s Fiscal
Compliance Audit Report of MDTA Dated September 13, 2021
Page 2 of 8
extent of preventative tolling equipment maintenance and employee training
performed, pointing out that even though there was no loss of revenue, the
possibility of customer overbillings could potentially generate unwanted
publicity for MDTA.
While MDTA could provide documentation that the tolling equipment was
fixed, it could not provide us with documentation that it researched the impact
of the problem on customers until the corrective actions were taken. After we
brought our concern about the impact on customers to MDTA’s attention in
April 2021, it further investigated the issue and determined it related to
equipment malfunctions in one of the twenty-two lanes over a period of 25
hours. MDTA advised us that it subsequently identified approximately 7,700
customers were overbilled $84,400. As of August 2021, MDTA advised us it
was in the process of correcting these customers’ accounts.
In addition, we identified another concern with customers being billed twice
on certain dates in January, March, August, and September 2020 due to
cameras misreading vehicles in other toll lanes (similar to the issue noted
below at the Francis Scott Key Bridge). MDTA management advised us that
they were not aware of this issue and that these types of errors are extremely
rare since its tolling system is supposed to automatically detect and correct
such errors. Nevertheless, upon us bringing the issue to MDTA’s attention in
April 2021, it performed limited research (two separate 24-hour periods
during March and September 2020) to determine if the errors resulted in
customers being overbilled. MDTA advised us that a small number of
customers were overbilled but it did not determine the amount of the
overbillings or conduct further research by reviewing other time periods.
Francis Scott Key Bridge
We identified customers being billed twice on certain dates in April and May
2020 due to cameras misreading vehicles in other toll lanes (similar to the
issue noted above at the Fort McHenry Tunnel). In this instance, customers
were both correctly charged for a 2-axle vehicle ($3), and then incorrectly
charged again for a 5-axle vehicle ($24) one second later. As with the
aforementioned Fort McHenry Tunnel issue, MDTA management advised us
that they were not aware of this issue and that these types of errors are
39

--- Page 42 ---
Exhibit 1
Toll Collection Finding and Response from OLA’s Fiscal
Compliance Audit Report of MDTA Dated September 13, 2021
Page 3 of 8
extremely rare since its tolling system is supposed to automatically detect and
correct such errors. Nevertheless, upon us bringing the issue to MDTA’s
attention in April 2021, it performed limited research (two separate 24-hour
periods during April and May 2020) to determine if the errors resulted in
customers being overbilled. MDTA again advised us that a small number of
customers were overbilled, but it did not determine the amount of the
overbillings or conduct further research by reviewing other time periods.
Intercounty Connector and the I-95 Express Toll Lanes
According to MDTA’s records, during the period from April 6, 2020 to
August 18, 2020, there were issues with the equipment (such as camera
cables) at the Intercounty Connector that resulted in vehicle misreads, which
could have caused incorrect toll charges or overbillings. A similar situation
was noted for the I-95 Express Toll Lanes during the period from October 6,
2020 to October 9, 2020. While MDTA could document that the equipment
issues were fixed, it had not determined the extent of customer overbillings.
Thomas J. Hatem Memorial (Hatem) Bridge
MDTA identified an overbilling issue due to the miscounting of axles at the
Hatem Bridge. In this instance, MDTA proactively performed a review of
transactions for commuter plan customers between October 21, 2019 and
November 26, 2019 and identified 5,646 transactions for 2-axle vehicles that
may have been overbilled. MDTA management advised the related accounts
were credited $67,000.
We were unable to quantify the potential overbilling related to these issues due to
the lack of available data; however, MDTA acknowledged that it would be
expected that tolling errors would increase during the new system implementation
and there was a general increase in tolls dismissed from tolling errors, but could
not cite the above issues as the cause. Specifically, according to MDTA records,
during the period September 2019 to December 2019 there was a significant
increase in the amount of tolls dismissed due to errors compared to September
2018 to December 2018 (see Figure 3). The dismissed tolls in 2019 represented
almost five percent of tolls billed compared to one percent in 2018.
40

--- Page 43 ---
Exhibit 1
Toll Collection Finding and Response from OLA’s Fiscal
Compliance Audit Report of MDTA Dated September 13, 2021
Page 4 of 8
Figure 3
Comparison of Tolls Dismissed
2018-2019
$300,000
$250,000
$200,000
$150,000
$100,000
$50,000
$0
September October November December
2018 2019
Source: MDTA Records
Recommendation 1
We recommend that MDTA
a. review and evaluate significant tolling issues (such as, an increase in
similar customer complaints or a pattern of tolling abnormalities). For
example, MDTA may want to consider developing a formal policy to
review and evaluate tolling issues and determine the extent of customer
overbillings for appropriate corrective actions (such as making
restitution); and
b. review previously identified electronic toll issues to determine the extent
of customer overbillings and in consultation with legal counsel, assess the
practicality of related customer restitution.
41

--- Page 44 ---
Exhibit 1
Toll Collection Finding and Response from OLA’s Fiscal
Compliance Audit Report of MDTA Dated September 13, 2021
Page 5 of 8
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide The Maryland Transportation Authority (MDTA) acknowledges that in
additional certain limited circumstances, customers were charged an incorrect toll rate;
comments as however, the MDTA respectfully disagrees with the suggestion from the
deemed necessary Office of Legislative Audits (OLA) that these identified issues are part of a
larger unknown problem. Although hardware or software problems may
occur on occasion, MDTA’s tolling system has a robust real-time
monitoring system that alerts to anomalies so that issues can be quickly
identified and corrected to minimize any potential errors. During the audit
period, MDTA processed an average of 158 million transactions per year.
In a detailed analysis provided to OLA covering four specific days at two
different facilities, MDTA identified 15 occurrences of customers being
overcharged out of a total of 230,687 transactions. This reflects an error
rate of 0.000098.
During the COVID-19 pandemic, the MDTA quickly transitioned to all-
electronic tolling (AET) for the safety of its customers and employees and
undertook a major transition from the old tolling system to the new one,
including the replacement of toll equipment at 131 toll locations. While
numerous controls were in place with the contractors during the toll
equipment transition, transaction accuracy is most at risk when new
equipment is installed as it must go through a tuning and calibration
process. MDTA maintains a robust, statistical sampling-based quality
assurance and quality control program, including multiple layers of
verification, automated alerts, business intelligence analytics, and system
safety nets to achieve the highest degree of accuracy from its tolling
system. In addition, the new tolling system provides MDTA enhanced
ability to perform system monitoring and auditing compared to its previous
system.
The MDTA seeks to deliver excellent customer service. If it is determined
that a customer was charged a higher toll rate than was appropriate, the
MDTA refunds the difference to the customer. If it is determined that a
customer was charged a lower toll rate than was appropriate, the MDTA
does not seek additional funds from the customer. It is also important to
note that the processing of some customer refunds were delayed due to the
backlog of transactions associated with the switch to AET as a result of
COVID-19 and a scheduled delay in processing due to the transition to the
42

--- Page 45 ---
Exhibit 1
Toll Collection Finding and Response from OLA’s Fiscal
Compliance Audit Report of MDTA Dated September 13, 2021
Page 6 of 8
Agency Response (continued)
Analysis
new tolling system.
MDTA Issue Analysis Summary
One tracking tool utilized by MDTA is an Issue Analysis Summary (IAS),
which documents known system issues. MDTA provided its IAS tracker to
OLA, which included 25 issues (4 resulting in overcharges and 21 in
undercharges). The relevance is that the analysis includes the four
overcharge issues identified by the MDTA and statistically unidentifiable
errors.
Fort McHenry Tunnel (FMT) Equipment Malfunction
From the initial identification of the issue by the MDTA in December 2019,
the MDTA analyzed, isolated, and corrected the equipment failure, except
for crediting customers’ accounts. When questioned by OLA the MDTA
recognized the oversight and determined the number of customers impacted,
amount overbilled, and began to process credits owed to customers.
Intercounty Connector (ICC) and I-95 Express Toll Lanes (ETL)
MDTA is not aware of any discussions with OLA involving these
transactions to date. The ICC transactions were part of the backlog of
transactions and as such, credits could not be processed until posted. In
total, 703 ICC transactions require a credit totaling $425.54. In total, 1,720
ETL transactions require a credit totaling $3,440.21. In both cases, the
MDTA identified and fixed the issue and documentation exists supporting
our actions.
Thomas J. Hatem Memorial (Hatem) Bridge
MDTA agrees with the analysis and as indicated the MDTA identified and
resolved the issue and credited all 5,646 impacted transactions totaling
$67,000.
Potential Overcharges Cited by OLA
At the time of the exit conference, OLA provided the MDTA with
information regarding customers being billed twice. OLA provided a 3-hour
43

--- Page 46 ---
Exhibit 1
Toll Collection Finding and Response from OLA’s Fiscal
Compliance Audit Report of MDTA Dated September 13, 2021
Page 7 of 8
Agency Response (continued)
Analysis
time window for four dates, lane numbers, and indicated the duplicate
transactions were all E-ZPass®. Information was not provided to the MDTA
regarding FMT January or August transactions. Since one of the lanes
indicated was permanently closed during the timeframe identified by OLA,
the MDTA created a report looking for transactions, with the same
transponder, within minutes of each other for the entire toll facility. The
report spanned 24-hours for each date provided. Due to automated filters
and blocks in place, most cases of duplicate charges are prevented at a point
in the transaction processing prior to posting to the customer’s E-ZPass
account. In this case, the MDTA traced each transaction to the customer’s
E-ZPass account to verify if duplicate charges occurred. A rigorous
analysis was performed, and a detailed spreadsheet was provided to OLA
identifying 15 overcharge transactions, including 8 duplicate transactions
and 7 misclassifications, out of 230,687 transactions, along with supporting
documentation for every transaction reviewed.
Incorrect
Toll Total
Date Transactions Error Rate
Facility Transactions
Count Amount
FMT 3/12/20 83,946 5 $ 13.80 0.000060
FMT 9/2/20 101,533 1 $ 21.00 0.000010
FSK 4/23/20 25,082 6 $ 126.00 0.000239
FSK 5/30/20 20,126 3 $ 54.00 0.000149
Total 230,687 15 $ 214.80 0.000098
Detection of issues at these low error rates requires rigorous analysis far
exceeding conventional standards (e.g. ANSI/ASQ Z1.9, GAO/PCIE Financial
Audit Manual GAO-08-585G, 2020 AICPA AU-C Section 530, etc.). Today, when the
report (duplicate transponder read) is run, no transactions are identified,
consistently demonstrating an extremely low error rate.
The analysis also discusses an increase in tolls dismissed. The dismissals
are for video toll transactions and not E-ZPass transactions, which is the
primary focus of the aforementioned issues.
44

--- Page 47 ---
Exhibit 1
Toll Collection Finding and Response from OLA’s Fiscal
Compliance Audit Report of MDTA Dated September 13, 2021
Page 8 of 8
Agency Response (continued)
Recommendation 1a Agree Estimated Completion Date: 12/1/21
Please provide details The MDTA has an established process to ensure significant tolling
of corrective action or issues are identified, stopped, and fixed; customer accounts that are
explain disagreement. negatively impacted are credited; and lost revenue is recovered from
MDTA’s contractors. The MDTA will formalize the process in
documented procedures.
Recommendation 1b Agree Estimated Completion Date: 12/1/21
Please provide details The MDTA will review and reconcile previously identified electronic
of corrective action or toll issues from the tolling transition to ensure the customer credits
explain disagreement. identified in this finding and not already processed, are processed.
45

--- Page 48 ---
Exhibit 2
Summary of Allegations Received through the
Office of Legislative Audits’ Fraud, Waste, and Abuse Hotline
As of April 2, 2022, 74 complainants had contacted our fraud, waste, and abuse
hotline regarding MDTA tolling issues, with many having multiple complaints.
 29 complainants stated they were charged for a toll they did not incur.
This included being charged a toll for a vehicle they did not own,
charged a toll they did not incur, or charged on a transponder that had
been canceled.
 24 complainants stated they were charged an incorrect rate (such as
charged full price when they had an E-ZPass or commuter plan) or were
charged multiple times for the same trip.
 15 complainants had payment-related issues. This included replenishment
charges that were excessive, payments that were not properly credited to
their account, unable to make payments on their account, and accounts
referred to the State’s Central Collection Unit while tolls were still under
dispute.
 16 complainants had billing-related issues. This included receiving bills
for transactions that occurred months to more than a year prior, never
receiving an initial bill and now being charged late fees, and receiving
new bills for transactions they had already paid.
 25 complainants stated that MDTA’s customer service quality was poor
(not timely and/or not effective).
 9 complainants stated other issues not listed above (such as issues with
Maryland’s website for E-ZPass – DriveEZMD.com).
46

--- Page 49 ---
Exhibit 3
Summary of Duplicate Tolls Tested with Estimated Overcharges
Toll Charges
Analysis
Count Total Amount Estimated Percent
Scenario10
Charges Correct11 Improper Overcharged
Fort McHenry Tunnel and Baltimore Harbor Tunnel
1 1 A $8.00 $4.00 $4.00 100%
2 2 A 8.00 4.00 4.00 100%
3 3 A 8.00 4.00 4.00 100%
4 4 A 8.00 4.00 4.00 100%
5 5 A 12.00 6.00 6.00 100%
6 6 A 8.00 4.00 4.00 100%
7 7 B 16.00 8.00 8.00 100%
$68.00 $34.00 $34.00 100%
Francis Scott Key Bridge
8 1 A $5.40 $1.40 $4.00 286%
9 2 B 5.40 1.40 4.00 286%
10 3 B 5.40 1.40 4.00 286%
11 4 B 7.00 3.00 4.00 133%
12 5 B 5.40 1.40 4.00 286%
$28.60 $8.60 $20.00 233%
William Preston Lane Jr. Memorial (Bay) Bridge
13 1 A $5.40 $1.40 $4.00 286%
14 2 B 6.50 2.50 4.00 160%
15 3 B 6.50 2.50 4.00 160%
16 4 B 6.50 2.50 4.00 160%
17 5 B 6.50 2.50 4.00 160%
18 6 B 6.50 2.50 4.00 160%
19 7 B 6.50 2.50 4.00 160%
20 8 B 5.40 1.40 4.00 286%
$49.80 $17.80 $32.00 180%
John F. Kennedy Memorial Highway and I-95 Express Tolls Lanes
21 1 A $16.00 $8.00 $8.00 100%
22 2 A 2.38 1.19 1.19 100%
23 3 B 3.08 1.54 1.54 100%
$21.46 $10.73 $10.73 100%
Intercounty Connector
24 1 A $5.93 $4.38 $1.55 35%
25 2 A 2.86 1.68 1.18 70%
26 3 A 1.93 1.49 0.44 30%
10 There are three Analysis Scenarios (A, B, and C) that used different sets of criteria to identify duplicates.
The criteria for each Analysis Scenario are specified in Figure 9 on page 26.
11 For ICC tolls that were partially overlapping, correct charges were calculated based on MDTA’s toll
calculator on the MDTA website for the full trip actually driven by the customer. For all other tolls, the
correct charges were based on the toll that was properly charged.
47

--- Page 50 ---
Exhibit 3
Summary of Duplicate Tolls Tested with Estimated Overcharges
Toll Charges
Analysis
Count Total Amount Estimated Percent
Scenario10
Charges Correct11 Improper Overcharged
27 4 A 2.48 1.24 1.24 100%
28 5 A 5.26 3.52 1.74 49%
29 6 A 4.98 2.72 2.26 83%
30 7 A 5.94 2.72 3.22 118%
31 8 A 1.80 1.18 0.62 53%
32 9 A 3.17 2.26 0.91 40%
33 10 A 4.07 2.72 1.35 50%
34 11 A 2.31 1.83 0.48 26%
35 12 A 4.76 3.52 1.24 35%
36 13 A 2.98 1.74 1.24 71%
37 14 A 3.17 2.02 1.15 57%
38 15 A 5.29 2.92 2.37 81%
39 16 B 1.92 0.96 0.96 100%
40 17 B 5.10 3.86 1.24 32%
41 18 B 4.16 2.92 1.24 42%
42 19 B 2.98 1.74 1.24 71%
43 20 B 3.17 2.26 0.91 40%
44 21 B 1.84 1.12 0.72 64%
45 22 B 1.24 0.62 0.62 100%
46 23 B 1.92 0.96 0.96 100%
47 24 B 2.31 1.35 0.96 71%
48 25 C 12.05 5.28 6.77 128%
49 26 C 5.20 2.28 2.92 128%
50 27 C 3.13 2.26 0.87 38%
51 28 C 3.87 2.98 0.89 30%
52 29 C 3.63 2.72 0.91 33%
53 30 C 3.13 2.26 0.87 38%
54 31 C 4.35 2.02 2.33 115%
55 32 C 4.48 2.72 1.76 65%
56 33 C 4.02 1.76 2.26 128%
57 34 C 3.13 1.30 1.83 141%
58 35 C 4.05 2.92 1.13 39%
59 36 C 7.23 4.47 2.76 62%
60 37 C 8.70 5.28 3.42 65%
61 38 C * * * *
62 39 C * * * *
$148.54 $89.98 $58.56 65%
TOTAL $316.40 $161.11 $155.29 96%
* We were unable to determine the related overcharges due to the nature of how these ICC toll trips
were constructed.
48

--- Page 51 ---
APPENDIX

--- Page 53 ---
R T
EVIEW EAM
David R. Fahnestock, CPA
Data Analytics Manager
Ian T. Pontius
Data Analytics Senior Auditor
Mya N. Cofield
Staff Auditor