Title: Office of Administrative Hearings
Date: 03/28/2023
Type: Fiscal Compliance
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=6426cf16a1ce5820a488c90b
Extracted: 2025-06-19T23:04:48.544182
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Audit Report
Office of Administrative Hearings
March 2023
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Senator Clarence K. Lam, M.D. (Senate Chair) Delegate Jared Solomon (House Chair)
Senator Joanne C. Benson Delegate Steven J. Arentz
Senator Paul D. Corderman Delegate Nicholas P. Charles II
Senator Katie Fry Hester Delegate Andrea Fletcher Harrison
Senator Shelly L. Hettleman Delegate Steven C. Johnson
Senator Cheryl C. Kagan Delegate Mary A. Lehman
Senator Cory V. McCray Delegate David Moon
Senator Justin D. Ready Delegate Julie Palakovich Carr
Senator Bryan W. Simonaire Delegate Stephanie M. Smith
Senator Craig J. Zucker Delegate M. Courtney Watson
To Obtain Further Information
Office of Legislative Audits
The Warehouse at Camden Yards
351 West Camden Street, Suite 400
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Phone: 410-946-5900
Maryland Relay: 711
TTY: 410-946-5401 ꞏ 301-970-5401
E-mail: OLAWebmaster@ola.state.md.us
Website: www.ola.state.md.us
To Report Fraud
The Office of Legislative Audits operates a Fraud Hotline to report fraud, waste, or abuse involving State
of Maryland government resources. Reports of fraud, waste, or abuse may be communicated anonymously
by a toll-free call to 1-877-FRAUD-11, by mail to the Fraud Hotline, c/o Office of Legislative Audits, or
through the Office’s website.
Nondiscrimination Statement
The Department of Legislative Services does not discriminate on the basis of age, ancestry, color, creed,
marital status, national origin, race, religion, gender, gender identity, sexual orientation, or disability in the
admission or access to its programs, services, or activities. The Department’s Information Officer has been
designated to coordinate compliance with the nondiscrimination requirements contained in Section 35.107
of the United States Department of Justice Regulations. Requests for assistance should be directed to the
Information Officer at 410-946-5400 or 410-970-5400.

--- Page 3 ---
March 28, 2023
Senator Clarence K. Lam, M.D., Senate Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Delegate Jared Solomon, House Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Members of Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Annapolis, Maryland
Ladies and Gentlemen:
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the Office of Administrative
Hearings (OAH) for the period beginning July 3, 2018 and ending August 31,
2022. OAH was established to provide an unbiased and objective forum for
contested cases involving State agencies that regulate certain actions of businesses
and citizens.
Our audit did not disclose any findings that warrant mention in this report.
We wish to acknowledge OAH’s efforts to satisfactorily address the finding
contained in our preceding report. We also wish to acknowledge the cooperation
extended to us during the audit by OAH.
Respectfully submitted,
Gregory A. Hook, CPA
Legislative Auditor

--- Page 4 ---
2

--- Page 5 ---
Background Information
Agency Responsibilities
The Office of Administrative Hearings (OAH) was established to provide an
unbiased and objective forum for contested cases involving State agencies that
regulate certain actions of businesses and citizens. According to OAH’s records,
during fiscal year 2022, OAH disposed of 29,149 cases. The majority of cases
heard by OAH relate to the Motor Vehicle Administration, the Maryland
Department of Health, and the Department of Human Services. OAH’s fiscal
year 2022 appropriation provided for 115 employee positions, including 52
administrative law judges. According to the State’s records, during fiscal year
2022, OAH’s expenditures totaled approximately $16.9 million (See Figure 1).
Figure 1
OAH Positions, Expenditures, and Funding Sources
Full-Time Equivalent Positions as of June 30, 2022
Positions Percent
Filled 105 91.30%
Vacant 10 8.70%
Total 115
Fiscal Year 2022 Expenditures
Expenditures Percent
Salaries, Wages, and Fringe Benefits $14,345,599 84.71%
Technical and Special Fees 4,533 0.03%
Operating Expenses 2,585,510 15.26%
Total $16,935,642
Fiscal Year 2022 Funding Sources
Funding Percent
Reimbursable Fund $16,883,243 99.69%
Special Fund 52,399 0.31%
Total $16,935,642
Source: State financial and personnel records
3

--- Page 6 ---
Status of Finding From Preceding Audit Report
Our audit included a review to determine the status of the finding contained in our
preceding audit report dated February 11, 2019. We determined that OAH
satisfactorily addressed this finding.
Findings and Recommendations
Our audit did not disclose any significant deficiencies in the design or operation
of OAH’s internal controls. Our audit also did not disclose any significant
instances of noncompliance with applicable laws, rules, or regulations. Findings
that did not warrant inclusion in this report were separately communicated to
OAH.
A draft copy of this report was provided to OAH. Since there are no
recommendations in this report, a written response was not necessary.
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the Office of Administrative
Hearings (OAH) for the period beginning July 3, 2018 and ending August 31,
2022. The audit was conducted in accordance with generally accepted
government auditing standards. Those standards require that we plan and perform
the audit to obtain sufficient, appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis
for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives. We believe that
the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and
conclusions based on our audit objectives.
As prescribed by the State Government Article, Section 2-1221 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, the objectives of this audit were to examine OAH’s financial
transactions, records, and internal control, and to evaluate its compliance with
applicable State laws, rules, and regulations.
In planning and conducting our audit, we focused on the major financial-related
areas of operations based on assessments of significance and risk. The areas
addressed by the audit included procurements, disbursements, cash receipts, case
management (including review of fee cases), and payroll. We also determined the
status of the finding contained in our preceding audit report.
4

--- Page 7 ---
Our assessment of internal controls was based on agency procedures and controls
in place at the time of our fieldwork. Our tests of transactions and other auditing
procedures were generally focused on the transactions occurring during our audit
period of July 3, 2018 to August 31, 2022, but may include transactions before or
after this period as we considered necessary to achieve our audit objectives.
To accomplish our audit objectives, our audit procedures included inquiries of
appropriate personnel, inspections of documents and records, tests of transactions,
and to the extent practicable, observations of OAH’s operations. Generally,
transactions were selected for testing based on auditor judgment, which primarily
considers risk, the timing or dollar amount of the transaction, or the significance
of the transaction to the area of operation reviewed. As a matter of course, we do
not normally use sampling in our tests, so unless otherwise specifically indicated,
neither statistical nor non-statistical audit sampling was used to select the
transactions tested. Therefore, unless sampling is specifically indicated in a
finding, the results from any tests conducted or disclosed by us cannot be used to
project those results to the entire population from which the test items were
selected.
We also performed various data extracts of pertinent information from the State’s
Financial Management Information System (such as revenue and expenditure
data) and the State’s Central Payroll Bureau (payroll data). The extracts are
performed as part of ongoing internal processes established by the Office of
Legislative Audits and were subject to various tests to determine data reliability.
We determined that the data extracted from these sources were sufficiently
reliable for the purposes the data were used during this audit. We also extracted
data from OAH’s caseload system for the purpose of planning and testing. We
performed various tests of the relevant data and determined that the data were
sufficiently reliable for the purposes the data were used during the audit. Finally,
we performed other auditing procedures that we considered necessary to achieve
our audit objectives. The reliability of data used in this report for background or
informational purposes was not assessed.
OAH’s management is responsible for establishing and maintaining effective
internal control. Internal control is a process designed to provide reasonable
assurance that objectives pertaining to the reliability of financial records;
effectiveness and efficiency of operations, including safeguarding of assets; and
compliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations are achieved. As
provided in Government Auditing Standards, there are five components of
internal control: control environment, risk assessment, control activities,
information and communication, and monitoring. Each of the five components,
5

--- Page 8 ---
when significant to the audit objectives, and as applicable to OAH, were
considered by us during the course of this audit.
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate.
Our reports are designed to assist the Maryland General Assembly in exercising
its legislative oversight function and to provide constructive recommendations for
improving State operations. As a result, our reports generally do not address
activities we reviewed that are functioning properly.
6

--- Page 9 ---
A T
UDIT EAM
Bekana Edossa, CPA, CFE
Audit Manager
Matusala Y. Abishe
Senior Auditor
Yuvaraj N. Sharma
Staff Auditor