Title: Review of the Actions Taken by the Uninsured Employers' Fund to Resolve Audit Findings in Response to the April 2022 Joint Chairmen's Report
Date: 04/27/2023
Type: Special Reports and Letters
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=644ae6daa1ce58031c73e0c7
Extracted: 2025-06-19T23:05:06.922164
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
April 27, 2023
Senator Guy J. Guzzone, Chair
Senate Budget and Taxation Committee
Miller Senate Office Building, 3 West Wing
11 Bladen Street
Annapolis, Maryland 21401
Delegate Benjamin S. Barnes, Chair
House Appropriations Committee
House Office Building, Room 121
6 Bladen Street
Annapolis, Maryland 21401
Dear Senator Guzzone and Delegate Barnes:
The Office of Legislative Audits (OLA) has reviewed the actions taken by
the Uninsured Employers’ Fund (UEF) to resolve the three findings in our
September 14, 2021 audit report. This review was conducted in accordance with
a requirement specified in the April 2022 Joint Chairmen’s Report (JCR), page
15. The JCR required that, prior to the release of $250,000 of its special fund
appropriation for fiscal year 2023, UEF must take corrective action on all audit
findings on or before November 1, 2022. The JCR language further provided that
OLA submit a report to the budget committees listing each audit finding along
with a determination that each finding was corrected. The OLA report is required
to be submitted to allow 45 days for the budget committees to review and release
the funds prior to the end of the fiscal year.
The September 14, 2021 audit report of UEF contained three audit
findings that were addressed by eight recommendations. In accordance with the
April 2022 JCR requirement, UEF provided a report to OLA, dated October 20,
2022, detailing the corrective actions it had taken with respect to the audit
findings (Exhibit 1). The UEF status report indicated that corrective actions had

--- Page 2 ---
Senator Guy J. Guzzone, Chair -2- April 27, 2023
Delegate Benjamin S. Barnes, Chair
been completed for all three findings. In accordance with our policy, we have
redacted any vendor names or products mentioned by UEF in this document.
We reviewed the UEF status report and related documentation, performed
limited tests and analyses of the information, and held discussions with UEF
personnel as necessary to assess the implementation status of the related
recommendations. Our review did not constitute an audit conducted in
accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards. Based on our
review, we determined that UEF had resolved Finding 2, but had not yet taken
sufficient actions to correct Findings 1 and 3. Specifically, although UEF had
implemented certain elements of the recommendations related to Findings 1 and
3, the actions to date did not address the entirety of the findings (Exhibit 2).
Consequently, at the time of our review, our assessment of Findings 1 and 3
concluded that they were still in progress (Exhibit 3).
After discussing our review results, UEF generally agreed with the
accuracy of the information presented. We wish to acknowledge the cooperation
extended to us during the review by UEF. We also wish to acknowledge UEF’s
willingness to address the audit issues and implement appropriate corrective
actions.
We trust our response satisfactorily addresses the JCR requirement.
Please contact me if you need additional information.
Sincerely,
Gregory A. Hook, CPA
Legislative Auditor
cc: Senator Clarence K. Lam, M.D., Senate Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Delegate Jared Solomon, House Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee Members and Staff
Senator William C. Ferguson IV, President of the Senate

--- Page 3 ---
Senator Guy J. Guzzone, Chair -3- April 27, 2023
Delegate Benjamin S. Barnes, Chair
Delegate Adrienne A. Jones, Speaker of the House of Delegates
Governor Westley W. Moore
Comptroller Brooke E. Lierman
Treasurer Dereck E. Davis
Attorney General Anthony G. Brown
Secretary Helene T. Grady, Department of Budget and Management
Michael W. Burns, Executive Director, Uninsured Employers’ Fund
Martin E. Lewis, Chairman of the Board, Uninsured Employers’ Fund
Joan M. Peacock, Manager, Audit Compliance Unit, Department of Budget
and Management
Victoria L. Gruber, Executive Director, Department of Legislative Services
Jason A. Kramer, Senior Policy Analyst, Department of Legislative
Services

--- Page 4 ---
Exhibit 1 to April 27, 2023 Letter to Joint Chairmen
LAWRENCE J. HOGAN, JR. STATE OF MARYLAND MARTIN E. LEWIS
GOVERNOR CHAIR
MICHAEL W. BURNS CASEY BRYANT
Director DONCELLA S. WILSON
michaelburtal@ntalyland.gov MEMBERS
STATE OF MARYLAND
UNINSURED EMPLOYERS' FUND
300 East Joppa Road, Suite 402
Towson, MD 21286
PHONE - (410) 321-4136
FAX - (410) 321-3975
October 20, 2022
Gregory A. Hook, CPA
Legislative Auditor
State of Maryland
Office of Legislative Audits
State Office Building, Room 1202
301 West Preston Street
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Dear Mr. Hook:
Please accept this letter as the Maryland Uninsured Employer's Fund (UEF) report to
the Office of Legislative Audits (OLA) for the Audit Report dated September 21, 2021 (2021
Audit) as required by the Joint Chairmen's Report (JCR) for the 2022 Legislative Session. As
outlined on p.15 of the JCR, the Legislature enacted the following:
C96J00.01 General Administration
Add the following language to the special fund appropriation:
provided that since the Uninsured Employers' Fund (UEF) has had
serious findings in the most recent fiscal compliance audit issued by the
Office of Legislative Audits (OLA), $250,000 of this agency's special
fund appropriation may not be expended unless:

--- Page 5 ---
Exhibit 1 to April 27, 2023 Letter to Joint Chairmen
(1) UEF provides a status report to OLA describing the corrective
action that it has taken with respect to all audit findings on or before
November 1, 2022; and
(2) a report is submitted to the budget committees by OLA listing
each audit finding along with a determination that each finding was
corrected. The budget committees shall have 45 days from the date of the
receipt of the report to review and comment to allow for funds to be
released prior to the end of fiscal 2023.
JCR at p. 15.
The UEF reports the following as to the corrective actions taken regarding the
three findings from the 2021 Audit:
Finding 1-
UEF did not ensure that payments to its TPA were adequately supported
and consistent with the contract terms. As a result, we identified payments
totaling $521,083 for which the rate paid by UEF was not included in the
contract or exceeded the rates specified in the contract.
UEF Response-
The UEF has expanded its inquiry into this Finding to include areas not noted in the
OLA Audit Finding. After working for months with the agency's Attorneys General, the agency
has evaluated every bill on all fixed priced items under the contract with the contractor and has
confirmed that the UEF has overpaid the contractor. The contractor has denied that it was
overpaid. Regarding this contractual dispute, the UEF has made a written claim with the
contract's procurement officer pursuant to State Finance and Procurement Article §15-216.1 and
COMAR Sec. 21.10.04.05 on August 31, 2022. The agency further intends to reduce the
contractor’s monthly fee during the remaining months of the contract until the agency is made
whole in order to recover the funds. Under law, the state procurement officer has 180 days to
make a decision on the claim and either party could then appeal that decision to the Board of
Contract Appeals.
Recommendations 1-
We recommend that UEF
a. ensure that invoiced amounts are supported and agree to contract
approved rates and level of services prior to approving invoices for
payment (repeat), and discontinue payments not provided for in the
contract;
b. establish a process for monitoring TPA performance for claims
processing and related functions (repeat); and
c. consult with legal counsel regarding the potential to recover the
aforementioned overpayments.

--- Page 6 ---
Exhibit 1 to April 27, 2023 Letter to Joint Chairmen
The UEF has also established procedures to have fiscal staff review invoiced amounts to
"ensure that invoiced amounts are supported and agree to contract approved rates and level of
services prior to approving invoices for payment" and has discontinued payments not provided
for in the contract and adjusted payments to conform to the requirements of the contract.
As part of this process the fiscal staff continues to monitor the performance of the
TPA regarding claims management and processing, a process which has been ongoing.
As noted, the agency has been working with the agency staff to recover overpayments.
The UEF has, therefore, complied with this finding and recommendations to the extent
possible by law at this time. Further action on recovery of overpayments awaits the decision of
the procurement officer and the resulting response of the TPA, both of which are actions outside
of the control of this agency. Upon the results of these decisions the agency will take
appropriate action to recover the funds owed as outlined above.
The UEF strongly emphasizes that this matter may well end up in litigation and upon the
direction of counsel has limited discussion of details herein in a public document as to this
matter in contemplation of litigation as being in the best interests of the State of Maryland in
successfully recovering all relevant funds.
Finding 2 -
UEF did not adequately review recurring indemnity payments processed by
the TPA to ensure claimants were still eligible for payment.
Recommendations 2-
We recommend that UEF
a. establish a documented procedure to verify, at least on a test basis, that
recurring indemnity payments are made only to eligible individuals; and
b. obtain and review the results of the TPA's alive and well checks to
ensure that future recurring indemnity payments to deceased individuals are
terminated and recover any payments made after the date of death.
UEF Response
As noted in the initial response to the 2021 Audit, Agency staff has been complying
with Recommendation 2a. for many months. A fiscal staff member is forwarded a spreadsheet
from the TPA with relevant information bi-weekly and randomly reviews cases to ensure
payments confirm to WCC orders. Names of cases reviewed are recorded.
Additionally, a process has been in place for almost one year whereby quarterly
meetings are conducted between UEF staff, Attorneys General and TPA staff to review a
detailed list of all ongoing permanent disability cases in detail. Each relevant cased is discussed
and reviewed between UEF staff, OAG staff and TPA staff.

--- Page 7 ---
Exhibit 1 to April 27, 2023 Letter to Joint Chairmen
Finally, a process by the UEF to review the results of all "alive and well" checks was
implemented many months ago with the results of all checks conduced furnished to Agency
Director as "alive and well" checks occur for review by the Director. Information concerning
those checks is forwarded to the UEF by the TPA when they occur.
The UEF has, therefore, complied with the Find and Recommendations of Finding
2.
Finding 3-
UEF did not adequately monitor and pursue collection of all delinquent accounts. As of
November 30, 2020, there were 1,920 delinquent accounts totaling $14.5 million that,
based on their age, should have been referred to the State's Central Collection Unit
(CCU).
Recommendations 3 -
We recommend that UEF
a. investigate and take the necessary corrective actions to resolve the noted
deficiencies (generate dunning notices and produce accurate accounts receivable aging
reports) to ensure that the accounting system provides sufficient information to
monitor and pursue collection activities (repeat),
b. refer all delinquent accounts to CCU for collection in accordance with the
amended CCU regulations (repeat), and
c. establish a process to identify and refer delinquent employers to applicable State
and local licensing authorities for license or permit suspension (repeat).
UEF Response
In response to Finding 3 the UEF hired a temporary staff person whose responsibilities
have been to comply with this Audit Finding and resulting recommendations. The UEF reports
that this person now reviews accounts to insure accurate and ongoing collection efforts, refers
all delinquent accounts to the Central Collection Unit (CCU) on a regular ongoing basis, and
has related responsibilities for these activities. This individual works with other staff members
as well on the matters discussed above.
As previously noted, as part of the ongoing program to overhaul, correct and initiate
proper Agency functioning, the UEF set up a program to "establish a process to identify and
refer delinquent employers to applicable State and local licensing authorities for license or
permit suspension" several years ago. That program has been and remains ongoing. Based on
Recommendation 3.c., the agency, working with its Attorneys General, has memorialized the
process for identifying and referring delinquent employers for license or permit suspension in
detail. A copy of the Agency License Revocation Process procedures document has been
previously provided to the OLA in 2021.
The license suspension program continues to be ongoing, and routinely is initiated
whenever an employer fails to comply with the terms of relevant Orders issued by the Workers

--- Page 8 ---
Exhibit 1 to April 27, 2023 Letter to Joint Chairmen
Compensation Commission (WCC) and therefore triggers UEF involvement and expenditures
in a case.
After hiring the new temporary staff member, training that person, and many months of
full-time research and investigation the UEF can report it has completely reviewed and disposed of
the 1920 accounts referred to us by the OLA Audit. The results are as follows:
- 1150 accounts totaling $13,416,703.91 were sent to the CCU for collection.
- 20 accounts for amounts owed under $30.00 cannot be sent to the CCU because the
CCU refuses to accept amounts due under $30.00 for collection.
- 750 of the "delinquent accounts" identified for referral to the CCU were found to
have either already been sent to the CCU for collection previously by the agency or
were not eligible to be sent to the CCU for reasons including: the claims had been
paid; a settlement approved by the WCC reduced the original amount owed; the claim
had been dismissed or never pursued by the claimant; the debtor was deceased; a
payment agreement had been agreed to by the parties; the claims are ongoing so
revised debt amounts are forwarded as generated by the UEF to the CCU already;
and/or 100 percent of the claim total eligible for collections had already been
forwarded to the CCU.
These 750 claims totaled $1,082,161.72.
The UEF has, therefore, hired a temporary staff position to handle and comply with the
Finding Number 3, and related recommendations, and continues to deal with relevant ongoing
matters. As previously detailed, the agency has also resolved the 1920 accounts herein in
compliance with this finding and recommendations.
The UEF asserts that it has, therefore, complied fully with Audit 2021 Finding 2 and 3 and
has, to the extent legally possible, complied with Audit 2021 Finding 1. The UEF requests that the
OLA so find and report such to the Maryland Legislature in a timely fashion.
Thank you for your attention, assistance and consideration.
Sincerely,
Michael W. Burns, Esquire
Director

--- Page 9 ---
Exhibit 2 to April 27, 2023 Letter to Joint Chairmen
Status of OLA’s September 14, 2021 Audit Report on the Uninsured
Employers’ Fund (UEF)
Status Based on
Prior Recommendations
OLA Review
Third Party Administrator Contract
1. We recommend that UEF
a. ensure that invoiced amounts are supported and agree to
Not Resolved
contract approved rates and level of services prior to
(In Progress)
approving invoices for payment, and discontinue payments
not provided for in the contract.
b. establish a process for monitoring third party administrator
Not Resolved
(TPA) performance for claims processing and related
(Minimal or No
functions.
Progress)
c. consult with legal counsel regarding the potential to
recover the aforementioned payments. Resolved
Claims Processing
2. We recommend that UEF
a. establish a documented procedure to verify, at least on a
Resolved
test basis, that recurring indemnity payments are made only
to eligible individuals.
b. obtain and review the results of the TPA’s alive and well
checks to ensure that future recurring indemnity payments
to deceased individuals are terminated and recover any Resolved
payments made after the date of death.
Accounts Receivable
3. We recommend that UEF
a. investigate and take the necessary corrective actions to
Not Resolved
resolve the noted deficiencies (generate dunning notices
(Minimal or No
and produce accurate accounts receivable aging reports) to
Progress)
ensure that the accounting system provides sufficient
information to monitor and pursue collection activities.
b. refer all delinquent accounts to the State’s Central
Not Resolved
Collection Unit (CCU) for collection in accordance with
(In Progress)
the amended CCU regulations.
c. establish a process to identify and refer delinquent
employers to applicable State and local licensing
Resolved
authorities for license or permit suspension.

--- Page 10 ---
Exhibit 3 to April 27, 2023 Letter to Joint Chairmen
OLA’s Assessments Regarding Repeat Findings and Recommendations That
Were Not Resolved
Prior Report Recommendation – Finding 1
We recommend that UEF
a. ensure that invoiced amounts are supported and agree to contract approved rates and
level of services prior to approving invoices for payment (repeat), and discontinue
payments not provided for in the contract; and
b. establish a process for monitoring third party administrator (TPA) performance for
claims processing and related functions (repeat).
Status: Not Resolved
Our review disclosed that although UEF ensured that invoices from the TPA vendor were in
accordance with the approved contract rates, UEF still did not obtain documentation to support
the propriety of the charges. In addition, UEF had not established a process to monitor the
TPA’s performance for claims processing and related functions.
Prior Report Recommendation – Finding 3
We recommend that UEF
a. investigate and take the necessary corrective actions to resolve the noted deficiencies
(generate dunning notices and produce accurate accounts receivable aging reports) to
ensure that the accounting system provides sufficient information to monitor and
pursue collection activities (repeat), and
b. refer all delinquent accounts to the State’s Central Collection Unit (CCU) for collection
in accordance with the amended CCU regulations (repeat).
Status: Not Resolved
Our review disclosed that UEF had not taken corrective action to ensure its automated accounts
receivable system generated dunning notices and produced accurate reports for the purpose of
monitoring and pursuing collection activities (including referrals to CCU for collection).
Consequently, although UEF established a process to refer delinquent accounts to CCU, since it
was not based on reliable reports there was no assurance that all appropriate delinquent accounts
were referred to CCU.