Title: Department of General Services - Office of State Procurement
Date: 05/03/2023
Type: Fiscal Compliance
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=64557bb1a1ce581598d6d794
Extracted: 2025-06-19T23:05:16.102613
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Audit Report
Department of General Services
Office of State Procurement
May 2023
Public Notice
In compliance with the requirements of the State Government Article Section
2-1224(i), of the Annotated Code of Maryland, the Office of Legislative
Audits has redacted cybersecurity findings and related auditee responses
from this public report.
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Senator Clarence K. Lam, M.D. (Senate Chair) Delegate Jared Solomon (House Chair)
Senator Joanne C. Benson Delegate Steven J. Arentz
Senator Paul D. Corderman Delegate Nicholas P. Charles II
Senator Katie Fry Hester Delegate Andrea Fletcher Harrison
Senator Shelly L. Hettleman Delegate Steven C. Johnson
Senator Cheryl C. Kagan Delegate Mary A. Lehman
Senator Cory V. McCray Delegate David Moon
Senator Justin D. Ready Delegate Julie Palakovich Carr
Senator Bryan W. Simonaire Delegate Stephanie M. Smith
Senator Craig J. Zucker Delegate M. Courtney Watson
To Obtain Further Information
Office of Legislative Audits
The Warehouse at Camden Yards
351 West Camden Street, Suite 400
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Phone: 410-946-5900
Maryland Relay: 711
TTY: 410-946-5401 ꞏ 301-970-5401
E-mail: OLAWebmaster@ola.state.md.us
Website: www.ola.state.md.us
To Report Fraud
The Office of Legislative Audits operates a Fraud Hotline to report fraud, waste, or abuse involving State
of Maryland government resources. Reports of fraud, waste, or abuse may be communicated anonymously
by a toll-free call to 1-877-FRAUD-11, by mail to the Fraud Hotline, c/o Office of Legislative Audits, or
through the Office’s website.
Nondiscrimination Statement
The Department of Legislative Services does not discriminate on the basis of age, ancestry, color, creed,
marital status, national origin, race, religion, gender, gender identity, sexual orientation, or disability in the
admission or access to its programs, services, or activities. The Department’s Information Officer has been
designated to coordinate compliance with the nondiscrimination requirements contained in Section 35.107
of the United States Department of Justice Regulations. Requests for assistance should be directed to the
Information Officer at 410-946-5400 or 410-970-5400.

--- Page 3 ---
May 3, 2023
Senator Clarence K. Lam, M.D., Senate Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Delegate Jared Solomon, House Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Members of Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Annapolis, Maryland
Ladies and Gentlemen:
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the Department of General
Services (DGS) – Office of State Procurement (OSP) for the period beginning
October 16, 2018 and ending October 31, 2021. OSP responsibilities include
managing the centralized procurement of certain goods and services for State
agencies and monitoring providers with procurement preferences.
Our audit disclosed that OSP has not adequately monitored the implementation of
enhancements to the new Statewide eProcurement system – eMaryland
Marketplace Advantage (eMMA). Specifically, OSP did not obtain a
comprehensive implementation plan at the beginning of the project and did not
track contract expenditures to ensure that task orders for the project’s
development and implementation were not overspent. We believe that these
issues have contributed to a multi-year delay in system implementation and note
that while eMMA is now operational, all intended initial functionality is still in
development. On March 6, 2019 the Board of Public Works approved a $38.2
million 10-year contract to develop, implement, and maintain eMMA. The new
system includes several enhancements over the prior eMaryland Marketplace
system including an interface with the State’s Financial Management Information
System (FMIS). As of February 2022 (three years through the ten-year contract
period), disbursements related to this contract totaled $14.6 million or
approximately 38 percent of the total contract value.
Our audit also disclosed deficiencies relating to OSP’s Statewide procurement
responsibilities. For example, OSP did not adequately monitor certain State

--- Page 4 ---
agency procurements that were specifically subject to its oversight. OSP
established the Policy, Procurement Review, and Reporting Bureau (PRRB) to be
responsible for conducting audits of delegated procurements at all State agencies.
As of April 2022, PRRB had not sufficiently audited State agencies’ delegated
procurement activity as required by State regulations and PRRB procedures.
Specifically, PPRB only completed three delegated procurement audits dating
back to October 2019, and our review of these audits disclosed that the scope of
the audits did not include all delegated procurements and that the workpapers did
not always support the conclusions in the respective report.
Additionally, OSP did not ensure that certain contract awards were published on
eMMA as required. Furthermore, OSP did not properly monitor providers that, by
State law, receive procurement preferences for State agency purchases. For
example, OSP lacked documentation that it independently determined and
published the fair market prices of goods and services available from Maryland
Correctional Enterprises.
Also, OSP did not always conduct emergency procurements in compliance with
State procurement regulations.
Furthermore, our audit disclosed a cybersecurity-related finding. However, in
accordance with the State Government Article, Section 2-1224(i) of the
Annotated Code of Maryland, we have redacted the finding from this audit report.
Specifically, State law requires the Office of Legislative Audits to redact
cybersecurity findings in a manner consistent with auditing best practices before
the report is made available to the public. The term “cybersecurity” is defined in
the State Finance and Procurement Article, Section 3A-301(b), and using our
professional judgment we have determined that the redacted finding falls under
the referenced definition. The specifics of the cybersecurity finding were
previously communicated to those parties responsible for acting on our
recommendations.
Finally, our audit included a review to determine the status of the six findings
contained in our preceding audit report of the former DGS – Office of
Procurement and Logistics (now OSP). For the non-cybersecurity-related
findings we determined that OSP satisfactorily addressed one of those five
findings. The remaining four findings are repeated in this report.
DGS’ response to this audit, on behalf of OSP, is included as an appendix to this
report. In accordance with State law, we have reviewed the response and, while
OSP generally agrees with the recommendations in this report, we identified
2

--- Page 5 ---
certain instances in which statements in the response conflict with or disagree
with the report findings. In each instance, we reviewed and reassessed our audit
documentation, and reaffirmed the validity of our finding. In accordance with
generally accepted government auditing standards, we have included “auditor’s
comments” within DGS’ response to explain our position. However, consistent
with the requirements of State law, we have redacted the elements of DGS’
response related to the cybersecurity audit finding.
We will advise the Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee (JAEC) of any
outstanding issues that we cannot resolve with OSP, including any involvement
needed from the JAEC to clarify legislative expectations on establishing the
necessary accountability over the Pricing and Selection Committee, a multi-
agency State Committee. We continue to believe that it is both reasonable and
natural for OSP to continue its past involvement with Maryland Correctional
Enterprises commodity pricing. Furthermore, we believe that the DGS Secretary
serving on the Committee and OSP providing staffing to the Committee further
supports our position.
We wish to acknowledge the cooperation extended to us during the audit by DGS
and OSP.
Respectfully submitted,
Gregory A. Hook, CPA
Legislative Auditor
3

--- Page 6 ---
4

--- Page 7 ---
Table of Contents
Background Information 7
Agency Responsibilities 7
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report 8
Findings and Recommendations 10
eMaryland Marketplace Advantage (eMMA)
Finding 1 – The Office of State Procurement (OSP) did not ensure that the 11
eMMA vendor had a comprehensive implementation plan and did not
maintain sufficient records to track contract expenditures, which we
believe may have contributed to project delays and increased costs.
* Finding 2 – OSP did not require certain bidders on State contracts to 13
utilize available functions in eMMA to take advantage of security
features intended to ensure the integrity of the bidding process and did
not always publish contract awards as required.
State Agency Procurement Monitoring
* Finding 3 – OSP did not adequately monitor certain State agency 14
procurements that were specifically subject to its oversight.
Providers with Procurement Preferences
* Finding 4 – OSP lacked documentation that it independently determined 16
and published the fair market prices of Maryland Correctional
Enterprises goods and services.
* Finding 5 – OSP did not monitor Maryland Works to ensure it coordinated 17
contracting activity in accordance with the Employment Works
Program.
Information System Security and Control
Finding 6 – Redacted cybersecurity-related finding 19
 Denotes item repeated in full or part from preceding audit report
5

--- Page 8 ---
Emergency Procurements
Finding 7 – During the COVID-19 pandemic, OSP did not always 19
conduct emergency procurements in compliance with State
procurement regulations.
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology 21
Exhibit 1 – Summary of Delegated Procurement Findings in OLA 24
Audit Reports Issued October 2019 to April 2022
Agency Response Appendix
6

--- Page 9 ---
Background Information
Agency Responsibilities
The Department of General Services (DGS) – Office of State Procurement (OSP)
was created in response to several recent law changes and replaced the former
DGS – Office of Procurement and Logistics. Specifically, Chapter 590, Laws of
Maryland 2017, consolidated most State procurement activities within the
Executive Branch under DGS, and created a Chief Procurement Officer to oversee
the consolidated procurement activity. The law also transferred procurement
personnel from the Departments of Budget
Figure 1
and Management, Information Technology,
OSP Statewide Procu rement Activity
and Public Safety and Correctional Services
Fiscal Years 2019-2021
(capital construction) to DGS. Chapters
(In Millio ns)
527 and 528, Laws of Maryland 2022,
$2,231
formally named the procurement unit
within DGS the Office of State
Procurement.
$868
$441
OSP’s responsibilities include the
procurement of contracts for commodities
2019 2020 2021
and services, and certain capital
construction on behalf of State agencies.
Commodities include a wide range of items including energy, fuel, vehicles, auto
parts, office and cleaning supplies, medical supplies, equipment, and food.
Services include architectural and engineering, construction, and facilities
maintenance. According to the State’s records, during fiscal year 2021, the value
of Statewide procurements awarded by OSP totaled approximately $868 million.
During the audit period OSP processed a significantly higher volume of
procurement transactions due to the consolidation of procurement activity and the
COVID-19 health pandemic (see Figure 1).
OSP’s fiscal year 2022 appropriation provided for 85 employee positions.
According to the State’s records, during fiscal year 2022, OSP’s expenditures
totaled approximately $9.7 million (see Figure 2 on the following page).
7

--- Page 10 ---
Figure 2
OSP Positions, Expenditures, and Funding Sources
Full-Time Equivalent Positions as of June 30, 2022
Positions Percent
Filled 78 91.8%
Vacant 7 8.2%
Total 85
Fiscal Year 2022 Expenditures
Expenditures Percent
Salaries, Wages, and Fringe Benefits $9,140,434 94.6%
Technical and Special Fees 179,919 1.9%
Operating Expenses 338,075 3.5%
Total $9,658,428
Fiscal Year 2022 Funding Sources
Funding Percent
General Fund $7,854,121 81.3%
Special Fund 1,034,522 10.7%
Reimbursable Fund 769,785 8.0%
Total $9,658,428
Source: State financial and personnel records
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report
Our audit included a review to determine the status of the six findings contained
in our preceding audit report of the former DGS – Office of Procurement and
Logistics (OPL) dated December 5, 2019 (OSP’s responsibilities include OPL’s
functions and duties). As disclosed in Figure 3 on the following page, for the
non-cybersecurity-related findings, we determined that OSP satisfactorily
addressed one of those five findings. The remaining four findings are repeated in
this report.
8

--- Page 11 ---
Figure 3
Status of Preceding Findings
Preceding Implementation
Finding Description
Finding Status
OPL did not adequately monitor certain
Repeated
Finding 1
State agency procurements that were
(Current Finding 3)
specifically subject to its oversight.
OPL did not publish contract awards
Repeated
Finding 2
totaling $37 million on eMaryland
(Current Finding 2)
Marketplace (eMM), as required.
OPL did not always provide prices for
products available from
Finding 3 Not repeated
Intergovernmental Cooperative
Purchasing Agreements to State
agencies.
OPL did not establish comprehensive
procedures for determining the fair
market prices of goods and services
available from Maryland Correctional
Repeated
Finding 4
Enterprises (MCE). Furthermore, OPL
(Current Finding 4)
did not publish fair market prices of
items available for purchase from MCE
and the Blind Industries and Services of
Maryland, as required.
OPL did not adequately monitor the
coordinating entity for the Employment Repeated
Finding 5
Works Program to ensure that it met its (Current Finding 5)
responsibilities under the law.
OPL did not periodically review system
access to eMM and did not require
Finding 6 Status Redacted1
periodic reviews of the eMM vendor to
ensure the safeguarding and availability
of the system.
1 Specific information on the current status of cybersecurity-related finding 6 has been
redacted from this publicly available audit report in accordance with State Government Article,
Section 2-1224(i) of the Annotated Code of Maryland.
9

--- Page 12 ---
Findings and Recommendations
eMaryland Marketplace Advantage
Background
In July 2017, the Department of General Services (DGS), Department of Budget
and Management, and Department of Information Technology (DoIT) drafted a
solicitation for the procurement and maintenance of a new eProcurement system.
DGS, the Office of the Comptroller, and the State Treasurer’s Office, evaluated
vendor proposals and on March 6, 2019 the Board of Public Works approved a
$38.2 million 10-year contract for development, implementation, and
maintenance of this new system. The new eProcurement system is called
eMaryland Marketplace Advantage (eMMA) and includes several enhancements
over the prior eMaryland Marketplace (eMM) system including an interface with
the State’s Financial Management Information System (FMIS), document
management, and search and reporting capabilities. As of February 2022 (three
years through the ten-year contract period), disbursements related to this contract
totaled $14.6 million or approximately 38 percent of the total contract value.
The new system was intended to address existing operational inefficiencies with
eMM. The integration with FMIS was a feature included in the original eMM
contract and was intended to address concerns noted in the 2007 Governor’s
Transition Report; however, eMM’s implementation stalled early in development
and it was never interfaced with FMIS. As a result, employees were required to
manually and redundantly enter information into both eMM and FMIS. eMM also
lacked document management capabilities; and, therefore, vendors were required
to upload the same documents for every procurement action. Additionally, eMM
lacked robust search and reporting capabilities which limited comprehensive
monitoring of Statewide purchasing activity and strategic sourcing efforts.
The current contract contains fixed-price and indefinite-quantity components.
The fixed price components include eMMA implementation, software licensing,
and optional features, while the indefinite-quantity components include hourly
rates for labor categories to be used under work orders. The total contract value
was comprised of $7.8 million for development and implementation during the
first 2 years of the project, $14.9 million for operation and maintenance for the
10-year base period, and $15.5 million for value-added modules to perform other
work associated with the implementation based on approved work orders (see
Figure 4 on the following page). An example of a value-added module, which
was not specifically included in the scope of the original contract, was a DGS –
Office of State Procurement (OSP)-issued work order for the vendor to add
invoicing capabilities to eMMA.
10

--- Page 13 ---
Figure 4
eMMA Contract Award
Development and Operation and Value-Added
Implementation Maintenance Modules*
Contract Year 1 $6,385,563 $1,431,800 -
Contract Year 2 1,459,687 1,491,000 -
Contract Year 3 - 1,491,000 -
Contract Year 4 - 1,491,000 -
Contract Years 5-10 - 8,946,000 -
Value-Added Modules - - $15,470,021
Subtotals $7,845,250 $14,850,800 $15,470,021
Total Contract
$38,166,071
Award
*Value-Added Modules were included in the vendor's proposal, in addition to the core functionality used as the
basis for the bid evaluation.
State laws and regulations generally provide that eMMA is to be used by State
agencies, counties, municipalities, public institutions of higher education, local
public school systems, and other certain entities to publish awards greater than
$50,000. In addition, registered vendors may utilize eMMA to receive notices of
bid opportunities and securely submit bids to the aforementioned entities.
Finding 1
OSP did not ensure that the eMMA vendor had a comprehensive
implementation plan and did not maintain sufficient records to track
contract expenditures, which we believe may have contributed to project
delays and increased costs.
Analysis
OSP did not ensure that the eMMA vendor had a comprehensive implementation
plan and did not maintain sufficient records to track contract expenditures.
Consequently, major functionality of the new system has not been implemented,
as the project completion has been delayed by more than 3 years while expenses
continue to exceed initial estimates. As of February 2022, OSP has paid the
eMMA vendor approximately 19 percent ($2.3 million) more than the projected
costs from the vendor’s contract.
OSP Did Not Obtain a Comprehensive Implementation Plan
As of February 2022, OSP had not obtained a comprehensive implementation
plan from the vendor. Although not required by the contract, an implementation
11

--- Page 14 ---
plan is a best practice and was recommended in February 2021 by the
independent consultant hired by DoIT to monitoring the system implementation.
Such a plan is important because certain eMMA project milestones were
dependent on one party completing tasks before the other party could begin the
next task. For example, the vendor’s integration of eMMA with FMIS depended
on tasks performed by OSP.
The lack of a plan may have contributed to 6 of the 7 contract phases being
delayed between 15 months and more than 3 years beyond the planned
implementation date and major components of the contract, including enhanced
functionality that has not been implemented. For example, per the vendor’s
approved proposal, the date for the final phase of system implementation was
March 2020 and was to include the ability to initiate requisitions and purchase
orders through eMMA. However, as of July 2022, the system has not been
implemented and we were subsequently advised in February 2023 that OSP could
not estimate when it would be completed.
In March 2019, prior to the start of the contract, the Board of Public Works
(BPW) questioned the implementation timeline and whether sufficient detail was
available in a formal plan to hold the vendor accountable for meeting specific
deadlines. DGS testified to the BPW that while specific details on the
implementation plan, such as, the specific people needed and the timeframe that
work was to be completed, were not immediately available, it intended to obtain
this information from the vendor. However, as of July 2022, OSP advised that it
had not obtained the aforementioned information from the vendor. In addition, as
noted above, DoIT’s consultant responsible for monitoring the implementation
also noted that the OSP did not maintain an integrated implementation schedule of
all tasks performed by both OSP and the vendor.
OSP Did Not Adequately Monitor and Approve Vendor Charges
OSP did not prepare a comprehensive project budget spending plan until March
2020, one year after the contract was awarded and payments totaling
approximately $5.1 million had been made. In accordance with the contract, the
vendor was to be paid a fixed dollar amount for system maintenance and
implementation of basic functions. The vendor was also to be paid an hourly rate
for the implementation of added functions. Without a project spending plan, OSP
lacked assurance that first year payments for maintenance and implementation
costs were reasonable or consistent with the intent of the contract.
After the comprehensive project budget spending plan was prepared, OSP did not
establish a process to track payments made to the vendor by work order (under the
value-added module in use the work order process was used to identify specific
12

--- Page 15 ---
tasks to be performed). Consequently, OSP could not effectively or readily
determine whether payments exceeded the approved cost proposed by the vendor
in the approved task orders. Specifically, the vendor submitted invoices which
contained labor hours for work performed and although the OSP contract monitor
approved invoices, it was unclear how it was determined that the amounts paid
were proper because the invoices did not reference a task order. OSP provided a
separate schedule listing all payments with the associated work order, but advised
us that this document was not utilized to ensure that work orders were not
overspent. According to OSP records, as of March 2022, 36 work orders were
processed for services valued at approximately $8.6 million.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that OSP
a. coordinate with the vendor to ensure that a comprehensive
implementation plan and schedule is maintained and accurately reflects
responsibilities and resources of each party; and
b. establish a process to accurately track payments made to the vendor,
based on individual deliverables, such as work orders.
Finding 2
OSP did not require certain bidders on State contracts to utilize available
functions in eMMA to take advantage of security features intended to ensure
the integrity of the bidding process and did not always publish contract
awards as required.
Analysis
OSP did not require certain bidders on State contracts to utilize available
functions in eMMA to take advantage of security features intended to ensure the
integrity of the bidding process and did not always publish contract awards as
required. We tested 14 contract awards totaling $417.9 million initiated by OSP
during the period from October 2018 through October 2021.
 We reviewed the bid submission process for 3 of the aforementioned 14
contracts and found that the bids for the 3 contracts were submitted through
normal State email addresses instead of through eMMA. The contracts were
for information technology and professional services totaling $80 million
awarded between April 2020 and August 2020. While there is no law,
regulation, or policy requiring the use of eMMA for submitting bids, eMMA
provides enhanced security over the State email system, which would help
ensure the integrity of the bidding process.
13

--- Page 16 ---
 OSP did not publish contract awards on eMMA as required by State
procurement laws and regulations. As of February 2022, of the 14 contract
awards tested, OSP had not published 4 of the awards totaling $99.3 million,
and 6 other awards totaling $103.0 million were published between 41 and
738 days after the respective contracts were awarded. State procurement laws
and regulations require awards for contracts greater than $50,000 to be
published on eMMA not more than 30 days after the execution and approval of
the contract. Publishing awards on eMMA provides transparency over State
procurements, including information about winning bidders and the amount of
the related awards.
A similar condition regarding publishing awards was commented upon in our two
preceding audit reports dating back to 2016. In response to our prior report, DGS
indicated that they would implement policies and new system functionalities
within eMMA, and conduct training to begin internal procurement reviews by July
2021 to ensure all contract awards were posted. However, OSP management
advised us that it did not consistently require compliance with this requirement or
correctly utilize eMMA.
Recommendation 2
We recommend that OSP
a. require bidders to utilize available functionality in eMMA to ensure bids
are adequately secured, and
b. comply with State procurement laws and regulations by publishing
contract awards on eMMA within 30 days of the contract award (repeat).
State Agency Procurement Monitoring
Finding 3
OSP did not adequately monitor certain State agency procurements that
were specifically subject to its oversight.
Analysis
OSP did not adequately monitor certain State agency procurements that were
specifically subject to its oversight. OSP established the Policy, Procurement
Review, and Reporting Bureau (PRRB) in October 2019 to be responsible for
conducting audits of delegated procurements at all State agencies. As permitted
by State regulations, OSP delegated authority to State agencies for procurements
under $50,000 (other than vehicle leases) and up to $200,000 for facilities
14

--- Page 17 ---
maintenance contracts and contracts to preferred providers.2 According to State
records, State agencies made 80,474 delegated procurements totaling
approximately $4.5 billion during our audit period.
 Between October 2019 and April 2022, PRRB only completed audits of three
State agencies’ (Department of Natural Resources, Maryland Department of
Health, and the Military Department) delegated procurement activity. State
regulations and PRRB procedures require these audits to ensure procurements
are proper, including the use of competitive procurement (a deficiency often
cited in our fiscal compliance audit reports of State agencies).
In addition, our review of the three audits that were conducted disclosed that
workpapers did not always support the conclusions in the related audit report.
For example, the workpapers supporting PRRB’s audit of the Military
Department noted that the procurement of one contract lacked required
documentation, which included a list of vendors solicited and evidence that
the winning vendor was authorized to do business in the State. However, the
resulting PRRB report, dated December 2021, did not include a related
finding or recommendation of necessary corrective action, nor did the
workpapers include an explanation or justification for the omission of this
finding.
 OSP did not use available reports from FMIS to ensure agencies obtained OSP
approval for procurements that exceeded their delegated authority. Several
recent OLA audits have noted instances in which agencies procured
goods/services for amounts greater than its delegated dollar amount. See
Exhibit 1 for a list of delegated procurement-related findings included in OLA
audit reports between October 2019 and April 2022.
A similar condition regarding the lack of sufficient audits was commented upon in
our three preceding audit reports dating back to 2013. In response to our prior
report, OSP indicated that it would implement the recommended corrective action
by December 2020. During our current review, OSP management advised us that
they lacked sufficient personnel to conduct the required audits.
2 Other individual agencies have been delegated specific authority for construction, services, and
information technology contracts.
15

--- Page 18 ---
Recommendation 3
We recommend that OSP
a. ensure that PRRB monitor agency procurements by conducting audits of
delegated procurements in accordance with State regulations and its
procedures (repeat). In this regard, PRRB should establish a schedule to
ensure audits are conducted on a regular basis (such as once every three
to four years);
b. ensure that PRRB’s workpaper conclusions are consistent with the audit
report or explained and that the audits are comprehensive (repeat); and
c. use available reports to ensure agencies obtain approval for all
procurements that exceed their delegated authority.
Providers with Procurement Preferences
Background
State laws and regulations provide for procurement preferences to benefit
disadvantaged individuals or representative organizations. Specifically, State law
provides that, when goods or services can be supplied at prices that do not exceed
the prevailing market prices, State aided or controlled entities shall give
procurement preferences to Maryland Correctional Enterprises (MCE), Blind
Industries and Services of Maryland (BISM), the Employment Works Program
(EWP), and individuals with disability-owned businesses.
Finding 4
OSP lacked documentation that it independently determined and published
the fair market prices of MCE goods and services.
Analysis
OSP lacked documentation that it independently determined and published the
fair market prices of new and existing MCE goods and services. OSP published
prices for all MCE goods and services, but could not document that these prices
reflected the fair market prices. State laws and regulations require OSP to
independently determine the fair market prices of MCE products, and to distribute
a catalog of those products and fair market prices, at least annually, for State
agency personnel to compare with MCE’s established prices when making
procurement decisions. We were advised by MCE that it currently offers
approximately 900 different primary products, as well as variations to those
products (such as multiple sizes). According to a report provided by MCE, during
fiscal year 2021, State agencies posted procurement awards to MCE totaling
approximately $50.1 million.
16

--- Page 19 ---
Similar conditions have been commented upon in our five preceding audit reports
dating back to February 2007. In response to our prior audit, OSP indicated that it
would convene a working group to discuss the feasibility of establishing
procedures to independently determine and publish fair market prices of MCE’s
goods and services. OSP subsequently established procedures to verify the
pricing in November 2020, however the procedures were not comprehensive as
they did not describe the minimum number of items required to be sampled or
other criteria for the selection (such as whether high dollar items should be chosen
at a higher frequency), and as noted above the efforts were not documented.
Effective July 1, 2022, legislation was passed that transferred the authority for
reviewing the pricing of commodities sold by MCE from OSP to the Pricing and
Selection Committee (PSC) for Preferred Providers.3 Given the DGS Secretary’s
involvement with the PSC, OSP providing staffing to the PSC, and OSP’s
continued role in publishing the prices, we believe it is appropriate for OSP to be
the responsible State agency in this matter.
Recommendation 4
We recommend that DGS through OSP, in its role as a member of the
Pricing and Selection Committee for Preferred Providers,
a. perform independent documented reviews of the fair market value of
existing and new MCE goods and services in a timely manner (repeat),
and
b. modify its procedures for evaluating the fair market value of existing
MCE goods and services to include guidance for the number of items to
review and the materiality of those items.
Finding 5
OSP did not monitor Maryland Works to ensure it coordinated contracting
activity in accordance with the EWP.
Analysis
OSP did not monitor Maryland Works to ensure it coordinated contracting
activity between the State and individuals with a disability-owned business or
businesses operated in the interest of individuals with disabilities (collectively
referred to as preferred providers). In accordance with State law, DGS designated
3 PSC consists of five members: the Secretary of General Services, Secretary of Transportation,
Secretary of Public Safety and Correctional Services, Secretary of Labor, and the Assistant
Secretary Vocational Rehabilitation within the State Department of Education. PSC has
historically been responsible for validating the pricing for goods and services provided by Blind
Industries and Services of Maryland and through the Employment Works Program.
17

--- Page 20 ---
Maryland Works4 as its coordinating entity (CE) to identify potential contracts for
State procurement, establish procedures for the selection of preferred providers,
provide training and assistance, and monitor preferred providers. According to
State records, in fiscal year 2021, payments totaling approximately $10 million
were made to 26 EWP preferred providers and payments to Maryland Works
totaled $1.6 million.
We tested 18 of the 26 EWP preferred providers who received payments totaling
$9.3 million that had been recommended by Maryland Works in fiscal year 2021.
Our review disclosed that OSP had not ensured that the 18 providers were
accredited by the Division of Rehabilitation Services of the Maryland State
Department of Education. This accreditation ensures that the provider is operated
by, or in the interest of, individuals with disabilities and is a Program participation
eligibility requirement.
In addition, OSP did not obtain documentation from Maryland Works to support
that the recommended contract award was in the best interest of the State. Such
documentation would include Maryland Works’ cost justification for
recommending the provider. We acknowledge that such documentation is not a
Program requirement, but since Maryland Works is paid a percentage of the
recommended contract award amounts, we believe that it is critical to ensure that
the recommended award is in the best interest of the State.
Similar conditions, including provider accreditation, have been commented upon
in our three preceding audit reports dating back to 2013. In response to our prior
report, OSP agreed to monitor the CE through designated personnel made
available through a proposed organizational restructuring. During the current
audit, we were advised by OSP management that although limited monitoring
processes were in place, these processes did not address the above noted issues.
Recommendation 5
We recommend that OSP monitor Maryland Works to ensure that it is
fulfilling its CE responsibilities required by State law (repeat), including
a. ensuring providers recommended for contract awards are eligible for
those awards, and
b. that cost justifications are in the best interest of the State.
4 According to its website, MD Works is a non-profit organization that promotes and develops
employment and business ownership opportunities for people with disabilities and other barriers
to employment and has been the coordinating entity (CE) since 1985.
18

--- Page 21 ---
Information System Security and Control
We determined that Finding 6 related to “cybersecurity”, as defined by the State
Finance and Procurement Article, Section 3A-301(b) of the Annotated Code of
Maryland, and therefore is subject to redaction from the publicly available audit
report in accordance with the State Government Article 2-1224(i). Consequently,
the specifics of the following finding, including the analysis, related
recommendation(s), along with DGS’ responses, have been redacted from this
report copy.
Finding 6
Redacted cybersecurity-related finding.
Emergency Procurements
Finding 7
During the COVID-19 pandemic, OSP did not always conduct emergency
procurements in compliance with State procurement regulations.
Analysis
OSP did not always conduct emergency procurements in compliance with State
procurement regulations during the COVID-19 pandemic. Our test of four
emergency procurements for commodities and information technology services
valued at $54.9 million awarded between March 2020 and May 2021 disclosed
that OSP could not provide documentation of the basis for the purchases (such as
justification for the use of the emergency procurement method or how the vendors
were identified). In addition, the related purchase orders did not include certain
critical provisions required by State procurement regulations such as conformance
with specifications, delivery and acceptance, liquidated damages, compliance
with laws, anti-bribery statements, and registration of the business with the State
Department of Assessments and Taxation.
OSP also did not report all emergency procurements to the Board of Public Works
(BPW) as required. Specifically, our additional analysis of 129 emergency
procurements valued at $110.4 million awarded from September 2020 through
February 2022 disclosed 31 procurements valued at $32.2 million that were not
reported to BPW as of March 2022.
State regulations authorize agencies to procure goods and services using the
emergency procurement method when faced with an emergency, which is defined
19

--- Page 22 ---
as a sudden and unexpected occurrence or condition which agency management
reasonably could not foresee that requires an action to avoid or mitigate serious
damage to public health, safety, or welfare. Emergency procurement regulations
waive a key independent oversight control found in certain other State
procurement processes – the submission of related contracts to BPW for formal
approval prior to contract execution. Instead, agencies must report emergency
procurements (including modifications) in excess of $50,000 to BPW within 45
days after the contract execution.
Our December 2021 report Review of Certain Emergency Procurements Related
to the State of Maryland’s COVID-19 Response noted similar conditions with
multiple State agencies including DGS. For example, there was no formal written
contract for certain procurements, the contracts for other procurements did not
include all of the critical provisions required by State procurement regulations,
and contracts were not always reported to BPW within the required timeframes.
Recommendation 7
We recommend that OSP ensure compliance with State procurement
regulations relating to emergency procurements by ensuring that
a. all documentation supporting the basis for the emergency procurement,
such as, the justification for the emergency procurement and how the
vendor is identified, is retained;
b. all critical provisions are included in the purchase orders; and
c. all emergency procurements are reported to BPW timely.
20

--- Page 23 ---
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the Department of General
Services (DGS) – Office of State Procurement (OSP) for the period beginning
October 16, 2018 and ending October 31, 2021. The audit was conducted in
accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards. Those
standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient,
appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and
conclusions based on our audit objectives. We believe that the evidence obtained
provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit
objectives.
As prescribed by the State Government Article, Section 2-1221 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, the objectives of this audit were to examine OSP’s financial
transactions, records, and internal control, and to evaluate its compliance with
applicable State laws, rules, and regulations.
In planning and conducting our audit, we focused on the major financial-related
areas of operations based on assessments of significance and risk. The areas
addressed by the audit included procurement of commodities and maintenance,
information technology, and professional services, eMaryland Marketplace
Advantage (eMMA), OSP’s use of the State’s Financial Management Information
System for performing Statewide procurement functions, Intergovernmental
Cooperative Purchasing Agreements, and preferred procurement providers. We
also determined the status of the findings contained in our preceding audit report.
Our audit did not include certain support services provided to OSP by DGS –
Office of the Secretary. These support services (such as payroll processing) are
included within the scope of our audit of the DGS – Office of the Secretary.
Our assessment of internal controls was based on agency procedures and controls
in place at the time of our fieldwork. Our tests of transactions and other auditing
procedures were generally focused on the transactions occurring during our audit
period of October 16, 2018 to October 31, 2021, but may include transactions
before or after this period as we considered necessary to achieve our audit
objectives.
To accomplish our audit objectives, our audit procedures included inquiries of
appropriate personnel, inspections of documents and records, tests of transactions,
and to the extent practicable, observations of OSP’s operations. Generally,
transactions were selected for testing based on auditor judgment, which primarily
considers risk, the timing or dollar amount of the transaction, or the significance
21

--- Page 24 ---
of the transaction to the area of operation reviewed. As a matter of course, we do
not normally use sampling in our tests, so unless otherwise specifically indicated,
neither statistical nor non-statistical audit sampling was used to select the
transactions tested. Therefore, unless sampling is specifically indicated in a
finding, the results from any tests conducted or disclosed by us cannot be used to
project those results to the entire population from which the test items were
selected.
We also performed various data extracts of pertinent information from the State’s
Financial Management Information System (such as revenue and expenditure
data). These extracts are performed as part of ongoing internal processes
established by the Office of Legislative Audits and were subject to various tests to
determine data reliability. We determined that the data extracted from these
sources were sufficiently reliable for the purposes the data were used during this
audit.
In addition, we extracted data from eMMA for the purpose of assessing user
access. We performed various tests of the relevant data and determined that the
data were sufficiently reliable for the purposes the data were used during the
audit. Finally, we performed other auditing procedures that we considered
necessary to achieve our audit objectives. The reliability of data used in this
report for background or informational purposes was not assessed.
OSP’s management is responsible for establishing and maintaining effective
internal control. Internal control is a process designed to provide reasonable
assurance that objectives pertaining to the reliability of financial records;
effectiveness and efficiency of operations, including safeguarding of assets; and
compliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations are achieved. As
provided in Government Auditing Standards, there are five components of
internal control: control environment, risk assessment, control activities,
information and communication, and monitoring. Each of the five components,
when significant to the audit objectives, and as applicable to OSP, were
considered by us during the course of this audit.
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate.
Our reports are designed to assist the Maryland General Assembly in exercising
its legislative oversight function and to provide constructive recommendations for
22

--- Page 25 ---
improving State operations. As a result, our reports generally do not address
activities we reviewed that are functioning properly.
This report includes findings related to conditions that we consider to be
significant deficiencies in the design or operation of internal control that could
adversely affect OSP’s ability to maintain reliable financial records, operate
effectively and efficiently, and/or comply with applicable laws, rules, and
regulations. Our report also includes findings regarding significant instances of
noncompliance with applicable laws, rules, or regulations. Other less significant
findings were communicated to OSP that did not warrant inclusion in this report.
State Government Article Section 2-1224(i) requires that we redact in a manner
consistent with auditing best practices any cybersecurity findings before a report
is made available to the public. This results in the issuance of two different
versions of an audit report that contains cybersecurity findings – a redacted
version for the public and an unredacted version for government officials
responsible for acting on our audit recommendations.
The State Finance and Procurement Article, Section 3A-301(b), states that
cybersecurity is defined as “processes or capabilities wherein systems,
communications, and information are protected and defended against damage,
unauthorized use or modification, and exploitation”. Based on that definition, and
in our professional judgment, we concluded that certain findings in this report fall
under that definition. Consequently, for the publicly available audit report all
specifics as to the nature of cybersecurity findings and required corrective actions
have been redacted. We have determined that such aforementioned practices, and
government auditing standards, support the redaction of this information from the
public audit report. The specifics of these cybersecurity findings have been
communicated to OSP and those parties responsible for acting on our
recommendations in an unredacted audit report.
DGS’ response to our findings and recommendations, on behalf of OSP, is
included as an appendix to this report. Depending on the version of the audit
report, responses to any cybersecurity findings may be redacted in accordance
with State law. As prescribed in the State Government Article, Section 2-1224 of
the Annotated Code of Maryland, we will advise DGS regarding the results of our
review of its response.
23

--- Page 26 ---
Exhibit 1
Summary of Delegated Procurement Findings in OLA Audit Reports
Issued October 2019 to April 2022
Page 1 of 3
Audit Finding
Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services (DPSCS) – Central Operations
Report Dated November 20, 2019
Finding 3 – DPSCS made repeated purchases of fresh produce and maintenance services without
consolidating and appropriately soliciting competitive bids and executing written contracts.
Finding 4 – DPSCS did not always publish contract awards, as required by State procurement
regulations, and artificially split certain purchases made with purchasing cards to avoid soliciting
vendor bids.
Maryland Department of Transportation – Maryland Aviation Administration (MAA)
Report Dated December 12, 2019
Finding 1 – MAA circumvented State procurement regulations by directing its parking services
vendor to procure, at a total cost of $1.7 million, construction work for valet services and six
customer service robots.
Finding 3 – MAA did not always document that bid openings were proper, and did not ensure
contract awards were published on eMaryland Marketplace as required.
Maryland Department of Health – Spring Grove Hospital Center (SGHC)
Report Dated April 22, 2020
Finding 1 – The invitation for bid for the purchase of dietary equipment costing $800,000
appeared to be tailored to a particular vendor.
Finding 2 – SGHC circumvented State procurement regulations and MDH procurement policies
by artificially dividing procurements for goods and services to keep them under certain
solicitation and delegation thresholds. In addition, SGHC did not always competitively procure
or verify amounts paid on certain purchases, resulting in certain questionable activity and
overpayments.
Military Department
Report Dated June 10, 2020
Finding 2 – The Department divided purchases of certain equipment maintenance services into
multiple procurements and inflated the value of certain purchase orders.
Department of Housing and Community Development (DHCD)
Report Dated July 10, 2020
Finding 1 – DHCD did not always adhere to State procurement regulations with respect to
solicitation documentation. DHCD also awarded two contracts for amounts substantially higher
than the related bids prices contained in the proposals.
24

--- Page 27 ---
Exhibit 1 – continued
Summary of Delegated Procurement Findings in OLA Audit Reports
Issued October 2019 to April 2022
Page 2 of 3
Audit Finding
Maryland Department of Transportation – Motor Vehicle Administration (MVA)
Report Dated September 23, 2020
Finding 9 – MVA did not have adequate safeguards in place to secure competitive bids that were
electronically received and document that two employees were present for bid openings.
Department of Human Services (DHS) – Office of the Secretary and Related Units
Report Dated November 17, 2020
Finding 4 – DHS did not always publish contract awards on eMaryland Marketplace as required
by State procurement laws and regulations.
Public Service Commission (PSC)
Report Dated January 15, 2021
Finding 2 – PSC did not obtain required control agency approval for three sole source contracts
for consulting services totaling approximately $605,000.
Maryland Department of Health – Regulatory Services
Report Dated January 19, 2021
Finding 6 – The Board of Dental Examiners did not comply with State procurement regulations
when awarding two sole source contracts totaling $302,000 to a vendor for a new licensing
system.
Department of Natural Resources (DNR)
Report Dated April 5, 2021
Finding 6 – DNR did not always comply with State procurement regulations including
documenting bid openings, retaining proposals, executing contracts, and publishing contract
awards on eMaryland Marketplace.
Office of the Public Defender (OPD)
Report Dated August 10, 2021
Finding 1 – OPD did not comply with State procurement laws and regulations when awarding
two sole source IT contracts with expenditures totaling $960,000.
Department of Juvenile Services (DJS)
Report Dated September 2, 2021
Finding 1 – DJS did not consolidate procurements and publish contract awards to maximize State
purchasing power and enhance transparency, oversight, and control; and could not support
certain contract modifications.
25

--- Page 28 ---
Exhibit 1 – continued
Summary of Delegated Procurement Findings in OLA Audit Reports
Issued October 2019 to April 2022
Page 3 of 3
Audit Finding
Office of People’s Counsel (OPC)
Report Dated September 16, 2021
Finding 1 – OPC did not obtain required approvals for five sole source contracts for consulting
services totaling approximately $277,000.
Finding 2 – OPC did not always comply with State procurement regulations for competitive
procurements.
Maryland Department of Labor (MDL) – Office of the Secretary – Division of
Administration – Division of Workforce Development and Adult Learning
Report Dated January 7, 2022
Finding 3 – MDL did not always obtain required Board of Public Works approval for contract
modifications prior to execution and did not publish certain contract awards on eMaryland
Marketplace, as required.
State Lottery and Gaming Control Agency (SLGCA)
Report Dated March 15, 2022
Finding 5 – SLGCA did not always follow State procurement regulations and did not adequately
monitor certain contracts.
Department of Human Services – Local Department Operations
Report Dated March 30, 2022
Finding 6 – Local Department of Social Services contracts were not adequately monitored and
sole source procurements were not adequately justified.
26

--- Page 29 ---
APPENDIX
April 26, 2023
Mr. Gregory A. Hook, CPA
Legislative Auditor
Office of Legislative Audits
The Warehouse at Camden Yards
351 West Camden Street, Suite 400
Baltimore, MD 21201
Dear Mr. Hook:
Thank you for your letter dated April 11, 2023 with the draft audit report of the Department
of General Services Office of State Procurement for the period beginning October 16, 2018 and
ending October 31, 2021. As requested, we are submitting our completed Agency Response Form
in Microsoft Word format with this cover letter.
If you have any further questions or concerns, please feel free to contact myself or Jamie
Tomaszewski, Chief Administrative Officer for the Office of State Procurement at
Jamie.tomaszewski@maryland.gov or 410-260-7386.
Sincerely,
Atif Chaudhry
Secretary
Enclosures
cc: Michael F. Haifley, Acting Chief Procurement Officer, OSP
Nelson E. Reichart, Deputy Secretary, DGS
Chichi Nyagah-Nash, Chief Operating Officer, DGS
Jamie Tomaszewski, Chief Administrative Officer, OSP
Ellen Robertson, Legislative Liaison, DGS

--- Page 30 ---
Department of General Services
Office of State Procurement
Agency Response Form
eMaryland Marketplace Advantage
Finding 1
OSP did not ensure that the eMMA vendor had a comprehensive implementation plan and
did not maintain sufficient records to track contract expenditures, which we believe may
have contributed to project delays and increased costs.
We recommend that OSP
a. coordinate with the vendor to ensure that a comprehensive implementation plan and
schedule is maintained and accurately reflects responsibilities and resources of each
party; and
b. establish a process to accurately track payments made to the vendor, based on
individual deliverables, such as work orders.
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide DGS would like to further clarify for context with additional information
additional comments as as noted below.
deemed necessary.
DGS originally had a comprehensive implementation plan at the
beginning of eMMA project implementation; however, the plan has been
re-baselined throughout the project, as needed, and all relevant
stakeholders were informed and in agreement. The move to the
MSProject project management software has improved the project, and
the team will continue to track project progress using it as the tool.
Additionally, the issues in this finding were addressed by the
Independent Verification and Validation (IV&V) and have been
corrected, although not noted in the finding.
OSP did not ensure that the eMMA vendor had a comprehensive
implementation plan.
The issues were identified by the IV&V and process improvements have
been implemented which addressed and rectified the concerns prior to
the release of the audit. It was the opinion of the eMMA project team at
the onset of the implementation that the system integrator's plan was
sufficiently comprehensive. As time passed it was identified that
tracking to the plan was inadequate and that gaps were being identified.
Due to identified gaps, DGS agreed with the IV&Vs recommendation
for a plan that would “maintain an integrated schedule that shows
activities across all teams that are involved in deliverables for the
Page 1 of 14

--- Page 31 ---
Department of General Services
Office of State Procurement
Agency Response Form
project,” and did deploy such a plan. In 2021, OSP hired a new Project
Manager who worked with the system integrator in early 2022 to switch
to a Microsoft Project software for project management planning and
scheduling, which the eMMA team will maintain throughout the
deployment. It is important to note that the IV&V continues to monitor
the project plan and schedule.
OSP did not maintain records to track contract expenditures.
Invoices were received pertaining to each individual task order, which
were reviewed for accuracy and completeness prior to approval. The
project team was confident that they were able to confirm that the
requisite work required for completeness was sufficiently identified and
tracked. As the project grew and matured, DGS agreed with IV&V
recommendations and developed a detailed contract expenditure tracking
system. The invoices are reviewed by subject matter experts, the project
manager, the procurement officer, and finally the OSP Business Services
Manager for payment through the DGS Fiscal Services Division. There
is an automated Smartsheet tracker that documents this workflow.
Implementation of major features delayed more than 3 years.
As with most large IT project deployments, schedules are impacted by
many issues, which include an 18+ months delay during the COVID-19
pandemic for this project. Many issues came to play here, including the
number of stakeholders that were involved. Since this type of system had
not been developed and deployed in Maryland in more than 20 years, it
would have been difficult for any system implementor to have the
requisite knowledge to efficiently deploy this type of a comprehensive
project. Additional complexities were identified during the
implementation process that required added time to develop requisite
solutions.
Auditor’s Comment: DGS asserts that a comprehensive implementation plan was
provided at the beginning of the eMMA project. However, as noted in our analysis this
statement is inaccurate, as evidenced by an independent consultant recommending the
implementation of such a plan. Moreover, despite OLA’s numerous requests for
documentation of a comprehensive implementation plan during the course of the audit,
one was not provided by DGS. Finally, OLA would like to highlight that DGS
acknowledged in the response to Recommendation 1a that, “While DGS had an
implementation plan from the beginning of the project, DGS agrees that the plan should
have been more comprehensive.”
Page 2 of 14

--- Page 32 ---
Department of General Services
Office of State Procurement
Agency Response Form
Recommendation 1a Agree Estimated Completion Date: Completed
Please provide details of While DGS had an implementation plan from the beginning of the
corrective action or project, DGS agrees that the plan should have been more
explain disagreement. comprehensive. A more thorough plan may have prevented a
discrepancy between the vendor's proposal and actual work execution.
Specifically, the vendor’s lack of Maryland process and policy
knowledge resulted in several delivery gaps that were addressed via
subordinate task orders. DGS would note that the Task/Work Orders
were within the scope of the contract as they addressed gaps in the
deliverables. In addition, the gaps associated with delivery effectively
extended the delivery timeline for the base features. In all cases,
incremental work efforts were accurately reflected in the annual
Information Technology Project Request (ITPR) spend plans and re-
baseline requests for the eMMA project. It is important to note that all
invoices have been tracked, approved, and reconciled with the associated
incremental task orders and statements of work, and OSP now has a
comprehensive implementation plan based on the IV&V
recommendations.
Recommendation 1b Agree Estimated Completion Date: Completed
Please provide details of See responses noted above, we believe that all invoices have been
corrective action or tracked, approved, and reconciled with the associated incremental task
explain disagreement. orders and statements of work.
Finding 2
OSP did not require certain bidders on State contracts to utilize available functions in
eMMA to take advantage of security features intended to ensure the integrity of the bidding
process and did not always publish contract awards as required.
We recommend that OSP
a. require bidders to utilize available functionality in eMMA to ensure bids are adequately
secured, and
b. comply with State procurement laws and regulations by publishing contract awards on
eMMA within 30 days of the contract award (repeat).
Page 3 of 14

--- Page 33 ---
Department of General Services
Office of State Procurement
Agency Response Form
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide DGS agrees that the use of eMMA as a tool to enhance and protect
additional comments as information is a good practice; however, it is important to note that some
deemed necessary. procurements and some procuring agencies will have valid reasons not
to utilize eMMA as the portal for receiving bids. Given that it is not
required by law or regulation for agencies to have vendors submit bids
on eMMA, the background/analysis provided is somewhat unclear. As
DGS OSP continues to implement eMMA and agencies become more
familiar with its functionality, DGS OSP will create a policy to address
bids being submitted electronically through the platform, as applicable.
DGS does agree with the finding regarding the non-posting of awards
and has taken actions to mitigate the issue.
Recommendation 2a Agree Estimated Completion Date: Completed
Please provide details of Where DGS OSP is able to use the eMMA functionality to secure
corrective action or bids/proposals, it has and continues to utilize eMMA functionality as the
explain disagreement. implementation of additional functionality is available. Currently,
secondary competition is not available in eMMA. Whether
bids/proposals are received as a hard copy or electronically, there has
always been a system in place to secure bids/proposals prior to the bid
due date. While this is a feature that will be available to executive
branch agencies once the eMMA implementation is completed,
interfacing agencies and other users may not be able to utilize the
function. We agree that there is efficiency realized in accepting bids via
the tool; however, there is no statutory or regulatory mandate requiring
use of the tool. While DGS OSP does not disagree that agencies should
use the tool to its advantage, we also agree that “[w]hile there is no law,
regulation, or policy requiring the use of eMMA for submitting bids,
eMMA provides enhanced security over the State email system, which
would help ensure the integrity of the bidding process.” DGS will
promote the use of eMMA for the acceptance of bids as a process
improvement initiative. The full implementation roll out of eMMA to
the agencies is staggered. Once all agencies are brought onboard to
utilize eMMA’s full functionality, DGS OSP will create a policy around
the usage of eMMA to secure bids/proposals.
Recommendation 2b Agree Estimated Completion Date: 12/1/2023
Please provide details of DGS agrees with this finding and has taken actions to mitigate it. In
corrective action or Spring 2022 DGS started the development of an internal audit program.
explain disagreement. On a monthly cycle, DGS has started to audit its procurements for
completeness. As part of this audit process, the auditor is validating that
contracts are posted on eMMA for award. Those results are shared with
Page 4 of 14

--- Page 34 ---
Department of General Services
Office of State Procurement
Agency Response Form
OSP management and individuals who have failed to post awards, who
are then counseled by their managers. Additionally, posting of awards is
now included in employee proficiency reports and employees may be
disciplined as appropriate if future awards are not posted. DGS has
created a unit that performs reporting and analytics, which will assist the
audit process by providing eMMA and ADPICS reports for validation.
Posting contract awards in eMMA continues to be an issue for many
agencies, including DGS, in part because of double-entries in ADPICS
and eMMA. With the elimination of double-entries, the eMMA team is
researching the possibility of adding the award posting to the approval
workflow. If this proves to be a possibility, the award publication would
happen automatically and will eliminate the issue. Until that time, DGS
OSP will continue with its internal auditing and reporting processes.
State Agency Procurement Monitoring
Finding 3
OSP did not adequately monitor certain State agency procurements that were specifically
subject to its oversight.
We recommend that OSP
a. ensure that PRRB monitor agency procurements by conducting audits of delegated
procurements in accordance with State regulations and its procedures (repeat). In this
regard, PRRB should establish a schedule to ensure audits are conducted on a regular
basis (such as once every three to four years);
b. ensure that PRRB’s workpaper conclusions are consistent with the audit report or
explained and that the audits are comprehensive (repeat); and
c. use available reports to ensure agencies obtain approval for all procurements that
exceed their delegated authority.
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 3a Agree Estimated Completion Date: 12/1/2023
Page 5 of 14

--- Page 35 ---
Department of General Services
Office of State Procurement
Agency Response Form
Please provide details of DGS agrees that improvement needs to be achieved and is evaluating
corrective action or various methodologies to ensure adequate monitoring of agency
explain disagreement. procurements. DGS OSP has many different review processes in place
for agency procurement oversight: including monitoring processes for
procurements that are not delegated; non-delegated procurements are
reviewed prior to solicitation and again prior to award by DGS
procurement officers; and delegated procurements over $200,000 are
reviewed prior to award. DGS agrees that its oversight of delegated
small procurements needs improvement. From the previous audit
finding, DGS OSP worked with OLA on a plan for mitigating this issue
and OLA agreed to the plan. As part of improving the process, DGS is
adding resources to the unit and has developed an audit procedure and
plan to be utilized in future audits. This will initially focus on delegated
small procurements, as all other procurements are reviewed and
approved by DGS staff prior to solicitation and then again before award.
The recent development of an analytics unit within DGS OSP will
provide comprehensive reports to give insight into other agencies’
compliance. DGS believes that the agency audit cycle and compliance
reporting will provide the necessary level of oversight.
Recommendation 3b Agree Estimated Completion Date: 12/1/2023
Please provide details of This is part of the audit team’s responsibility and will be defined in the
corrective action or updated audit plan and audit procedure documents.
explain disagreement.
Recommendation 3c Agree Estimated Completion Date: 12/1/2023
Please provide details of The DGS analytics unit has created various agency monthly reports
corrective action or which DGS staff review and validate for each procurement, and more
explain disagreement. will be added as needed. DGS believes this requirement can, and will, be
monitored through reporting. Actions will be taken when reports indicate
issues and/or when DGS does its periodic scheduled on-sight audits.
Providers with Procurement Preferences
Finding 4
OSP lacked documentation that it independently determined and published the fair market
prices of MCE goods and services.
We recommend that DGS through OSP, in its role as a member of the Pricing and
Selection Committee for Preferred Providers,
Page 6 of 14

--- Page 36 ---
Department of General Services
Office of State Procurement
Agency Response Form
a. perform independent documented reviews of the fair market value of existing and new
MCE goods and services in a timely manner (repeat), and
b. modify its procedures for evaluating the fair market value of existing MCE goods and
services to include guidance for the number of items to review and the materiality of
those items.
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide DGS agrees with this finding; however, we believe the recommendations
additional comments as are moot. During the 2022 legislative session, per HB 723, Chapter 527,
deemed necessary. Laws of 2022, the applicable statute was modified and put the
responsibilities noted above under the authority of the Pricing and
Selection Committee (PSC) for Preferred Providers, including Maryland
Correctional Enterprises (MCE).
Auditor’s Comment: DGS acknowledges that it lacked documentation of an
independent determination and subsequent publication of the fair market prices of MCE
goods and services, prior to July 1, 2022. In addition, as noted in the analysis, DGS did
not have comprehensive procedures to verify the pricing. DGS disagrees with the related
recommendations, citing a recent law change (that was disclosed in the audit finding
analysis) that transferred the responsibility to a multi-agency State Committee. This
Committee will not be subject to an individual OLA audit (as it is OLA’s understanding
that it does not exist as a budgetary unit of State government). Furthermore, this current
situation seems contrary to the intent of the enhanced procurement authority granted to
OSP by HB 723 (2022 Session). In this regard, written testimony submitted by DGS in
support of HB 723 addressed the pricing Committee and stated that through this
legislation, “There is an opportunity to establish appropriate language and procedures so
as to increase not only the effectiveness of the OSP but also its transparency. One
example of this is the creation of a more uniform process for Maryland’s three (3)
preferred providers to propose their prevailing average market prices based on the market
average.”
OLA concurs that effectiveness and transparency are important, but no more or less than
accountability. Such accountability existed pre-HB 723 when OSP was solely
responsible for pricing (in compliance with State law) and has been lost by assigning this
function to a multi-agency Committee with a collective responsibility, but without a
means to hold any one agency accountable. Therefore, we continue to believe that it is
both reasonable and natural for OSP to continue its past involvement for MCE
Page 7 of 14

--- Page 37 ---
Department of General Services
Office of State Procurement
Agency Response Form
commodity pricing as evidenced by the Secretary’s role on, and OSP providing the
staffing for, the Committee.
Recommendation 4a Disagree Estimated Completion Date: N/A
Please provide details of DGS believes that procedural changes are not necessary in DGS policy,
corrective action or since the applicable statute was changed during the 2022 legislative
explain disagreement. session to make the PSC for Preferred Providers the responsible party for
reviewing and verifying the fair market value of existing and new MCE
goods and services. Please see Correctional Services Article §3-515 (a)
and (b) and State Finance and Procurement Articles §14-106 (f) (3) and
§14-107 (1) (iii).
Recommendation 4b Disagree Estimated Completion Date: N/A
Please provide details of DGS believes that procedural changes are not necessary in DGS policy,
corrective action or since the applicable statute was changed in 2022 to make the PSC for
explain disagreement. Preferred Providers the responsible party for reviewing and verifying fair
market value using the prevailing average market prices. Please see
Correctional Services Article §3-515 (a) and (b) and State Finance and
Procurement Articles §14-106 (f) (3) and §14-107 (1) (iii).
Finding 5
OSP did not monitor Maryland Works to ensure it coordinated contracting activity in
accordance with the EWP.
We recommend that OSP monitor Maryland Works to ensure that it is fulfilling its CE
responsibilities required by State law (repeat), including
a. ensuring providers recommended for contract awards are eligible for those awards, and
b. that cost justifications are in the best interest of the State.
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 5a Disagree Estimated Completion Date: N/A
Page 8 of 14

--- Page 38 ---
Department of General Services
Office of State Procurement
Agency Response Form
Please provide details of All vendors must be eligible Employment Works Program (EWP)
corrective action or vendors, which means they must be approved by the Department of
explain disagreement. Rehabilitative Services (DORS). DORS is technically the entity
responsible for maintaining the list of eligible disabled vendors for the
EWP. Accordingly, DGS relies on DORS to ensure the list of approved
eligible disabled vendors for the EWP is continually updated and
properly maintained. A representative of DORS is a member of the
Pricing and Selection Committee (PSC) and, as such, reviews each
award recommendation. Before approving each award, the PSC should
verify the recommended awardee’s status as an eligible DORS provider.
Auditor’s Comment: DGS disagrees that OSP is responsible for monitoring Maryland
Works, the CE. As noted in the Auditor’s Comments to our prior audit report finding
on this subject, OLA continues to believe that since OSP is required to designate a CE to
identify potential contracts for State procurement, establish procedures for the selection
of preferred providers, provide training and assistance to participating providers, and
monitor EWP preferred providers, it is reasonable to expect OSP to ensure providers
recommended for contract awards are eligible for those awards.
Recommendation 5b Disagree Estimated Completion Date: N/A
Please provide details of The threshold for cost justification is “the fair market price of supplies,
corrective action or services and other sales” as per State Finance and Procurement Articles
explain disagreement. §14-106 (f) (8). The PSC has the responsibility for making the
determination regarding “fair market prices”. The PSC is made up of
several different agencies of which DGS is just one participating
member. DGS has no direct authority and is not responsible for
controlling the committee as it relates to the cost justification. In
accordance with the statute, if the price is determined to be “the fair
market price” then it will be by default in the State’s best interest.
Auditor’s Comment: DGS disagrees that OSP is responsible for monitoring the CE to
ensure that cost justifications are in the best interest of the State because it asserts that
this is the Pricing and Selection Committee’s responsibility and not DGS. For the
reasons set forth in the current Auditor’s Comment for Finding 4 (and related
recommendations), OLA continues to believe that OSP (DGS) should assume a
significant role in the Committee’s actions. In addition, DGS asserted that the cost
justifications are in the best interest of the State because they were determined to be the
fair market value, without documenting that the costs indeed represented fair market
value.
Page 9 of 14

--- Page 39 ---
Department of General Services
Office of State Procurement
Agency Response Form
Information System Security and Control
The Office of Legislative Audits (OLA) has determined that Finding 6 related to “cybersecurity”,
as defined by the State Finance and Procurement Article, Section 3A-301(b) of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, and therefore is subject to redaction from the publicly available audit report
in accordance with State Government Article 2-1224(i). Although the specifics of the finding,
including the analysis, related recommendations, along with DGS’ responses, have been redacted
from this report copy, DGS’ responses indicated agreement with the finding and related
recommendations.
Finding 6
Redacted cybersecurity-related finding.
Agency Response has been redacted by OLA.
Emergency Procurements
Finding 7
During the COVID-19 pandemic, OSP did not always conduct emergency procurements in
compliance with State procurement regulations.
We recommend that OSP ensure compliance with State procurement regulations relating
to emergency procurements by ensuring that
a. all documentation supporting the basis for the emergency procurement, such as, the
justification for the emergency procurement and how the vendor is identified, is
retained;
b. all critical provisions are included in the purchase orders; and
c. all emergency procurements are reported to BPW timely.
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide The Department of Legislative Services' Office of Program Evaluation
additional comments as and Government Accountability conducted a special review of certain
deemed necessary. emergency procurements related to the State of Maryland’s response to
the COVID-19 pandemic. This review was initiated by the Office of
Legislative Audits, and it represents an expansion of an earlier limited
review that was undertaken based on a request from the chairs of the
Page 10 of 14

--- Page 40 ---
Department of General Services
Office of State Procurement
Agency Response Form
Senate Education, Health, and Environmental Affairs and the House
Health and Government Operations Committees for a review of two
COVID-related emergency procurements. The report is dated December
13, 2021.
The methodology of that report stated that “Generally, the procurements
were judgmentally selected based on our consideration of certain factors
that may be indicative of significant violations of state Procurement laws
or regulations.” The conclusion of the report stated “Generally, from our
review, we identified a lack of compliance with State regulations for
emergency procurements…” The conclusion of the report is essentially
the same as the finding above. As such, DGS also provided a response to
the report which is a matter of record, but we will again respond to the
similar finding in this audit.
The State of Maryland’s COVID-19 response was organized around one
core mission: to prevent as many deaths and hospitalizations as possible
while ensuring that Marylanders can go about their normal business in a
reopened economy safely. Maryland has been recognized as one of the
best COVID-19 responses in the nation. Maryland moved aggressively
early in the pandemic to undertake steps to ensure a robust response to
address:
A. Ensure sufficient hospital capacity throughout the State;
B. Acquire adequate personal protective equipment and other
medical equipment;
C. Set up the framework for access to COVID-19 tests;
D. Building a robust contact tracing infrastructure;
E. Creating a wide set of COVID-19 vaccine distribution channels
to sustain one of the most successful vaccination initiatives in the
nation.
The Department of General Services conducted its procurements as part
of the statewide COVID-19 pandemic response based on the following
principles:
1. Adherence to existing procurement law, regulations, and policies
to the maximum extent possible – as demonstrated by review of
legal sufficiency, competitive bids, and reporting to the Board of
Public works (BPW);
Page 11 of 14

--- Page 41 ---
Department of General Services
Office of State Procurement
Agency Response Form
2. A focus on improving our business processes as shortcomings
were identified.
Regarding the second principle above, as opposed to normal or
traditional business processes of state government, the COVID-19
pandemic required actions that have not been undertaken in over a
century, or perhaps never in the history of the State.
Recommendation 7a Agree Estimated Completion Date: Completed
Please provide details of DGS partially agrees with this recommendation. DGS agrees with
corrective action or retaining procurement records and making a procurement officer’s
explain disagreement. determination for using the emergency procurement method. However,
the vendor selection may be as simple as they were the cheapest, the
fastest to deliver to mitigate damages, the only one to respond, etc. and
the “how" is not necessarily required to be separately documented in the
procurement officer’s determination.
In many cases DGS was buying from any, and all qualified vendors for
PPE and ventilators as the supply chain basically did not exist. If a
qualified vendor was found, and the products deemed genuine and
appropriate for the needs of MDH, or whoever the requesting agency
was, DGS OSP purchased the requisite quantity. There was a critical
shortage of PPE and ventilators and therefore the rationale for
purchasing was because we could get the products needed at a
reasonable price from a qualified vendor. In some cases, the time delay
between obtaining a quote and placing an order resulted in the product
being sold to another entity before DGS could place an order for those
supplies. Again, DGS had never before seen any such shortages in the
supply chain for critical life-saving products.
For emergency procurements, COMAR technically does not require
documenting the methodology in which a vendor is selected. COMAR
21.05.06.02C(1) does not specify a selection method or process but
instead simply states that “[t]he procedure used shall assure that the
required items are procured in time to meet the emergency.” Since the
basis of selection is not a required element in COMAR, it stands that any
such documentation of the selection would also not be required.
Auditor’s Comment: OLA stresses that this response is erroneous and contradicts State
procurement regulations, and specifically COMAR 21.05.06.02(D)(2), which require the
record of each emergency procurement to include the basis and justification for the
procurement, as well as the name of and basis for the selection of a particular contractor.
Page 12 of 14

--- Page 42 ---
Department of General Services
Office of State Procurement
Agency Response Form
Recommendation 7b Agree Estimated Completion Date: Completed
Please provide details of DGS concedes that certain procurements did not contain all of the
corrective action or clauses required under COMAR, however, it should be noted that under
explain disagreement. COMAR 21.05.06.02(D)(2), the guidance provided in regulation is “[a]
record of each emergency procurement shall be made as soon as
practicable and shall set forth…” The entirety of the state government
was being asked to rise to meet the challenges posed by a world-wide
health crisis, the likes of which had not been witnessed in over one
hundred years. With supply chains completely gridlocked or collapsed,
demand far exceeding supply, and no contingency planning for these
types of global events, the “as soon as practicable” part of the regulation
certainly provided the reasoning behind the strategies employed to
acquire critical supplies and services. The emergency procurements were
made in a streamlined and expedited way for Maryland to order and
receive critical supplies that otherwise would not have been able to be
obtained. It is important to note that these emergency procurements and
their associated documentation were deemed legally sufficient by the
Office of the Attorney General.
Recommendation 7c Agree Estimated Completion Date: Completed
Please provide details of DGS agrees in part with this recommendation that emergency
corrective action or procurements should be reported timely to the BPW; however, DGS has
explain disagreement. delegation from the BPW for all commodities contracts. Per COMAR
21.02.01.04.B (5), DGS has procurement delegation for All contracts for
the purchase of commodities and supplies, except for contracts for
single items of equipment or single equipment leases in an amount over
$200,000. This would include emergency procurements.
Never in the history of the BPW have emergency commodity contracts
been reported to the BPW. There was much discussion about this change
in policy and procedure during the pandemic. DGS did agree to report
the emergency commodity contracts to the BPW in the spirit of
transparency and oversight. Due to the volume of the emergency
commodities procurements to be reported, DGS OSP worked with the
BPW staff to create a format for presenting these procurements to the
BPW. The effort to create a new process to accommodate this new
reporting component was lengthy and time consuming, and meanwhile
DGS OSP was still expected to continue to acquire critically needed
supplies and services where, in many cases supplies were scarce. Due to
health and public safety reasons, sourcing and acquiring the items were
higher priorities than reporting commodities purchases to the BPW,
when prior to the pandemic, that was never a requirement. The important
aspect that should be noted is that in collaboration with the BPW staff
Page 13 of 14

--- Page 43 ---
Department of General Services
Office of State Procurement
Agency Response Form
the procurements were reported. To summarize, DGS agrees that all
applicable emergency procurements should be reported to the BPW in a
timely manner. However, the emergency procurements for commodities
purchased during the COVID-19 pandemic were not required to be
presented to the BPW but were still presented for transparency.
Page 14 of 14

--- Page 44 ---
A T
UDIT EAM
Heather A. Warriner, CPA
Audit Manager
Walter L. Horan, IV
Senior Auditor
Kareem R. Jackson
Owen M. Long-Grant
Nga T. Nguyen Simmons
Staff Auditors