Title: Review of the Actions Taken by the Maryland Higher Education Commission to Resolve Repeat Audit Findings in Response to the April 2022 Joint Chairmen's Report
Date: 05/10/2023
Type: Special Reports and Letters
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=645bef36a1ce581390655ad8
Extracted: 2025-06-19T23:05:33.778513
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
May 10, 2023
Senator Guy J. Guzzone, Chair
Senate Budget and Taxation Committee
Miller Senate Office Building, 3 West Wing
11 Bladen Street
Annapolis, Maryland 21401
Delegate Benjamin S. Barnes, Chair
House Appropriations Committee
House Office Building, Room 121
6 Bladen Street
Annapolis, Maryland 21401
Dear Senator Guzzone and Delegate Barnes:
The Office of Legislative Audits (OLA) has reviewed the actions taken by
the Maryland Higher Education Commission (MHEC) to resolve the five repeat
findings in our June 24, 2021 audit report. This review was conducted in
accordance with a requirement specified in the April 2022 Joint Chairmen’s
Report (JCR), page 195. The JCR required that, prior to the release of $100,000
of its administrative appropriation for fiscal year 2023, MHEC must take
corrective action on all repeat audit findings on or before November 1, 2022. The
JCR language further provided that OLA submit a report to the budget
committees listing each audit finding along with a determination that each finding
was corrected. The OLA report is required to be submitted to allow 45 days for
the budget committees to review and release the funds prior to the end of the
fiscal year.
The June 24, 2021 audit report of MHEC contained five repeat audit
findings that were addressed by eleven recommendations. In accordance with the
April 2022 JCR requirement, MHEC provided a report to OLA, dated November

--- Page 2 ---
Senator Guy J. Guzzone, Chair -2- May 10, 2023
Delegate Benjamin S. Barnes, Chair
4, 2022, detailing the corrective actions it had taken with respect to the audit
findings (Exhibit 1). The MHEC status report indicated that corrective actions
had been completed for all five findings.
If reviewing this public copy of the results of OLA’s review of MHEC’s
actions to address repeat audit findings, the following notice is applicable. The
related MHEC audit report was issued prior to the effective date of Chapter 241,
Laws of Maryland 2022, which generally requires the OLA to redact any
cybersecurity findings in a manner consistent with auditing best practices before
the report is made available to the public. Consequently, any information on the
status of prior audit report Findings 3 and 7 (which OLA considers cybersecurity
related) have been redacted from the public copy of this document and related
exhibits.
We reviewed the MHEC status report and related documentation,
performed limited tests and analyses of the information, and held discussions with
MHEC personnel as necessary to assess the implementation status of the related
recommendations. Our review did not constitute an audit conducted in
accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards. Based on our
review, for the three non-cybersecurity related findings we determined that
MHEC had resolved Finding 5, but had not yet taken sufficient actions to correct
Findings 1 and 4. Specifically, although MHEC had implemented certain
elements of the recommendations related to Findings 1 and 4, the actions to date
did not address the entirety of the findings (Exhibit 2). Consequently, at the time
of our review, our assessment of Findings 1 and 4 concluded that they were still in
progress as of November 2022 (Exhibit 3).
Although we concluded that those aforementioned findings had not been
fully resolved, Exhibit 3 does provide additional detail regarding certain
corrective actions that had been taken to date. We discussed our findings with
MHEC and their feedback has been incorporated into Exhibit 3.
We trust our response satisfactorily addresses the JCR requirement.
Please contact me if you need additional information.
Sincerely,
Gregory A. Hook, CPA
Legislative Auditor

--- Page 3 ---
Senator Guy J. Guzzone, Chair -3- May 10, 2023
Delegate Benjamin S. Barnes, Chair
cc: Senator Clarence K. Lam, M.D., Senate Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Delegate Jared Solomon, House Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee Members and Staff
Senator William C. Ferguson IV, President of the Senate
Delegate Adrienne A. Jones, Speaker of the House of Delegates
Governor Westley W. Moore
Comptroller Brooke E. Lierman
Treasurer Dereck E. Davis
Attorney General Anthony G. Brown
Secretary Helene T. Grady, Department of Budget and Management
Mary Pat Seurkamp, Ph.D., Chair, Maryland Higher Education Commission
Acting Secretary Sanjay K. Rai, Ph.D., Maryland Higher Education Commission
Assistant Secretary and Director Geoffrey F. Newman, Finance and
Administration, Maryland Higher Education Commission
Joan M. Peacock, Manager, Audit Compliance Unit, Department of Budget
and Management
Victoria L. Gruber, Executive Director, Department of Legislative Services
Sara J. Baker, Policy Analyst, Department of Legislative Services
Kelly K. Norton, Policy Analyst, Department of Legislative Services

--- Page 4 ---
Exhibit 1 to May 10, 2023 Letter to Joint Chairmen
Larry Hogan
Governor
Boyd K. Rutherford
Lt. Governor
Mary Pat Seurkamp, Ph.D.
Chair
James D. Fielder, Jr., Ph. D.
Secretary
November 4, 2022
Mr. Gregory A. Hook, CPA
Legislative Auditor
Office of Legislative Audits
301 West Preston Street, Room 1202
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Re: Report on the Fiscal 2023 State Operating
Budget (SB 290) And the State Capital Budget (SB
291) And Related Recommendations (April 2022
Joint Chairmen’s Report (JCR))
Status of corrective actions related to most recent
fiscal compliance audit
P. 195
Dear Mr. Hook:
Please find enclosed MHEC’s Agency Status Report for the repeat audit findings as requested
on page 195 of the Report on the Fiscal 2023 State Operating Budget (SB 290) And the State
Capital Budget (SB 291) And Related Recommendations (April 2022 Joint Chairmen’s Report
(JCR)). Over the last eighteen months, MHEC staff have diligently worked to implement the
audit recommendations. Today, I am happy to report that as of November 1, 2022, MHEC has
fully implemented corrective action to address all of the repeat audit findings.
If you have any questions or concerns, please contact Mr. Aubrey Bascombe, Director of
Finance and Administration, at aubrey.bascombe1@maryland.gov or 410-767-3044.
Sincerely,
Dr. James D. Fielder, Jr.
Secretary
Enclosure
MARYLAND HIGHER EDUCATION COMMISSION
6 N. Liberty Street • 10th Floor • Baltimore, MD 21201
T 410.767.3300 • 800.974.0203 • F 410.332.0270 • TTY for the Deaf 800.735.2258 www.mhec.maryland.gov

--- Page 5 ---
Exhibit 1 to May 10, 2023 Letter to Joint Chairmen
Career-Based Financial Aid
Finding 1
MHEC did not monitor service obligation compliance in a timely and comprehensive
manner, and consequently did not ensure that repayments were pursued when required.
We recommend that MHEC
a. generate and review all reports of recipients and employers requiring initial or follow-
up action on a timely basis (repeat), and
b. ensure that all required requests are sent and follow-up action is taken in a timely
manner (repeat).
Agency Corrective Actions
Recommendation 1a Status Complete Complete
Please provide details of OSFA has implemented an online Service Questionnaire form and
corrective action. updated the Employer Verification Form. For the Service Questionnaire,
individuals will complete the online form in lieu of the paper Service
Questionnaire form. This new online questionnaire form eliminates the
need for individuals to submit paper applications. The online Service
Questionnaire was implemented in early July 2022.
OSFA continues to release service questionnaire and employer
verification notices every 21 days; and repayment notices every 30 days
in accordance with its internal procedures.
In addition, OSFA and Accounting will continue to meet to reconcile
accounts placed into Repayment.
Recommendation 1b Status Complete Complete
Please provide details of To ensure service notifications are generated timely, OSFA implemented
corrective action. a monthly quality assurance review process. This process was
implemented in August 2022 and continues on a monthly basis. Each
corresponding query is reviewed for the respective notification, to ensure
the individual that appeared on the list are correct.
In addition to reviewing each individual that appears on the notification,
before they are released and within 21 days of the monthly status,
change reports are run. The OSFA Compliance Officer has completed a
review over the past 3 month (i.e. August, September, and October of
2022) to review each individual that appeared on the reports and ensure
the status change applied was accurate.
To date, OSFA has implemented and completed the review process of all
notifications prior to them being released.

--- Page 6 ---
Exhibit 1 to May 10, 2023 Letter to Joint Chairmen
Maryland College Aid Processing System (MDCAPS)
Finding 3 related to “cybersecurity”, as defined by the State Finance and Procurement
Article, Section 3A-301(b) of the Annotated Code of Maryland, and therefore MHEC’s
corrective actions and OLA’s conclusion from its review of MHEC’s status report are
subject to redaction for the publicly available document in accordance with State
Government Article 2-1224(i).
Finding 3
Sufficient controls were not established over the issuance and monitoring of user access to
MDCAPS.
We recommend that MHEC
a. require independent authorization for the establishment or modification of all user
access accounts, and retain the related authorization forms on file (repeat);
b. ensure that periodic reviews of employee access are comprehensive and performed by
an employee independent of the process of establishing or modifying user accounts
(repeat);
c. ensure that access reviews of external users are performed by external entities and that
documentation of these reviews is received and reviewed (repeat); and
d. remove unnecessary or improper user accounts or access capabilities, including those
noted above (repeat).
Agency corrective actions have been redacted by OLA.
Finding 4
MHEC did not adequately restrict user access to SOLR resulting in employees with
unnecessary access to process critical functions and others with the ability to process
adjustments without independent review and approval.
We recommend that MHEC
a. establish procedures, including the use of output reports, to allow for an independent
review and approval of critical adjustments to recipient service obligation accounts on
SOLR based on supporting documentation (repeat)
Agency Corrective Actions
Recommendation 4a Status Complete Complete
Please provide details of In August 2022, the OSFA Compliance Officer commenced a monthly
corrective action. quality assurance review process, by reviewing everyone that appeared
on the applicable reports, in accordance with the SOLR Quality
Assurance Review Procedures.

--- Page 7 ---
Exhibit 1 to May 10, 2023 Letter to Joint Chairmen
The Admin. Officer 1 reviews each corresponding query for the
respective notification and identifies any student on the reports that are
incorrect. The Admin. Officer I also identifies what information needs to
be reviewed and corrected. In addition, the Compliance Officer reviews
the monthly SOLR QA process.
Aid to Community Colleges
Finding 5
MHEC had not implemented effective procedures for ensuring that all payments made to
community colleges for retirement and pension contributions were proper.
We recommend that MHEC ensure that the amounts paid for the State’s share of
community college employees’ retirement and pension costs are proper. Specifically, we
recommend that MHEC enhance its procedures to
a. thoroughly review audited retirement and pension contribution data received from
community colleges and resolve, on a timely basis, differences between the audited data
and corresponding amounts in its own records, including the aforementioned
differences (repeat);
b. take appropriate actions to pay or collect differences in amounts owed to or due from
the colleges (repeat); and
c. document the actions taken (repeat).
Agency Corrective Actions
Analysis
Please provide MHEC completes a comprehensive review process before making
additional comments as optional retirement payments to the community colleges. The
deemed necessary. community colleges must provide supporting documentation when
submitting invoices, including a detailed list of employees. In addition,
the State Retirement Agency (SRA) certifies all eligible new employees
at the community colleges and MHEC will not make payments for any
new employees included in invoices if MHEC does not receive the
certification from SRA.
The OLA testing did not identify any incidents of MHEC making
optional retirement payments to the community colleges without the
proper supporting documentation.
Recommendation 5a Status Complete Complete

--- Page 8 ---
Exhibit 1 to May 10, 2023 Letter to Joint Chairmen
Please provide details of MHEC completed the reconciliations for FY 2019 and 2020, including
corrective action. fully investigating differences and documenting actions taken (if any).
In addition, MHEC implemented an annual reconciliation of retirement
amounts submitted by the community colleges in their CC-4 Audited
Financial Report, including following up with the community colleges to
address differences identified during the review of their CC-4s and
documenting actions taken (if any).
Recommendation 5b Status Complete Complete
Please provide details of Any differences and discrepancies discovered by the annual
corrective action. reconciliation of retirement amounts reported in the community college
CC-4s will be researched to determine the cause for these differences
and corrective action will be pursued including collection and/or
payment. This action will be pursued in a timely manner.
Recommendation 5c Status Complete Complete
Please provide details of Both the annual reconciliation processes as well as any follow-up
corrective action. actions on identified differences and discrepancies will be documented
regarding its circumstance, results of our research, and any corrective
action taken.
Information Systems Security and Control
Finding 7 related to “cybersecurity”, as defined by the State Finance and Procurement
Article, Section 3A-301(b) of the Annotated Code of Maryland, and therefore MHEC’s
corrective actions and OLA’s conclusion from its review of MHEC’s status report are
subject to redaction for the publicly available document in accordance with State
Government Article 2-1224(i).
Finding 7
MHEC maintained sensitive personally identifiable information (PII) in a manner that did
not provide adequate safeguards and lacked assurance that adequate security protections
existed over PII on the vendor-hosted development servers.
We recommend that MHEC, in conjunction with their MDCAPS vendor and DoIT,
implement appropriate information security safeguards for sensitive PII it maintains
(repeat).
Agency corrective actions have been redacted by OLA.

--- Page 9 ---
Exhibit 2 to May 10, 2023 Letter to Joint Chairmen
Status of Repeat Findings in OLA’s June 24, 2021 Audit Report on the
Maryland Higher Education Commission (MHEC)
Status Based on
Prior Recommendations Pertaining to Repeat Findings
OLA Review
Career-Based Financial Aid
1. We recommend that MHEC
a. generate and review all reports of recipients and employers
Resolved
requiring initial or follow-up action on a timely basis.
b. ensure that all required requests are sent and follow-up
Not Resolved
action is taken in a timely manner.
(In Progress)
Maryland College Aid Processing System (MDCAPS)
3. We recommend that MHEC
a. require independent authorization for the establishment or Status Redacted1
modification of all user access accounts, and retain the
related authorization forms on file.
b. ensure that periodic reviews of employee access are
comprehensive and performed by an employee independent Status Redacted1
of the process of establishing or modifying user accounts.
c. ensure that access reviews of external users are performed
by external entities and that documentation of these
Status Redacted1
reviews is received and reviewed.
d. remove unnecessary or improper user accounts or access
capabilities, including those noted above. Status Redacted1
Accounts Receivable
4. We recommend that MHEC
a. establish procedures, including the use of output reports, to
allow for an independent review and approval of critical Not Resolved
adjustments to recipient service obligation accounts on the (In Progress)
Service Obligation Loan Repayment module based on
supporting documentation.
1 Specific information of the current status of this cybersecurity-related finding has been redacted from the publicly
available document in accordance with State Government Article, Section 2-1224(i) of the Annotated Code of
Maryland.

--- Page 10 ---
Exhibit 2 to May 10, 2023 Letter to Joint Chairmen
Status of Repeat Findings in OLA’s June 24, 2021 Audit Report on the
Maryland Higher Education Commission (MHEC)
Status Based on
Prior Recommendations Pertaining to Repeat Findings
OLA Review
Aid to Community Colleges
5. We recommend that MHEC ensure that the amounts paid for
the State’s share of community college employees’ retirement
and pension costs are proper. Specifically, we recommend that
MHEC enhance its procedures to
a. thoroughly review audited retirement and pension Resolved
contribution data received from community colleges and
resolve, on a timely basis, differences between the audited
data and corresponding amounts in its own records,
including the aforementioned differences.
b. take appropriate actions to pay or collect differences in
amounts owed to or due from the colleges. Resolved
c. document the actions taken.
Resolved
Information System Security and Control
7. We recommend that MHEC, in conjunction with their
MDCAPS vendor and DoIT, implement appropriate Status Redacted1
information security safeguards for sensitive PII it maintains.

--- Page 11 ---
Exhibit 3 to May 10, 2023 Letter to Joint Chairmen
OLA’s Assessments Regarding Repeat Findings and Recommendations That
Were Not Resolved
Prior Report Recommendation – Finding 1
We recommend that MHEC
b. ensure that all required requests are sent and follow-up action is taken in a timely
manner (repeat).
Status: Not Resolved
Our review disclosed that MHEC established a monthly quality assurance process to help ensure
that service notifications are generated timely; however, for older service notifications MHEC
was not always sending required requests and taking follow-up action in a timely manner. We
reviewed three recipients from the monthly career based service obligation report as of March
28, 2023 who had a service start date prior to 2022, and all three did not have required requests
sent, and no follow-up action had been taken. For example, we identified one student whose
status was changed to in service in March 2018. Although the student submitted the required
initial service obligation questionnaire in March 2019, MHEC did not send notices to the student
to obtain a current questionnaire as required on an annual basis. After our inquiries in March
2023, the student was placed in repayment pending status.
Although MHEC management did not disagree with the factual accuracy of the results of OLA’s
review, it did disagree with the conclusion of “Not Resolved”. MHEC management advised us
that it was unaware that to fully resolve this finding it was required to review all prior activity
and send all required requests and obtain responses from recipients and employers as applicable.
Finding 3 related to “cybersecurity”, as defined by the State Finance and Procurement
Article, Section 3A-301(b) of the Annotated Code of Maryland, and therefore is subject to
redaction for the publicly available document in accordance with State Government Article
2-1224(i).
Prior Report Recommendation – Finding 3
We recommend that MHEC
a. require independent authorization for the establishment or modification of all user
access accounts, and retain the related authorization forms on file (repeat); and
b. ensure periodic reviews of employee access are comprehensive and performed by an
employee independent of the process of establishing or modifying user accounts
(repeat).
Status: Redacted

--- Page 12 ---
Exhibit 3 to May 10, 2023 Letter to Joint Chairmen
Prior Report Recommendation – Finding 4
We recommend that MHEC
a. establish procedures, including the use of output reports, to allow for an independent
review and approval of critical adjustments to recipient service obligation accounts on
the Service Obligation Loan Repayment module based on supporting documentation
(repeat).
Status: Not Resolved
Although not reflected in MHEC’s November Status Report, we were advised that subsequently,
MHEC established a procedure, using output reports, to review critical adjustments. We did not
perform a detailed review of this report, but we noted that it did not begin until March 2023 and
the reports used only included adjustments made beginning in December 2022. Prior to
December 2022, MHEC relied on a quality assurance review to verify the propriety of
adjustments. Nevertheless, we determined that this review was not sufficiently comprehensive,
since certain types of critical adjustments identified in our preceding audit report were not
subject to review in this process.