Title: Maryland Department of Health - Chronic Care Hospital Centers - Deer's Head and Western Maryland Hospital Centers
Date: 05/10/2023
Type: Fiscal Compliance
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=645baea8a1ce58139065444a
Extracted: 2025-06-19T23:05:25.218060
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Audit Report
Maryland Department of Health
Chronic Care Hospital Centers
Deer’s Head and Western Maryland Hospital Centers
May 2023
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Senator Clarence K. Lam, M.D. (Senate Chair) Delegate Jared Solomon (House Chair)
Senator Joanne C. Benson Delegate Steven J. Arentz
Senator Paul D. Corderman Delegate Nicholas P. Charles II
Senator Katie Fry Hester Delegate Andrea Fletcher Harrison
Senator Shelly L. Hettleman Delegate Steven C. Johnson
Senator Cheryl C. Kagan Delegate Mary A. Lehman
Senator Cory V. McCray Delegate David Moon
Senator Justin D. Ready Delegate Julie Palakovich Carr
Senator Bryan W. Simonaire Delegate Stephanie M. Smith
Senator Craig J. Zucker Delegate M. Courtney Watson
To Obtain Further Information
Office of Legislative Audits
The Warehouse at Camden Yards
351 West Camden Street, Suite 400
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Phone: 410-946-5900
Maryland Relay: 711
TTY: 410-946-5401 ꞏ 301-970-5401
E-mail: OLAWebmaster@ola.state.md.us
Website: www.ola.state.md.us
To Report Fraud
The Office of Legislative Audits operates a Fraud Hotline to report fraud, waste, or abuse involving State
of Maryland government resources. Reports of fraud, waste, or abuse may be communicated anonymously
by a toll-free call to 1-877-FRAUD-11, by mail to the Fraud Hotline, c/o Office of Legislative Audits, or
through the Office’s website.
Nondiscrimination Statement
The Department of Legislative Services does not discriminate on the basis of age, ancestry, color, creed,
marital status, national origin, race, religion, gender, gender identity, sexual orientation, or disability in the
admission or access to its programs, services, or activities. The Department’s Information Officer has been
designated to coordinate compliance with the nondiscrimination requirements contained in Section 35.107
of the United States Department of Justice Regulations. Requests for assistance should be directed to the
Information Officer at 410-946-5400 or 410-970-5400.

--- Page 3 ---
May 10, 2023
Senator Clarence K. Lam, M.D., Senate Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Delegate Jared Solomon, House Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Members of Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Annapolis, Maryland
Ladies and Gentlemen:
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the following units of the
Maryland Department of Health (MDH) – Deer’s Head Hospital Center (DHHC)
for the period beginning June 11, 2018 and ending April 30, 2022 and Western
Maryland Hospital Center (WMHC) for the period beginning January 2, 2019 and
ending April 30, 2022. These units, collectively referred to as the Chronic Care
Hospital Centers (CCHCs), provide chronic care and treatment to patients
requiring a hospital-level rehabilitation program, long-term nursing home care,
and inpatient and outpatient kidney dialysis services.
In our previous audits of the CCHCs, we issued separate audit reports for DHHC
and WMHC. Effective May 31, 2019, the MDH transferred oversight of the
CCHCs from the Public Health Administration budgetary unit to the MDH
Operations Administration budgetary unit. To promote audit efficiency, we have
consolidated our review of the CCHCs into one audit, with our recommendations
for the CCHCs being made to the MDH Healthcare System under the MDH
Operations Administration.
Our audit disclosed that DHHC did not consolidate procurements which resulted
in the failure to maximize its leverage as a high-volume purchaser and the
circumvention of certain control agency approvals. For example, DHHC made
380 individual payments to 2 vendors for the rental of beds with specialized
hospital mattresses, totaling $434,700 (for an average purchase of $1,143). By
keeping individual purchases below $50,000 (its MDH delegated purchase level),
DHHC missed the opportunity to maximize its purchasing power and avoided

--- Page 4 ---
MDH Office of Contract Management and Procurement (OCMP) oversight and
certain approvals, such as the Department of General Services or Board of Public
Works, as necessary.
Additionally, the CCHCs had not established adequate controls over the propriety
of payroll transactions. For example, the CCHCs were unable to provide
documentation that payroll adjustments had been reviewed prior to submission for
Statewide Personnel System processing.
Furthermore, we determined that DHHC did not have adequate procedures in
place to ensure that all kidney dialysis treatments provided were properly billed to
insurers, and did not independently review and approve non-cash credit
adjustments to the related accounts receivable records.
Finally, our audit included a review to determine the status of the two findings
contained in our preceding report of DHHC and the two findings contained in our
preceding audit report of WMHC. We determined that DHHC satisfactorily
addressed one finding and the remaining finding is repeated in this report.
WMHC satisfactorily addressed both of these findings.
MDH Healthcare System’s response to this audit, on behalf of the CCHCs, is
included as an appendix to this report. We reviewed the response to our findings
and related recommendations, and have concluded that the corrective actions
identified are sufficient to address all audit issues.
We wish to acknowledge the cooperation extended to us during the course of this
audit by the CCHCs. We also wish to acknowledge MDH’s and the CCHC’s
willingness to address the audit issues and implement appropriate corrective
actions.
Respectfully submitted,
Gregory A. Hook, CPA
Legislative Auditor
2

--- Page 5 ---
Table of Contents
Background Information 4
Agency Responsibilities 4
Organizational and Audit Approach Changes 5
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Reports 6
Findings and Recommendations 7
Purchases and Disbursements
Finding 1 – Deer’s Head Hospital Center (DHHC) did not consolidate the 7
procurement of certain goods and services to maximize its leverage as
a high-volume purchaser resulting in the circumvention of certain
oversight and did not adequately justify the use of a sole source
procurement.
Payroll
Finding 2 – The Chronic Care Hospital Centers had not established 9
adequate controls to ensure the propriety of payroll transactions,
including adjustments to employee pay and leave balances.
Kidney Dialysis Unit Billing
* Finding 3 – DHHC did not ensure that responsible third-party insurers 10
were billed for all treatments provided to patients, and did not
independently verify the propriety of non-cash credits recorded in the
accounts receivable records, since May 2021.
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology 12
Exhibit 1 – Listing of Most Recent Office of Legislative Audits Fiscal 15
Compliance Audits of Maryland Department of Health Units in
Current Audit Cycle
Agency Response Appendix
* Denotes item repeated in full or part from preceding audit report
3

--- Page 6 ---
Background Information
Agency Responsibilities
The Maryland Department of Health (MDH) operates the Deer’s Head Hospital
Center (DHHC), located in Salisbury, and the Western Maryland Hospital Center
(WMHC), located in Hagerstown. Each Center is deemed a Chronic Care
Hospital Center (CCHC) since it provides chronic care and treatment to patients
requiring a hospital-level rehabilitation program, and longer-term nursing home
care. The DHHC also provides inpatient and outpatient kidney dialysis services.
The CCHCs are accredited by The Joint Commission, which evaluates and
monitors health care organizations nationwide to promote safe, high-quality care,
treatment, and services.
During fiscal year 2022, DHHC had a licensed capacity of 146 inpatients, and an
average daily population of 42 inpatients. DHHC’s dialysis unit also provided
7,449 dialysis treatments to 92 patients. In the same fiscal year, WMHC had a
licensed capacity of 123 inpatients, and an average daily population of 42
inpatients. As shown in Figure 1 on the following page, according to the State’s
records during fiscal year 2022, DHHC and WMHC expenditures totaled
approximately $24.6 million and $24.2 million, respectively.
4

--- Page 7 ---
Figure 1
DHHC and WMHC Positions, Expenditures, and Funding Sources
DHHC WMHC
Full Time Equivalent Positions as of June 30, 2022
Positions Percent Positions Percent
Filled 177 86.3% 173 82.8%
Frozen1 1 0.5% 1 0.5%
Vacant 27 13.2% 35 16.7%
Total 205 209
Fiscal Year 2022 Expenditures
Expenditures Percent Expenditures Percent
Salaries, Wages and
$18,222,628 74.0% $18,889,566 78.2%
Fringe Benefits
Technical and Special
1,405,471 5.7% 763,591 3.1%
Fees
Operating Expenses 4,995,814 20.3% 4,507,331 18.7%
Total $24,623,913 $24,160,488
Fiscal Year 2022 Funding Sources
Funding Percent Funding Percent
General Fund $22,278,531 90.5% $21,906,409 90.7%
Special Fund 1,941,243 7.9% 214,044 0.9%
Federal Fund 404,139 1.6% 312,331 1.3%
Reimbursable Fund 0 0.0% 1,727,704 7.1%
Total $24,623,913 $24,160,488
Source: State financial and personnel records
Organizational and Audit Approach Changes
Effective May 31, 2019, MDH transferred oversight of the CCHCs from the
Public Health Services budgetary unit to the MDH Operations Administration
1 Prior to December 1, 2021, a hiring freeze resulted in certain positions being frozen. Frozen
positions were unauthorized to be filled according to budgetary instructions from the Department
of Budget and Management. Any position that is currently marked as frozen has not been filled
since the freeze was lifted; however, these positions now are available to be filled.
5

--- Page 8 ---
budgetary unit. In our previous audits of the CCHCs, we issued separate audit
reports for DHHC and WMHC. In response to MDH’s change in oversight and to
promote audit efficiency, we have consolidated our review of the CCHCs into one
audit. Consequently, our audit report recommendations for the CCHCs will be
made to the MDH Healthcare System under the MDH Operations Administration.
A listing of the most recent Office of Legislative Audits’ fiscal compliance audits
of MDH units performed during the current audit cycle can be found in Exhibit 1
of this report.
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Reports
Our audit included a review to determine the status of the two findings contained
in the DHHC audit report, dated March 14, 2019, and the two findings in the
WMHC audit report dated June 20, 2019. As disclosed in Figure 2, we
determined that the CCHCs collectively satisfactorily addressed three of these
findings. The remaining finding related to DHHC is repeated in this report.
Figure 2
Status of Preceding Findings
Preceding Implementation
Finding Description
Finding Status
DHHC
DHHC allowed a contract with a medical supply vendor to
expire prior to initiating a new competitive contract
Finding 1 procurement to replace it. For 11 months, DHHC continued to Not Repeated
purchase supplies from the vendor at significantly higher prices
than provided for in both the expired and subsequent contracts.
DHHC did not ensure that responsible third-party insurers were
billed for all treatments provided to dialysis patients, and did
Repeated
Finding 2 not independently verify the propriety of non-cash credits
(Current Finding 3)
recorded in the Kidney Dialysis Unit’s accounts receivable
records.
WMHC
WMHC did not procure fresh produce and certain medical and
Finding 1 dietary supplies in accordance with State procurement Not Repeated
regulations and Maryland Department of Health policies.
Supervisory reviews of corporate purchasing card activity did
not always ensure that the billed services were received, and
Finding 2 Not Repeated
did not make use of available Level-3 data to help ensure the
propriety of the purchases, as required.
6

--- Page 9 ---
Findings and Recommendations
Purchases and Disbursements
Background
Deer’s Head Hospital Center (DHHC), referred to as a Chronic Care Hospital
Center (CCHC), is responsible for procuring its own goods and services. Any
goods or services in excess of its delegated authority of $50,000, must be
procured by the Maryland Department of Health (MDH) Office of Contract
Management and Procurement (OCMP). DHHC procured goods and services
totaling $6.4 million in fiscal year 2022.
Finding 1
DHHC did not consolidate the procurement of certain goods and services to
maximize its leverage as a high-volume purchaser resulting in the
circumvention of certain oversight and did not adequately justify the use of a
sole source procurement.
Analysis
DHHC did not consolidate the procurement of certain goods and services to
maximize its leverage as a high-volume purchaser. Since these procurements
individually were within its delegated spending authority, DHHC was able to
circumvent certain State procurement regulations intended to enhance controls,
oversight, and transparency. In addition, DHHC did not adequately justify the use
of a sole source procurement.
Our review of purchasing and payment activity for several vendors disclosed that
DHHC had a pattern of not consolidating its own procurements, but rather
splitting purchases into multiple purchase orders, direct payments not associated
with purchase orders, or corporate purchasing card (CPC) payments (see Figure 3
on the following page). Specifically, throughout our audit period, DHHC issued
108 purchase orders valued at approximately $1 million, made direct payments
unrelated to purchase orders valued at $122,000, and payments with CPCs valued
at $618,500. The total payments to four vendors, including those paid through
purchase orders, direct payments unrelated to purchase orders, and with CPC,
totaled $1.1 million. Generally, each of these purchase orders and payments were
in amounts below its delegated purchase limit of $50,000.
7

--- Page 10 ---
Figure 3
DHHC Vendor Purchasing Activity
June 11, 2018 through April 30, 2022
Purchase Orders
Type of Direct CPC Total
Vendor Purchase Number Total Value PO Payments Payments Payments Payments
1 Beds 65 $652,700 $183,400 $50,300 $900 $234,600
2 Beds 43 346,000 129,300 71,700 0 $201,000
3 Food 0 0 0 0 316,000 $316,000
4 Food 0 0 0 0 301,600 $301,600
Total 108 $998,700 $312,700 $122,000 $618,500 $1,053,200
Source: State Financial Records
For example, for the rentals of beds with specialized hospital mattresses, DHHC
issued 108 purchase orders valued at approximately $998,700 to 2 vendors via the
sole source procurement method, and made 380 related purchase order and direct
payments totaling $434,700 and a $900 CPC payment. By keeping individual
purchases low (generally under $50,000), DHHC avoided the direct involvement
of MDH’s OCMP in the procurement. Further, depending upon the value of
procurements, DHHC procurements might also be subject to further approvals
from the Department of General Services – Office of State Procurement (DGS –
OSP), or Board of Public Works (BPW).
Additionally, the use of the sole source method to obtain these beds was
questionable. In this regard, while the sole source justifications stated that the
respective vendor was the only manufacturer and distributor of this type of bed,
our cursory internet search identified numerous other vendors that rented or sold
similar beds.
State procurement regulations (SPR) prohibit procurements from being artificially
divided to circumvent procurement requirements and that sole source
procurements should only be used when goods or services are available from only
a single vendor. The MDH Procurement Policy requires procurements exceeding
$50,000 to be submitted to OCMP for procurement, or to obtain a delegation
approval. Finally, regardless of DHHC or OCMP procurement processing, SPR
further provide that contracts for goods or services of $50,000 or more require
DGS approval and BPW approval for either sole sourced contracts valued at
$100,000 or greater or generally for contracts valued at $200,000 or greater.
8

--- Page 11 ---
Recommendation 1
We recommend that the MDH Healthcare System, in conjunction with
DHHC,
a. consolidate procurements to maximize State purchasing power and
obtain appropriate approvals as required by MDH Policy and SPR; and
b. ensure that the sole source procurement method is used only when a
single vendor can meet the requirements, and adequately document this
justification.
Payroll
Finding 2
The CCHCs had not established adequate controls to ensure the propriety of
payroll transactions, including adjustments to employee pay and leave
balances.
Analysis
The CCHCs had not established adequate controls over the processing of payroll
transactions on the Statewide Personnel System (SPS). During the CCHCs’
respective audit periods, they collectively processed 702 payroll adjustments
(such as retroactive payroll payments) that changed employee pay by a total of
approximately $97,800 (increase of $92,200 and decrease of $5,600). During this
period, the CCHCs also processed 1,218 leave adjustments (such as leave bank
enrollments) that changed employee leave balances by 37,681 hours (increase of
17,590 hours and decrease of 20,091 hours).
The CCHCs did not have a procedure to review certain payroll adjustments prior
to or following submission to the MDH Office of Human Resources (OHR) for
processing in SPS. In addition, the CCHCs did not have a procedure to verify the
propriety, prior to or after submission, of leave balance adjustments either made
by CCHC employees directly in SPS or made on the CCHCs’ behalf by OHR. As
a result, there is no assurance that payroll and leave adjustments recorded in SPS
were authorized adjustments.
Our test of 20 leave and payroll adjustments processed by the CCHCs disclosed
that none had a documented independent supervisory review. In addition, our
review determined that 2 leave adjustments at DHHC were improper.
Specifically, 2 employees received 522 hours of leave time for which they were
not eligible due to a DHHC human resources employee error. Furthermore, 4
payroll adjustments (2 at DHHC and 2 at WMHC) totaling $8,808 did not have
required supporting documentation to enable us to make a determination of the
9

--- Page 12 ---
propriety of the transactions. The CCHCs started seeking reimbursement and
making corrective entries for the aforementioned 2 leave adjustments once we
brought them to their attention. No further action was taken by the CCHCs on the
aforementioned 4 payroll adjustments.
Prudent business practices dictate that a documented, independent review of
payroll and leave adjustments should be made for validity, completeness,
authorization, accuracy, and proper classification.
Recommendation 2
We recommend that the MDH Healthcare System
a. establish procedures and controls to review payroll and leave balance
adjustments;
b. ensure that independent supervisory personnel review and approve
payroll transactions (including supporting documentation), and that this
approval be documented and all supporting documentation for
adjustment is retained; and
c. independently verify SPS output reports of payroll and leave balance
adjustments to ensure only authorized adjustments had been processed
and investigate the propriety of discrepancies.
Kidney Dialysis Unit Billing
Finding 3
DHHC did not ensure that responsible third-party insurers were billed for
all treatments provided to patients, and did not independently verify the
propriety of non-cash credits recorded in the accounts receivable records,
since May 2021.
Analysis
DHHC did not establish sufficient controls to ensure that all billable kidney
dialysis treatments were billed to responsible third parties and that the propriety of
non-cash credits adjustments to related accounts receivable records were
independently verified. If responsible third party insurers are not billed, then,
ultimately, the State will assume the cost of treatment.
 Adequate controls were not maintained to ensure that insurers were billed for
all treatments provided. Nurses recorded the treatments provided to patients
in an automated system, and this treatment information was transferred
electronically to a DHHC billing system at the end of each month. As part of
10

--- Page 13 ---
the billing process, and based on patient records, three employees manually
select the treatments to be included on an invoice sent to each insurer.
Our August 2022 review disclosed that since May 2021 there were no reviews
of the invoices to ensure that all treatments received by patients with
insurance were included. During fiscal year 2022, there were 6,691
treatments provided with billings totaling $3.5 million. Our test of five
billings during the period from July 2020 to April 2022 disclosed that all
treatments provided appeared to have been properly billed.
A similar condition was commented upon in our preceding audit report.
MDH’s response, on behalf of DHHC, noted that an independent review
process started in January 2019. However, as noted above, independent
reviews had not been performed since May 2021.
 Non-cash credits recorded in the accounts receivable records by the
aforementioned DHHC employees were not subject to independent
supervisory review and approval. A similar condition was noted in our
preceding audit report. In response to that report, DHHC established a
procedure in which a supervisor would perform an audit of non-cash credit
adjustments made to the DHHC’s billing system; however, this review has not
been completed since May 2021. Further, the supervisor who performed the
past audit was not independent as this individual also had the capability to
record the adjustments in the system.
According to agency records, during fiscal year 2022, non-cash adjustments
totaled approximately $5.7 million, the majority of which related to
differences between actual charges and amounts allowed by insurance
providers. The Comptroller of Maryland’s Accounting Procedures Manual
requires a supervisory review and approval of non-cash adjustments to
accounts receivable records.
Recommendation 3
We recommend that the MDH Healthcare System
a. establish an independent review process to ensure treatments are
properly billed to third party insurers by DHHC, at least on a test basis
(repeat); and
b. ensure that non-cash credits to the accounts receivable records are
subject to a documented independent supervisory review by DHHC
(repeat).
11

--- Page 14 ---
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the following units of the
Department of Health (MDH): the Deer’s Head Hospital Center (DHHC) for the
period beginning June 11, 2018 and ending April 30, 2022 and the Western
Maryland Hospital Center (WMHC) for the period beginning January 2, 2019 and
ending April 30, 2022. These units are collectively referred to as the Chronic
Care Hospital Centers (CCHCs).
The audit was conducted in accordance with generally accepted government
auditing standards. Those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to
obtain sufficient, appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our
findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives. We believe that the
evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions
based on our audit objectives.
As prescribed by the State Government Article, Section 2-1221 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, the objectives of this audit were to examine the CCHCs
financial transactions, records, and internal control, and to evaluate its compliance
with applicable State laws, rules, and regulations.
In planning and conducting our audit, we focused on the major financial-related
areas of operations based on assessments of significance and risk. The areas
addressed by the audit included certain procurements and disbursements for
operating expenditures, corporate purchasing cards, accounts receivable, and
certain payroll activities. We also determined the status of the findings included
in our preceding audit reports of DHHC and WMHC.
Our audit did not include certain support services provided to the CCHCs by
MDH – Office of the Secretary. These support services (such as certain other
payroll and procurement activities, maintenance of accounting records, and
related fiscal functions) are included within the scope of our audit of MDH -
Office of the Secretary and Other Units.
Our assessment of internal controls was based on agency procedures and controls
in place at the time of our fieldwork. Our tests of transactions and other auditing
procedures were generally focused on the transactions occurring during our audit
period, as detailed above for the various units audited, but may include
transactions before or after this period as we considered necessary to achieve our
audit objectives.
12

--- Page 15 ---
To accomplish our audit objectives, our audit procedures included inquiries of
appropriate personnel, inspections of documents and records, tests of transactions,
and to the extent practicable, observations of operations at the CCHCs.
Generally, transactions were selected for testing based on auditor judgment,
which primarily considers risk, the timing or dollar amount of the transaction, or
the significance of the transaction to the area of operation reviewed. As a matter
of course, we do not normally use sampling in our tests, so unless otherwise
specifically indicated, neither statistical nor non-statistical audit sampling was
used to select the transactions tested. Therefore, unless sampling is specifically
indicated in a finding, the results from any tests conducted or disclosed by us
cannot be used to project those results to the entire population from which the test
items were selected.
We also performed various data extracts of pertinent information from the State’s
Financial Management Information System (such as revenue and expenditure
data) and the State’s Central Payroll Bureau (payroll data), as well as from the
contractor administering the State’s Corporate Purchasing Card Program (credit
card activity). The extracts are performed as part of ongoing internal processes
established by the Office of Legislative Audits and were subject to various tests to
determine data reliability. We determined that the data extracted from these
sources were sufficiently reliable for the purposes the data were used during this
audit. We also extracted data from DHHC’s automated kidney dialysis health
record and billing systems for the purposes of testing the propriety of billings,
cash receipts, accounts receivable, and non-cash credits. We performed various
tests of the relevant data and determined that the data were sufficiently reliable for
the purposes the data were used during the audit. Finally, we performed other
auditing procedures that we considered necessary to achieve our audit objectives.
The reliability of data used in this report for background or informational
purposes was not assessed.
Under MDH Healthcare System, a part of MDH Operations Administration, the
CCHCs’ managements are responsible for establishing and maintaining effective
internal control. Internal control is a process designed to provide reasonable
assurance that objectives pertaining to the reliability of financial records;
effectiveness and efficiency of operations, including safeguarding of assets; and
compliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations are achieved. As
provided in Government Auditing Standards, there are five components of
internal control: control environment, risk assessment, control activities,
information and communication, and monitoring. Each of the five components,
when significant to the audit objectives, and as applicable to the CCHCs, were
considered by us during the course of this audit.
13

--- Page 16 ---
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate.
Our reports are designed to assist the Maryland General Assembly in exercising
its legislative oversight function and to provide constructive recommendations for
improving State operations. As a result, our reports generally do not address
activities we reviewed that are functioning properly.
This report includes findings relating to conditions that we consider to be
significant deficiencies in the design or operation of internal control that could
adversely affect the CCHCs’ ability to maintain reliable financial records, operate
effectively and efficiently, and/or comply with applicable laws, rules, and
regulations. Our report also includes findings regarding significant instances of
noncompliance with applicable laws, rules, or regulations. Other less significant
findings were communicated to the CCHCs that did not warrant inclusion in this
report.
The response from MDH Healthcare System, on behalf of the CCHCs, to our
findings and recommendations is included as an appendix to this report. As
prescribed in the State Government Article, Section 2-1224 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, we will advise MDH regarding the results of our review of its
response.
14

--- Page 17 ---
Exhibit 1
Listing of Most Recent Office of Legislative Audits (OLA) Fiscal
Compliance Audits of Maryland Department of Health (MDH)
Units in Current Audit Cycle
As of February 2023 (Page 1 of 2)
Name of Audit Areas Covered Report Date
Developmental Disabilities
1 Developmental Disabilities Administration 10/26/22
Administration
Behavioral Health Administration
 Behavioral Health Administration
and Medical Care Programs
 Medical Care Programs Administration
2 Administration - Administrative 10/25/22
Administrative Service Organization for
Service Organization for Behavioral
Behavioral Health Services
Health Services
 Holly Center
Intellectual Disabilities Residential  Potomac Center
3 10/24/22
Centers  Secure Evaluation and Therapeutic Treatment
Program
 John L. Gildner Regional Institute for Children
Regional Institutes for Children and and Adolescents
4 07/13/22
Adolescents  Regional Institute for Children and Adolescents –
Baltimore
Office of the Chief Medical
5 Office of the Chief Medical Examiner 05/12/22
Examiner
 Prevention and Health Promotion Administration
Prevention and Health Promotion
 Office of Population Health Improvement
Administration - Office of
 Office of Preparedness and Response
Population Health Improvement -
6  Office of Provider Engagement and Regulation – 02/23/21
Office of Preparedness and Response
Office of Controlled Substances Administration
- Office of Provider Engagement and
 Office of Provider Engagement and Regulation –
Regulation
Prescription Drug Monitoring Program
 22 Health Professional Boards and Commissions
7 Regulatory Services 01/19/21
 Office of Health Care Quality
8 Vital Statistics Administration Vital Statistics Administration 11/10/20
Pharmacy Services for
 Medicaid Managed Care Program
 Maryland Medicaid Pharmacy Program
9 Pharmacy Services  Kidney Disease Program 08/31/20
 Maryland AIDS Drug Assistance Program
 Breast and Cervical Cancer Diagnosis and
Treatment Program
15

--- Page 18 ---
Exhibit 1
Listing of Most Recent OLA Fiscal Compliance Audits
of MDH Units in Current Audit Cycle
As of February 2023 (Page 2 of 2)
Name of Report Areas Covered Report Date
 Office of the Secretary
 Deputy Secretary and Executive Director for
Behavioral Health
Office of the Secretary and Other  Deputy Secretary for Developmental Disabilities
10 07/14/20
Units  Deputy Secretary for Public Health
 Deputy Secretary for Health Care Financing and
Chief Operating Officer
 Deputy Secretary for Operations
12 Spring Grove Hospital Center Spring Grove Hospital Center 04/22/20
Medical Care Programs Managed Care Program, known as HealthChoice
13 Administration - Managed Care including oversight of the nine private Managed 04/22/20
Program Care Organizations
14 Laboratories Administration Laboratories Administration 04/10/20
15 Clifton T. Perkins Hospital Center Clifton T. Perkins Hospital Center 03/17/20
Medical Care Programs
16 Medical Care Programs Administration 11/07/19
Administration
 Maryland Health Care Commission
 Health Services Cost Review Commission
17 Health Regulatory Commissions 04/05/19
 Maryland Community Health Resources
Commission
18 Thomas B. Finan Hospital Center Thomas B. Finan Hospital Center 3/26/19
19 Springfield Hospital Center Springfield Hospital Center 12/06/18
20 Eastern Shore Hospital Center Eastern Shore Hospital Center 11/19/18
16

--- Page 19 ---
APPENDIX
May 8, 2023
Mr. Gregory A. Hook, CPA
Legislative Auditor
The Warehouse at Camden Yards
351 West Camden Street, Suite 400
Baltimore, MD 21201
Dear Mr. Hook:
Enclosed is the draft audit report on the Maryland Department of Health – Deer’s Head
Hospital Center for the period beginning June 11, 2018 and ending April 30, 2022 and Western
Maryland Hospital Center for the period beginning January 2, 2019 and ending April 30, 2022.
If you have any questions, please contact Frederick D. Doggett at 410-767-0885 or email at
frederick.doggett@maryland.gov.
Sincerely,
Laura Herrera Scott, Secretary
Maryland Department of Health
Enclosure
cc: Erin K. McMullen, Chief of Staff, MDH
Marie Grant, Assistant Secretary for Health Policy, MDH
Frederick D. Doggett, Director, Internal Controls, Audit Compliance & Information
Security
Deneen Toney, Deputy Director, Audit & Compliance, MDH
Mary Beth Waide, R.N., J.D., Executive Director, Deer’s Head Hospital Center

--- Page 20 ---
Holly C. Young, O.T.D., Acting Executive Officer, Western Maryland Hospital Center,
MDH
Bryan I. Mroz, Deputy Secretary of Operations, MDH
Jordan Fisher, Chief of Staff, Operations, MDH
Ken Waller, Chief Financial Officer, Deer’s Head Hospital Center, MDH
Kelly L. Edmonds, Chief, Financial Services Team, Western Maryland Hospital Center,
MDH
Annie Ollie, Acting Director, Maryland Healthcare System, MDH
2

--- Page 21 ---
Maryland Department of Health
Chronic Care Hospital Centers
Deer’s Head and Western Maryland Hospital Centers
Agency Response Form
Purchases and Disbursements
Finding 1
DHHC did not consolidate the procurement of certain goods and services to maximize its
leverage as a high-volume purchaser resulting in the circumvention of certain oversight
and did not adequately justify the use of a sole source procurement.
We recommend that the MDH Healthcare System, in conjunction with DHHC,
a. consolidate procurements to maximize State purchasing power and obtain appropriate
approvals as required by MDH Policy and SPR; and
b. ensure that the sole source procurement method is used only when a single vendor can
meet the requirements, and adequately document this justification.
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide The MDH Healthcare System, which was established on July 1, 2021
additional comments as comprises the eleven operating MDH healthcare facilities, including the
deemed necessary. five adult psychiatric hospitals, the two facilities for individuals with
intellectual disabilities, the two Regional Institutes for Children and
Adolescents, and the two chronic care hospitals, which are the subject
of this audit report.
The CCHC’s were brought under the MDH Healthcare System and
MDH Operations Administration after the reporting period for this audit.
The MDH Healthcare System was established to create opportunities for
both standardization of policies and procedures and sharing of resources
where appropriate and beneficial to optimize patient care and fiscal
responsibility.
Additionally, the Maryland Department of Health reorganized the
Department’s procurement unit into the Office of Contract Management
& Procurement (OCMP) in early 2021. OCMP’s mission is to implement
lifecycle contract management and procurement initiatives into all
aspects of MDH operations, including for the MDH Healthcare System.
Further in November 2022, all MDH procurement officers were
centralized into OCMP, including all MDH Healthcare System
procurement officers.
Page 1 of 6

--- Page 22 ---
Maryland Department of Health
Chronic Care Hospital Centers
Deer’s Head and Western Maryland Hospital Centers
Agency Response Form
Recommendation 1a Agree Estimated Completion Date: 12/31/2022
Please provide details of The MDH Healthcare System will explore opportunities to consolidate
corrective action or contracts where appropriate. Through the procurement centralization,
explain disagreement. this will be accomplished through OCMP with support from the MDH
Healthcare System.
With the recent hiring of a new MDH Healthcare System Chief Financial
Officer, the MDH Healthcare System in coordination with the MDH
Office of Contract Management and Procurement (OCMP) will continue
to focus on consolidating system-wide procurements for similar goods
and services. These activities are ongoing but have begun within the
MDH Healthcare System for new procurements.
Recommendation 1b Agree Estimated Completion Date: 12/31/2022
Please provide details of Through the procurement officer centralization, OCMP will have
corrective action or oversight over all sole source procurements and will ensure the
explain disagreement. appropriate documentation is maintained. Sole Source Procurements
require the completion of the Sole Source Procurement Officer's
Determination. This document requires approval of the sole source by
the director of the requesting unit, the MDH Director of OCMP, and the
Secretary of MDH or his/her designee.
The MDH Healthcare System will coordinate with OCMP to ensure that
the sole source procurement methodology will only be utilized when a
single vendor can provide these services and will ensure that adequate
documentation of the sole source is maintained in the procurement file.
Page 2 of 6

--- Page 23 ---
Maryland Department of Health
Chronic Care Hospital Centers
Deer’s Head and Western Maryland Hospital Centers
Agency Response Form
Payroll
Finding 2
The CCHCs had not established adequate controls to ensure the propriety of payroll
transactions, including adjustments to employee pay and leave balances.
We recommend that the MDH Healthcare System
a. establish procedures and controls to review payroll and leave balance adjustments;
b. ensure that independent supervisory personnel review and approve payroll transactions
(including supporting documentation), and that this approval be documented and all
supporting documentation for adjustment is retained; and
c. independently verify SPS output reports of payroll and leave balance adjustments to
ensure only authorized adjustments had been processed and investigate the propriety of
discrepancies.
Agency Response
Analysis Factually Accurate
Please provide
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 2a Agree Estimated Completion Date: 5/31/2023
Please provide details of
corrective action or Deer’s Head Hospital Center
explain disagreement.
Deer’s Head Hospital Center (DHHC) concurs with the
recommendation.
DHHC will develop procedures and controls to ensure the
appropriateness of payroll and leave adjustments. Adjustments will be
documented and reviewed by supervisory personnel, and an independent
review from the Human Resources Director and the Chief Financial
Officer (or their designee) will be performed and the approval will be
documented prior to submission to the MDH Office of Human
Resources for processing.
Western Maryland Hospital Center
Page 3 of 6

--- Page 24 ---
Maryland Department of Health
Chronic Care Hospital Centers
Deer’s Head and Western Maryland Hospital Centers
Agency Response Form
Western Maryland Hospital Center (WMHC) concurs with the
recommendation.
WMHC will establish a written procedure for verifying the
appropriateness of payroll and leave balance adjustments.
Recommendation 2b Agree Estimated Completion Date: 2/28/2023
Please provide details of
corrective action or Deer’s Head Hospital Center
explain disagreement.
Deer’s Head Hospital Center (DHHC) concurs with the
recommendation.
Adjustments are documented and reviewed by supervisory personnel,
and an independent review from the Human Resources Director and the
Chief Financial Officer (or their designee) is performed and the approval
will be documented and retained prior to submission to the MDH Office
of Human Resources (MDH OHR) for processing.
Western Maryland Hospital Center
Western Maryland Hospital Center (WMHC) concurs with the
recommendation.
WMHC reviews current operating procedures regarding payroll and
leave balances with MDH Office of Human Resources (OHR) and has
established a written, documented procedure of ensuring payroll and
leave adjustments are reviewed, retained and approved by independent
supervisory personnel before adjustments are submitted to MDH OHR.
Recommendation 2c Agree Estimated Completion Date: 2/28/2023
Please provide details of
corrective action or Deer’s Head Hospital Center
explain disagreement.
The Deer’s Head Hospital Center (DHHC) concurs with the
recommendation.
The DHHC Chief Financial Officer or designee is responsible for
independently reviewing and verifying the appropriateness of payroll
adjustments against SPS output reports to ensure only authorized
adjustments are processed.
Page 4 of 6

--- Page 25 ---
Maryland Department of Health
Chronic Care Hospital Centers
Deer’s Head and Western Maryland Hospital Centers
Agency Response Form
The DHHC Human Resources Director or designee has developed
procedures and is responsible for reviewing and independently verifying
the appropriateness of leave balance adjustments against SPS output
reports to ensure only authorized adjustments are processed.
Western Maryland Hospital Center
Western Maryland Hospital Center (WMHC) concurs with the
recommendation.
WMHC has established a written procedure for verifying SPS output
reports for payroll and leave balance adjustments against approved
payroll and leave balance adjustments to ensure only authorized
adjustments have been processed.
Kidney Dialysis Unit Billing
Finding 3
DHHC did not ensure that responsible third-party insurers were billed for all treatments
provided to patients, and did not independently verify the propriety of non-cash credits
recorded in the accounts receivable records, since May 2021.
We recommend that the MDH Healthcare System
a. establish an independent review process to ensure treatments are properly billed to
third party insurers by DHHC, at least on a test basis (repeat); and
b. ensure that non-cash credits to the accounts receivable records are subject to a
documented independent supervisory review by DHHC (repeat).
Agency Response
Analysis Factually Accurate
Please provide
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 3a Agree Estimated Completion Date: 6/30/2022
Page 5 of 6

--- Page 26 ---
Maryland Department of Health
Chronic Care Hospital Centers
Deer’s Head and Western Maryland Hospital Centers
Agency Response Form
Please provide details of
corrective action or DHHC restarted the hard close review process in June of 2022 upon
explain disagreement. receipt of payment related to billing issues impacting claims from May
of 2021 through May of 2022, with no exceptions noted. DHHC is
ensuring treatments are properly billed to third party insurers (where
applicable), and documented on a test basis, through the hard close
process.
In the event insurance billing issues arise that could jeopardize the
collection of insurance funds used to supplant state General Funds, as
occurred in May of 2021, DHHC will perform an interim independent
review of treatment totals, with a final documented independent review
through the hard close process upon resolution.
Recommendation 3b Agree Estimated Completion Date: 6/30/2022
Please provide details of
corrective action or DHHC ensures that all non-cash credits to accounts receivable are
explain disagreement. subject to an independent supervisory review and documented on a
monthly basis through the hard close process.
In the event the hard close process is paused due to insurance billing
issues, DHHC will continue to perform an interim independent review of
non-cash credits to the accounts receivable records monthly, with a final
documented independent review performed through the hard close
process once resumed.
Page 6 of 6

--- Page 27 ---
A T
UDIT EAM
Catherine M. Clarke, CPA, CIA, CFE
Audit Manager
Walter L. Horan, IV
Senior Auditor
Dorian A. Fournier
Staff Auditor