Title: Department of Budget and Management - Office of the Secretary and Other Units
Date: 05/24/2023
Type: Fiscal Compliance
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=646fd029a1ce580a18daf743
Extracted: 2025-06-19T23:05:53.268863
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Audit Report
Department of Budget and Management
Office of the Secretary and Other Units
May 2023
Public Notice
In compliance with the requirements of the State Government Article Section
2-1224(i), of the Annotated Code of Maryland, the Office of Legislative
Audits has redacted cybersecurity findings and related auditee responses
from this public report.
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Senator Clarence K. Lam, M.D. (Senate Chair) Delegate Jared Solomon (House Chair)
Senator Joanne C. Benson Delegate Steven J. Arentz
Senator Paul D. Corderman Delegate Nicholas P. Charles II
Senator Katie Fry Hester Delegate Andrea Fletcher Harrison
Senator Shelly L. Hettleman Delegate Steven C. Johnson
Senator Cheryl C. Kagan Delegate Mary A. Lehman
Senator Cory V. McCray Delegate David Moon
Senator Justin D. Ready Delegate Julie Palakovich Carr
Senator Bryan W. Simonaire Delegate Stephanie M. Smith
Senator Craig J. Zucker Delegate M. Courtney Watson
To Obtain Further Information
Office of Legislative Audits
The Warehouse at Camden Yards
351 West Camden Street, Suite 400
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Phone: 410-946-5900
Maryland Relay: 711
TTY: 410-946-5401 · 301-970-5401
E-mail: OLAWebmaster@ola.state.md.us
Website: www.ola.state.md.us
To Report Fraud
The Office of Legislative Audits operates a Fraud Hotline to report fraud, waste, or abuse involving State
of Maryland government resources. Reports of fraud, waste, or abuse may be communicated anonymously
by a toll-free call to 1-877-FRAUD-11, by mail to the Fraud Hotline, c/o Office of Legislative Audits, or
through the Office’s website.
Nondiscrimination Statement
The Department of Legislative Services does not discriminate on the basis of age, ancestry, color, creed,
marital status, national origin, race, religion, gender, gender identity, sexual orientation, or disability in the
admission or access to its programs, services, or activities. The Department’s Information Officer has been
designated to coordinate compliance with the nondiscrimination requirements contained in Section 35.107
of the United States Department of Justice Regulations. Requests for assistance should be directed to the
Information Officer at 410-946-5400 or 410-970-5400.

--- Page 3 ---
May 24, 2023
Senator Clarence K. Lam, M.D., Senate Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Delegate Jared Solomon, House Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Members of Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Annapolis, Maryland
Ladies and Gentlemen:
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the Department of Budget and
Management’s (DBM) Office of the Secretary, which includes the Central
Collection Unit (CCU), and certain other units of DBM for the period beginning
October 20, 2017 and ending January 15, 2022. DBM assists the Governor in the
preparation and monitoring of the State’s annual operating and capital budgets.
CCU is responsible for collecting delinquent debts owed to the State, except those
excluded by law (such as taxes and child support) and its collections totaled
$121.8 million during fiscal year 2022.
Our audit disclosed several deficiencies relating to procedures and controls at
CCU. For example, potential wage garnishments were not always pursued as a
means to collect outstanding debts – a condition that we have commented upon
since 1997 – and there was a lack of controls over the abatement of accounts,
which generally results in a cessation of collection efforts. During our audit
period, CCU abated accounts totaling $5.9 million.
Furthermore, CCU did not periodically review existing deviations from State
regulations granted to State agencies regarding the submission of delinquent
accounts to CCU to ensure that the deviations were still warranted. At the time of
our review, there were 127 active deviations held by 32 State agencies dating
back to 1979. Our audit also disclosed that DBM did not verify that electronic
receipts collected by a third-party vendor for CCU, which totaled $54.3 million
during fiscal year 2021, were deposited into the State’s bank account and
accurately recorded in the State’s records.

--- Page 4 ---
In addition, our audit disclosed certain risks in DBM’s information systems.
However, in accordance with the State Government Article, Section 2-1224(i) of
the Annotated Code of Maryland, we have redacted the findings from this audit
report. Specifically, State law requires the Office of Legislative Audits to redact
cybersecurity findings in a manner consistent with auditing best practices before
the report is made available to the public. The term “cybersecurity” is defined in
the State Finance and Procurement Article, Section 3.5-301(b), and using our
professional judgment we have determined that the redacted findings fall under
the referenced definition. The specifics of the cybersecurity findings were
previously communicated to those parties responsible for acting on our
recommendations.
Also, DBM did not verify the propriety of charges from the Department of
Information Technology for technology enterprise services, which totaled $4.1
million during fiscal years 2020 and 2021.
Finally, our audit included a review to determine the status of 13 of the 14
findings contained in our preceding report. For the non-cybersecurity-related
findings we determined that DBM satisfactorily addressed 5 of those 8 findings.
The remaining 3 findings are repeated in this report.
DBM’s response to this audit is included as an appendix to this report. We
reviewed the response to our findings and related recommendations, and have
concluded that the corrective actions identified are sufficient to address all audit
issues. In accordance with our policy, we have edited any vendor names or
products mentioned by DBM in this document.
We wish to acknowledge the cooperation extended to us during the audit by
DBM. We also wish to acknowledge DBM’s willingness to address the audit
issues and implement appropriate corrective actions.
Respectfully submitted,
Gregory A. Hook, CPA
Legislative Auditor
2

--- Page 5 ---
Table of Contents
Background Information 5
Agency Responsibilities 5
Organizational and Operational Change 7
Central Collection Unit Operations 7
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report 8
Findings and Recommendations 11
Central Collection Unit (CCU)
Finding 1 – Redacted cybersecurity-related finding 12
* Finding 2 – CCU did not adequately pursue potential wage garnishments 12
from debtors, and it had not established a formal system for
prioritizing such activity as committed to in its response to this
longstanding issue in our preceding audit report.
* Finding 3 – CCU did not have adequate controls over the abatement of 13
accounts, which totaled approximately $5.9 million during our audit
period.
* Finding 4 – CCU did not adequately monitor long-term deviations from 15
State regulations previously granted to State agencies regarding the
submission of delinquent accounts to CCU.
Finding 5 – The Department of Budget and Management (DBM) did 16
not verify that electronic receipts collected by a third-party vendor for
CCU were deposited into the State’s bank account and accurately
recorded in the State’s accounting records.
Information Systems Security and Control
Finding 6 – Redacted cybersecurity-related finding 17
Finding 7 – Redacted cybersecurity-related finding 17
Finding 8 – Redacted cybersecurity-related finding 17
* Denotes item repeated in full or part from preceding audit report
3

--- Page 6 ---
Disbursements
Finding 9 – DBM did not determine the reasonableness of charges related 17
to technology enterprise services from the Department of Information
Technology, which were valued at $4.1 million.
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology 19
Agency Response Appendix
4

--- Page 7 ---
Background Information
Agency Responsibilities
The Department of Budget and Management (DBM) is primarily responsible for
assisting the Governor in the preparation and monitoring of the State’s annual
operating and capital budgets. This audit includes the Office of the Secretary
(including Executive Direction, the Division of Finance and Administration, and
the Central Collection Unit (CCU)), the Office of Budget Analysis, and the Office
of Capital Budgeting. DBM’s Office of Personnel Services and Benefits, which
directs the State’s personnel policies and administers the health care benefits
programs for State employees and retirees, is audited and reported upon
separately.
As noted in Figure 1 on the following page, the three units covered by this audit
had combined expenditures totaling approximately $31.7 million during fiscal
year 2022, of which 52 percent related to CCU.
5

--- Page 8 ---
Figure 1
DBM - Office of the Secretary and Other Units
Positions, Expenditures, and Funding Sources
Office of the Secretary
Office of Budget Analysis
Executive Direction,
and Office of Capital
Division of Finance and Central Collection Unit
Budgeting
Administration
Full Time Equivalent Positions as of June 30, 2022
Positions Percent Positions Percent Positions Percent
Filled 25 96.2% 105 90.5% 38 95.0%
Frozen1 0 0.0% 6 5.2% 0 0.0%
Vacant 1 3.8% 5 4.3% 2 5.0%
Total 26 116 40
Fiscal Year 2022 Expenditures
Expenditures Percent Expenditures Percent Expenditures Percent
Salaries, Wages, and
$4,101,622 64.7% $9,882,429 60.0% $5,005,106 56.1%
Fringe Benefits
Technical and
219,915 3.5% 575,325 3.5% 18,415 0.2%
Special Fees
Operating Expenses 2,016,758 31.8% 6,025,360 36.5% 3,891,355 43.7%
Total $6,338,295 $16,483,114 $8,914,876
Fiscal Year 2022 Funding Sources
Funding Percent Funding Percent Funding Percent
General Fund $6,109,200 96.4% $ - 0.0% $6,719,683 75.4%
Special Fund - 0.0% 16,483,114 100.0% 544,251 6.1%
Reimbursable Fund 229,095 3.6% - 0.0% 1,650,942 18.5%
Total $6,338,295 $16,483,114 $8,914,876
Source: State financial and personnel records
1 Prior to December 1, 2021, a hiring freeze resulted in certain positions being frozen. Frozen
positions were unauthorized to be filled according to budgetary instructions from the Department
of Budget and Management. Any position that is currently marked as frozen has not been
filled since the freeze was lifted; however, these positions now are available to be filled.
6

--- Page 9 ---
Organizational and Operational Change
Chapter 590, Laws of Maryland 2017 effective on various dates beginning
October 1, 2017 and culminating with the final implementation date of October 1,
2019 required among other changes, the consolidation of most State procurement
activities under the Department of General Services (DGS) authority. Effective
October 1, 2019, the law repealed the authority of DBM over service contract
procurements and motor vehicle leases. The authority over these functions was
placed with the DGS – Office of State Procurement (OSP) and DBM procurement
personnel were transferred to OSP in fiscal year 2020.
Central Collection Unit Operations
CCU’s primary responsibility is to collect delinquent accounts owed to the State,
except those excluded by law (such as taxes and child support). CCU’s
operations include its Baltimore headquarters office, and five satellite offices
established at select Motor Vehicle Administration (MVA) locations to assist
primarily in the collection of uninsured motorist penalty fees assessed by MVA.
Collections on debt, less CCU’s assessed collection fees, are generally paid either
to the State Treasury or to the unit of State government where the debt originated.
State law authorizes CCU to assess and collect for each debt a fee sufficient to
cover all collection and administrative costs, not to exceed 20 percent of the
outstanding principal and interest. CCU’s collection fee is currently established at
17 percent, which is added to the original amount of the debt. Collection fees
received are deposited into the Central Collection Fund, a continuing, non-lapsing
special fund used to pay CCU’s operating expenses. According to State law, any
balance in the Fund at the end of the fiscal year exceeding 15 percent of CCU’s
actual operating expenses for that year is required to be reverted to the State’s
General Fund.
According to State records, during fiscal years 2018 to 2022, CCU reverted
approximately $6.1 million to the State’s General Fund. This amount represents a
decrease of approximately $4.3 million from the amount reverted during fiscal
years 2015 to 2017, and was primarily the result of suspended collection efforts
by CCU between April 3, 2020 and October 9, 2020 because of the COVID 19
pandemic. According to CCU’s records, as of July 1, 2022, the balance in the
Central Collection Fund totaled approximately $85,040.
According to its records, the balance of outstanding debt referred to CCU for
collection efforts was approximately $2.7 billion as of June 30, 2022, as noted in
Figure 2 on the following page.
7

--- Page 10 ---
Figure 2
Outstanding Debts
(As of June 30th)
Fiscal Year Accounts Balance Collections*
2018 8,191,315 $2,634,687,680 $131,225,902
2019 8,370,436 2,531,001,408 134,968,902
2020 10,019,917 2,654,603,517 113,234,730
2021 10,255,975 2,708,195,074 105,374,255
2022 10,585,817 2,651,451,510 121,813,683
*Collections are net of collection fees and account adjustments (such as refunds), and
include amounts collected through the State’s Tax Refund Intercept Program.
Source: CCU records
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report
Our audit included a review to determine the status of 13 of the 14 findings
contained in our preceding audit report dated October 29, 2019.2 As disclosed in
Figure 3 on the following page, for the non-cybersecurity-related findings, we
determined that DBM satisfactorily addressed 5 of those 8 findings. The
remaining 3 findings are repeated in this report.
2 Prior audit report Finding 9, will be subject to follow-up during the next Office of Legislative
Audits audit of the Department of Information Technology.
8

--- Page 11 ---
Figure 3
Status of Preceding Findings
Preceding Implementation
Finding Description
Finding Status
CCU did not perform a periodic review of user access to its debt collection and cash
Finding 1 Status Redacted 3
register systems, and did not adequately restrict access to those systems.
DBM did not ensure that access to personally identifiable information (PII) stored in
its debt collection system, such as names and related social security numbers, was
Finding 2 Status Redacted 3
restricted. We noted that PII for approximately 5.8 million accounts was not
adequately restricted.
Deficiencies in CCU’s debt collection system resulted in the failure to assess
Finding 3 collection fees of at least $17.8 million and the improper rejection of certain valid Not repeated
debts.
Repeated
Finding 4 CCU did not adequately pursue potential wage garnishments from debtors.
(Current Finding 2)
CCU did not have adequate controls over the abatement of accounts, which totaled Repeated
Finding 5
approximately $39.1 million during our audit period. (Current Finding 3)
CCU did not perform a periodic review of existing deviations from State regulations
Repeated
Finding 6 previously granted to State agencies regarding the submission of delinquent
(Current Finding 4)
accounts to CCU.
Certain significant debt amounts were excluded from TRIP because of CCU system
Finding 7 Not repeated
omissions and errors.
CCU collected TRIP revenues totaling $11.6 million for a private entity after the law
Finding 8 Not repeated
authorizing these collections to be handled by CCU was repealed in 2005.
Vendor PII was not adequately restricted in the Financial Management Information
Finding 9 Not pursued 4
System (FMIS) and was visible to 5,204 employees Statewide.
Finding 10 Sensitive PII maintained by CCU was stored without adequate safeguards. Status Redacted 3
DBM did not have a complete information technology disaster recovery plan for
Finding 11 Status Redacted 3
recovering computer operations.
Network security risks existed from information technology contractors having
Finding 12 unnecessary network-level access to the DBM network and the unnecessary Status Redacted 3
assignment of administrative rights on numerous workstations.
3 Specific information on the current status of this cybersecurity-related finding has been redacted
from this publicly available report in accordance with State Government Article, Section 2-
1224(i) of the Annotated Code of Maryland.
4 Our preceding audit report included a finding on FMIS that was also included in our Department
of Information Technology (DoIT) audit report dated May 1, 2020. During our current audit we
did not review the status of this finding, which will be addressed as part of our DoIT audit.
9

--- Page 12 ---
Figure 3
Status of Preceding Findings
Preceding Implementation
Finding Description
Findings Status
DBM did not require State agencies to report interagency agreements with local
Finding 13 Not repeated
community colleges.
DBM lacked documented justification for excluding certain vehicle types from its
annual review of vehicle usage. In addition, DBM’s cost assessments of the need for
Finding 14 Not repeated
an agency to retain vehicles when they were not driven the minimum annual miles
without adequate justification were not properly calculated.
10

--- Page 13 ---
Findings and Recommendations
Central Collection Unit
Background
The Department of Budget and Management’s (DBM) – Central Collection Unit
(CCU) uses a variety of methods and resources to facilitate the collection of
delinquent accounts, including automated and manual processes, as well as the
use of a private collection agency. Automated collection efforts include the use of
the State’s Tax Refund Intercept Program (TRIP), which captures debtor State tax
refunds, and other automated intercept programs. CCU agents will pursue
voluntary payments (such as payment plan agreements) via phone and written
correspondence and will also forward selected accounts to the CCU Legal
Measures Unit for proactive non-voluntary collection actions, such as wage
garnishments and property liens. CCU processes debtor payments received via
the internet, mail, or in person as a walk-in, or from the referring agency where
the debt originated.
Figure 4 below depicts the details of fiscal year 2022 collections totaling
approximately $121.8 million, by collection method, according to CCU records.
Figure 4
CCU Fiscal Year 2022 Debt Collections by Source
Automated -
TRIP
45%
Automated
(Other) *
9%
Manual -
Manual CCU
Referring
42% Private Collection Agency
Agency 3%
1%
*Automated (Other) includes State Payroll and Vendor Payment Intercepts, Lottery and Casino Winnings
Intercepts, and Federal Tax Refund Intercepts.
Source: CCU records
11

--- Page 14 ---
We determined that Finding 1 related to “cybersecurity”, as defined by the State
Finance and Procurement Article, Section 3.5-301(b) of the Annotated Code of
Maryland, and therefore is subject to redaction from the publicly available audit
report in accordance with the State Government Article 2-1224(i). Consequently,
the specifics of the following finding, including the analysis, related
recommendation(s), along with DBM’s responses, have been redacted from this
report copy.
Finding 1
Redacted cybersecurity-related finding.
Finding 2
CCU did not adequately pursue potential wage garnishments from debtors,
and it had not established a formal system for prioritizing such activity as
committed to in its response to this longstanding issue in our preceding audit
report.
Analysis
CCU did not always pursue wage garnishments from debtors when viable wages
were identified through quarterly computer matches of its accounts with State
wage data from the Maryland Department of Labor (MDL). CCU’s debt
collection policies provide that CCU will generally consider pursuing wage
garnishments on accounts with debts greater than $750, and for which wages of at
least $3,500 per quarter are currently available to attach (garnish).
CCU’s quarterly wage match queries for the second quarter of calendar year 2021
identified approximately 61,200 debtor accounts (each greater than $750 and
quarterly wages greater than $3,500) with balances totaling $343.2 million and
MDL-reported quarterly wages earned of $711.6 million, which could have been
subject to garnishment based on CCU policies. In May 2022, we judgmentally
selected (based on materiality) and reviewed the CCU accounts for 15 debtors
appearing on this match, with debtor balances as of October 2021 totaling
approximately $12 million and quarterly wages of $220,000. Our review
disclosed that 11 debtors had not made a payment for periods ranging from 25 to
272 months.5
In addition, we noted a general lack of adequate subsequent collection activity
after the wage match in question, as CCU’s Legal Measures Unit had established
5 CCU may have recovered certain amounts from these debtors using involuntary methods, such as
a tax refund intercept.
12

--- Page 15 ---
a wage garnishment for only 2 of these 15 debtors. For the remaining 13 debtors
we found:
• Eleven debtors with quarterly wages totaling approximately $170,000, had
not made any debt payments. Of the 11, 8 had not been referred to the
Legal Measures Unit to initiate wage garnishments and there was not
documentation as to why these debtors were not referred. The remaining
3 debtors were referred, but wage garnishments had not been established
nor were the reason(s) for not taking such action documented.
• One debtor did not have sufficient current wages to pursue wage
garnishment.
• One debtor had a lien placed on their property but no wage garnishment
was initiated.
Similar conditions regarding wage garnishments were noted in our eight prior
audit reports dating back to 1997. In response to our preceding report, CCU
agreed with our recommendations to pursue wage garnishment when practicable,
but advised that executing a wage garnishment is an expensive and lengthy
process. CCU further advised us that it used its limited resources to pursue debts
that are likely to produce the best recoveries; however, its policies did not address
prioritizing accounts for potential wage garnishments once viable accounts are
identified. CCU further advised that it planned to establish guidance on
prioritizing accounts for potential wage garnishments within CCU’s debit
collection policies; however, as of June 2022 no such policy had been established.
Recommendation 2
We recommend that DBM
a. take appropriate action to pursue potential wage garnishments from
debtors in a timely manner and document its efforts (repeat), and
b. establish formal guidance on prioritizing accounts for potential wage
garnishments within CCU’s debt collection policies (repeat).
Finding 3
CCU did not have adequate controls over the abatement of accounts, which
totaled approximately $5.9 million during our audit period.
Analysis
CCU had not established adequate controls over the abatement of accounts
(generally, the cessation of collection efforts). Specifically, there was no
procedure in place to ensure that only authorized accounts were moved from an
active status to an abated status in the debt management system. According to
13

--- Page 16 ---
CCU’s records, approximately 2,126 accounts valued at $5.9 million were abated
during our audit period.
Generally, accounts that are deemed uncollectable, for example because of
inadequate support or the close of a debtor’s business, are manually compiled on a
written form along with supporting documentation for submission to CCU’s
abatement committee for review. CCU policy requires approval from its
abatement committee for certain changes in account status from active to abated.
Once approved, the employee who prepared the manual abatement form forwards
the committee-approved abatement account list to a second employee to update
the account status in the system. Our review disclosed that CCU did not have a
procedure to ensure that only authorized accounts were abated on the system. As
noted in Finding 1 of this report, 78 users had unnecessary system access to abate
accounts. Our test of 10 accounts abated during our current audit period totaling
approximately $829,000 did not disclose any abatements that were not approved
by the committee.
A similar condition was commented upon in our preceding audit report. In that
report we noted that a review of recorded system abatements for proper support
that CCU had previously performed had not been conducted since July 2016. In
response to that report, DBM indicated that a system report would be developed
by October 2019 that shows all changes in abatement status which would be
reviewed by an individual who does not have access to make changes on the
system. As noted above, DBM did not establish the necessary report and
independent review procedure as indicated in its response.
Recommendation 3
We recommend that DBM
a. establish adequate controls over the abatement process by having an
independent employee verify that all changes in account status to an
abatement status have been properly authorized (repeat); and
b. examine accounts abated since July 2016, at least on a test basis, to ensure
they were proper and approved (repeat).
14

--- Page 17 ---
Finding 4
CCU did not adequately monitor long-term deviations from State regulations
previously granted to State agencies regarding the submission of delinquent
accounts to CCU.
Analysis
CCU did not have an adequate process for monitoring long-term deviations from
compliance with State regulations regarding the submission of delinquent
accounts to CCU that had been granted to State agencies. At the time of our
review, approximately 94 State agencies6 had referred debts to CCU during our
audit period, of which 32 of these agencies had 127 active deviations for various
types of accounts receivable. These deviations were authorized by CCU, without
an expiration date or renewal requirement, during the period between December
1979 and June 2019, the majority (88) of which were established prior to 1999.
Although we were not readily able to estimate the value of debts not referred to
CCU in accordance with existing deviations, as of April 15, 2022, the balance of
accounts referred to CCU during our audit period by the 32 agencies with current
deviations totaled approximately $327 million on 877,000 accounts.
A similar condition was commented upon in our preceding audit report. In
response to that report, DBM indicated that by December 2019 CCU would
perform a documented review of approved deviations to determine their current
validity and to assess the impact on debt collectability. However, CCU did not
perform a complete and comprehensive review of approved deviations, and a
formal process for monitoring deviations was not established. Beginning
September 2020, CCU sent questionnaires regarding the need and impact of
deviations to 27 of the 32 agencies with active deviations. As of May 31, 2022,
responses had been received from just 9 agencies (the most recent being received
in March 2022), all of which indicated that their deviations were still needed. The
questionnaire stated that if no response was received from the agency, its
deviation would be rescinded, and for responses indicating that the deviation was
still needed, CCU would notify the agency within 30 days as to whether the
deviation request would continue to be approved.
As of May 2022, CCU had not documented its decision regarding the 9 agencies
that responded, and had not rescinded any deviations from agencies that failed to
respond. According to CCU, other priorities and its workload have delayed its
follow-up on the questionnaires.
6 This includes 14 Maryland community colleges and 19 Register of Wills offices, none of which
hold a deviation from CCU.
15

--- Page 18 ---
State regulations generally require State agencies to send the debtor three written
demands for payment at 30-day intervals after which the unpaid account is to be
submitted to CCU for further collection efforts. With the approval of the
Secretary of DBM, however, CCU may grant an agency a deviation from these
regulations based on a documented request from the agency. Such requests must
include the nature of the deviation, the type of accounts involved, and justification
for the deviation. For example, an agency may request and receive approval to
extend the period after which accounts must be sent to CCU in order to allow
more time for debtors to respond to the agency’s own collection efforts.
Recommendation 4
We recommend that DBM establish a formal process for periodically
monitoring deviations granted to State agencies to ensure that they remain
necessary and effective, including timely follow-up when agencies respond or
fail to respond to requests for information and documentation regarding
their deviations (repeat).
Finding 5
DBM did not verify that electronic receipts collected by a third-party vendor
for CCU were deposited into the State’s bank account and accurately
recorded in the State’s accounting records.
Analysis
DBM did not verify that electronic collections reported by the third-party vendor
used to receive and process these collections were deposited into the State’s bank
account, and were accurately recorded in the State’s accounting records.
According to CCU’s records, electronic collections totaled approximately $54.3
million during fiscal year 2021.
Our test of five days of vendor-reported collections judgmentally selected based
on materiality and totaling approximately $1.1 million, disclosed that the
collections were properly deposited into the State’s bank account and recorded in
the State’s accounting records. The Comptroller of Maryland’s Accounting
Procedures Manual requires collections to be independently verified to deposit
and recorded in the State’s accounting records.
Recommendation 5
We recommend that DBM implement procedures to verify that all electronic
collections reported by the vendor were properly deposited and recorded,
and that these verifications be documented.
16

--- Page 19 ---
Information Systems Security and Control
We determined that the Information Systems Security and Control section,
including Findings 6 through 8 related to “cybersecurity”, as defined by the State
Finance and Procurement Article, Section 3.5-301(b) of the Annotated Code of
Maryland, and therefore are subject to redaction from the publicly available audit
report in accordance with the State Government Article 2-1224(i). Consequently,
the specifics of the following findings, including the analysis, related
recommendations, along with DBM’s responses, have been redacted from this
report copy.
Finding 6
Redacted cybersecurity-related finding.
Finding 7
Redacted cybersecurity-related finding.
Finding 8
Redacted cybersecurity-related finding.
Disbursements
Finding 9
DBM did not determine the reasonableness of charges related to technology
enterprise services from DoIT, which were valued at $4.1 million.
Analysis
DBM did not determine the reasonableness of DoIT charges for technology
enterprise services during fiscal years 2020 and 2021 valued at $2.1 million and
$2 million, respectively. At the beginning of fiscal 2020, DoIT transitioned to a
cost allocation model for technology enterprise services provided to State
agencies, including DBM. Under this model, in fiscal years 2020 and 2021, DoIT
submitted an invoice covering the services it planned to provide to DBM, which
DBM was to pay in four equal quarterly payments. The DoIT invoices specified
the general categories of work to be performed. For example, the fiscal year 2020
annual invoice included end user support services totaling $441,000 for 503
devices and cyber defense services totaling $103,000 for 332 users.
17

--- Page 20 ---
Our review disclosed that DBM did not take action to determine the
reasonableness of the DoIT invoices or otherwise verify the accuracy of the
number of devices billed or the extent to which services were provided.
Furthermore, DBM had not determined the reason for an increase in DoIT’s
Financial Management Information System (FMIS) user access charges, which
went from $35,000 in fiscal year 2020 to $127,000 in fiscal year 2021, an increase
of over 250 percent.
Recommendation 9
We recommend that DBM take reasonable measures to
a. in the future, ensure that all technology enterprise services invoiced have
been received; and
b. verify receipt of the services noted above as invoiced for fiscal years 2020
and 2021, and the reason for the significant increase in FMIS user access
charges between the two years.
18

--- Page 21 ---
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the following units of the
Department of Budget and Management (DBM) for the period beginning October
20, 2017 and ending January 15, 2022.
Office of the Secretary (including the Central Collection Unit)
Office of Budget Analysis
Office of Capital Budgeting
The audit was conducted in accordance with generally accepted government
auditing standards. Those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to
obtain sufficient, appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our
findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives. We believe that the
evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions
based on our audit objectives.
As prescribed by the State Government Article, Section 2-1221 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, the objectives of this audit were to examine DBM’s financial
transactions, records, and internal control, and to evaluate its compliance with
applicable State laws, rules, and regulations.
In planning and conducting our audit, we focused on the major financial-related
areas of operations based on assessments of significance and risk. The areas
addressed by the audit included cash receipts, collection practices, accounts
receivable, procurement and disbursement activity, interagency agreements, and
vehicle fleet maintenance. Our audit included DBM’s administration of the
Cigarette Restitution Fund and State Reserve Fund that consisted of the Dedicated
Purpose Account, the Revenue Stabilization Account, the Economic Development
Opportunities Program Fund, and the Catastrophic Event Fund.
Our audit also included certain support services (such as maintenance of certain
accounting records) provided by DBM to the Office of Personnel Services and
Benefits (OPSB). In addition, it included certain support services (such as legal,
internal audit, and budgeting) provided by DBM to the Department of Information
Technology. We also determined the status of the findings contained in our
preceding audit report.
Our audit did not include certain support services provided to DBM by OPSB.
These support services (such as payroll and certain contract monitoring) are
included within the scope of our audit of OPSB.
19

--- Page 22 ---
Our assessment of internal controls was based on agency procedures and controls
in place at the time of our fieldwork. Our tests of transactions and other auditing
procedures were generally focused on the transactions occurring during our audit
period of October 20, 2017 to January 15, 2022, but may include transactions
before or after this period as we considered necessary to achieve our audit
objectives.
To accomplish our audit objectives, our audit procedures included inquiries of
appropriate personnel, inspections of documents and records, tests of transactions,
and to the extent practicable, observations of DBM’s operations. Generally,
transactions were selected for testing based on auditor judgment, which primarily
considers risk, the timing or dollar amount of the transaction, or the significance
of the transaction to the area of operation reviewed. As a matter of course, we do
not normally use sampling in our tests, so unless otherwise specifically indicated,
neither statistical nor non-statistical audit sampling was used to select the
transactions tested. Therefore, unless sampling is specifically indicated in a
finding, the results from any tests conducted or disclosed by us cannot be used to
project those results to the entire population from which the test items were
selected.
We also performed various data extracts of pertinent information from the State’s
Financial Management Information System (such as expenditure data), as well as
from the contractor administering the State’s Corporate Purchasing Card Program
(credit card activity). The extracts are performed as part of ongoing internal
processes established by the Office of Legislative Audits and were subject to
various tests to determine data reliability. We determined that the data extracted
from these sources were sufficiently reliable for the purposes the data were used
during this audit.
We also extracted data from DBM’s debt management system in order to perform
certain tests related to cash receipts and accounts receivable, including collection
practices. We performed various tests of the relevant data and determined that the
data were sufficiently reliable for the purposes the data were used during the
audit. Finally, we performed other auditing procedures that we considered
necessary to achieve our objectives. The reliability of data used in this report for
background or informational purposes was not assessed.
DBM’s management is responsible for establishing and maintaining effective
internal control. Internal control is a process designed to provide reasonable
assurance that objectives pertaining to the reliability of financial records;
effectiveness and efficiency of operations including safeguarding of assets; and
compliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations are achieved. As
20

--- Page 23 ---
provided in Government Auditing Standards, there are five components of
internal control: control environment, risk assessment, control activities,
information and communication, and monitoring. Each of the five components,
when significant to the audit objectives, and as applicable to DBM, were
considered by us during the course of this audit.
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate.
Our reports are designed to assist the Maryland General Assembly in exercising
its legislative oversight function and to provide constructive recommendations for
improving State operations. As a result, our reports generally do not address
activities we reviewed that are functioning properly.
This report includes findings relating to conditions that we consider to be
significant deficiencies in the design or operation of internal control that could
adversely affect DBM’s ability to maintain reliable financial records, operate
effectively and efficiently, and/or comply with applicable laws, rules, and
regulations. Our report also includes findings regarding significant instances of
noncompliance with applicable laws, rules, or regulations. Other less significant
findings were communicated to DBM that did not warrant inclusion in this report.
State Government Article Section 2-1224(i) requires that we redact in a manner
consistent with auditing best practices any cybersecurity findings before a report
is made available to the public. This results in the issuance of two different
versions of an audit report that contains cybersecurity findings – a redacted
version for the public and an unredacted version for government officials
responsible for acting on our audit recommendations.
The State Finance and Procurement Article, Section 3.5-301(b), states that
cybersecurity is defined as “processes or capabilities wherein systems,
communications, and information are protected and defended against damage,
unauthorized use or modification, and exploitation”. Based on that definition, and
in our professional judgement, we concluded that certain findings in this report
fall under that definition. Consequently, for the publicly available audit report all
specifics as to the nature of cybersecurity findings and required corrective actions
have been redacted. We have determined that such aforementioned practices, and
government auditing standards, support the redaction of this information from the
public audit report. The specifics of these cybersecurity findings have been
21

--- Page 24 ---
communicated to DBM and those parties responsible for acting on our
recommendations in an unredacted audit report.
DBM’s response to our findings and recommendations is included as an appendix
to this report. Depending on the version of the audit report, responses to any
cybersecurity findings may be redacted in accordance with State law. As
prescribed in the State Government Article, Section 2-1224 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, we will advise DBM regarding the results of our review of its
response.
22

--- Page 25 ---
APPENDIX
WES MOORE HELENE GRADY
Governor Secretary
ARUNA MILLER MARC L. NICOLE
Lieutenant Governor Deputy Secretary
May 17, 2023
Mr. Gregory A. Hook, CPA
Legislative Auditor
Office of Legislative Audits
The Warehouse at Camden Yards, Suite 400
315 West Camden Street
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Dear Mr. Hook:
The Department of Budget and Management (DBM) has reviewed your draft audit report on the DBM Office of
the Secretary, which includes the Central Collection Unit (CCU), and certain other units of DBM for the period
beginning October 20, 2017, and ending January 15, 2022. As requested, attached are our responses to the
findings in the report.
If you have any questions or need additional information, you may contact me at 410-260-7041 or Joan Peacock,
Director of the Audit and Finance Compliance Unit, at 443-871-1648.
Sincerely,
Helene Grady
Secretary
Cc: Secretary Katie Savage, DoIT
Marc Nicole, Deputy Secretary, DBM
Clifton Gray, Assistant Attorney General, DBM
Anthony Fugett, Director, Central Collection Unit, DBM
Kathrine Thomson, Acting Director, Finance and Administration, DBM
Joan Peacock, Director, Audit & Finance Compliance Unit, DBM
45 Calvert Street • Annapolis, MD 21401-1907
Tel: 410-260-7041 • Fax: 410-974-2585 • Toll Free: 1-800-705-3493 • TTY Users: Call via Maryland Relay
http://dbm.maryland.gov

--- Page 26 ---
Department of Budget and Management
Office of the Secretary and Other Units
Agency Response Form
Central Collection Unit
The Office of Legislative Audits (OLA) has determined that Finding 1 related to “cybersecurity” as
defined by the State Finance and Procurement Article, Section 3.5-301(b) of the Annotated Code of
Maryland, and therefore is subject to redaction from the publicly available audit report in accordance
with State Government Article 2-1224(i). Although the specifics of the finding, including the analysis,
related recommendations, along with DBM’s responses, have been redacted from this report copy,
DBM’s responses indicated agreement with the finding and related recommendations.
Finding 1
Redacted cybersecurity-related finding.
Agency Response has been redacted by OLA.
Finding 2
CCU did not adequately pursue potential wage garnishments from debtors, and it had not
established a formal system for prioritizing such activity as committed to in its response to this
longstanding issue in our preceding audit report.
We recommend that DBM
a. take appropriate action to pursue potential wage garnishments from debtors in a timely
manner and document its efforts (repeat), and
b. establish formal guidance on prioritizing accounts for potential wage garnishments within
CCU’s debt collection policies (repeat).
Agency Response
Analysis
Additional Comment:
DBM agrees that potential wage garnishments from debtors should be adequately
pursued in a timely manner, and that documentation should be maintained to support
the process and efforts taken. Executing a wage garnishment is an expensive and
lengthy process that may take months or even years to obtain the required judgments
and orders from the courts. CCU uses its limited resources to pursue debts that are
likely to produce the best recoveries.
As the number of accounts referred to CCU increases, so does the potential
opportunities to pursue wage garnishment. The pandemic introduced additional
challenges.
CCU will continue to make the best use of its resources to collect from debtors and will
ensure its collection efforts are documented. Since the introduction of the new

--- Page 27 ---
Department of Budget and Management
Office of the Secretary and Other Units
Agency Response Form
collection system, CCU has been working to gain some efficiency through automation.
This includes the potential opportunity to take advantage of automation of the various
county courts systems. The efforts to pursue this were stalled and put on delay with the
occurrence of the pandemic. As mentioned below, we are hoping to have some of these
efforts in place by June 2023.
Additionally, as noted by the auditors, CCU will implement policies (as part of its
SOPs) to address prioritizing accounts for potential wage garnishments once viable
accounts are identified. This has been put on hold as we were developing a more
automated process.
Recommendation 2a Agree Estimated Completion Date: August 2023
CCU has implemented manual reports to identify potential wage garnishment that is
currently being used by Legal Measures until the IT department can automate the
process. The automated process is anticipated to be in place by July 31, 2023.
As described above, CCU will make the best use of its resources to pursue potential
wage garnishments in a timely manner, prioritizing accounts that are determined to
provide the best opportunity for collection. These efforts will be documented,
including why debtor accounts have not been pursued or were not selected for wage
garnishment.
Recommendation 2b Agree Estimated Completion Date: August 2023
As part of the automation process, CCU will establish a Suit Drafting SOP along with
the existing Wage Garnishment SOP that will contain formal guidance and application
configuration on the Wage Garnishment and suit drafting processes. These SOPs will
include guidance on prioritizing accounts for potential wage garnishments.

--- Page 28 ---
Department of Budget and Management
Office of the Secretary and Other Units
Agency Response Form
Finding 3
CCU did not have adequate controls over the abatement of accounts, which totaled approximately
$5.9 million during our audit period.
We recommend that DBM
a. establish adequate controls over the abatement process by having an independent employee
verify that all changes in account status to an abatement status have been properly authorized
(repeat); and
b. examine accounts abated since July 2016, at least on a test basis, to ensure they were proper
and approved (repeat).
Agency Response
Analysis
Recommendation 3a Agree Estimated Completion Date: June 2023
CCU IT will generate a monthly Abatements Report of all accounts that are abated
automatically or manually in our debt collection system. This report will be submitted
to DBM’s audit team. The audit team will perform a monthly independent review to
ensure changes in account status to abatement status have been properly authorized. As
applicable, this review will include a reconciliation of accounts abated to the
Abatement Committee reports, that show all accounts submitted to the Abatement
Committee for review and their status (approved or not approved for abatement). For
all other accounts abated through an automated process, the audit team will, at
minimum, review a sample to verify the abatement was properly authorized or
processed. This process is estimated to be in place by May 31, 2023.
Recommendation 3b Agree Estimated Completion Date: June 2023
The DBM audit team will do an independent review that includes sampling to ensure
abatements, from July 2016 through April 2023, were proper and approved.

--- Page 29 ---
Department of Budget and Management
Office of the Secretary and Other Units
Agency Response Form
Finding 4
CCU did not adequately monitor long-term deviations from State regulations previously granted
to State agencies regarding the submission of delinquent accounts to CCU.
We recommend that DBM establish a formal process for periodically monitoring deviations
granted to State agencies to ensure that they remain necessary and effective, including timely
follow-up when agencies respond or fail to respond to requests for information and documentation
regarding their deviations (repeat).
Agency Response
Analysis
Deviation Requests from agencies do not prohibit agencies from referring delinquent
accounts to CCU for collection but may alter the timeframe accounts are referred to
CCU for collection based on the agencies’ request.
Recommendation 4 Agree Estimated Completion Date: October 2023
All requests for Deviation Reviews or Updates will be sent to agencies by 7-1-23. CCU
will monitor agency responses and perform timely follow-up and reviews.
For the 9 agencies mentioned in the audit analysis that indicated in their responses to
CCU that their deviations were still needed, CCU has completed a review of their
responses, agrees that the deviation is still needed and has notified all 9 agencies that
their deviation was approved.
Once the comprehensive review is completed, CCU will establish a formal process to
periodically review deviations granted to State agencies to ensure that they remain
necessary and effective. This will include timely follow-up when agencies respond or
fail to respond to requests for information and documentation regarding their deviations

--- Page 30 ---
Department of Budget and Management
Office of the Secretary and Other Units
Agency Response Form
Finding 5
DBM did not verify that electronic receipts collected by a third-party vendor for CCU were
deposited into the State’s bank account and accurately recorded in the State’s accounting records.
We recommend that DBM implement procedures to verify that all electronic collections reported
by the vendor were properly deposited and recorded, and that these verifications be documented.
Agency Response
Analysis
Recommendation 5 Agree Estimated Completion Date: August 2023
CCU Accounting will implement a process to create a manual spreadsheet to complete
a match to ensure electronic payments reported by the third-party vendor are credited
to the State’s bank account and accurately recorded to the State’s accounting records
(i.e., CCU’s FMIS fund balance) by utilizing the following reports: the third-party
payment report, bank statement and the FMIS dafr7200 report. Any discrepancies will
be investigated. This review, to verify that all electronic collections reported by the
vendor were properly deposited and recorded, will be documented and retained for
future purposes

--- Page 31 ---
Department of Budget and Management
Office of the Secretary and Other Units
Agency Response Form
Information Systems Security and Control
OLA has determined that the Information Systems Security and Control section, including Findings 6
through 8 related to “cybersecurity”, as defined by the State Finance and Procurement Article, Section
3.5-301(b) of the Annotated Code of Maryland, and therefore are subject to redaction from the publicly
available audit report in accordance with State Government Article 2-1224(i). Although the specifics of
the findings, including the analysis, related recommendations, along with DBM’s responses, have been
redacted from this report copy, DBM’s responses indicated agreement with the findings and related
recommendations.
Finding 6
Redacted cybersecurity-related finding.
Agency Response has been redacted by OLA.
Finding 7
Redacted cybersecurity-related finding.
Agency Response has been redacted by OLA.
Finding 8
Redacted cybersecurity-related finding.
Agency Response has been redacted by OLA.

--- Page 32 ---
Department of Budget and Management
Office of the Secretary and Other Units
Agency Response Form
Disbursements
Finding 9
DBM did not determine the reasonableness of charges related to technology enterprise services
from DoIT, which were valued at $4.1 million.
We recommend that DBM take reasonable measures to
a. in the future, ensure that all technology enterprise services invoiced have been received; and
b. verify receipt of the services noted above as invoiced for fiscal years 2020 and 2021, and the
reason for the significant increase in FMIS user access charges between the two years.
Agency Response
Analysis
Recommendation 9a Agree Estimated Completion Date: May 2023
DBM will review DoIT billings for reasonableness. To the extent possible, DBM will
verify billings are consistent with our MOU with DoIT and appear reasonable based on
expected services to be provided by DoIT.
Recommendation 9b Agree Estimated Completion Date: May 2023
DBM is in the process of completing a review of the FY2020 and FY2021 DoIT
invoices to ensure amounts billed are consistent with our MOU with DoIT and appear
reasonable with expected services to be received from DoIT. As part of this review, we
are determining the reason for the significant increase in FMIS user access charges
between the two years that was noted by the auditors.

--- Page 33 ---
A T
UDIT EAM
Robert A. Wells Jr., CPA
Audit Manager
R. Brendan Coffey, CPA, CISA
Edwin L. Paul, CPA, CISA
Information Systems Audit Managers
Matusala Y. Abishe
Menachem Katz, CPA
Senior Auditors
Peter W. Chong
Matthew D. Walbert, CISA
Information Systems Senior Auditors
Stephen R. Alexander, CFE
Ibijoke O. Owolabi, CPA
Stacey D. Streett
Staff Auditors
Vickey K. Micah
Information Systems Staff Auditor