Title: Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services - Regional Operations
Date: 07/20/2023
Type: Fiscal Compliance
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=64bfc4f6a1ce580300acb75d
Extracted: 2025-06-19T23:06:10.809440
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Audit Report
Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services
Regional Operations
July 2023
Public Notice
In compliance with the requirements of the State Government Article Section
2-1224(i), of the Annotated Code of Maryland, the Office of Legislative
Audits has redacted cybersecurity findings and related auditee responses
from this public report.
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Senator Clarence K. Lam, M.D. (Senate Chair) Delegate Jared Solomon (House Chair)
Senator Joanne C. Benson Delegate Steven J. Arentz
Senator Paul D. Corderman Delegate Nicholas P. Charles II
Senator Katie Fry Hester Delegate Andrea Fletcher Harrison
Senator Shelly L. Hettleman Delegate Steven C. Johnson
Senator Cheryl C. Kagan Delegate Mary A. Lehman
Senator Cory V. McCray Delegate David Moon
Senator Justin D. Ready Delegate Julie Palakovich Carr
Senator Bryan W. Simonaire Delegate Stephanie M. Smith
Senator Craig J. Zucker Delegate M. Courtney Watson
To Obtain Further Information
Office of Legislative Audits
The Warehouse at Camden Yards
351 West Camden Street, Suite 400
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Phone: 410-946-5900
Maryland Relay: 711
TTY: 410-946-5401 ꞏ 301-970-5401
E-mail: OLAWebmaster@ola.state.md.us
Website: www.ola.state.md.us
To Report Fraud
The Office of Legislative Audits operates a Fraud Hotline to report fraud, waste, or abuse involving State
of Maryland government resources. Reports of fraud, waste, or abuse may be communicated anonymously
by a toll-free call to 1-877-FRAUD-11, by mail to the Fraud Hotline, c/o Office of Legislative Audits, or
through the Office’s website.
Nondiscrimination Statement
The Department of Legislative Services does not discriminate on the basis of age, ancestry, color, creed,
marital status, national origin, race, religion, gender, gender identity, sexual orientation, or disability in the
admission or access to its programs, services, or activities. The Department’s Information Officer has been
designated to coordinate compliance with the nondiscrimination requirements contained in Section 35.107
of the United States Department of Justice Regulations. Requests for assistance should be directed to the
Information Officer at 410-946-5400 or 410-970-5400.

--- Page 3 ---
July 20, 2023
Senator Clarence K. Lam, M.D., Senate Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Delegate Jared Solomon, House Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Members of Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Annapolis, Maryland
Ladies and Gentlemen:
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the Department of Public Safety
and Correctional Services (DPSCS) Regional Operations for the period beginning
April 1, 2018 and ending January 21, 2022. This audit of the Regional Operations
covered certain fiscal activities performed by the 5 regional fiscal offices on
behalf of the 21 DPSCS correctional and pretrial facilities located in the State.
Our audit disclosed that DPSCS did not ensure that employees at correctional
facilities complied with DPSCS’ overtime policies. As a result, certain overtime
hours paid were not approved or supported and were not compliant with DPSCS
policies.
In addition, our audit disclosed that monthly reconciliations between the inmate
fund activity in DPSCS’ Maryland Offenders Banking System III (MOBS III) and
the Comptroller of Maryland’s records were not performed timely or sufficiently
comprehensive. For example, reconciliations did not address persistent
differences between MOBS III and the Comptroller’s records. Our review of
these records as of December 2021 disclosed a difference of $1.4 million between
MOBS III ($14.2 million) and the Comptroller’s fund balance ($15.6 million). As
a result, certain differences were not readily identified and resolved.
Furthermore, our review of inmate fund accounting at two regional fiscal offices
disclosed that DPSCS did not have adequate controls over inmate fund collections
at one regional fiscal office, which deposited collections totaling $134,650
between 10 and 12 days after receipt.

--- Page 4 ---
Our audit also disclosed a cybersecurity-related finding with DPSCS’ payroll
processing. However, in accordance with the State Government Article, Section
2-1224(i) of the Annotated Code of Maryland, we have redacted the finding from
this audit report. Specifically, State law requires the Office of Legislative Audits
to redact cybersecurity findings in a manner consistent with auditing best
practices before the report is made available to the public. The term
“cybersecurity” is defined in the State Finance and Procurement Article, Section
3.5-301(b), and using our professional judgment we have determined that the
redacted finding falls under the referenced definition. The specifics of the
cybersecurity finding were previously communicated to those parties responsible
for acting on our recommendations.
Finally, our audit included a review to determine the status of the four findings
contained in our preceding audit report. For the non-cybersecurity-related
findings we determined that the DPSCS satisfactorily addressed one of those three
findings. The remaining two findings are repeated in this report.
DPSCS’ response to this audit is included as an appendix to this report. We
reviewed the response and noted general agreement to our findings and related
recommendations. Subsequent to the response receipt, but prior to the issuance of
the final report, we contacted DPSCS staff and obtained verbal clarification that
satisfactorily resolved all outstanding questions and issues. Consequently, we
have concluded that the written responses and verbal clarification together
indicate that the DPSCS corrective actions identified are sufficient to address all
audit issues. However, consistent with the requirements of State law, we have
redacted the elements of DPSCS’ response related to the cybersecurity audit
finding.
We wish to acknowledge the cooperation extended to us during the audit by
DPSCS. We also wish to acknowledge DPSCS’ willingness to address the audit
issues and implement appropriate corrective actions.
Respectfully submitted,
Gregory A. Hook, CPA
Legislative Auditor
2

--- Page 5 ---
Table of Contents
Background Information 4
Agency Responsibilities 4
Organization Change 6
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report 6
Findings and Recommendations 8
Payroll
Finding 1 – Redacted cybersecurity-related finding 9
* Finding 2 – Employee overtime at Department of Public 9
Safety and Correctional Services’ (DPSCS) facilities was not
always pre-approved and supported and was not restricted to a
maximum of 80 hours per pay period, as required by DPSCS
policy.
Finding 3 – DPSCS did not maintain certain documentation supporting 10
the propriety of time recorded on the biometric timekeeping
system.
Inmate Funds
Finding 4 – DPSCS did not establish adequate controls over inmate 12
fund collections at the Jessup fiscal office to ensure collections
were deposited and recorded timely.
* Finding 5 – Monthly reconciliations of inmate funds recorded in 13
the Maryland Offenders Banking System III to the related
Comptroller of Maryland’s records were not timely or sufficiently
comprehensive.
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology 15
Agency Response Appendix
 Denotes item repeated in full or part from preceding audit report
3

--- Page 6 ---
Background Information
Agency Responsibilities
Through its correctional institutions and parole and probation programs, the
Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services (DPSCS) has statewide
responsibility for the supervision and rehabilitation of incarcerated and paroled
individuals. DPSCS also sets standards for criminal justice training and operates
criminal justice information systems. We conduct separate audits of DPSCS
Central Operations (which includes the Division of Parole and Probation), DPSCS
Regional Operations, DPSCS Information Technology and Communications
Division, and Maryland Correctional Enterprises. Personnel costs for DPSCS
Regional Operations represent the majority of total expenses and as of June 30,
2022, approximately 12 percent of the total 6,709 positions were vacant as noted
in Figure 1.
Figure 1
Regional Operations Positions, Expenditures, and
Funding Sources
Full-Time Equivalent Positions as of June 30, 2022
Positions Percent
Filled 5,877 87.6%
Vacant 832 12.4%
Total 6,709
Fiscal Year 2022 Expenditures
Expenditures Percent
Salaries, Wages, and Fringe Benefits $760,254,103 69.3%
Technical and Special Fees 1,562,422 0.1%
Operating Expenses 336,057,213 30.6%
Total $1,097,873,738
Fiscal Year 2022 Funding Sources
Funding Percent
General Fund $682,862,692 62.2%
Special Fund 3,631,026 0.3%
Federal 409,695,631 37.3%
Reimbursable Fund 1,684,389 0.2%
Total $1,097,873,738
Source: State financial and personnel records
4

--- Page 7 ---
This audit of DPSCS Regional Operations included certain financial activities of
DPSCS’ 5 regional fiscal offices on behalf of 21 facilities, although 3 facilities
were depopulated by DPSCS effective June 30, 2021, see Figure 2.
Figure 2
List of Regional Offices and Supported DPSCS Facilities
Jessup Regional Office
Baltimore City Correctional Center Maryland Correctional Institution for Women
Brockbridge Correctional Facility * Maryland Correctional Institution - Jessup
Dorsey Run Correctional Facility Central Maryland Correctional Facility
Eastern Pre-Release Unit * Patuxent Institution
Jessup Correctional Institution Southern Maryland Pre-Release Unit *
Baltimore Regional Office
Baltimore Central Booking and Intake Center Youth Detention Center
Metropolitan Transition Center Maryland Reception, Diagnostic, and
Chesapeake Detention Facility Classification Center
Hagerstown Regional Office
Maryland Correctional Institution - Maryland Correctional Training Center
Hagerstown Roxbury Correctional Institution
Cumberland Regional Office
North Branch Correctional Institution Western Correctional Institution
Eastern Shore Regional Office
Eastern Correctional Institution and Annex
Source: DPSCS
*DPSCS depopulated these facilities effective June 30, 2021.
We reviewed activities for these regional fiscal offices that were unique to the
facilities, such as inmate cash receipts, inmate funds, and the biometric
timekeeping system used by correctional officers. According to DPSCS records,
during calendar year 2021, inmate fund collections and disbursements totaled
$49.1 million and $41.7 million (including $24.5 million disbursed for
commissary and phone related purchases), respectively.
Certain DPSCS fiscal and operational activities are subject to audit during the
DPSCS Central Operations audit, not this Regional Operations audit. DPSCS
activities included in the Central Operations audit include all
 DPSCS payroll processed within the Statewide Personnel System,
 disbursements and procurement transactions,
 corporate purchasing card activity,
 equipment accountability,
5

--- Page 8 ---
 information systems controls, and
 non-inmate cash receipts.
The Information Technology and Communications Division audit includes the
activities associated with the maintenance and support of DPSCS’ information
systems, and the Maryland Correctional Enterprises audit includes the work and
job training provided to inmates of the Maryland correctional system.
Organization Change
Prior to October 1, 2021, DPSCS was responsible for administering the 9-1-1
Trust Fund. The 9-1-1 Trust Fund included revenue from State and local fees,
and a fee charged on prepaid wireless services (as well as investment earnings on
the fund). All fees collected were remitted to the Comptroller of Maryland on a
monthly basis. Chapter 287, Laws of Maryland 2021, effective October 1, 2021,
transferred the Maryland 9-1-1 Board and related responsibilities and assets from
DPSCS to the Maryland Department of Emergency Management. Activities prior
to the transfer are included in the scope of our audit of DPSCS Central
Operations.
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report
Our audit included a review to determine the current status of the four findings
contained in our preceding audit report dated September 5, 2019. As disclosed in
Figure 3 below, for the non-cybersecurity-related findings, we determined that
DPSCS satisfactorily addressed one of those three findings. The remaining two
findings are repeated in this report.
6

--- Page 9 ---
Figure 3
Status of Preceding Findings
Preceding Implementation
Finding Description
Finding Status
Monthly reconciliations between the Maryland
Offenders Banking System II and the
Repeated
Finding 1 Comptroller’s records were not always
(Current Finding 5)
sufficiently comprehensive, timely, and
supported.
DPSCS did not have adequate controls over
Finding 2 inmate fund collections and disbursements at the Not repeated
two regional fiscal offices reviewed.
Access to the biometric timekeeping system was
not periodically reviewed and adequately
restricted, resulting in numerous employees with
the ability to edit and approve their own time and
Finding 3 leave records. In addition, DPSCS did not ensure Status Redacted1
that time and leave recorded in the timekeeping
system were accurately transferred to the
Statewide Personnel System for biweekly payroll
processing.
Overtime for employees at certain facilities
whose payroll was processed by the Jessup fiscal
office was not pre-approved and employee Repeated
Finding 4
overtime was not restricted to a maximum of 80 (Current Finding 2)
hours per pay period, as required by DPSCS
policy.
1 Specific information on the current status of cybersecurity-related finding 3 has been redacted
from this publicly available audit report in accordance with State Government Article,
Section 2-1224(i) of the Annotated Code of Maryland.
7

--- Page 10 ---
Findings and Recommendations
Payroll
Background
The Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services (DPSCS) uses a
biometric timekeeping system in all detention facilities to record employee “in”
and “out” times. When a detention facility employee uses leave, it is approved by
each employee’s immediate supervisor and then manually posted in the system by
a timekeeper.
According to DPSCS records, as of April 19, 2022, there were 5,453 employees
using the biometric system to record time worked and there were 677 users who
could manually post, edit, and/or approve time and leave on the system as of
March 2022. We reviewed the access for the 677 users and the system access
policies and procedures at the Jessup regional fiscal office. In addition, we tested
timekeeping system transactions from facilities supported by the Jessup,
Hagerstown, and Baltimore regional fiscal offices and select overtime payments
at all five regional fiscal offices. As noted in Figure 4 during fiscal year 2022 the
five regional offices had 6,709 authorized positions with related payroll
expenditures totaling $761,816,525.
Figure 4
Fiscal Year 2022 Payroll Expenditures and
Authorized Positions by Regional Office
Authorized
Office Expenditures
Positions
Jessup $258,412,959 34% 2,182 32%
Baltimore 184,684,151 24% 1,591 24%
Hagerstown 133,134,067 17% 1,206 18%
Cumberland 103,997,826 14% 952 14%
Eastern Shore 81,587,522 11% 778 12%
Totals $761,816,525 100% 6,709 100%
Source: DPSCS Records
8

--- Page 11 ---
We determined that Finding 1 related to “cybersecurity”, as defined by the State
Finance and Procurement Article, Section 3.5-301(b) of the Annotated Code of
Maryland, and therefore is subject to redaction from the publicly available audit
report in accordance with the State Government Article 2-1224(i). Consequently,
the specifics of the following finding, including the analysis, related
recommendation(s), along with DPSCS’ responses, have been redacted from this
report copy.
Finding 1
Redacted cybersecurity-related finding.
Finding 2
Employee overtime at DPSCS’ facilities was not always pre-approved and
supported and was not restricted to a maximum of 80 hours per pay period,
as required by DPSCS policy.
Analysis
Employee overtime at DPSCS’ facilities was not always pre-approved and
supported and was not restricted to a maximum of 80 hours per pay period, as
required by DPSCS policy. The DPSCS Overtime Policy - Correctional Staff
requires supervisors to approve overtime before it is worked and prohibits
employees from working more than 80 hours of overtime in a pay period.
According to State records, during calendar year 2022 the payroll for DPSCS’
facilities totaled $761.8 million, including overtime totaling approximately $145.6
million (19 percent).
Our test of 2,016 overtime hours recorded for 16 employees (with significant
overtime activity) from 8 facilities over two pay periods in September and
December 2021, disclosed that for 5 employees DPSCS lacked pre-approval and
other support for 544 overtime hours totaling $21,434. For example, DPSCS
advised that 3 employees received 316 overtime hours valued at $12,928 for
attending training, but lacked pre-approval or other documentation to support that
explanation.
In addition, our review of the overtime procedures at the 5 fiscal offices disclosed
that they did not have controls to limit overtime to 80 hours per pay period. We
reviewed the timekeeping records for all 6,009 DPSCS Regional Operations
employees during calendar year 2021 and noted 6,773 instances in which 1,119
employees were paid for working more than 80 hours of overtime in a pay period.
During calendar year 2021, 88 of these employees were paid for working an
average of 81 to 103 overtime hours per pay period. We were advised by DPSCS
9

--- Page 12 ---
management that the main factors contributing to the significant overtime hours
worked include the facilities requiring 24-hours per day staffing, correctional
officer staffing shortages, and employees being allowed to earn overtime on days
they use leave (other than sick leave).
Similar conditions regarding overtime not being pre-approved and not restricted
to 80 hours per pay period were noted in our preceding audit report. In response
to that report, DPSCS agreed to implement the related recommendations by April
2019. However, DPSCS management explained that during our current audit they
could not enforce existing policies or maintain the related controls, because of
correctional officer staffing shortages (included in the total vacancies listed in
Figure 1, page 4) and the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic.
Recommendation 2
We recommend that DPSCS
a. ensure the required pre-approval of overtime hours to be worked is
obtained or, absent pre-approval, that an employee is prohibited from
working overtime (repeat); and
b. establish controls to ensure that employees do not work more than 80
overtime hours in a pay period (repeat).
Finding 3
DPSCS did not maintain certain documentation supporting the propriety of
time recorded on the biometric timekeeping system.
Analysis
DPSCS did not adequately document its verification of time recorded on the
biometric timekeeping system. Designated timekeepers for each facility, are
responsible for reviewing time recorded in the biometric timekeeping system to
ensure it is reasonable and agrees with shift schedules documented on Post
Assignment Worksheets (PAW). In addition, following the end of the pay period
each employee is responsible for reviewing a Complete Payroll Report (CPR),
which lists all entries of time worked and leave taken for that employee. If there
are any errors, the employee will record the correction and then sign the CPR
certifying the information as accurate. The CPR is also reviewed and signed by
the employee’s immediate supervisor. The approved time and leave information
is then interfaced into the Statewide Personnel System for payroll processing.
Our review disclosed that DPSCS did not always retain the aforementioned PAW
and CPR documents to support the propriety of time posted in the biometric
10

--- Page 13 ---
timekeeping system. We tested 3,666 hours recorded for 16 employees2 who
earned gross pay totaling $142,843 from 8 facilities over two pay periods.
DPSCS was unable to provide the approved PAWs for 6 employees related to
1,032 hours charged and the approved CPRs for an additional 7 employees which
related to 1,362 hours charged. The unsupported hours equate to payroll
disbursements totaling $94,851 of the $142,843 tested. As a result, there was a
lack of assurance that information recorded in the timekeeping system and the
related payroll disbursements for these employees was accurate.
Recommendation 3
We recommend that DPSCS maintain sufficient documentation to ensure the
accuracy of hours recorded in the timekeeping system, in accordance with its
policies.
Inmate Funds
Background
The five DPSCS regional fiscal Figure 5
offices maintain inmate funds on Calendar Year 2021 Inmate Fund Activity
behalf of individuals incarcerated in (In thousands of dollars)
State correctional and detention Regional Balance as
Funds Funds
Fiscal of December
facilities. All receipts are initially
Received Disbursed
Office 31, 2021
deposited in the State’s General
Jessup $26,537 $4,841 $55,687
Fund and are then transferred to
Hagerstown 19,862 5,162 53,829
checking accounts maintained by
Eastern Shore 985 3,589 13,328
each regional fiscal office. Regional
Cumberland 712 2,788 11,783
fiscal office staff record all inmate
fund activity in the Maryland Baltimore 974 806 5,295
Offenders Banking System III Commissary 0 24,481 0
(MOBS III). Disbursements of Totals $49,070 $41,667 $139,922
inmate funds are made by check or
Source: DPSCS Records
cash to inmates or their designees.
According to DPSCS records, during calendar year 2021, approximately $49.1
million was deposited into the inmate fund, $17.2 million was disbursed on behalf
of inmates, and $24.5 million was disbursed for commissary and phone related
purchases, see Figure 5.
During this audit, we reviewed inmate fund procedures at the Jessup and
Hagerstown regional fiscal offices (the two offices with the greatest fiscal
2 We selected the employees hours for testing based upon the materiality of the hours recorded and
the related payments made to them.
11

--- Page 14 ---
activity), and tested selected transactions, including inmate fund reconciliations,
from each of the five regional fiscal offices.
Finding 4
DPSCS did not establish adequate controls over inmate fund collections at
the Jessup fiscal office to ensure collections were deposited and recorded
timely.
Analysis
DPSCS did not establish adequate controls over inmate fund collections at the
Jessup fiscal office to ensure collections were deposited and recorded timely in
the State’s accounting system and MOBS III. According to DPSCS records, the
Jessup fiscal office had lockbox collections of $11.4 million and remotely
deposited collections of $2.9 million during fiscal year 2021. Our test of 10
remote deposits totaling $266,500 and 5 lockbox deposits totaling $530,500 made
between July 2020 and December 2021 disclosed the following conditions:
 Five remote deposits tested totaling $134,650 were deposited between 8 to 12
business days after the initial receipt. The delays typically occurred because
the facilities responsible for delivering the collections (checks and cash) to the
Jessup fiscal office did not drop off the collections in a timely manner. While
each facility’s mail room was responsible for initially receiving the collections
and recording the receipts on a log, the collections and recordation were
forwarded to the fiscal office that was responsible for posting the receipts to
the proper account and depositing all collections.
 Three lockbox deposits totaling $153,400 were recorded into the State’s
accounting system four to nine business days after being deposited, and four
other remote deposits totaling $87,200 were recorded into MOBS III from
three to six business days after being deposited.
The Comptroller of Maryland’s Accounting Procedures Manual requires the
establishment of sufficient internal controls over collections, including depositing
of cash receipts within one business day and recording cash receipts into the
State’s accounting system within two business days of the deposit. In addition,
the DPSCS Financial Operations Manual provides that cash receipts should be
recorded in MOBS III on a daily basis.
Recommendation 4
We recommend that DPSCS ensure that all collections are deposited and
recorded into the State’s accounting system and MOBS III in a timely
12

--- Page 15 ---
manner as required by the Comptroller’s Accounting Procedures Manual and
DPSCS internal policies.
Finding 5
Monthly reconciliations of inmate funds recorded in MOBS III to the related
Comptroller of Maryland’s records were not performed timely or sufficiently
comprehensive.
Analysis
Monthly reconciliations between MOBS III and the Comptroller of Maryland’s
records were not performed timely or sufficiently comprehensive. Responsibility
for performing the reconciliations and for investigating any differences is
delegated to the regional fiscal offices. DPSCS enters inmate activity into MOBS
III, including detailed information by inmate and the total balance of all inmate
funds. DPSCS also records total fund collections and disbursements in the
Comptroller’s records.
Our test of the most recent 30 reconciliations between MOBS III and the
Comptroller of Maryland’s records as of March 2022, disclosed that 3 regional
fiscal offices had not conducted a reconciliation for periods ranging from 2 to 15
months. For example, the most recent reconciliation prepared for the Baltimore
fiscal office was for November 2020. In addition, persistent differences between
MOBS III and the Comptroller’s records were not reconciled or investigated. For
example, our review of the December 2021 reconciliations for all five offices
disclosed an aggregate difference of $1.4 million between MOBS III ($14.2
million) and the Comptroller’s fund balance ($15.6 million). We were advised by
DPSCS management that these individual differences could not be isolated to a
specific region or transaction due to limitations with the reporting function of
MOBS III.
The DPSCS Financial Operations Manual provides that, on a monthly basis,
inmate fund balances on MOBS III should be reconciled with the related balances
on the Comptroller’s records. Furthermore, the Comptroller of Maryland’s
Accounting Procedures Manual requires that agencies conduct a monthly
reconciliation of agency systems to the State’s accounting system.
Similar conditions regarding the failure to conduct comprehensive and timely
reconciliations were included in several preceding audit reports for various
DPSCS entities dating back to 2002. In response to our most recent prior report,
DPSCS indicated that monthly reconciliations were in progress and that they
expected to fully implement the report recommendations by December 2019.
13

--- Page 16 ---
However, current DPSCS management advised that regional fiscal office staffing
vacancies have prevented certain reconciliations from being completed timely.
Although as noted in Figure 1, there was a 12.4 percent vacancy rate as of June
30, 2022 for DPSCS Regional Operations personnel in total, DPSCS was unable
to readily provide a breakdown as to the number related to the fiscal offices.
Recommendation 5
We recommend that DPSCS
a. prepare comprehensive monthly reconciliations between MOBS III and
the Comptroller’s records as required (repeat); and
b. consult with appropriate control agency personnel (such as the
Comptroller’s General Accounting Division), as needed, regarding the
resolution of the aforementioned longstanding differences (repeat).
14

--- Page 17 ---
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the Department of Public Safety
and Correctional Services (DPSCS) Regional Operations for the period beginning
April 1, 2018 through January 21, 2022. The audit was conducted in accordance
with generally accepted government auditing standards. Those standards require
that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient, appropriate evidence to
provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit
objectives. We believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for
our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives.
As prescribed by the State Government Article, Section 2-1221 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, the objectives of this audit were to examine DPSCS’ financial
transactions, records, and internal control, and to evaluate its compliance with
applicable State laws, rules, and regulations.
In planning and conducting our audit, we focused on the major financial-related
areas of operations based on assessments of significance and risk. The areas
addressed by the audit included inmate funds and payroll activity unique to the
regional fiscal offices, including the timekeeping system. We also determined the
status of the findings contained in our preceding audit report.
Our audit did not include certain support services provided to DPSCS – Regional
Operations by DPSCS – Central Operations. These support services (such as
procurements, disbursements, equipment, processing certain payroll transactions,
and corporate purchasing card activity) are included within the scope of our audit
of the DPSCS – Central Operations. Our audit also did not include the computer
operations of the DPSCS Information and Technology and Communications
Division and the Maryland Correctional Enterprises, which are audited separately.
Our assessment of internal controls was based on agency procedures and controls
in place at the time of our fieldwork. Our tests of transactions and other auditing
procedures were generally focused on the transactions occurring during our audit
period of April 1, 2018 to January 21, 2022, but may include transactions before
or after this period as we considered necessary to achieve our audit objectives.
To accomplish our audit objectives, our audit procedures included inquiries of
appropriate personnel, inspections of documents and records, test of transactions,
and to the extent practicable, observations of the DPSCS regional fiscal office
operations. Generally, transactions were selected for testing based on auditor
judgment, which primarily considers risk, the timing or dollar amount of the
transaction, or the significance of the transaction to the area of operation
15

--- Page 18 ---
reviewed. As a matter of course, we do not normally use sampling in our tests, so
unless otherwise specifically indicated, neither statistical nor non-statistical audit
sampling was used to select the transactions tested. Therefore, unless sampling is
specifically indicated in a finding, the results from any tests conducted or
disclosed by us cannot be used to project those results to the entire population
from which the test items were selected.
We also performed various data extracts of pertinent information from the State’s
Central Payroll Bureau (payroll data). The extracts are performed as part of
ongoing internal processes established by the Office of Legislative Audits and
were subject to various tests to determine data reliability. We determined that the
data extracted from this source was sufficiently reliable for the purposes the data
were used during this audit. We also extracted data from DPSCS’ biometric
timekeeping system used for recording correctional employee time for the
purpose of testing the propriety of employee earnings, including overtime. We
performed various tests of the relevant data and determined that the data were
sufficiently reliable for the purposes the data were used during the audit. Finally,
we performed other auditing procedures that we considered necessary to achieve
our audit objectives. The reliability of data used in this report for background or
informational purposes was not assessed.
DPSCS’ management is responsible for establishing and maintaining effective
internal control. Internal control is a process designed to provide reasonable
assurance that objectives pertaining to the reliability of financial records;
effectiveness and efficiency of operations, including safeguarding of assets; and
compliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations are achieved. As
provided in Government Auditing Standards, there are five components of
internal control: control environment, risk assessment, control activities,
information and communication, and monitoring. Each of the five components,
when significant to the audit objectives, and as applicable to DPSCS, were
considered by us during the course of this audit.
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate.
Our reports are designed to assist the Maryland General Assembly in exercising
its legislative oversight function and to provide constructive recommendations for
improving State operations. As a result, our reports generally do not address
activities we reviewed that are functioning properly.
16

--- Page 19 ---
This report includes findings relating to conditions that we consider to be
significant deficiencies in the design or operation of internal control that could
adversely affect DPSCS’ ability to maintain reliable financial records, operate
effectively and efficiently, and/or comply with applicable laws, rules, and
regulations. Our report also includes findings regarding significant instances of
noncompliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations. Other less significant
findings were communicated to DPSCS that did not warrant inclusion in this
report.
State Government Article Section 2-1224(i) requires that we redact in a manner
consistent with auditing best practices any cybersecurity findings before a report
is made available to the public. This results in the issuance of two different
versions of an audit report that contains cybersecurity findings – a redacted
version for the public and an unredacted version for government officials
responsible for acting on our audit recommendations.
The State Finance and Procurement Article, Section 3.5-301(b), states that
cybersecurity is defined as “processes or capabilities wherein systems,
communications, and information are protected and defended against damage,
unauthorized use or modification, and exploitation”. Based on that definition, and
in our professional judgment, we concluded that certain findings in this report fall
under that definition. Consequently, for the publicly available audit report all
specifics as to the nature of cybersecurity findings and required corrective actions
have been redacted. We have determined that such aforementioned practices, and
government auditing standards, support the redaction of this information from the
public audit report. The specifics of these cybersecurity findings have been
communicated to DPSCS and those parties responsible for acting on our
recommendations in an unredacted audit report.
The response from DPSCS, on behalf of the regional fiscal offices, to our findings
and recommendations is included as an appendix to this report. Depending on the
version of the audit report, responses to any cybersecurity findings may be
redacted in accordance with State law. As prescribed in the State Government
Article, Section 2-1224 of the Annotated Code of Maryland, we will advise
DPSCS regarding the results of our review of its response.
17

--- Page 20 ---
APPENDIX
Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services
Office of the Secretary
6776 Reisterstown Road, Baltimore, Maryland 21215
410-585-3346 – TOLL FREE 877-379-8636 • www.dpscs.maryland.gov
STATE OF MARYLAND July 14, 2023
WES MOORE
GOVERNOR
ARUNA MILLER
LT. GOVERNOR
Mr. Gregory A. Hook, CPA
CAROLYN J. SCRUGGS Legislative Auditor
SECRETARY
Office of Legislative Audits
ANTHONY A. GASKINS
CHIEF OF STAFF Department of Legislative Services
The Warehouse at Camden Yards
CHRISTINA LENTZ
DEPUTY SECRETARY 351 West Camden Street, Suite 400
ADMINISTRATION
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
ANNIE D. HARVEY
DEPUTY SECRETARY
OPERATIONS
Dear Mr. Hook:
ANGELINA GUARINO
ASSISTANT SECRETARY
DATA, POLICY AND GRANTS
The Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services (DPSCS) has reviewed
RENARD E. BROOKS
ASSISTANT SECRETARY the Draft Audit Report dated June 2023 for the DPSCS – Regional Operations. We
PROGRAMS, TREATMENT & RE-
ENTRY SERVICES appreciate the constructive findings and recommendations that were made as the result
of this audit.
Please find attached the Department’s itemized responses to the findings and
recommendations. Corrective action has or will be taken for all the findings identified
by your audit, and the Office of the Inspector General will conduct periodic follow up
reviews to monitor the status of compliance.
If you have any questions regarding this response, please contact me.
Sincerely,
Carolyn J. Scruggs
Secretary
Attachment
Copy: Harold “Bud” Frank, Deputy Chief of Staff

--- Page 21 ---
Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services
Regional Operations
Agency Response Form
Payroll
The Office of Legislative Audits (OLA) has determined that Finding 1 related to “cybersecurity”,
as defined by the State Finance and Procurement Article, Section 3.5-301(b) of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, and therefore is subject to redaction from the publicly available audit report
in accordance with State Government article 2-1224(i). Although the specifics of the finding,
including the analysis, related recommendations, along with DPSCS’ responses, have been
redacted from this report copy, DPSCS’ responses indicated agreement with the finding and
related recommendations.
Finding 1
Redacted cybersecurity-related finding.
Agency response has been redacted by OLA.
Finding 2
Employee overtime at DPSCS’ facilities was not always pre-approved and supported and
was not restricted to a maximum of 80 hours per pay period, as required by DPSCS policy.
We recommend that DPSCS
a. ensure the required pre-approval of overtime hours to be worked is obtained or, absent
pre-approval, that an employee is prohibited from working overtime (repeat); and
b. establish controls to ensure that employees do not work more than 80 overtime hours in
a pay period (repeat).
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 2a Agree Estimated Completion Date: August 15,
2023
Please provide details of The Department shall ensure that processes are in place to comply with
corrective action or DPSCS policy to obtain the pre-approval of overtime hours to be
explain disagreement. worked, and if pre-approval is not provided, that employees are
prohibited from working overtime.
Page 1 of 6

--- Page 22 ---
Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services
Regional Operations
Agency Response Form
The Department is in the process of establishing a new policy that
clearly defines protocols for timely documentation of overtime
authorization and oversight of all overtime by the Time Keepers and
Shift Supervisors. This documentation will be completed by each shift’s
Time Keeper and the appropriate existing forms will be signed each pay
period by both the employee and the Shift Supervisor. Also, the Security
Chiefs shall ensure that all Shift Supervisors are aware of the
Department’s pre-approval requirements and shall review rosters and
timesheets to ensure compliance. In addition, the overtime will be
documented on the daily Post Assignment Worksheets (PAWs), and the
Facility Administrator and/or the Security Chief will approve the daily
PAWs for each shift, in advance of Officers being assigned to their shift.
The use of the PAWs is a standard operating policy and procedure for all
DPSCS facilities.
Recommendation 2b Agree Estimated Completion Date: August 15,
2023
Please provide details of The Department shall ensure that processes are in place to comply with
corrective action or DPSCS policy that prohibits custody staff from working more than 80
explain disagreement. overtime hours in a pay period. The Security Chiefs shall ensure that all
supervisors are aware of the 80 hour requirement and shall review
PAWs, timesheets, and the Complete Payroll Reports (CPRs) to ensure
compliance.
Department policy stipulates that “An officer who has worked 80 hours
of OT in the current pay period shall not be permitted to work overtime.”
This policy coincides with the already established memorandum of
understanding between the Department and AFSCME. Furthermore, the
Department is currently in the process of establishing a new policy,
which outlines required protocols for proper management of Officer
overtime. These protocols will establish a better means for maintaining a
record of approved overtime, allowing more efficient and effective
monitoring of overtime worked by officers.
Finally, the Department engages in proactive overtime monitoring on a
biweekly basis through its management of the TCP Timekeeping
System, which flags employees close to and exceeding the contractual
and policy limits of 80 hours per pay period. Employees out of
compliance are reported to appointing authorities so that Facility Shift
Supervisors can modify upcoming schedules to bring excessive
overtime use into compliance.
Page 2 of 6

--- Page 23 ---
Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services
Regional Operations
Agency Response Form
Finding 3
DPSCS did not maintain certain documentation supporting the propriety of time recorded
on the biometric timekeeping system.
We recommend that DPSCS maintain sufficient documentation to ensure the accuracy of
hours recorded in the timekeeping system, in accordance with its policies.
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 3 Agree Estimated Completion Date: February 18,
2022
Please provide details of The Department will maintain sufficient documentation to ensure the
corrective action or accuracy of hours recorded in the timekeeping system, in accordance
explain disagreement. with its policies. In fact, beginning February 2022, the Department
began receiving and maintaining copies of the Complete Payroll Reports
(CPRs) each pay period, which lists the entries of all time worked and
leave taken during a given pay period. The report is signed off by the
employee and immediate supervisor.
In addition, per OPS.115.0001 Staffing Analysis & Overtime Manager
policy, Post Assignment Worksheets (PAWs) are maintained for 3 years
or until the completion of an audit.
According to the Timekeeping Manual, all CPRs are sent to the local
Fiscal (Payroll) office in the region for storage after the employee and
supervisor reviews and signs.
Continued training and policy review is ongoing with the current facility
timekeepers to include that all reviews of the CPRs will be monitored for
accuracy.
Page 3 of 6

--- Page 24 ---
Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services
Regional Operations
Agency Response Form
Inmate Funds
Finding 4
DPSCS did not establish adequate controls over inmate fund collections at the Jessup fiscal
office to ensure collections were deposited and recorded timely.
We recommend that DPSCS ensure that all collections are deposited and recorded into the
State’s accounting system and MOBS III in a timely manner as required by the
Comptroller’s Accounting Procedures Manual and DPSCS internal policies.
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide All collections brought to the CRFO Cash Receipts Unit are presented
additional comments as on ledgers, verified, and logged onto a daily log sheet.
deemed necessary.
The Cash Receipts Unit now has multiple staff fully trained in the
complete process and additional staff trained in the supporting functions,
resulting in proper support and coverage for the lockbox process. The
additional full cross-training enables the flexibility to interchange
personnel without losing quality of work and incurring any timing
delays.
Recommendation 4 Agree Estimated Completion Date: March 31,
2023
Please provide details of The Department will ensure that all collections are deposited and
corrective action or recorded into the State’s accounting system and MOBS III in a timely
explain disagreement. manner, in accordance with the Comptroller’s Accounting Procedures
Manual and DPSCS internal policies.
The facilities responsible for delivering any monetary collections to the
Finance offices will be notified that it is incumbent upon them to
forward such collections to the Cash Receipts Unit within 2 business
days of collection. The Cash Receipts Fiscal Account Technician will
begin comparing the date of the collections items presented on the ledger
with the current date. If the collections presented are more than 2 days
late, or beyond any reasonable delay, notice will be made to the facility's
Warden concerning the unreasonable delay in presenting the collection
to the Jessup Finance Office.
The recording of lockbox deposits via journal entries into the State's
accounting system is no longer applicable, effective April 2022. Prior to
Page 4 of 6

--- Page 25 ---
Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services
Regional Operations
Agency Response Form
April 2022, there was a journal entry initiated by the Inmate Accounts
Lockbox Unit to reclassify the deposit from a default liability account to
the correct Program Cost Account (PCA). As of April 2022, that
process was changed to have the State Treasurer's Office post the
lockbox daily deposits directly into the correct account using the
appropriate transaction code and PCA. This adjustment has eliminated
the necessity for a journal entry from the Inmate Accounts Unit.
Page 5 of 6

--- Page 26 ---
Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services
Regional Operations
Agency Response Form
Finding 5
Monthly reconciliations of inmate funds recorded in MOBS III to the related Comptroller
of Maryland’s records were not performed timely or sufficiently comprehensive.
We recommend that DPSCS
a. prepare comprehensive monthly reconciliations between MOBS III and the
Comptroller’s records as required (repeat); and
b. consult with appropriate control agency personnel (such as the Comptroller’s General
Accounting Division), as needed, regarding the resolution of the aforementioned
longstanding differences (repeat).
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide The staffing shortages in the Division of Financial Services had
additional comments as hampered the timely completion of the reconciliations in the Baltimore
deemed necessary. Region, but that has since been addressed. Reconciliations are now being
completed timely.
Recommendation 5a Agree Estimated Completion Date: June 30, 2022
Please provide details of The Department will prepare comprehensive monthly reconciliations
corrective action or between MOBS III and the Comptroller’s records as required. The
explain disagreement. comprehensive monthly reconciliations have been completed in a timely
manner since June 2022 by all regions.
Recommendation 5b Agree Estimated Completion Date: December 31,
2023
Please provide details of The Department will consult with appropriate control agency personnel
corrective action or as needed, regarding the resolution of the aforementioned longstanding
explain disagreement. differences.
Since June 2022, the regional reconciliations have been completed
timely. Now that the Department has been more consistent in completing
the transactional reconciliations between FMIS and MOBS III, the
balances have also been remaining consistent. Accordingly, by
December 31, 2023, the Department will seek guidance and permission
from the General Accounting Division to write-off the unreconciled
balances.
Page 6 of 6

--- Page 27 ---
A T
UDIT EAM
Heather A. Warriner, CPA
Audit Manager
Anthony V. Calcagno
Senior Auditor
Benjamin H. Straube
Brian M. Webbert
Staff Auditors