Title: Workers’ Compensation Commission
Date: 07/27/2023
Type: Fiscal Compliance
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=64c2a5cda1ce580c8043393a
Extracted: 2025-06-19T23:06:19.747378
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Audit Report
Workers’ Compensation Commission
July 2023
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Senator Clarence K. Lam, M.D. (Senate Chair) Delegate Jared Solomon (House Chair)
Senator Joanne C. Benson Delegate Steven J. Arentz
Senator Paul D. Corderman Delegate Nicholas P. Charles II
Senator Katie Fry Hester Delegate Andrea Fletcher Harrison
Senator Shelly L. Hettleman Delegate Steven C. Johnson
Senator Cheryl C. Kagan Delegate Mary A. Lehman
Senator Cory V. McCray Delegate David Moon
Senator Justin D. Ready Delegate Julie Palakovich Carr
Senator Bryan W. Simonaire Delegate Stephanie M. Smith
Senator Craig J. Zucker Delegate M. Courtney Watson
To Obtain Further Information
Office of Legislative Audits
The Warehouse at Camden Yards
351 West Camden Street, Suite 400
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Phone: 410-946-5900
Maryland Relay: 711
TTY: 410-946-5401 ꞏ 301-970-5401
E-mail: OLAWebmaster@ola.state.md.us
Website: www.ola.state.md.us
To Report Fraud
The Office of Legislative Audits operates a Fraud Hotline to report fraud, waste, or abuse involving State
of Maryland government resources. Reports of fraud, waste, or abuse may be communicated anonymously
by a toll-free call to 1-877-FRAUD-11, by mail to the Fraud Hotline, c/o Office of Legislative Audits, or
through the Office’s website.
Nondiscrimination Statement
The Department of Legislative Services does not discriminate on the basis of age, ancestry, color, creed,
marital status, national origin, race, religion, gender, gender identity, sexual orientation, or disability in the
admission or access to its programs, services, or activities. The Department’s Information Officer has been
designated to coordinate compliance with the nondiscrimination requirements contained in Section 35.107
of the United States Department of Justice Regulations. Requests for assistance should be directed to the
Information Officer at 410-946-5400 or 410-970-5400.

--- Page 3 ---
July 27, 2023
Senator Clarence K. Lam, M.D., Senate Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Delegate Jared Solomon, House Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Members of Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Annapolis, Maryland
Ladies and Gentlemen:
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the Workers’ Compensation
Commission (WCC) for the period beginning August 6, 2018 and ending
September 30, 2022. WCC adjudicates claims for compensation arising under the
Workers’ Compensation Law and is responsible for the approval and monitoring
of Maryland self-insured employers. WCC’s expenditures are recovered from
assessments to insurance companies and self-insured employers.
Our audit disclosed that WCC did not use available information to proactively
identify employers that did not have the required workers’ compensation
insurance. For example, WCC did not utilize records it obtains from the
Maryland Department of Labor - Unemployment Insurance Division (DUI) to
identify employers that may not have current workers’ compensation insurance.
We utilized the data from DUI and an insurance rating and data collection bureau
specializing in workers' compensation to identify 1,650 employers with one or
more employees active during our audit period that appeared to lack workers’
compensation insurance. Our test of 20 of these employers confirmed that 19 did
not have insurance.
In addition, our audit disclosed that WCC did not maintain complete tracking
records of actions taken against potentially noncompliant employers. Our
examination of the case docket records for hearings held on 7 days between
November 2021 through September 2022 disclosed that 139 of the 647 employers
(21 percent) scheduled for hearings were not listed on the tracking records and for
493 other employers (76 percent), the records did not indicate the outcome of the
cases.

--- Page 4 ---
Furthermore, we noted WCC did not have procedures to independently verify that
all collections received were deposited and did not require payments to be made
electronically (such as via wire transfer) to enhance accountability and security
over the funds.
Finally, our audit also included a review to determine the status of the three
findings contained in our preceding audit report. We determined that WCC
satisfactorily address one of the three prior audit findings. The remaining two
findings are repeated in this report.
WCC’s response to this audit is included as an appendix to this report. We
reviewed the response to our findings and related recommendations, and have
concluded that the corrective actions identified are sufficient to address all audit
issues.
We wish to acknowledge the cooperation extended to us during the audit by
WCC. We also wish to acknowledge WCC’s willingness to address the audit
issues and implement appropriate corrective actions.
Respectfully submitted,
Gregory A. Hook, CPA
Legislative Auditor
2

--- Page 5 ---
Table of Contents
Background Information 4
Agency Responsibilities 4
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report 5
Findings and Recommendations 7
Employer Compliance
Finding 1 – The Workers’ Compensation Commission (WCC) did not use 8
available information to proactively identify employers that did not
have required workers’ compensation insurance.
* Finding 2 – WCC did not maintain complete tracking records of actions 9
taken against potentially noncompliant employers, which precluded
effective oversight.
Cash Receipts
* Finding 3 – WCC did not have procedures to independently verify that 10
all collections received were deposited, and did not require large
payments to be submitted electronically to enhance security of
the funds.
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology 12
Agency Response Appendix
* Denotes item repeated in full or part from preceding audit report
3

--- Page 6 ---
Background Information
Agency Responsibilities
The Workers’ Compensation Commission (WCC) administers Title 9 of the
Labor and Employment Article of the Annotated Code of Maryland, also known
as the Maryland Workers’ Compensation Law. WCC receives reports of
workplace accidents, adjudicates claims for compensation arising under the law,
conducts hearings of contested workers’ compensation cases, refers claimants
requiring rehabilitation to appropriate rehabilitation service providers, and
assesses penalties against employers to be paid to the Uninsured Employers’ Fund
for failing to provide workers’ compensation insurance coverage as required by
law. For adjudicated claim awards that involve permanent disability or death, the
awards include provisions to fund Maryland’s Subsequent Injury Fund and
Uninsured Employers’ Fund through WCC-imposed assessments against
employers or insurers. Finally, WCC is responsible for approving employers who
wish to be self-insured in the State and for monitoring their activities and
financial solvency.
According to WCC’s records, WCC received 22,075 workers’ compensation
claims and approved 16,213 awards involving permanent disability or death,
totaling approximately $373.9 million during fiscal year 2022. In accordance
with State law, all of WCC’s expenditures, as well as the expenditures of certain
programs within the Maryland Department of Labor (MDL), are primarily funded
by assessments billed to insurance companies that issue workers’ compensation
insurance policies and companies that self-insure for workers’ compensation
coverage.
WCC is governed by a 10-member Commission, appointed by the Governor to
staggered 12-year terms, subject to confirmation by the Maryland Senate. WCC’s
fiscal year 2022 appropriation provided for 115 employee positions and,
according to the State’s records, WCC expenditures totaled $18.6 million (see
Figure 1 on the following page). These expenditures were solely funded by fiscal
year 2022 assessments, which according to WCC's records totaled approximately
$33.2 million (of which $13.9 million was used to fund MDL programs).
4

--- Page 7 ---
Figure 1
WCC Positions, Expenditures, and Funding Sources
Full-Time Equivalent Positions as of June 30, 2022
Positions Percent
Filled 99 85.3%
Frozen 1 1 0.9%
Vacant 16 13.8%
Total 116
Fiscal Year 2022 Expenditures
Expenditures Percent
Salaries, Wages, and Fringe Benefits $11,635,952 62.4%
Technical and Special Fees 844,157 4.5%
Operating Expenses 6,168,699 33.1%
Total $18,648,808
Fiscal Year 2022 Funding Sources
Funding Percent
Special Fund $18,648,808 100.0%
Total $18,648,808
Source: State financial and personnel records
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report
Our audit included a review to determine the status of the three findings contained
in our preceding audit report dated April 2, 2019. As disclosed in Figure 2 on the
following page, WCC satisfactorily addressed one of these findings. The
remaining two findings are repeated in this report.
1 Prior to December 1, 2021, a hiring freeze resulted in certain positions being frozen. Frozen
positions were unauthorized to be filled according to budgetary instructions from the Department
of Budget and Management. Any position that is currently marked as frozen has not been filled
since the freeze was lifted; however, these positions now are available to be filled.
5

--- Page 8 ---
Figure 2
Status of Preceding Findings
Preceding Implementation
Finding Description
Finding Status
WCC had not taken timely action to schedule
Repeated
hearings before the Commission for known or
Finding 1 (Current Finding
potentially uninsured employers, and its monitoring
2)
records were incomplete.
WCC lacked adequate procedures to ensure that all Repeated
Finding 2 collections received were deposited, and that (Current Finding
deposits were made in a timely manner. 3)
Adequate controls had not been established to
ensure the propriety of WCC’s payroll, employee
Finding 3 Not repeated
leave balances, and user access capabilities in the
Statewide Personnel System.
6

--- Page 9 ---
Findings and Recommendations
Employer Compliance
Background
State law generally requires each employer with one or more employees to
maintain workers’ compensation insurance from an authorized insurer to provide
coverage of accidental personal injury arising out of and in the course of
employment or obtain approval to self-insure. The Workers’ Compensation
Commission (WCC) is responsible for determining if employers are in
compliance with the applicable workers’ compensation insurance laws.
Additionally, State law gives WCC the authority to order an employer without
proper workers’ compensation insurance to attend a hearing. The purpose of the
hearing is to give the employer the opportunity to explain why it should not be
considered in violation of the law requiring such insurance. An employer found
to be in violation of the law is described as noncompliant, and WCC may order
the employer to obtain insurance and pay a penalty not to exceed $10,000 to the
Uninsured Employers’ Fund. State law also requires WCC to set hearings as soon
as practicable for employers who fail to secure the required insurance coverage.
WCC identifies potentially uninsured employers by reviewing reports, provided
by the National Council on Compensation Insurance (NCCI),2 of employers who
have cancelled their current workers’ compensation insurance policies. WCC
may also identify uninsured employers through workers’ compensation claim
hearings and tips received from the public. For each employer identified, WCC
mails the employer a letter requesting information about current insurance
coverage or documentation supporting why coverage is no longer needed.
When an employer fails to respond to the aforementioned letter with appropriate
documentation, WCC issues an order directing the employer to attend a hearing
before the Commission. Based on WCC’s records, the Commission held 47
employer compliance hearings for 3,184 cases from August 2018 to September
2022. Due to the COVID-19 pandemic, the Commission did not hold employer
compliance hearings from May 2020 to October 2021.
2 NCCI is an insurance rating and data collection bureau specializing in workers' compensation,
which gathers and analyzes related data, including workers’ compensation claims and policies,
and maintains associated databases for the benefit of its member organizations across the
country, including WCC.
7

--- Page 10 ---
Finding 1
WCC did not use available information to proactively identify employers
that did not have the required workers’ compensation insurance.
Analysis
WCC did not use available information to proactively identify employers that did
not have the required workers’ compensation insurance. Specifically, WCC’s
process was not comprehensive as it did not utilize active employment records
available from the Maryland Department of Labor’s Division of Unemployment
Insurance (DUI)3 to identify employers with one or more employees that may not
have current workers’ compensation insurance. Rather, as noted above, WCC’s
procedures were generally limited to following up on NCCI records of employers
that cancelled workers’ compensation insurance policies and investigating tips
regarding employers with no workers’ compensation insurance. These procedures
would not proactively identify employers who never obtained the required
workers’ compensation insurance.
We obtained DUI records of employers with one or more employees active
between July 1, 2017 through December 31, 2020 which we deemed reliable for
our purposes and compared them to NCCI records for calendar year 2020. We
filtered these records to include only those employers added to the DUI records
during our audit period. Our comparison identified 1,650 Maryland employers
with one or more employees based on DUI records that did not have active
workers’ compensation insurance according to NCCI. Our test of 20 of these
employers to WCC records confirmed that 19 did not have active Maryland
workers’ compensation coverage. WCC was not aware of the lack of insurance
for 18 of the 19 employers until we brought the matter to its attention.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that WCC
a. develop a comprehensive process to proactively identify employers that
potentially did not have workers’ compensation insurance. For example,
WCC should periodically obtain and compare DUI records of employers
with one or more employees to NCCI records; and
b. investigate and take appropriate corrective actions (such as assessing
penalties) for any employers that do not have the required workers’
3 WCC utilizes data from DUI in its calculation of assessments to licensed workers’ compensation
insurers and self-insured companies. WCC advised us that although it has access to query DUI
data for certain assessment calculation purposes, it does not have the data in a format that would
allow for identification of employers without workers’ compensation insurance.
8

--- Page 11 ---
compensation insurance, including any of the 1,650 employers noted
above determined to not have insurance.
Finding 2
WCC did not maintain complete tracking records of actions taken against
potentially noncompliant employers, which precluded effective oversight.
Analysis
WCC did not maintain complete tracking records of actions taken against
potentially noncompliant employers, which precluded effective oversight. The
purpose of the tracking records is to assist WCC in monitoring the disposition of
cases when potentially noncompliant employers are first identified. Our
examination of the case docket records for the hearings held on 7 days between
November 2021 through September 2022 disclosed that 139 of the 647 employers
(21 percent) scheduled for hearings were not listed on the tracking records and for
493 other employers (76 percent), WCC did not document the outcome of the
cases in the tracking records.4 The lack of complete tracking records precluded
WCC from effectively monitoring the timeliness and correctness of processed
cases.
Similar conditions regarding incomplete tracking records were commented upon
in our preceding audit report. In its response to that report, WCC indicated that a
new information technology modernization project would be implemented that
would create an electronic system to administer the employer compliance
program that would be linked to the docket function. In addition, WCC indicated
that it had created a docket checklist to help ensure that each case was properly
documented. Although WCC indicated these steps would be completed by
February 2019, during our current audit we noted that the new system was still
being developed and WCC had not fully implemented procedures to ensure its
tracking records were complete (such as by reconciling the tracking records to the
related docket records as recommended last audit).
Recommendation 2
We recommend that WCC ensure its tracking records are complete. For
example, we recommend that WCC periodically compare its tracking and
docket records to ensure completeness and accuracy (repeat).
4 State law requires WCC to set hearings as soon as practicable for employers and our prior audit
noted that such hearings were not being scheduled timely. We did not test the timeliness of the
hearings this audit due to the lack of complete and accurate tracking records and because the
Commission suspended the hearings from May 2020 to October 2021 due to the COVID-19
pandemic.
9

--- Page 12 ---
Cash Receipts
Finding 3
WCC did not have procedures to independently verify that all collections
received were deposited, and did not require large payments to be submitted
electronically to enhance security of the funds.
Analysis
WCC did not have procedures to independently verify that all collections received
were deposited since the employee responsible had access to the collections and
maintained the related accounts receivable records. In addition, WCC did not
require large payments to be submitted electronically to enhance security of the
funds. WCC deposits totaled $33.7 million during fiscal year 2022, which
primarily related to assessment payments from insurance companies and self-
insured employers.
 The employee responsible for verifying the initial record of collections to the
validated deposit documentation had access to the safe where collections were
stored prior to deposit. In addition, this employee created the invoices for
assessments, and maintained the accounts receivable records which generated
the resultant collections. As a result, errors or other discrepancies could occur
without timely detection and there was a lack of assurance that all collections
had been deposited. The Comptroller of Maryland’s Accounting Procedures
Manual requires independent verification of collections to deposit. The
Manual further provides for segregating cash receipts and accounts receivable
related functions.
 WCC did not require insurance companies and self-insured employers to
submit assessment payments electronically (such as via wire transfer) to
enhance accountability and security over the funds. Our review of 319 large
dollar value payments WCC received during the period May 2021 through
September 2022 totaling $13.8 million, disclosed that 55 checks totaling $13.1
million ranged in amounts from $20,000 up to $2.5 million.
A similar condition regarding the lack of an independent deposit verifications was
commented upon in our prior audit. In response to that report, WCC indicated
that effective January 2019 the employee performing the deposit verifications and
accounts receivable recordkeeping no longer had access to the safe and related
collections. However, as noted above, access to the safe and related collections
had not been restricted during the current audit period. WCC management
advised us that staffing vacancies within the fiscal department prevented the
recommendations from being implemented as intended.
10

--- Page 13 ---
Recommendation 3
We recommend that WCC
a. ensure employees responsible for performing the deposit verifications and
accounts receivable recordkeeping do not have access to related
collections, as required; (repeat) and
b. consider requiring assessment check payments to be made electronically
to enhance security over the funds.
We advised WCC on accomplishing the necessary separation of duties using
existing personnel.
11

--- Page 14 ---
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the Workers’ Compensation
Commission (WCC) for the period beginning August 6, 2018 and ending
September 30, 2022. The audit was conducted in accordance with generally
accepted government auditing standards. Those standards require that we plan
and perform the audit to obtain sufficient, appropriate evidence to provide a
reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives.
We believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings
and conclusions based on our audit objectives.
As prescribed by the State Government Article, Section 2-1221 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, the objectives of this audit were to examine WCC’s financial
transactions, records, and internal control, and to evaluate its compliance with
applicable State laws, rules, and regulations.
In planning and conducting our audit, we focused on the major financial-related
areas of operations based on assessments of significance and risk. The areas
addressed by the audit included employer compliance, assessments, cash receipts,
disbursements, and payroll. We also determined the status of the findings
contained in our preceding audit report.
Our assessment of internal controls was based on agency procedures and controls
in place at the time of our fieldwork. Our tests of transactions and other auditing
procedures were generally focused on the transactions occurring during our audit
period of August 6, 2018 to September 30, 2022, but may include transactions
before or after this period as we considered necessary to achieve our audit
objectives.
To accomplish our audit objectives, our audit procedures included inquiries of
appropriate personnel, inspections of documents and records, tests of transactions,
and to the extent practicable, observations of WCC’s operations. Generally,
transactions were selected for testing based on auditor judgment, which primarily
considers risk, the timing or dollar amount of the transaction, or the significance
of the transaction to the area of operation reviewed. As a matter of course, we do
not normally use sampling in our tests, so unless otherwise specifically indicated,
neither statistical nor non-statistical audit sampling was used to select the
transactions tested. Therefore, unless sampling is specifically indicated in a
finding, the results from any tests conducted or disclosed by us cannot be used to
project those results to the entire population from which the test items were
selected.
12

--- Page 15 ---
We performed various data extracts of pertinent information from the State’s
Financial Management Information System (such as revenue and expenditure
data) and the State’s Central Payroll Bureau (payroll data). These extracts are
performed as part of ongoing internal processes established by the Office of
Legislative Audits and were subject to various tests to determine data reliability.
We determined that the data extracted from these sources were sufficiently
reliable for the purposes the data were used during this audit. We also extracted
data from WCC’s assessment billing and compliance tracking records for the
purpose of testing certain areas. We performed various tests of the relevant data
and determined that the data were sufficiently reliable for the purposes the data
were used during the audit. We further obtained active employer data extracts
from the Maryland Department of Labor’s Division of Unemployment Insurance
(DUI) for the purpose of testing employer compliance. We performed various
tests of the relevant data and determined that the data were sufficiently reliable for
the purposes the data were used during our audit of WCC. Finally, we performed
other auditing procedures that we considered necessary to achieve our audit
objectives. The reliability of data used in this report for background or
informational purposes was not assessed.
WCC’s management is responsible for establishing and maintaining effective
internal control. Internal control is a process designed to provide reasonable
assurance that objectives pertaining to the reliability of financial records;
effectiveness and efficiency of operations, including safeguarding of assets; and
compliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations are achieved. As
provided in Government Auditing Standards, there are five components of
internal control: control environment, risk assessment, control activities,
information and communication, and monitoring. Each of the five components,
when significant to the audit objectives, and as applicable to WCC, were
considered by us during the course of this audit.
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate.
Our reports are designed to assist the Maryland General Assembly in exercising
its legislative oversight function and to provide constructive recommendations for
improving State operations. As a result, our reports generally do not address
activities we reviewed that are functioning properly.
This report includes findings relating to conditions that we consider to be
significant deficiencies in the design or operation of internal control that could
13

--- Page 16 ---
adversely affect WCC’s ability to maintain reliable financial records, operate
effectively and efficiently, and/or comply with applicable laws, rules, and
regulations. Our report also includes findings regarding significant instances of
noncompliance with applicable laws, rules, or regulations. Other less significant
findings were communicated to WCC that did not warrant inclusion in this report.
WCC’s response to our findings and recommendations is included as an appendix
to this report. As prescribed in the State Government Article, Section 2-1224 of
the Annotated Code of Maryland, we will advise WCC regarding the results of
our review of its response.
14

--- Page 17 ---
APPENDIX
WES MOORE MAUREEN QUINN
Governor Chair
ARUNA MILLER KATHLEEN A. EVANS
Lt. Governor JAMES R. FORRESTER
ASHA JOSEPH JEFFERSON
MARY K. AHEARN
W C C
ALLAN H. KITTLEMAN
Chief Executive Officer ORKERS’ OMPENSATION OMMISSION MORRISANN MARTIN
HOWARD L. METZ
10 East Baltimore Street, Baltimore, Maryland 21202-1641 JU Y. OH
Phone: 410-864-5100 • MD Toll Free: 1-800-492-0479 DELIA TURANO SCHADT
TTY Users Call Via Maryland Relay TRACEY PARKER WARREN
www.wcc.state.md.us Commissioners
July 26, 2023
Mr. Gregory A. Hook, CPA
Office of Legislative Audits
The Warehouse at Camden Yards
351 West Camden Street
Suite 400
Baltimore, MD 21201
Dear Mr. Hook:
The Workers’ Compensation Commission (WCC) appreciates the opportunity to provide
responses to the Draft Audit Report for the period beginning August 6, 2018 and ending
September 30, 2022. The WCC’s responses are presented using the Agency Response Form
provided by your office.
Please do not hesitate to contact David E. Jones, Chief Financial Officer, if you or your
staff should have any questions or concerns regarding the WCC’s proposed strategy for
addressing these issues. David’s telephone number is (410) 864-5255.
Sincerely,
Maureen Quinn
Chair
Attachment
cc: Mary K. Ahearn, Chief Executive Officer
David E. Jones, Chief Financial Officer

--- Page 18 ---
Workers’ Compensation Commission
Agency Response Form
Employer Compliance
Finding 1
WCC did not use available information to proactively identify employers that did not have
the required workers’ compensation insurance.
We recommend that WCC
a. develop a comprehensive process to proactively identify employers that potentially did
not have workers’ compensation insurance. For example, WCC should periodically
obtain and compare DUI records of employers with one or more employees to NCCI
records; and
b. investigate and take appropriate corrective actions (such as assessing penalties) for any
employers that do not have the required workers’ compensation insurance, including
any of the 1,650 employers noted above determined to not have insurance.
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 1a Agree Estimated Completion Date: 12/31/2023
Please provide details of The WCC will contact DUI to determine the most feasible way to
corrective action or capture the reporting recommended and modify the Memorandum of
explain disagreement. Understanding with the DUI to include getting the recommended
reporting to compare with NCCI records. The WCC will endeavor to
build the data collection/comparison into the ongoing Enterprise
Modernization Project for the Employer Compliance program.
Recommendation 1b Agree Estimated Completion Date: 12/31/2023
Please provide details of The WCC will review the 1,650 employers to determine if coverage
corrective action or existed; contact those employers that did not have coverage to determine
explain disagreement. if coverage was required and proceed accordingly (assess fines if
coverage was required).
Page 1 of 4

--- Page 19 ---
Workers’ Compensation Commission
Agency Response Form
Finding 2
WCC did not maintain complete tracking records of actions taken against potentially
noncompliant employers, which precluded effective oversight.
We recommend that WCC ensure its tracking records are complete. For example, we
recommend that WCC periodically compare its tracking and docket records to ensure
completeness and accuracy (repeat).
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 2 Agree Estimated Completion Date: 6/30/2023
Please provide details of The WCC will monthly review the tracking records (Excel file) to ensure
corrective action or that it is complete and accurate. The WCC will also ensure that each
explain disagreement. docketing sheet is maintained in the system for comparison to the
tracking sheet. It should be noted that the hardcopy files also show the
actions taken on each employer compliance case.
Page 2 of 4

--- Page 20 ---
Workers’ Compensation Commission
Agency Response Form
Cash Receipts
Finding 3
WCC did not have procedures to independently verify that all collections received were
deposited, and did not require large payments to be submitted electronically to enhance
security of the funds.
We recommend that WCC
a. ensure employees responsible for performing the deposit verifications and accounts
receivable recordkeeping do not have access to related collections, as required; (repeat)
and
b. consider requiring assessment check payments to be made electronically to enhance
security over the funds.
We advised WCC on accomplishing the necessary separation of duties using existing
personnel.
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 3a Agree Estimated Completion Date: 4/27/2023
Please provide details of The WCC has reassigned these functions to ensure segregation of duties.
corrective action or Specifically, the employee who is responsible for performing the deposit
explain disagreement. verifications is now a different individual than the employee who is
responsible for accounts receivable recordkeeping. The employee who
is now responsible for performing the deposit verifications does not have
access to the safe and collections.
It should be noted that the agency addressed this finding from the
previous audit on January 24, 2019 by ensuring the employee who was
responsible for performing the deposit verifications and for account
receivable recordkeeping did not have access to the safe and collections.
This segregation of duties was in place until June 2021 when the
individual performing the accounts receivable recordkeeping departed
the agency. Because of the short staffing and other logistical challenges
brought on by the COVID-19 pandemic, the agency was not able to
maintain this segregation of duties until another employee was hired and
Page 3 of 4

--- Page 21 ---
Workers’ Compensation Commission
Agency Response Form
trained. As of April 27, 2023, the agency once again has the appropriate
segregation of duties in place.
Recommendation 3b Agree Estimated Completion Date: 12/31/2023
Please provide details of The WCC will consult with the State Treasurer’s Office to consider
corrective action or allowing insurance companies and self-insured employers to submit
explain disagreement. check payments electronically (such as via wire transfer) to enhance
accountability and security over the funds.
Page 4 of 4

--- Page 22 ---
A T
UDIT EAM
Mark S. Hagenbuch, CPA
Audit Manager
Anthony V. Calcagno
Senior Auditor
Albert S. Kim
Staff Auditor