Title: Review of Local Government Audit Reports - Fiscal Year Ending June 30, 2022
Date: 08/18/2023
Type: Special Reports and Letters
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=64df8075a1ce5817b8caec18
Extracted: 2025-06-19T23:06:28.454212
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Review of Local Government Audit Reports
Fiscal Year Ending June 30, 2022
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Senator Clarence K. Lam, M.D. (Senate Chair) Delegate Jared Solomon (House Chair)
Senator Joanne C. Benson Delegate Steven J. Arentz
Senator Paul D. Corderman Delegate Nicholas P. Charles II
Senator Katie Fry Hester Delegate Andrea Fletcher Harrison
Senator Shelly L. Hettleman Delegate Steven C. Johnson
Senator Cheryl C. Kagan Delegate Mary A. Lehman
Senator Cory V. McCray Delegate David Moon
Senator Justin D. Ready Delegate Julie Palakovich Carr
Senator Bryan W. Simonaire Delegate Stephanie M. Smith
Senator Craig J. Zucker Delegate M. Courtney Watson
To Obtain Further Information
Office of Legislative Audits
The Warehouse at Camden Yards
351 West Camden Street, Suite 400
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Phone: 410-946-5900
Maryland Relay: 711
TTY: 410-946-5401 ꞏ 301-970-5401
E-mail: OLAWebmaster@ola.state.md.us
Website: www.ola.state.md.us
To Report Fraud
The Office of Legislative Audits operates a Fraud Hotline to report fraud, waste, or abuse involving State
of Maryland government resources. Reports of fraud, waste, or abuse may be communicated anonymously
by a toll-free call to 1-877-FRAUD-11, by mail to the Fraud Hotline, c/o Office of Legislative Audits, or
through the Office’s website.
Nondiscrimination Statement
The Department of Legislative Services does not discriminate on the basis of age, ancestry, color, creed,
marital status, national origin, race, religion, gender, gender identity, sexual orientation, or disability in the
admission or access to its programs, services, or activities. The Department’s Information Officer has been
designated to coordinate compliance with the nondiscrimination requirements contained in Section 35.107
of the United States Department of Justice Regulations. Requests for assistance should be directed to the
Information Officer at 410-946-5400 or 410-970-5400.

--- Page 3 ---
August 18, 2023
Senator Clarence K. Lam, M.D., Senate Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Delegate Jared Solomon, House Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Members of Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Annapolis, Maryland
The Honorable Brooke E. Lierman
Comptroller of Maryland
Ms. Victoria L. Gruber, Executive Director
Department of Legislative Services
Ladies and Gentlemen:
In accordance with the Local Government Article, Section 16-307 of the
Annotated Code of Maryland, we have performed desk reviews of the audit
reports for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2022 filed by each county, incorporated
city or town, and taxing district in Maryland (referred to as local governments).
We also reviewed overdue audit reports for prior fiscal years that were received
over the past year. The desk reviews consisted of assessments of compliance with
certain accounting and auditing standards, evaluations of compliance with certain
State laws, and analyses of selected financial data to identify potential financial
problems.
Most of the financial statements filed by the local governments for the fiscal year
ended June 30, 2022, along with the related independent auditors’ reports,
complied with the accounting and auditing standards that we assessed.
Nevertheless, we identified instances of noncompliance with certain requirements
of our audit guidelines, generally accepted accounting principles, and/or generally
accepted auditing standards. We sent letters to 37 local governments (some of
whom had several different instances of non-compliance) and, as applicable, to
their independent auditors to notify them of the deficiencies disclosed by our

--- Page 4 ---
reviews so that corrective actions could be taken to help ensure future
compliance.
For example, a number of audit reports were not filed timely in accordance with
the requirements of State law. As of July 17, 2023, 19 local governments had not
submitted audit reports for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2022, which had a
statutory filing deadline of October 31, 2022 or December 31, 2022 (based on a
jurisdiction’s population size). Additionally, 7 of those 19 local governments had
not filed audit reports for fiscal years ending June 30, 2021; and 1 of those 7 also
had not filed its audit report for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2020.
If a local government does not comply with the audit report filing requirements,
State law provides that the Comptroller of Maryland, on notice from the
Executive Director of the Department of Legislative Services, may order the
discontinuance of all moneys, grants, or State aid to which the local governments
are entitled. Previously, in a separate letter, we notified the Executive Director of
the Department of Legislative Services of the local government with more than
one fiscal year’s audit report outstanding.
Eleven financial statements disclosed 10 local governments with cash deposits
that were not adequately collateralized, or otherwise insured, which is an area of
noncompliance with State law. Additionally, for one local government, the
auditor’s report included an explanatory paragraph describing an uncertainty
about its ability to continue as a going concern. As appropriate, we sent letters to
these local governments, and to their legislative representatives, to communicate
their noncompliance and to request that the local governments advise us of the
corrective actions that will be taken.
Respectfully submitted,
Gregory A. Hook, CPA
Legislative Auditor
2

--- Page 5 ---
Table of Contents
Introduction and Scope, Objectives, and Methodology 4
Results of Desk Reviews 6
Audit Reports
Finding 1 – A number of local governments had not filed the required 6
audit reports or had filed after the required date.
Finding 2 – The auditor’s report for one local government contained 7
a qualified opinion on one opinion unit, while another auditor’s
report for a different local government contained a disclaimer of
opinion on the financial statements.
Finding 3 – Auditors’ reports for seven local governmental units 8
were not presented in accordance with certain generally accepted
auditing standards.
Financial Statements
Finding 4 – The financial statements submitted by 13 local 8
governments did not meet certain requirements of generally
accepted accounting principles.
Finding 5 – Financial statements, accompanying notes, and required 9
supplementary information did not include certain disclosures
required by generally accepted accounting principles for three
audit reports.
Uncollateralized Funds
Finding 6 – Eleven financial statements submitted by 10 local 10
governments contained disclosures that cash deposits were not
adequately collateralized, or otherwise insured, as required by
State law.
Potential Financial Problems
Finding 7 – One local government disclosed potential financial 11
problems resulting in uncertainty regarding its ability to
continue as a going concern.
Special Taxing Districts 11
3

--- Page 6 ---
Introduction and Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
The Local Government Article, Section 16-306 of the Annotated Code of
Maryland requires each county, incorporated city or town, and special taxing area
in Maryland (referred to in this report as local governments) to file audit reports
annually or once every four years under specified conditions. There are 23
counties, Baltimore City, 156 incorporated cities and towns, and 14 special taxing
areas in Maryland that fall under the scope of our review. Based on current
reports, past due reports, and waivers previously granted by this Office, there
were 198 local government audit reports due for our fiscal year 2022 review.1
The reports are to include financial statements, with accompanying notes, and
auditors’ reports that express opinions as to whether the financial statements are
fairly presented. The financial statements are required to be prepared in
accordance with generally accepted accounting principles and audited in
accordance with generally accepted auditing standards. Finally, we annually
prepare and distribute audit guidelines to provide additional information regarding
the accounting, reporting, and auditing requirements.
The Local Government Article, Section 16-307 of the Code requires the Office of
Legislative Audits to perform a desk review of each local government’s annual
audit report for compliance with generally accepted accounting principles and
auditing standards. As part of the desk review process, we also addressed other
attributes as described below. Section 16-308 of the Article specifies the
reporting and review requirements applicable to special taxing districts created by
the counties (in general, the difference between a special taxing district and a
special taxing area relates to the party responsible for monitoring). The
applicable county is responsible for monitoring each special taxing district’s
compliance with the applicable provisions of the law and for submitting the
districts’ reports to the Office of Legislative Audits. Generally, the Office also
reviews the counties’ monitoring of the districts’ reports.
We conducted a desk review of each of the fiscal year 2022 reports that had been
received from the counties, incorporated cities and towns, and special taxing
areas. We also reviewed one fiscal year 2019 report (Town of Deer Park), three
fiscal year 2020 reports (Town of Deer Park, City of Hyattsville, Town of
Middletown) and six fiscal year 2021 reports (Town of Capitol Heights, Town of
Cheverly, Town of East New Market, City of Mount Rainier, Town of Princess
Anne and Town of Rock Hall) that were received over the last year. The desk
1 As noted in the “Results of Desk Review” section of this report, not all reports due this year were
submitted.
4

--- Page 7 ---
reviews consisted of reviewing each audit report in order to accomplish the
following tasks:
 Identify areas of noncompliance with our audit guidelines and certain
accounting and auditing standards pertaining to the presentation of the
financial statements and auditors’ reports.
 Identify any instances of noncompliance with certain provisions of State law
(for example, collateral for bank deposits, timely filing of audit reports).
 Identify local governments with potential financial problems relating to deficit
fund balances or unfavorable trends and ratios, based on analyses of financial
data over the most recent five-year period (July 1, 2017 through June 30,
2022).
We also reviewed each of the fiscal year 2022 special taxing district reports
received and the related results of the counties’ reviews of these reports. The
purpose of our review was to ensure that the counties had received all required
reports from the districts and reviewed the reports submitted for compliance with
the provisions of the law and to identify instances in which required reports were
not submitted.
At the conclusion of our review, we sent letters to applicable local governments
and their independent auditors to notify them of the deficiencies disclosed during
the review so that corrective actions can be taken to help ensure future
compliance. Additionally, as appropriate, we sent letters to local governments,
and to their legislative representatives, to communicate certain noncompliance
with State law or potential financial problems. For these issues, we asked the
local governments to advise us of corrective actions that will be taken.
5

--- Page 8 ---
Results of Desk Reviews
Audit Reports
Finding 1
A number of local governments had not filed the required audit reports or
had filed after the required filing date.
As of July 17, 2023, 19 local governments were delinquent in filing audit reports
as required by the Local Government Article of the Annotated Code of Maryland.
Local Government Fiscal Years Outstanding
Dorchester County 2021, 2022
Town of Barclay 2022
Town of Berwyn Heights 2022
Town of Burkittsville 2022
Town of Capitol Heights 2022
Town of Charlestown 2022
Town of Deer Park 2021, 2022
Town of East New Market 2022
Town of Forest Heights 2021, 2022
Town of Greensboro 2022
City of Hyattsville 2021, 2022
Town of Indian Head 2022
Town of Lonaconing 2022
Town of Middletown 2021, 2022
Village of Port Tobacco 2022
Town of Princess Anne 2022
Town of Rock Hall 2022
City of Seat Pleasant 2020, 2021, 2022
Town of Sudlersville 2021, 2022
Furthermore, 19 local governments submitted 20 audit reports after the required
filing date. The submission of audit reports after the required filing date was also
noted for 10 of these 19 local governments during one or more of our preceding
reviews. The failure of a local government to file an audit report, or a delay in
filing, results in the lack of timely accountability to its citizens. The Local
Government Article, Section 16-306 of the Annotated Code of Maryland
generally requires audit reports to be filed on or before October 31 after the close
of the fiscal year, or on or before December 31 after the close of the fiscal year for
those local governments with a population of more than 400,000.
6

--- Page 9 ---
Budget language adopted during previous sessions of the Maryland General
Assemble resulted in the withholding of transportation aid from certain local
governments pending receipt of their delinquent audit reports. Furthermore, the
failure to file a required report with the Department of Legislative Services for
three successive years provides the Department’s Executive Director with
reasonable cause to suppose that the municipality is no longer actively operating
under its charter, which could cause the municipality to have its charter repealed.
We have reported the failure of the City of Seat Pleasant to file the required
reports for the fiscal years ending June 30, 2020, 2021, and 2022 to the Executive
Director.
We will review all audit reports outstanding as of July 17, 2023 and take any
follow-up action necessary when the delinquent reports are received. The results
of these reviews will be included in the report on our review of fiscal year 2023
local government audit reports.
The towns of Barnesville, Barton, Brookview, Church Creek, Eagle Harbor,
Eldorado, Galestown, Goldsboro, Henderson, Hillsboro, Queen Anne,
Templeville, and the special taxing areas of Ellerslie and Mount Savage
previously requested and were granted waivers from filing audit reports. Local
governments granted waivers are required to meet the conditions for filing an
audit report every fourth year as provided for under the Local Government
Article, Section 16-305 of the Code and, depending on the waiver period, will be
required to file its next audit report for either fiscal year 2023, 2024, or 2025.
Finding 2
The auditor’s report for one local government contained a qualified opinion
on one opinion unit, while another auditor’s report for a different local
government contained a disclaimer of opinion on the financial statements.
The auditor’s fiscal year 2021 report for the Town of East New Market contained
a qualified opinion on the Governmental Activities and General Funds opinion
units because the auditor was unable to obtain sufficient appropriate audit
evidence supporting the amounts recorded for cash, local taxes receivable and
local tax revenues, and impact fees revenues and expenses. This area of
noncompliance was previously noted for the Town’s fiscal year 2020 financial
statements.
The auditor’s fiscal year 2021 report for the Town of Princess Anne contained a
disclaimer of opinion on the financial statements. A disclaimer of opinion is
7

--- Page 10 ---
issued because the auditor was unable to obtain sufficient appropriate audit
evidence in order to express an opinion on the financial statements.
Although required by our audit guidelines, the auditor for the Town of Princess
Anne did not submit a separate letter to the Office of Legislative Audits
explaining the reason why an unqualified opinion could not be expressed and the
Town management’s plan to rectify the problem to enable the auditor to express
an unqualified opinion in the future.
Finding 3
Auditors’ reports for seven local governmental units were not presented in
accordance with certain generally accepted auditing standards.
Auditors’ reports for seven local governmental units were not presented in
accordance with certain generally accepted auditing standards. Specifically, the
auditors did not express an opinion on all opinion units or financial statements for
seven reports. The auditors’ reports for two of these local governmental units
included deficiencies that were also cited during our preceding year’s review.
The Local Government Article, Section 16-306 of the Annotated Code of
Maryland requires that audits be performed in accordance with generally accepted
auditing standards. These standards require, in part, that the auditor express an
opinion(s) as to whether the basic financial statements present fairly, in all
material respects, the respective financial position, the respective changes in
financial position, and cash flows, where applicable, of the local government in
conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of
America.
Financial Statements
Finding 4
The financial statements submitted by 13 local governments did not meet
certain requirements of generally accepted accounting principles.
Thirteen financial statements submitted by 13 local governments did not meet
certain requirements of generally accepted accounting principles in 15 instances.
Further, the deficiencies noted in these 13 financial statements were not noted
during our preceding year's review. The following is a summary of the
deficiencies and the corresponding number of instances:
8

--- Page 11 ---
Number of
Deficiency
Instances
Presentation of financial statement(s) was inappropriate 6
(for example, certain amounts reported on more than
one financial statement did not agree).
Misclassification or improper presentation (for example, 7
financial statement was not mathematically
accurate).
Governmental fund balances were not properly 2
classified.
Finding 5
Financial statements, accompanying notes, and required supplementary
information did not include certain disclosures required by generally
accepted accounting principles for three audit reports.
Certain required information was not included in the financial statements, or
disclosed in the accompanying notes, or the required supplementary information,
for three local governments’ audit reports. Adequate disclosure is necessary to
facilitate the understanding of and to provide for fair presentation of the financial
information. The financial statements of one of these local governments included
a deficiency that was also cited during our preceding year’s review. The
following is a summary of the areas of insufficient disclosure and the
corresponding number of instances:
Number of
Area of Insufficient Disclosure
Instances
Basis of accounting and measurement focus 1
Information related to other post-employment benefits 1
Information related to pensions 1
9

--- Page 12 ---
Uncollateralized Funds
Finding 6
Eleven financial statements submitted by 10 local governments contained
disclosures that cash deposits were not adequately collateralized, or
otherwise insured, as required by State law.
Eleven financial statements submitted by 10 local governments contained
disclosures that cash deposits were not adequately collateralized, or otherwise
insured, as required by State law.
Uncollateralized/ Similar Disclosure
Uninsured Cash Included in Audit
Entity Deposit Amount Reports for Each
Year Since
At June 30, 2022
Counties
Howard County $2,791,002 2016
St. Mary’s County 1,320,092 n/a
Cities and Towns
Town of Boonsboro 109,769 2021
Town of Brentwood 2,093,834 2016
Town of Brookeville 4,000 n/a
Town of Landover Hills 893,768 2020
Village of Martin’s Additions 1,251 n/a
Town of Secretary 60,626 n/a
Special Taxing Areas
Village of Drummond 159,142 2020
At June 30, 2020
Cities and Towns
Town of Deer Park 11,075 2019
At June 30, 2019
Cities and Towns
Town of Deer Park 21,756 n/a
n/a – not applicable, as not included in prior year report.
10

--- Page 13 ---
The Local Government Article, Section 17-101 of the Annotated Code of
Maryland requires that deposits with financial institutions by local governmental
units be fully collateralized. Full collateralization minimizes the risk of loss of
deposits in the event the financial institution defaults. In addition, this law
requires that collateral be of the types specified in the State Finance and
Procurement Article, Section 6-202 of the Code.
Potential Financial Problems
Finding 7
One local government disclosed potential financial problems resulting in
uncertainty regarding its ability to continue as a going concern.
One local government, the Upper Potomac River Commission – Waste Treatment
Plant, Trunk Sewer and Municipal Connecting System Fund (Fund), disclosed
potential financial problems resulting in uncertainty regarding its ability to
continue as a going concern. The auditor’s report for this Fund included an
emphasis paragraph describing an uncertainty about the Fund’s ability to continue
as a going concern. Specifically, the auditor’s report referenced the Fund’s notes
to the financial statements which stated that substantial doubt exists about its
ability to continue as a going concern. Additionally, the notes stated that the Fund
management is in the process of addressing how it will fulfill the Fund’s
obligations, given its economic dependence on a private corporation. This Fund
had an unrestricted net position deficit of $1,031,472, which was offset by net
investment in capital assets of $1,096,513 leaving the Fund with a positive net
position of $65,041 as of June 30, 2022. A similar condition has been noted in
regard to the Commission’s financial statements each fiscal year since 2019.
Special Taxing Districts
The preceding contents of this report are applicable to local governments filing
audit reports in accordance with the provisions of the Local Government Article,
Section 16-306 of the Code. Section 16-308 of this Article requires that certain
types of special taxing districts (created by a county) file annual audited or
unaudited financial reports with the county in which the districts are located not
later than 90 days after the close of the fiscal year, in accordance with the rules
and regulations established by the applicable county. The applicable county is
responsible for reviewing each district’s compliance with the applicable
provisions of the law and for submitting copies of these reports to the Office of
11

--- Page 14 ---
Legislative Audits. For fiscal year 2022, the 92 required reports had been filed
timely with the applicable county for all special taxing districts.
12

--- Page 15 ---
A T
UDIT EAM
Bekana Edossa, CPA, CFE
Audit Manager
W. Thomas Sides
Senior Auditor
Timothy Moon
Staff Auditor