Title: Maryland Department of Health - Office of the Secretary and Other Units
Date: 10/19/2023
Type: Fiscal Compliance
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=6536f704a1ce581050451c20
Extracted: 2025-06-19T23:08:38.998327
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Audit Report
Maryland Department of Health
Office of the Secretary and Other Units
October 2023
Public Notice
In compliance with the requirements of the State Government Article Section
2-1224(i), of the Annotated Code of Maryland, the Office of Legislative Audits
has redacted cybersecurity findings and related auditee responses
from this public report.
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Senator Clarence K. Lam, M.D. (Senate Chair) Delegate Jared Solomon (House Chair)
Senator Joanne C. Benson Delegate Steven J. Arentz
Senator Paul D. Corderman Delegate Nicholas P. Charles II
Senator Katie Fry Hester Delegate Andrea Fletcher Harrison
Senator Shelly L. Hettleman Delegate Steven C. Johnson
Senator Cheryl C. Kagan Delegate Mary A. Lehman
Senator Cory V. McCray Delegate David Moon
Senator Justin D. Ready Delegate Julie Palakovich Carr
Senator Bryan W. Simonaire Delegate Stephanie M. Smith
Senator Craig J. Zucker Delegate M. Courtney Watson
To Obtain Further Information
Office of Legislative Audits
The Warehouse at Camden Yards
351 West Camden Street, Suite 400
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Phone: 410-946-5900
Maryland Relay: 711
TTY: 410-946-5401 ꞏ 301-970-5401
E-mail: webmaster@ola.state.md.us
Website: www.ola.state.md.us
To Report Fraud
The Office of Legislative Audits operates a Fraud Hotline to report fraud, waste, or abuse involving State
of Maryland government resources. Reports of fraud, waste, or abuse may be communicated anonymously
by a toll-free call to 1-877-FRAUD-11, by mail to the Fraud Hotline, c/o Office of Legislative Audits, or
through the Office’s website.
Nondiscrimination Statement
The Department of Legislative Services does not discriminate on the basis of age, ancestry, color, creed,
marital status, national origin, race, religion, gender, gender identity, sexual orientation, or disability in the
admission or access to its programs, services, or activities. The Department’s Information Officer has been
designated to coordinate compliance with the nondiscrimination requirements contained in Section 35.107
of the United States Department of Justice Regulations. Requests for assistance should be directed to the
Information Officer at 410-946-5400 or 410-970-5400.

--- Page 3 ---
October 19, 2023
Senator Clarence K. Lam, M.D., Senate Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Delegate Jared Solomon, House Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Members of Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Annapolis, Maryland
Ladies and Gentlemen:
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the Office of the Secretary and
other units of the Maryland Department of Health (MDH) for the period
beginning February 12, 2019 and ending June 30, 2022. MDH is responsible for
promoting the health of the public and for strengthening partnerships between
State and local governments, the business community, and all health care
providers in Maryland.
Our audit disclosed deficiencies in MDH’s procedures to account for federal fund
activity, including an inability to determine whether federal funds were recovered
for all State-funded expenditures. Specifically, MDH did not ensure that all
provider payments were properly recorded in its automated system to enable
recovery of federal funds to offset State-funded expenditures. We also found that
for approximately three years MDH was not performing a critical quarterly
reconciliation to ensure that all available federal funds had been recovered,
resulting in the failure to recover approximately $973.3 million in federal funds
until we brought the matter to MDH’s attention in August 2022. Although MDH
subsequently recovered the funds, the untimely recovery resulted in lost interest to
the State of $6.4 million. MDH also did not have a procedure to verify that all
federal fund reimbursement requests for three federal grants that collectively
accounted for $10.2 billion (96 percent) of MDH’s $10.6 billion in federal fund
expenditures during fiscal year 2022 were subsequently received.
Our audit also disclosed that MDH lacked assurance that the balances of the
revenue and expenditure accounts related to federal fund activity were accurate.
For example, we identified numerous accounts with questionable balances as of
June 30, 2022, including a $1.1 billion deficit in the clearing account where
federal fund revenues were initially recorded, and balances (both positive and

--- Page 4 ---
negative) in multiple accounts dating back to fiscal year 2015. We also found that
MDH recorded accrued revenue entries at fiscal year-end to eliminate the account
balances without regard to the collectability of those revenues.
MDH did not always comply with State procurement regulations. Specifically,
our review of one emergency contract originally procured for consulting services
related to the State’s COVID-19 Vaccination Program in January 2021 disclosed
that MDH modified the contract to include unrelated services without justification
and did not sufficiently document that the services were received. As a result, we
were unable to determine the propriety of the payments MDH made to the vendor,
which totaled $62.1 million between April 2021 and October 2022. In addition,
MDH did not justify the noncompetitive procurement of three contracts totaling
$946,000, did not notify the Board of Public Works of one emergency
procurement, did not document that it conducted price negations of two sole
source contracts valued at approximately $11 million, and did not always publish
contract solicitations and awards as required.
We noted a number of deficiencies with MDH’s security and control over its
information systems. However, in accordance with the State Government Article,
Section 2-1224(i) of the Annotated Code of Maryland, we have redacted the
findings from this audit report. Specifically, State law requires the Office of
Legislative Audits to redact cybersecurity findings in a manner consistent with
auditing best practices before the report is made available to the public. The term
“cybersecurity” is defined in the State Finance and Procurement Article, Section
3.5-301(b), and using our professional judgment we have determined that the
redacted findings fall under the referenced definition. The specifics of the
cybersecurity findings were previously communicated to those parties responsible
for acting on our recommendations.
At the time of our review MDH was eight months behind on billing third parties
for certain services rendered at MDH inpatient facilities, which we estimated
could total $45.4 million. We also found that MDH had not established adequate
controls to ensure the propriety of biweekly payroll payments, leave balances, and
timesheets. For example, adjustments to employee pay and leave balances were
not reviewed for propriety. In addition, MDH did not have procedures to ensure
that employees who were terminated or left State service were promptly removed
from the payroll, resulting in improper payments to at least 45 former employees
totaling $151,000. Our audit also disclosed that MDH did not sufficiently control
collections, which totaled approximately $164.1 million during fiscal year 2022.
Finally, MDH did not ensure that corrective actions were implemented to address
findings from our Office’s fiscal compliance audits of other MDH units.
2

--- Page 5 ---
Our audit also included a review to determine the status of the six findings
contained in our preceding audit report. For the non-cybersecurity related
findings we determined that MDH satisfactorily addressed two of those four
findings. The remaining two findings are repeated in this report. Finally, our
audit included a review to determine the status of four of the five findings
contained in our special review of questionable grants awarded by the Opioid
Operational Command Center (dated February 7, 2020). We determined that
MDH satisfactorily addressed those four findings.
We determined that MDH’s accountability and compliance level was
unsatisfactory, in accordance with the rating system we established in conformity
with State law. The primary factors contributing to the unsatisfactory rating were
the number and significance of the audit findings contained in this report.
MDH’s response to this audit is included as an appendix to this report. We
reviewed the response and noted agreement to our findings and related
recommendations. Subsequent to the response receipt, but prior to the issuance of
the final report, we contacted MDH staff and obtained verbal clarification that
satisfactorily resolved certain outstanding questions and issues regarding Finding
7. In addition, there are other aspects of MDH’s response which will require
further clarification and we do not anticipate that these will require the Joint Audit
and Evaluation Committee’s attention to resolve. Finally, in accordance with our
policy, we have redacted any vendor names or products mentioned by MDH in
this document and consistent with State law, we have redacted the elements of
MDH’s response related to the cybersecurity audit findings.
We wish to acknowledge the cooperation extended to us during the course of this
audit by MDH. We also wish to acknowledge MDH’s willingness to address the
audit issues and implement appropriate corrective actions.
Respectfully submitted,
Gregory A. Hook, CPA
Legislative Auditor
3

--- Page 6 ---
4

--- Page 7 ---
Table of Contents
Background Information 8
Agency Responsibilities 8
Organizational Change 9
Ransomware Security Incident and Expanded Audit Period 10
Other Office of Legislative Audits Reviews 11
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report 12
Findings and Recommendations 15
Federal Funds
Finding 1 – The Maryland Department of Health (MDH) did not have 17
procedures to ensure MDH units properly entered all provider payments
into the Medicaid Management Information System and resolved any
rejected claims to enable timely and complete recovery of the funds.
Finding 2 – MDH did not ensure critical quarterly reconciliations were 19
performed, resulting in the failure to recover $973.3 million of federal
funding timely and lost investment income totaling $6.4 million.
Finding 3 – MDH did not have procedures to ensure federal funds 20
requested for reimbursement of State payments were subsequently
received.
Finding 4 – MDH did not have procedures to ensure all federal fund 21
reimbursements were properly allocated to the appropriate expenditure
accounts resulting in a lack of assurance that account balances were
accurate and the inability to determine whether all federal funds had
been recovered.
Budgetary and Year-End Closing
Finding 5 – MDH used an automated script to record year-end revenue 24
entries without verifying that the amounts recorded were valid and
collectable.
5

--- Page 8 ---
Procurements and Disbursements
Finding 6 – MDH used an emergency contract originally procured for 29
COVID related purposes for unrelated services without sufficient
documentation that the services were received and the related payments
were proper. As a result, we could not determine services were received
or the propriety of MDH payments totaling $60.4 million.
* Finding 7 – MDH did not always comply with State procurement 34
regulations when procuring goods and services via sole source and
emergency contracts and did not always publish contract solicitations
and awards as required.
Information Systems Security and Control
Finding 8 – Redacted cybersecurity-related finding 36
Finding 9 – Redacted cybersecurity-related finding 36
Finding 10 – Redacted cybersecurity-related finding 36
Finding 11 – Redacted cybersecurity-related finding 36
Finding 12 – Redacted cybersecurity-related finding 36
Accounts Receivable
Finding 13 – MDH was eight months behind on billing for services 36
rendered at MDH inpatient facilities, which based on MDH assertions
could total approximately $45.4 million at the time of our review.
Payroll
* Finding 14 – MDH had not established adequate controls to ensure the 37
propriety of biweekly payroll payments, leave balances, and
timesheets.
Finding 15 – MDH did not have procedures to ensure that employees 40
who were terminated or left State service were promptly removed from
the payroll, resulting in improper payments to at least 45 former
employees totaling $151,000.
* Denotes item repeated in full or part from preceding audit report
6

--- Page 9 ---
Cash Receipts
Finding 16 – MDH did not sufficiently control collections, including the 41
untimely endorsement and deposit of collections, a lack of independent
verification that collections were deposited, and a failure to require
large payments to be submitted electronically.
Executive Oversight
Finding 17 – MDH did not ensure that appropriate corrective actions 42
were implemented to address prior findings from our Office’s fiscal
compliance audits of the other MDH units.
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology 44
Exhibit 1 – MDH Organizational Chart 48
Exhibit 2 – Listing of Most Recent Office of Legislative Audits Fiscal 49
Compliance Audits of MDH Units in Current Audit Cycle as of
September 2023
Agency Response Appendix
7

--- Page 10 ---
Background Information
Agency Responsibilities
The Maryland Department of Health (MDH) is responsible for promoting the
health of the public and for strengthening partnerships between State and local
governments, the business community, and all health care providers in Maryland.
This audit report includes seven budgetary units associated with the MDH
Secretary and four Deputy Secretaries.1 According to the State’s records, during
fiscal year 2022, expenditures for these units totaled approximately $255.9
million2 (see Figure 1). This amount includes costs associated with the executive
leadership and its staff responsible for overseeing the other units in MDH and
does not include the programmatic expenditures for the underlying units (such as
Medicaid disbursements).
1 Specifically, the Deputy Secretaries for Public Health Services; Behavioral Health; Health Care
Financing and Medicaid; and Operations are included within the scope of this audit.
2 This amount reflects certain one-time expenditures related to the ransomware security incident
described on the next page, and the COVID-19 pandemic.
8

--- Page 11 ---
Figure 1
MDH Positions, Expenditures, and Funding Sources
Full-Time Equivalent Positions as of June 30, 2022
Positions Percent
Filled 493 86.9%
Vacant 74 13.1%
Total 567
Fiscal Year 2022 Expenditures
Expenditures Percent
Salaries, Wages, and Fringe Benefits $ 61,072,557 23.9%
Technical and Special Fees 6,941,492 2.7%
Operating Expenses 187,888,506 73.4%
Total $255,902,555
Fiscal Year 2022 Funding Sources
Funding Percent
General Fund $ 77,460,732 30.3%
Special Fund 42,745,341 16.7%
Federal Fund 115,177,601 45.0%
Reimbursable Fund 20,518,881 8.0%
Total $255,902,555
Source: State financial and personnel records
The MDH Secretary and five Deputy Secretaries provide administrative
infrastructure and oversight to MDH and health providers throughout the State.
In addition, they are responsible for policy formulation and program
implementation and provide executive oversight to the MDH administrations (see
Exhibit 1 for Organizational Chart). The various programs administered by these
units are audited separately in one of the 19 other MDH audits performed by the
Office of Legislative Audits (OLA) (see Exhibit 2 for a listing of OLA audits of
MDH and findings from the most recent audit report for each
program/administration).
Organizational Change
Effective July 1, 2022, Chapter 325, Laws of Maryland 2021 created the
Maryland Office of the Inspector General for Health (OIGH) and established it as
an independent unit of the State. Certain funding and staff from the then existing
MDH Office of the Inspector General (OIG) transferred to the new office. The
remaining OIG staff were reorganized into the MDH Office of Internal Controls,
9

--- Page 12 ---
Audit Compliance, and Information Security which is intended to function as an
internal audit unit and is answerable to the MDH Secretary. The activities of
OIGH, beginning July 1, 2022, will be included in a separate audit of OIGH.
Ransomware Security Incident and Expanded Audit Period
Our audit fieldwork originally commenced in October 2021. In December 2021,
MDH experienced a broad security incident resulting from a ransomware attack.3
This incident affected the entire MDH computer network and disrupted
information technology operations for all MDH servers and end user computers,
resulting in substantial impact on all MDH business operations. MDH notified
the Department of Information Technology’s (DoIT) Office of Security
Management, which initiated incident response measures. Various other parties
were informed of this incident or engaged for recovery efforts. DoIT concluded
that no evidence existed indicating that sensitive or regulated information had
been improperly acquired. In June 2022, MDH received $40.4 million from the
State Reserve Fund to cover the costs of its remediation, recovery, and security
modernization efforts related to the incident. The State of Maryland and MDH
filed separate cybersecurity insurance claims on this matter which together totaled
approximately $8.45 million.
The incident also resulted in a significant number of MDH records that we
deemed critical to satisfying our audit objectives and related conclusions being
temporarily inaccessible. In consultation with MDH officials, we suspended our
audit fieldwork for approximately seven months. Consequently, we also
expanded our original audit period from February 12, 2019 through October 31,
2021 to February 12, 2019 through June 30, 2022. Our audit included a review of
the aforementioned incident and related controls.
Additional details related to the ransomware attack are presented in the
Information Systems Security and Control section. However, the cybersecurity-
related information and audit findings will be redacted from our publicly available
report.
3 As defined by the Federal Department of Homeland Security’s Cybersecurity and Infrastructure
Security Agency, ransomware is an ever-evolving form of malware designed to encrypt files on a
device, rendering any files and the systems that rely on them unusable. Malicious actors then
demand ransom in exchange for decryption.
10

--- Page 13 ---
Other Office of Legislative Audits Reviews
During the expanded audit period, OLA conducted several reviews of MDH
activities in addition to our mandated fiscal compliance audits. These reviews
were initiated based on concerns received by OLA and focused on specific
activities involving MDH, certain of which are included, at least in part, in the
findings contained in this report.
Questionable Grants Awarded by the Opioid Operational Command Center
Based on an allegation received through our fraud, waste, and abuse hotline, we
conducted a special review of the Opioid Operational Command Center’s
(OOCC) grant procedures and tested 18 grant awards totaling $6.1 million
(including the grant referenced in the allegation) and issued the related report on
February 7, 2020. In that report, we concluded that OOCC did not have written
policies and procedures for the selection of grantees, amounts awarded, and the
monitoring of grantees. Our report also identified numerous deficiencies with
OOCC’s grant process, including specific instances of questionable grant awards
and payments.
The fiscal year 2021 budget bill enacted by the Maryland General Assembly
transferred OOCC from the Military Department to the MDH Office of the
Secretary, effective July 1, 2020. Consequently, our current audit included a
follow up on the findings in the February 2020 report and the activities of OOCC
since the transfer to MDH.
Review of Procurement of Certain COVID Tests
In June 2020, the chairs of the Senate Education, Health, and Environmental
Affairs and the House Health and Government Operations Committees requested
OLA to review two emergency procurements (for COVID tests and medical
supplies) related to the State of Maryland’s COVID-19 response and the
termination of two employees associated with the procurement of the COVID
tests. We subsequently received an allegation through our fraud, waste, and abuse
hotline raising concerns with the accuracy of the COVID tests obtained from one
of these procurements.
In response to these concerns, on March 31, 2021 we issued a special report on
the results of our review of the COVID tests procurement, in which we concluded
that the procurement was not in accordance with State procurement regulations.
We also concluded that available documentation did not support the basis of the
aforementioned employee terminations. We were unable to obtain access to test
results from the laboratories that used the COVID tests in time for inclusion in
this report. We ultimately obtained and analyzed these results during our
11

--- Page 14 ---
subsequent Expanded Review of COVID-19 Emergency Procurements (see
below). Our March 2021 report did not include recommendations and therefore,
we did not determine the current status of the findings as part of our current audit.
Expanded Review of COVID-19 Emergency Procurements
Due to the concerns identified in our March 2021 report, we conducted an
expanded review of statewide COVID procurements and followed up on the
aforementioned concerns with the COVID test results. During the course of our
review, we identified 99 emergency procurements totaling $371.4 million made
by MDH, of which we reviewed two procurements totaling $79.8 million. On
December 13, 2021, we issued a report on the results of our review which
disclosed an overall lack of compliance with State regulations for emergency
procurements and ineffective monitoring of the related payments. The report also
generally corroborated the concerns with the reliability of the COVID tests, but
we could not determine if the issues with the test results were due to deficiencies
with the procured tests or other factors.
This December 2021 report did not include recommendations, so we did not
follow up on the report during our current audit. However, MDH subsequently
processed several modifications to one of these procurements that significantly
increased the cost and scope of the contract which was subject to review during
this audit (see Finding 6).
Statewide Review of Budget Closeout Transactions for Fiscal Year 2022
In our January 26, 2023 special report on our review of budget closeout
transactions for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2022 we noted that MDH could not
support the propriety of accrued federal fund revenue, totaling approximately $3.5
billion, and did not identify and recover $862.5 million in federal fund revenue
until we brought the matter to its attention. Our current audit included an
expanded review of the fiscal year-end transactions (see Finding 4).
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report
Based on our current assessment of significance and risk relative to our audit
objectives, our audit included a review to determine the status of the six findings
contained in the MDH audit report dated July 14, 2020; and four of the five
findings in our February 7, 2020 special review of OOCC. As disclosed in Figure
2 on the following page, for the non-cybersecurity-related findings, we
determined that MDH satisfactorily addressed six of these findings. The two
remaining findings are repeated in this report.
12

--- Page 15 ---
Figure 2
Status of Preceding Findings
Preceding Implementation
Finding Description
Finding Status
MDH – Office of the Secretary and Other Units
MDH did not provide adequate oversight over interagency
agreements. As a result, certain interagency agreements were
Finding 1 used to augment MDH staff beyond budgeted positions, had Not Repeated
administrative rates that appeared excessive, were not properly
approved, and were not properly monitored.
MDH did not always comply with State procurement
Repeated
requirements related to sole source and emergency
Finding 2 (Current Finding
procurements and did not always publish contract awards, as
7)
required.
The Office of the Inspector General did not always conduct a
comprehensive review of contracts, payroll, and user access to
Finding 3 Not repeated
MDH’s automated systems during its audits of local health
departments.
MDH had not established adequate controls to ensure the Repeated
Finding 4 propriety of biweekly payroll payments, leave balances, and (Current Finding
timesheets. 14)
Intrusion detection prevention system coverage for the MDH
Finding 5 Status Redacted4
network was not adequate for blocking malicious traffic.
Information technology contractors had unnecessary network-
Finding 6 Status Redacted4
level access to the MDH network
OOCC– Allegations Related to a Questionable Grant Awarded to a Nonprofit
Organization
OOCC did not have written policies and procedures for the
selection of grantees, amounts awarded, and the monitoring of
Finding 1 grantees. We noted numerous deficiencies with the grant Not repeated
process that raised questions about the overall integrity of
grant awards and related payments.
4 Specific information on the current status of this cybersecurity-related finding has been redacted
from the publicly available audit report in accordance with State Government Article, Section 2-
1224(i) of the Annotated Code of Maryland.
13

--- Page 16 ---
Preceding Implementation
Finding Description
Finding Status
OOCC did not have adequate justification for a $750,000
Finding 2 grant awarded to a nonprofit organization for the purchase of a Not repeated
former country club and golf course.
OOCC awarded a $100,000 grant to an out-of-state nonprofit
organization that transferred almost all the funds to a for-profit
company owned by senior management of the nonprofit;
neither of which were registered to conduct business in the
Finding 3 Not repeated
State of Maryland. In addition, the payment rate paid to the
nonprofit was higher than the rate included in the grant
proposal and more than half of the required services were not
provided.
OOCC awarded a $40,959 grant to a nonprofit organization
that was not consistent with the related grant proposal. In
Finding 4 Not repeated
addition, purchases specified in the grant agreement appeared
to have no correlation to the related performance measures,
and certain grant expenditures appeared questionable.
During the June 30, 2019 fiscal year closing process, the
Not repeated
Maryland Department of Health and the Behavioral Health
Finding 5 (Not followed-
Administration improperly recorded certain expenditures on
up on)
behalf of OOCC retaining general fund appropriation for
future years.
14

--- Page 17 ---
Findings and Recommendations
Federal Funds
Background
According to State records, Maryland Department of Health (MDH) federal fund
expenditures during fiscal years 2019 through 2022 totaled approximately $36.1
billion (see Figure 3). This amount excludes federal funds related to the COVID-
19 public health emergency other than enhanced funding for the Medical
Assistance Program (Medicaid).5 During fiscal year 2022, MDH’s federal fund
expenditures totaled $10.6 billion, of which $10.2 billion (96 percent) were made
by the Medical Care Programs Administration (MCPA), the Behavioral Health
Administration’s Administrative Service Organization (BHA - ASO), and the
Developmental Disabilities Administration (DDA) (see Figure 3).
5 MDH’s receipt, expenditure, and accounting for these funds are subject to review and testing
during the annual federal Single Audit performed by independent auditors under contract with
the State of Maryland.
15

--- Page 18 ---
Our Office conducts separate audits of MCPA, BHA - ASO, and DDA. The
scope of our current audit included MDH’s procedures and controls to recover
federal funds for qualified expenditures made by these units related to Medicaid,
the Maryland Children’s Health Insurance Program (MCHIP), and the Money
Follows the Person Program (MFP). As shown in Figure 4, expenditures for these
programs accounted for virtually all of these units’ federal fund expenditures
during fiscal year 2022.
Figure 4
MCPA, BHA-ASO, and DDA
Fiscal Year 2022 Expenditures
by Federal Grant
Expenditures
Federal Grant
($ in millions)
Medicaid $ 9,957
MFP 4
MCHIP 250
Other 1
Total $ 10,212
Source: State accounting records
Expenditures for these three programs are ultimately recorded in MDH’s federally
certified computerized system, the Medicaid Management Information System
(MMIS II), to enable MDH to pursue federal reimbursement for the cost of
services (see Figure 5 on the following page for an overview of the MDH federal
fund accounting process).
Our current audit disclosed that MDH did not have comprehensive procedures
and controls over all four steps of the federal fund accounting process. As a
result, there was a lack of assurance that MDH recovered all available federal
funds and untimely recoveries resulted in significant lost investment income to
the State as further described in the findings below.
16

--- Page 19 ---
Figure 5
MDH Federal Fund Accounting Process
• MDH units (MCPA, BHA, and DDA) pay providers (such as
physicians) for services rendered to eligible individuals.
Pay • Units record payments in MMIS II for federal drawdown.
• MDH submits weekly reimbursement requests to the federal
government based on claims recorded in MMIS II.
• Quarterly reconciliations are performed to ensure that all
Request
payments were requested from the federal government.
• Funds received from the federal government are credited to the
Medicaid clearing account by the Office of the State Treasurer.
Receive
• MDH allocates funds from the clearing account to the related
expenditure accounts (see Figure 7).
Allocate
Finding 1
MDH did not have procedures to ensure MDH units properly entered all
provider payments into MMIS II and resolved any rejected claims to enable
timely and complete recovery of the funds.
Analysis
MDH did not have procedures to ensure MDH units properly entered all payments
to providers into MMIS II and resolved any rejected claims to enable timely and
complete recovery of the funds. The three MDH units noted above are
responsible for recording federal fund expenditures into MMIS II for federal
recovery purposes. MCPA expenditures are generally processed directly in
MMIS II, and DDA and BHA expenditures are initially processed through
separate systems (BHA expenditures are processed by its ASO contractor) before
the related claims are recorded in MMIS II for federal reimbursement. MMIS II
17

--- Page 20 ---
has numerous edits to ensure that only qualified expenditures are reported on
behalf of eligible recipients.
Our review disclosed that MDH had not established procedures to monitor the
units to ensure they were properly entering the payments and pursuing all rejected
claims. Specifically, MDH did not periodically compare expenditures made by
these units to the amounts recorded in MMIS II. As a result, certain claims were
not entered into or were rejected by MMIS II, and therefore the related federal
funds have not been recovered. In this regard, four of our most recent five DDA
audit reports (dating back to November 2009) have noted instances in which
federal funds were not recovered because the payments were not recorded in
MMIS II. For example, our October 26, 2022 DDA report noted that federal
funds totaling $8.8 million were not recovered because of this condition.
Although MDH’s response to that report indicated that it would investigate and
obtain federal reimbursement for these claims, in its April 11, 2023 status report
submitted to our Office, MDH advised that these funds are no longer recoverable.
As a result, State general funds will be needed to cover these expenditures, and
State and legislative officials with budgetary responsibilities will need to be
consulted on the appropriate course of action.
In addition, our October 25, 2022 BHA-ASO report disclosed that BHA had
unresolved denied claims totaling approximately $106.7 million that had not been
investigated as of September 2021. In its response to that report, MDH advised
that the condition was not expected to be resolved until December 31, 2024 and
its April 11, 2023 status report to our Office indicated that the issue had still not
been corrected. Even if MDH is able to recover all of these funds, the failure to
obtain timely reimbursement would still result in lost interest to the State.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that MDH
a. establish procedures to ensure that MDH units properly recorded all
payments in MMIS II and subsequently resolved any rejected claims, and
b. report the aforementioned unrecoverable funds to the Department of
Budget and Management (DBM) and the budget committees and develop
a plan to cover the related unfunded liabilities.
18

--- Page 21 ---
Finding 2
MDH did not ensure critical quarterly reconciliations were performed,
resulting in the failure to recover $973.3 million of federal funding timely
and lost investment income totaling $6.4 million.
Analysis
MDH did not ensure critical quarterly reconciliations were performed, resulting in
the failure to recover $973.3 million (see Figure 6) and lost investment income
totaling $6.4 million. MDH’s informal policy was to perform quarterly
reconciliations to ensure that amounts requested from the federal government
through the weekly drawdowns agreed to actual expenditures and to adjust
subsequent reimbursement requests to account for the variances. Our review
disclosed that MDH did not have a process to track the quarterly reconciliations to
ensure they were completed timely and properly.
As a result, we noted that MDH had not conducted the reconciliations for
approximately three years. Specifically, as of August 2022, MDH had not
performed the quarterly reconciliations for the activity during the period from
October 2019 to June 2022. MDH management advised us that the employee
who performed the reconciliations left State service in December 2019 and the
responsibility was never reassigned. MDH was not aware that the reconciliation
was not being performed until we inquired about the reconciliation in August
2022 during our audit. Furthermore, there was no documented supervisory
review of the reconciliations that were performed prior to October 2019.
MDH subsequently reconciled the
expenditures for the period October 2019 Figure 6
through March 2022 and identified and Unrecovered Federal
recovered approximately $862.5 million in Funds
federal funds that had not been previously
Federal
Unrecovered
requested. However, MDH did not reconcile
Fiscal
Federal Funds
the activity during the period from April
Year
2022 to June 2022 until November 22, 2022,
2020 $ 210,638,908
nearly four months after we first notified
2021 217,588,295
MDH of the condition. This November
2022 545,074,260
reconciliation resulted in the identification
Total $ 973,301,463
and recovery of an additional $110.8 million
Source: MDH Records
in federal funds. In addition, we estimated
that the failure to timely recover the $973.3 million resulted in lost investment
income totaling $6.4 million.
19

--- Page 22 ---
Recommendation 2
We recommend that MDH establish a formal policy and procedures,
including the appropriate procedural safeguards, to ensure that the critical
quarterly reconciliations are completed properly and timely, and reviewed
and approved by a supervisor independent of the reconciliation process.
Finding 3
MDH did not have procedures to ensure federal funds requested for
reimbursement of State payments were subsequently received.
Analysis
MDH did not have a documented procedure to verify that all federal fund
reimbursement requests were subsequently credited to the Medicaid clearing
account by the Office of the State Treasurer (STO).6 While senior MDH fiscal
personnel advised us that MDH verified the receipt of federal funds for most of its
federal grants, we found that these verifications did not include the federal
Medicaid, MCHIP, and MFP grants that collectively accounted for 96 percent
($10.2 billion) of MDH’s $10.6 billion in federal fund expenditures in fiscal year
2022. As a result, there is a lack of assurance that all funds requested were
subsequently paid by the federal granting agency and transferred to MDH by the
STO.
Our testing did not identify any instances in which federal fund requests were not
received. However, given the significant amount of federal funds associated with
these grants and the STO acting as an intermediary for the collection of the funds,
MDH should establish a documented procedure to ensure each federal fund
request is received.
Recommendation 3
We recommend that MDH establish a documented procedure to ensure that
all federal funds requested were received.
6 Although federal funds are requested by MDH, the STO actually receives the funds from the
federal government, which is documented by the STO posting the receipt activity to the clearing
account.
20

--- Page 23 ---
Finding 4
MDH did not have procedures to ensure all federal fund reimbursements
were properly allocated to the appropriate expenditure accounts resulting in
a lack of assurance that account balances were accurate and the inability to
determine whether all federal funds had been recovered.
Analysis
MDH did not have procedures to ensure all federal fund reimbursements were
properly allocated from the Medicaid clearing account to the related MDH
expenditure accounts. We found that funds were either not allocated or allocated
improperly, resulting in numerous accounts with questionable balances including
longstanding deficits dating back to at least fiscal year 2015. As noted in Finding
3, federal funds for Medicaid, MCHIP, and MFP are received from the STO and
are initially recorded in the Medicaid clearing account. MDH then needs to
allocate the federal funds via journal entry to the accounts where the related State
expenditures were initially recorded by MDH programs/administrations. As
noted in Figure 7, MDH used a variety of methods to allocate the funds, including
transferring the funds initially received from the federal grantor agencies and
recorded in the Medicaid clearing account to three subsidiary MDH accounts.
Our review of MDH’s process to account for this activity disclosed the following
deficiencies:
21

--- Page 24 ---
 MDH allocated federal funds from the Medicaid clearing account to the
related expenditure accounts without considering the amount of revenue
available for distribution. Specifically, MDH advised us that revenues were
allocated based on the balances (unreimbursed expenditures) reflected in the
accounts where the related expenditures were recorded. For example, in May
2022 MDH allocated $1.6 billion to eliminate deficit balances in the various
expenditure accounts even though there was only $124.5 million available in
the Medicaid clearing account. As of June 30, 2022, the Medicaid clearing
account reflected a $1.1 billion deficit balance. Since the clearing account is
only used to record and account for federal revenues until allocation to the
appropriate expenditure accounts, it should not have a negative balance. In
this context, the deficit balance means that MDH had allocated more federal
funds than the State actually had received.
 MDH did not update its revenue allocation methodology to reflect changes in
the DDA federal funds accounting process, which resulted in funds being
allocated improperly. Specifically, as noted in Figure 7, DDA funds from the
Medicaid clearing account are allocated to a single DDA expenditure account
based on amounts interfaced into MMIS II from DDA’s separate provider and
consumer information system. In fiscal year 2019, DDA began processing
certain payments directly in MMIS II, but MDH did not modify its allocation
methodology to include this activity which, totaled $300.9 million between
fiscal years 2019 and 2022 (according to MDH records). As a result, the
federal revenue received was likely allocated to other non-DDA expenditure
accounts (such as Medicaid or MCHIP); however, MDH could not readily
determine the disposition of the funds.
 MDH did not ensure that federal revenue allocated to the DDA, MCHIP, and
MFP subsidiary accounts was properly allocated to the appropriate
expenditure accounts to offset State-funded provider payments. As indicated
in Figure 7, revenues were transferred from the Medicaid clearing account to
one of three separate accounts maintained Figure 8
for these programs. MDH advised that Unallocated Revenue
further journal entries were required to at June 30, 2022
allocate the funds from these three
Unallocated
Program
subsidiary accounts to the specific related
Revenue
expenditure accounts. However, MDH
DDA $1,679,451,741
did not verify that these further journal
MCHIP 1,054,375,060
entries were made. Our review disclosed
MFP 89,213,617
that at fiscal year-end the revenues had
Total $2,823,040,418
not been allocated from these three
Source: State accounting records
accounts to the related expenditure
22

--- Page 25 ---
accounts resulting in surplus balances totaling $2.8 billion in these three
accounts as of June 30, 2022 (see Figure 8).
The failure to properly allocate the federal revenue resulted in a lack of assurance
that any of the account balances (the clearing accounts and the numerous
expenditure accounts) were accurate and MDH’s inability to determine whether
all federal funds were ultimately recovered. The significance of this condition
means that MDH could not readily determine the extent to which the numerous
positive and negative expenditure and revenue account balances were related,
resulting in certain deficit and surplus balances as of June 30, 2022 that dated
back to fiscal year 2015. Specifically, our analysis of MDH’s accounting records
at June 30, 2022 disclosed that 33 percent of the year-end balances were identical
to the year-end balances in one or more prior fiscal years7 (see Figure 9). For
example, the three accounts with negative balances of $48,967,112 appear
unchanged at every fiscal year-end from 2015 to 2022.
These conditions occurred, at least in part, because MDH had not established
comprehensive and effective oversight of its federal fund accounting process to
ensure that all critical journal entries were timely, properly, and accurately
performed. In this regard, MDH written procedures at the time of our audit did
7 Balances in the other 67 percent of the accounts including the Medicaid clearing account also go
back several years but were not identical and therefore the age of the balances could not be
readily determined.
23

--- Page 26 ---
not specify how often the journal entries should be performed, and supervisory
reviews of the journal entries were generally limited to verifying the mathematical
accuracy of the entry. Further, and most critically, no documented comprehensive
verifications were performed to ensure that revenues were matched to the related
expenditures and that MDH had recovered the cost of all services.
Recommendation 4
We recommend that MDH
a. establish procedures and controls to ensure federal funds are allocated
properly and timely, and that the related transactions are subject to
supervisory review and approval;
b. ensure clearing accounts have either a positive or zero balance;
c. investigate and resolve the aforementioned account balances; and
d. given the magnitude of the year-end closing deficiencies noted in this and
other findings, consider engaging a qualified third-party consultant to
assist in the development of appropriate corrective procedures and
controls.
Budgetary and Year-End Closing
Finding 5
MDH used an automated script to record year-end revenue entries without
verifying that the amounts recorded were valid and collectable.
Analysis
MDH used an automated script to record year-end revenue entries without
verifying that the amounts recorded were valid and collectable. Specifically, at
the end of fiscal year 2022, MDH recorded 1,250 accrued federal fund revenue
entries totaling approximately $10.2 billion consisting of 864 positive accrued
revenue entries totaling $6.2 billion (recording a receivable for anticipated future
funds due) and 386 negative accrued revenue entries totaling $4 billion (deferring
revenue received to the subsequent year). MDH advised that these entries were
the result of an automated script (creating a series of journal entries) based on the
balance in each account as reflected in the State’s accounting system at year-end
(see Figure 10 on the following page).
24

--- Page 27 ---
Figure 10
Year-End Accrued Revenue Calculation
Starting
Current
Balance Revenues
Expenditures Amount
(Carry- Allocated
Recorded to Accrued
Over From to Account
Account
Prior Year)
Year-End Accrued
Explanation
Balance Revenue
 Expenditures exceed the revenue recorded in the account.
 A positive accrued revenue entry is recorded to close the
Deficit Positive
account at zero, with the expectation that the funds will be
received in the next fiscal year.
 Revenues exceed the expenditures recorded in the account.
 A negative accrued revenue entry is recorded to close the
Surplus Negative
account at zero, deferring the recognition of revenue already
received to the next fiscal year.
As noted earlier in this report, MDH program costs (primarily provider payments
initially paid with State funds) are generally recovered on a reimbursable basis
(the State incurs the costs and then is reimbursed), so deficit balances in these
accounts on any given date or at year-end would be typical. However, our
analysis of the aforementioned 1,250 automated script-based accrued revenue
entries disclosed that 517 entries (41 percent) related to accounts that had no
expenditure activity recorded during fiscal year 2022, including 316 positive
entries made to eliminate deficit balances totaling $3.2 billion. In addition, 70
percent (361) of the 517 entries were identical to automated entries made in one
or more prior fiscal years dating as far back as June 30, 2015. For example,
during each of the 2017 through 2022 fiscal year-end closings, MDH recorded 32
accrued revenue entries to eliminate deficit balances totaling $829.6 million8 (see
Figure 11 on the following page).
8 We excluded fiscal year 2018 from our analysis because GAD recorded the year-end revenue
accruals on MDH’s behalf.
25

--- Page 28 ---
Figure 11
Accrued Federal Fund Revenue Entries For Accounts With
No Expenditure Activity Recorded in Fiscal Year 2022
First Fiscal Positive Entries Negative Entries
Year Entry (Deficit Account Balances) (Surplus Account Balances)
Recorded Entries Amount Entries Amount
2015 11 $ 1,672,436 9 $ (3,914,999)
2016 11 12,708,113 10 (6,235,453)
2017 32 829,575,066 17 (1,585,988)
2018* 0 - 0 -
2019 71 282,939,780 39 (1,008,874,410)
2020 46 230,141,979 25 (195,918,690)
2021 56 271,919,435 34 (195,481,388)
2022 89 1,560,055,814 67 (1,548,803,116)
Totals 316 $3,189,012,623 201 $(2,960,814,044)
*We excluded fiscal year 2018 from our analysis because GAD recorded the year-end
revenue accruals on MDH’s behalf.
Source: State accounting records
The age of the unreimbursed expenditures is significant because federal
regulations require claims to be submitted for reimbursement within two years
after the calendar quarter in which the expenditures were made. Given that MDH
processes federal reimbursement requests weekly, the age of these accrued
revenue entries and lack of related current year expenditures raises concerns that
federal reimbursement for previous State payments may not have been requested
or are no longer obtainable for the amounts accrued.
Although MDH senior fiscal management personnel advised that many of the
positive entries (deficit account balances) were offset by negative entries (surplus
account balances), as of April 28, 2023, MDH could not document the extent to
which the underlying account balances were related. Ultimately, a definitive
determination of these relationships may not be possible because of the age of the
transactions and what we consider to be the pervasive deficiencies in MDH’s
federal fund accounting procedures previously noted in this report. To the extent
26

--- Page 29 ---
that the federal funds are not available, State general funds may be needed to
cover any related deficits.9
MDH’s practice of recording automated script-based revenues to eliminate deficit
balances without regard to the ultimate collectability of those revenues is not
consistent with the Comptroller of Maryland – General Accounting Division’s
(GAD) policies. Specifically, the GAD year-end closing instructions provide that
accrued revenue transactions should reflect amounts that are collectable within 60
days of the end of the fiscal year and that revenue should be recognized in the
same fiscal year the expenditure is made. The closing instructions also require
that detail documentation to support the transactions be maintained.
Recommendation 5
We recommend that MDH
a. ensure that all year-end revenue transactions are properly supported,
b. analyze the balances in the federal fund accounts to determine the
collectability of any deficit balances and proper disposition of any surplus
balances, and
c. properly report any amounts determined to be uncollectable and work
with DBM to resolve any related deficits.
Procurements and Disbursements
Background
According to MDH’s records, during the period from February 2019 to November
2021, MDH awarded procurements totaling $1.4 billion, including emergency
procurements totaling $539.9 million and sole source procurements totaling
$131.7 million. We tested certain aspects of MDH’s procurement and monitoring
9 This condition was disclosed in our January 26, 2023 special report on the Statewide Review of
Budget Closeout Transactions for Fiscal Year 2022, in which we noted that MDH was unable to
provide documentation to support the propriety of 16 of the aforementioned 1,250 accrued
revenue entries totaling approximately $3.5 billion. MDH subsequently advised that
approximately $2.1 billion of this amount had been recovered as of April 2023, but that a
comprehensive analysis of its accounts was needed to determine the ultimate collectability of the
accrued revenue transactions recorded during the fiscal year 2022 closing. Since the corrective
actions implemented by MDH to address the concerns noted above occurred after our current
audit field work was completed, the validity of MDH’s accrued revenue entries (including
unresolved entries from fiscal year 2022) and the adequacy of any related actions will be subject
to OLA follow-up during our special review of fiscal year 2023 budget closeout transactions.
27

--- Page 30 ---
of 18 judgmentally selected10 (based on materiality and/or procurement type)
contracts totaling $170.9 million (see Figure 12).
Figure 12
MDH Procurements Selected for Testing
Contract Contract Attributes Tested
Count Type
Date Amount Procurement Payment Monitoring
1 Emergency 3/16/202 $303,075  - -
2 Emergency 7/16/202 423,792  - -
3 Emergency 10/20/20 2,173,296  - -
4 Emergency 2/15/201 348,905  - -
5 Emergency 1/21/202 87,046,141 *  
6 Sole Source 5/2/2019 7,300,000  - -
7 Sole Source 7/2/2019 10,864,992  - -
8 Sole Source 7/23/201 2,279,039  - -
9 Sole Source 6/24/201 149,756  - -
10 Sole Source 11/6/202 173,282   -
11 Sole Source 5/17/201 2,000,000   -
12 Statewide Contract Task 8/23/202 57,338,667   
13 Statewide Contract Task 2/2/2022 147,774   -
14 Statewide Contract Task 1/29/201 87,337   -
15 Statewide Contract Task 8/28/201 142,998   -
16 Statewide Contract Task 1/26/202 62,200   -
17 Statewide Contract Task 12/28/20 49,900   -
18 Small Procurement 7/31/202 43,764   -
Totals $170,934,918 18 10 2
*This contact procurement was tested as part of our Special Review of Certain Emergency Procurements
related to the State of Maryland’s COVID-19 Response. In our current audit, we performed follow-up on
the current status of the prior findings and included a review of the most recent contract modification.
Source: State records
Findings 6 and 7 describe the results of our testing. Specifically, Finding 6 is
specific to contract number 5 (in Figure 12), which we choose to highlight
separately due to its significant dollar value and our prior concerns with this
contract that had previously been disclosed in our December 2021 Review of
Certain Emergency Procurements Related to the State of Maryland’s COVID-19
Response (see page 25 of that report). Finding 7 covers contracts 1-18, exclusive
of contract number 5, except for certain publishing requirements and documents
10 To select these procurements, we considered certain factors including the dollar amount of the
contract award and the procurement method used by MDH.
28

--- Page 31 ---
that MDH did not comply with State procurement laws and regulations related to
various aspects of the procurement process.
Finding 6
MDH used an emergency contract originally procured for COVID related
purposes for unrelated services without sufficient documentation that the
services were received and the related payments were proper. As a result, we
could not determine services were received or the propriety of MDH
payments totaling $60.4 million.
Analysis
MDH used an emergency contract originally procured for COVID related
purposes for unrelated services without sufficient documentation that the billed
services were received and the related MDH payments were proper. MDH
awarded an emergency contract valued at $3.8 million for consulting services
related to the State’s COVID-19 Vaccination Program in January 2021. As of
November 2022, MDH had processed four modifications that collectively
increased the cost of this contract by $83.3 million (see Figure 13). Subsequent to
our current review, MDH processed another modification, extending the contract
through April 2023, more than a year after the state of emergency ended. This
modification will be subject to review in our next audit of MDH. MDH made
payments over the course of the entire contract totaling $83.7 million, including
certain amounts unrelated to the COVID public health emergency as noted below.
Figure 13
Contract Costs as of November 2022
Description Amount
Original Contract Consulting services for COVID-19
$3,794,600
January 21, 2021 Vaccination Program
Extended the term by six months and
Modification 1
funded the resources needed for additional 21,251,541
April 5, 2021
vaccination sites
Modification 2 Extended the term by eight months and
22,000,000
August 9, 2021 added funds
Modification 3 Retroactively modified the scope (effective
November 4, February 1, 2021) to include additional 0
2021 COVID services
Modification 4
Extended the term by six months and added
December 18, 40,000,000
network security incident response services
2021
Total $87,046,141
Source: State records
29

--- Page 32 ---
We reviewed activity under this contract through April 2021 during our
aforementioned December 2021 Review of Certain Emergency Procurements
Related to the State of Maryland’s COVID-19 Response. As noted on page 25 of
that report, we concluded that MDH lacked documentation to justify the initial
contract and the April 2021 modification and did not adequately monitor the
vendor and verify the propriety of the related payments (which totaled $3.7
million at the time of our review). As described below, our current audit
disclosed that the three modifications processed subsequent to the period covered
by our special review also violated State procurement regulations, and MDH
continued to make payments without sufficiently verifying that billed services
were received and related payments were proper.
Contract Modifications Circumvented the Competitive Procurement Process
MDH used contract modifications to circumvent State procurement regulations by
increasing the scope and cost of the emergency contract without justification. The
original contract required the vendor to (1) conduct a comprehensive assessment
of MDH’s COVID-19 Vaccination Program to identify any additional support,
processes, and actions necessary for MDH to effectively administer the Program
and (2) provide staff on an as needed basis to implement the recommendations
contained in this assessment.
Our review disclosed that the November and December 2021 modifications added
services that were unrelated to the Vaccination Program. Specifically, the
November 2021 modification retroactively modified the scope of the original
contract to include additional COVID response services (defined as “testing,
personal protective equipment, contact tracing, and hospital patient surge capacity
management”) and the $40 million December 2021 modification included $15
million for work related to MDH’s network security incident response (which is
described in broad terms in the Background Information Section of this audit
report).
MDH could not provide adequate justification for either modification, nor could it
explain why separate procurements were not issued for these services given the
nature of the new work, which appeared unrelated to the original COVID
vaccination scope. Specifically, MDH could not document the justification for
the November 2021 modification, and the only justification for the additional
work included in the December 2021 modification was that the vendor was
deemed to be “the only available option for meeting the State’s requirements and
deadline for this emergency.” However, MDH could not provide documentation
to explain how it made this determination and only provided us with two
presentations (prepared by the vendor) describing assistance the vendor had
provided to other entities that experienced similar cybersecurity incidents. Given
30

--- Page 33 ---
the disparate nature of this activity compared with the scope of the original
contract, we believe a separate contract should have been procured in conjunction
with the Department of Information Technology and included consideration of
information technology-specific vendors and consultants.
Furthermore, MDH could not explain how it determined the appropriateness or
necessity of the dollar amounts related to the August and December 2021
modifications that increased the cost by $62 million. Specifically, senior MDH
leadership advised us that “based on average monthly spend, MDH added funds
to carry the contract through the extended period.” However, MDH could not
document how this amount was calculated or the actual nature of the cost details
of the “average monthly spend” (specifically, what past services were being
provided and how they related to anticipated future services). In addition, the
modifications did not specify the number of vendor staff to be provided and the
new or additional services those individuals were to perform. The lack of
specificity is significant, because the billings for these new services accounted for
virtually all of the contract cost and the number of vendor staff provided increased
from 7 employees under the initial contract to as many as 138 (an increase of
approximately 1,900 percent).
MDH also did not appear to have accurately reported the November 2021
modification to the Board of Public Works (BPW). Specifically, the modification
was reported as a “no cost” modification despite the fact that it was retroactive
and significantly expanded the scope of the contract. MDH did not provide the
BPW with an estimate of the costs associated to these expanded services and
could not readily provide us with the actual costs of this modification during the
audit.
MDH Did Not Adequately Monitor the Contract and Related Payments
MDH did not adequately monitor the contract and related payments. Specifically,
there was a pervasive lack of documentation to support that MDH had requested,
reviewed, and approved the work the vendor performed. Consequently, MDH
lacked assurance that the amounts billed by the vendor were reasonable in relation
to the services provided.
MDH advised that it held weekly meetings with the vendor during which senior
MDH leadership assigned the vendor work and reviewed its progress; however,
when we inquired about independent (non-vendor based) documentation of these
MDH decisions and associated monitoring, MDH management could not
document the specific tasks it assigned the vendor and the number of employees it
had approved to perform the work. Rather, virtually all the relevant
documentation we were provided by MDH for this contract was prepared by the
31

--- Page 34 ---
vendor. Although MDH advised that these documents were discussed at the
weekly meetings, we found no evidence that MDH had formally validated and
approved the vendor’s work.
Furthermore, the vendor-prepared documentation provided to us by MDH did not
detail the work each vendor employee performed, and we found that MDH did not
obtain this detailed information when approving the related billings even though it
was required by the contract. Our review of all 57 invoices (totaling $62.1
million) paid between April 2021 and October 2022 disclosed that none of the
invoices included the contractually required statements of work performed by
each vendor employee or other documentation that would allow MDH to
independently determine the propriety of the billed amounts.
Specifically, the only routine support included with the invoices were a list of
names of each billed employee, a vague description of the function they
performed, the hours worked, and the associated hourly rates (see Figure 14 on
the following page). There was no documentation to correlate the amounts
invoiced to specific work MDH assigned to the vendor during the weekly
meetings, to support that the number of employees and hours billed was
reasonable in relation to these assignments, or that MDH officials had verified the
related tasks had been completed.
32

--- Page 35 ---
Figure 14
Excerpt of Vendor Invoice and Support Provided
Source: MDH records
Due to the questionable use of the emergency contract for the expanded services
combined with the pervasive lack of documentation to support what services
MDH had requested and what services were actually provided, we concluded that
MDH lacked assurance that its payments to the vendor were appropriate.
Recommendation 6
We recommend that MDH
a. conduct a review of this contract, which includes obtaining the detailed
staffing information required by the contract, determine the extent of the
services that were provided in relation to payments made, recover any
payments determined to be improper, and disclose this information to
BPW; and
b. ensure that future emergency contracts are procured and documented in
accordance with State procurement regulations and are properly
monitored to ensure services were received and the related billings are
adequately supported.
33

--- Page 36 ---
Finding 7
MDH did not always comply with State procurement regulations when
procuring goods and services via sole source and emergency contracts and
did not always publish contract solicitations and awards as required.
Analysis
MDH did not always comply with State procurement regulations when procuring
goods and services via sole source and emergency contracts and did not always
publish contract solicitations and awards as required.
Emergency and Sole Source Contracts Were Not Procured in Accordance with
State Regulations
MDH did not procure five emergency and sole source contracts in accordance
with State laws and regulations. Our review of six judgmentally selected sole
source procurements awarded between May 2019 and November 2020 totaling
$22.8 million and four emergency procurements awarded between February 2019
and October 2021 totaling $3.2 million disclosed the following instances of non-
compliance with State procurement laws and regulations.
 MDH did not justify the noncompetitive procurement of three contracts
totaling $946,000. Specifically, MDH could not provide us with the required
written justifications for one sole source contract totaling $173,000 and one
emergency contract totaling $424,000. In addition, documentation for another
emergency procurement totaling $349,000 did not justify the use of the
emergency procurement method, because it did not address how the
procurement was the result of a “sudden and unexpected occurrence or
condition which agency management could not foresee”, as required under
State regulations for an emergency procurement.
 MDH did not notify the BPW of the aforementioned emergency procurement
totaling $424,000 as required. The contract was awarded in July 2021, but
had not been reported to the BPW as of July 2023.
 MDH could not document that it conducted the required price negotiations for
two sole source procurements that respectively totaled $10.9 million and
$150,000. As a result, the basis for the State’s cost was not evident, and there
was a lack of assurance that the contract costs were in the best interest of the
State.
State procurement regulations provide that agencies document the justification for
not using a competitive procurement (such as sole source and emergency
34

--- Page 37 ---
procurements), notify the BPW of emergency procurements, and conduct price
negotiations for sole source procurements.
Contract Solicitations and Awards Were Not Published as Required
MDH did not always publish contract solicitations and awards on eMaryland
Marketplace Advantage (eMMA)11 as required. Specifically, our test of the
aforementioned 18 contracts disclosed that MDH did not publish the solicitation
for 4 contracts totaling $57.6 million and the award for 13 contracts totaling $81.3
million. State laws and regulations require State agencies to publish on eMMA all
competitive solicitations and the awards of contracts (including sole source and
emergency) expected to exceed $50,000. Publishing solicitations and awards
helps provide transparency over the procurements including notice of a State
contract opportunity, information about winning bidders, and the amount of the
related awards.
Similar conditions regarding the lack of adequate justifications and price
negotiations for sole source awards and the failure to comply with publication
requirements on eMMA were commented upon in our two preceding audit reports.
In its response to our prior audit report, MDH concurred with our prior findings
and indicated that corrective actions had been taken to address these deficiencies.
MDH attributed these conditions to staff turnover.
Recommendation 7
We recommend that MDH ensure that
a. sufficient documented justifications exist for sole source (repeat) and
emergency procurements;
b. documented price negotiations are conducted as appropriate (repeat);
c. BPW is notified of emergency procurements, including the one noted
above (repeat); and
d. solicitations and awards are published on eMMA as required (repeat),
including the ones noted above.
Information Systems Security and Control
We determined that the Information Systems Security and Control section,
including Findings 8 through 12 related to “cybersecurity”, as defined by the State
Finance and Procurement Article, Section 3.5-301(b) of the Annotated Code of
Maryland, and therefore are subject to redaction from the publicly available audit
11 eMMA is an internet-based, interactive procurement system managed by the
Department of General Services.
35

--- Page 38 ---
report in accordance with the State Government Article 2-1224(i). Consequently,
the specifics of the following findings, including the analysis, related
recommendations, along with MDH’s responses, have been redacted from this
report copy.
Finding 8
Redacted cybersecurity-related finding.
Finding 9
Redacted cybersecurity-related finding.
Finding 10
Redacted cybersecurity-related finding.
Finding 11
Redacted cybersecurity related finding.
Finding 12
Redacted cybersecurity related finding.
Accounts Receivable
Finding 13
MDH was eight months behind on billing for services rendered at MDH
inpatient facilities, which based on MDH assertions could total
approximately $45.4 million at the time of our review.
Analysis
MDH was eight months behind on billing responsible parties (such as Medicare
and insurance companies) for services rendered at MDH inpatient facilities.
MDH’s Division of Cost Accounting and Reconciliation (DCAR) uses several
automated systems to bill for these services and to monitor the related collections.
Our review disclosed that as of December 5, 2022 DCAR had not processed
billings for certain inpatient services rendered during the eight months between
April 2022 and November 2022.
36

--- Page 39 ---
MDH advised that the delay was caused by the ransomware security attack
previously mentioned in this report, which disrupted access to the automated
system used to bill the vast majority of DCAR activity. Specifically, MDH stated
the system was inaccessible between December 2021 and August 2022, which
temporarily precluded DCAR from processing billings for services. However,
although access to the system was restored in August 2022, MDH advised that it
has been unable to catch up with the backlog of unbilled services.
Further, we could not readily determine the dollar amount of unbilled services
between April 2022 and November 2022, but MDH indicated that the current
amount unbilled would be consistent with the services billed during the previous
eight months, which totaled approximately $45.4 million.
MDH management advised that it had developed a plan to address the backlog but
did not expect it to be resolved until August 2023. The failure to timely bill for
services results in lost investment income to the State totaling approximately
$62,000 and may decrease the likelihood of collecting the funds.
Recommendation 13
We recommend that MDH take formal action to address the backlog in
unbilled services and ensure future services are billed in a timely manner.
Payroll
Finding 14
MDH had not established adequate controls to ensure the propriety of
biweekly payroll adjustments, leave balances, and timesheets.
Analysis
MDH had not established adequate controls to ensure the propriety of biweekly
payroll payments, leave balances, and timesheets. According to State records,
MDH’s payroll expenditures totaled approximately $725.1 million in fiscal year
2022.
Employee Pay and Leave Balance Adjustments Were Not Adequately Reviewed
MDH did not adequately review adjustments to employee pay and leave balances
for propriety and to ensure the adjustments were properly processed. During
fiscal year 2022, MDH processed approximately 4,500 adjustments that changed
employee pay by a total of $1.7 million (increase of $1.6 million and decrease of
$77,200), and approximately 8,000 adjustments that changed employee leave
37

--- Page 40 ---
balances by 247,800 hours (increase of 69,000 hours and decrease of 178,800
hours).
Each pay period, an MDH employee was responsible for submitting a manually
prepared listing of payroll adjustments to DBM for processing in the Statewide
Personnel System (SPS). Although there was a supervisory review of this listing,
these reviews were not always documented and properly performed. Specifically,
our test of 15 payroll adjustments processed between July 2021 and June 2022
totaling $39,400 disclosed that the supervisor did not document their review of 3
adjustments, and another 6 adjustments were approved even though MDH could
not provide documentation to support that the adjustments were authorized.
Further, although MDH advised that a review of available system output reports
to verify the propriety of payroll adjustments processed by DBM was conducted,
we found that it was not documented.
Finally, MDH did not adequately verify the propriety of leave balance
adjustments. Although MDH advised that it reviewed SPS output reports to
ensure that only authorized adjustments were processed, this review was not
documented. We did not identify any impropriety in the 10 leave adjustments
tested.
MDH Approved Timesheets Without Verifying the Recorded Time
MDH’s Central Payroll Unit (CPU) approved timesheets without verifying that
the employees worked the recorded time. CPU timekeepers were responsible for
approving timesheets for employees when an employee’s respective supervisor
did not approve it before the payroll deadline. Our test of overtime on six
timesheets approved by CPU timekeepers during certain pay periods between
May 2020 and January 2022 disclosed that CPU timekeepers approved the
timesheets with no direct knowledge that the overtime was authorized or that the
employees worked the recorded time. For the pay periods we tested, these six
employees were paid overtime ranging from $2,400 to $33,600, with collective
overtime payments totaling $94,200.
Total Payroll Disbursements Were Not Reconciled
Biweekly payroll payments from the State’s Central Payroll Bureau (CPB) were
not reconciled, in the aggregate, to the payroll payments reflected in reports
generated by SPS. Employees recorded their work time directly into SPS for
online approval by their assigned supervisors. Payroll payments were processed
by CPB based on the approved work time for the pay period and the salary
information reflected in SPS. MDH did not compare the total payroll, as reflected
in the CPB payroll registers, with the SPS payroll summary reports reflecting the
amounts that should have been paid based on each employee’s approved work
38

--- Page 41 ---
time and salary information. As a result, there was a lack of assurance that actual
payroll payments were properly supported by time records and salary information
maintained within SPS.
SPS contains certain unique system design features, which often resulted in
differences between CPB and SPS. For example, CPB payroll registers only
reflect activity processed during the particular pay period while SPS payroll
summary reports will reflect all activity relevant to the pay period, irrespective of
when the transactions were processed. We obtained MDH’s payroll register from
CPB and the related report from SPS for the pay period ending May 3, 2022, and
we noted an unreconciled difference in that CPB reported payroll expense of
$287,000 greater than SPS.
Similar conditions were commented upon in our preceding audit report. In
response to that report, MDH indicated that our recommended corrective actions
would be implemented by August 2020. However, at the time of our current
review MDH was in the process of implementing the corrective actions, and we
concluded that adequate controls were still not in place.
Recommendation 14
We recommend that MDH
a. independently verify pay and leave balance adjustments to ensure that
only authorized adjustments have been processed and take appropriate
corrective action when errors are noted (repeat);
b. retroactively verify that the time recorded on timesheets approved by
payroll unit employees were actually worked, including those noted above
(repeat); and
c. reconcile total payroll as reflected in CPB payroll registers each pay
period with SPS payroll summary reports, investigate any differences,
and ensure that those reconciliations are documented (repeat).
39

--- Page 42 ---
Finding 15
MDH did not have procedures to ensure that employees who were
terminated or left State service were promptly removed from the payroll,
resulting in improper payments to at least 45 former employees totaling
$151,000.
Analysis
MDH did not have procedures to ensure that employees who were terminated or
left State service were removed timely from the payroll, resulting in at least 45
employees continuing to be paid after they were terminated. According to State
records, during February 12, 2019 to June 30, 2022, there were 6,282 employees
terminated from MDH. We obtained a report of all MDH employee terminations
processed in SPS during this period and compared the effective date of the
termination entered by MDH to the date MDH processed the termination in SPS.
We reviewed 76 terminations with the longest delays between the effective date
of the termination and the date the termination was processed in SPS, which
ranged from 13 to 129 days. Our review disclosed that the untimely processing of
the termination in SPS resulted in 45 employees receiving improper payments
totaling $151,000 subsequent to their termination. MDH was unaware of this
condition until we brought the matter to its attention in January 2023, and
consequently, MDH had not yet taken action to recover the improper payments.
Our analysis disclosed that of the 6,282 terminated employees, 1,049 terminations
processed in SPS were at least one day after the effective date of termination
(including the 76 we reviewed). Given the results of our testing, a comprehensive
review to determine whether additional improper payments were made to the
other 973 employees appears warranted.
Recommendation 15
We recommend that MDH
a. implement procedures to ensure timely posting in SPS of employees who
are terminated or leave State service; and
b. investigate payments to employees after they left State service, including
those noted above, and in consultation with legal counsel pursue recovery
of any improper payments as deemed appropriate.
40

--- Page 43 ---
Cash Receipts
Finding 16
MDH did not sufficiently control collections, including the untimely
endorsement and deposit of collections, a lack of independent verification
that collections were deposited, and a failure to require large payments to be
submitted electronically.
Analysis
MDH did not have sufficient controls over cash receipts, including the failure to
always independently verify collections to subsequent deposit. Collections are
received at MDH’s General Accounting Division as well as at various MDH units
and the Local Health Departments (LHDs), which are then forwarded to the
Division for processing. According to State records, MDH processed check
collections totaling approximately $164.1 million during fiscal year 2022.
 Checks received directly at the Division were not restrictively endorsed upon
receipt. Rather, the checks were handled by at least two employees prior to
being endorsed.
 Collections were not always deposited timely. Our test of 15 deposits
received between April 2020 and June 2022, totaling $32.9 million, disclosed
that 10 deposits totaling $19.2 million were made between 2 and 34 days after
receipt by the Division.
 MDH could not always document that deposit verifications were performed.
Specifically, there was no documentation of the deposit verification for 7 of
the aforementioned 15 deposits tested, which totaled $10.7 million.
 MDH did not require large payments to be made electronically to enhance
accountability and security over the funds. In this regard, we noted that $25.1
million (76 percent) of the aforementioned $32.9 million tested consisted of
27 checks ranging from $126,000 to $3.1 million, including 22 checks totaling
$18.4 million received by the LHDs and forwarded to the Division. Controls
could be enhanced by requiring these payments to be submitted electronically
(such as via wire transfer).
The Comptroller of Maryland’s Accounting Procedures Manual requires
collections to be restrictively endorsed immediately upon receipt, deposited
within one business day, and independently verified to deposit.
41

--- Page 44 ---
Recommendation 16
We recommend that MDH
a. restrictively endorse collections immediately upon receipt,
b. deposit collections within one business day of receipt,
c. ensure that independent deposit verifications are documented for all
collections, and
d. consider requiring large payments to be made electronically to enhance
control over the funds.
Executive Oversight
Finding 17
MDH did not ensure that appropriate corrective actions were implemented
to address prior findings from our Office’s fiscal compliance audits of the
other MDH units.
Analysis
MDH did not ensure that appropriate corrective actions were implemented to
address prior findings from our Office’s fiscal compliance audits of the other
MDH units. MDH is responsible for providing executive oversight and guidance
to the individual units. As detailed in Exhibit 2, our Office conducts 19 separate
audits of the various MDH units. Our most recent audit reports of these units
contained 77 findings.
MDH relied primarily on its Office of Internal Controls, Audit Compliance, and
Information Security12 to ensure the units implemented corrective actions to
address these findings. However, these efforts were not always sufficient to
ensure that the findings were satisfactorily addressed. Specifically, 20 of the
aforementioned 77 findings (26 percent) were repeated from our preceding audit
reports (see Exhibit 2). Furthermore, our most recent two audits of the
Development Disabilities Administration (DDA), which included a significant
number of repeat findings, have concluded that DDA’s accountability and
compliance level was unsatisfactory (in accordance with a rating process
approved by the Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee).
12As previously noted in this report, Chapter 325, Laws of Maryland 2021 established MDH’s
Office of the Inspector General as an independent unit of the State effective July 1, 2022. As a
result, MDH established the Office of Internal Controls, Audit Compliance, and Information
Security to manage certain responsibilities previously handled by the OIG, including conducting
follow-up reviews of audit-related corrective actions.
42

--- Page 45 ---
Recommendation 17
We recommend that MDH ensure that appropriate correction actions are
implemented to address Office of Legislative Audits report findings.
43

--- Page 46 ---
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the Office of the Secretary and
other units of the Maryland Department of Health (MDH) for the period
beginning February 12, 2019 and ending June 30, 2022. The audit was conducted
in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards. Those
standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient,
appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and
conclusions based on our audit objectives. We believe that the evidence obtained
provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit
objectives.
As prescribed by the State Government Article, Section 2-1221 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, the objectives of this audit were to examine MDH’s financial
transactions, records, and internal control, and to evaluate its compliance with
applicable State laws, rules, and regulations.
In planning and conducting our audit, we focused on the major financial-related
areas of operations based on assessments of significance and risk. The areas
addressed by the audit included audits of local health departments and private
providers, federal funds, procurements and disbursements, interagency
agreements, cash receipts, payroll, information security, accounts receivable for
patients in State facilities, and corporate purchasing card activity. Our audit also
included a review of certain support services (such as payroll, purchasing,
maintenance of accounting records, and related fiscal functions) provided by the
MDH’s Office of the Secretary and related units to the other units of MDH. We
also determined the status of the six findings contained in our preceding audit
report and four of the five findings contained in our special review of allegations
related to a questionable grant awarded to a nonprofit organization by the Opioid
Operational Command Center.
Our audit did not include an evaluation of internal controls over compliance with
federal laws and regulations for federal financial assistance programs and an
assessment of MDH’s compliance with those laws and regulations because the
State of Maryland engages an independent accounting firm to annually audit such
programs administered by State agencies, including MDH.
Our assessment of internal controls was based on agency procedures and controls
in place at the time of our fieldwork. Our tests of transactions and other auditing
procedures were generally focused on the transactions occurring during our audit
period of February 12, 2019 to June 30, 2022, but may include transactions before
or after this period as we considered necessary to achieve our audit objectives.
44

--- Page 47 ---
To accomplish our audit objectives, our audit procedures included inquiries of
appropriate personnel, inspections of documents and records, tests of transactions,
and to the extent practicable, observations of MDH’s operations. Generally,
transactions were selected for testing based on auditor judgment, which primarily
considers risk, the timing or dollar amount of the transaction, or the significance
of the transaction to the area of operation reviewed. As a matter of course, we do
not normally use sampling in our tests, so unless otherwise specifically indicated,
neither statistical nor non-statistical audit sampling was used to select the
transactions tested. Therefore, unless sampling is specifically indicated in a
finding, the results from any tests conducted or disclosed by us cannot be used to
project those results to the entire population from which the test items were
selected.
We also performed various data extracts of pertinent information from the State’s
Financial Management Information System (such as revenue and expenditure
data) and the State’s Central Payroll Bureau (payroll data), as well as from the
contractor administering the State’s Corporate Purchasing Card Program (credit
card activity). The extracts are performed as part of ongoing internal processes
established by the Office of Legislative Audits and were subject to various tests to
determine data reliability. We determined that the data extracted from these
sources were sufficiently reliable for the purposes the data were used during this
audit.
We also extracted data from various key MDH internal systems, such as the
Hospital Management Information System for the purpose of testing accounts
receivable for patients in State facilities. We performed various tests of the
relevant data and determined the data were sufficiently reliable for the purposes
the data were used during the audit. Finally, we performed other auditing
procedures that we considered necessary to achieve our audit objectives. The
reliability of data used in this report for background or informational purposes
was not assessed.
MDH’s management is responsible for establishing and maintaining effective
internal control. Internal control is a process designed to provide reasonable
assurance that objectives pertaining to the reliability of financial records;
effectiveness and efficiency of operations, including safeguarding of assets; and
compliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations are achieved. As
provided in Government Auditing Standards, there are five components of
internal control: control environment, risk assessment, control activities,
information and communication, and monitoring. Each of the five components,
when significant to the audit objectives, and as applicable to MDH, were
considered by us during the course of this audit.
45

--- Page 48 ---
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate.
Our reports are designed to assist the Maryland General Assembly in exercising
its legislative oversight function and to provide constructive recommendations for
improving State operations. As a result, our reports generally do not address
activities we reviewed that are functioning properly.
This report includes findings related to conditions that we consider to be
significant deficiencies in the design or operation of internal control that could
adversely affect MDH’s ability to maintain reliable financial records, operate
effectively and efficiently, and/or comply with applicable laws, rules, and
regulations. Our report also includes findings regarding significant instances of
noncompliance with applicable laws, rules, or regulations. Other less significant
findings were communicated to MDH that did not warrant inclusion in this report.
State Government Article Section 2-1224(i) requires that we redact in a manner
consistent with auditing best practices any cybersecurity findings before a report
is made available to the public. This results in the issuance of two different
versions of an audit report that contains cybersecurity findings – a redacted
version for the public and an unredacted version for government officials
responsible for acting on our audit recommendations.
The State Finance and Procurement Article, Section 3.5-301(b), states that
cybersecurity is defined as “processes or capabilities wherein systems,
communications, and information are protected and defended against damage,
unauthorized use or modification, and exploitation.” Based on that definition, and
in our professional judgment, we concluded that certain findings in this report fall
under that definition. Consequently, for the publicly available audit report all
specifics as to the nature of cybersecurity findings and required corrective actions
have been redacted. We have determined that such aforementioned practices, and
government auditing standards, support the redaction of this information from the
public audit report. The specifics of these cybersecurity findings have been
communicated to MDH and those parties responsible for acting on our
recommendations in an unredacted audit report.
As a result of our audit, we determined that MDH’s accountability and
compliance level was unsatisfactory. The primary factor contributing to the
unsatisfactory rating was the significance and number of the audit findings. Our
rating has been made solely pursuant to the aforementioned law and rating
46

--- Page 49 ---
guidelines approved by the Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee. The rating
process is not a practice prescribed by professional auditing standards.
MDH’s response to our findings and recommendations is included as an appendix
to this report. Depending on the version of the audit report, responses to any
cybersecurity findings may be redacted in accordance with State law. As
prescribed in the State Government Article, Section 2-1224 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, we will advise MDH regarding the results of our review of its
response.
47

--- Page 50 ---
Exhibit 1
Maryland Department of Health Organizational Chart
48

--- Page 51 ---
Exhibit 2
Listing of Most Recent Office of Legislative Audits
Fiscal Compliance Audits of Maryland Department of Health Units
As of September 2023 (Page 1 of 2)
Number of
Most Recent Total
Name of Audit Areas Covered Repeat
Report Date Findings
Findings
 Deer’s Head Hospital Center
1 Chronic Care Hospital Centers 05/10/23 3 1
 Western Maryland Hospital Center
Developmental Disabilities
2 Developmental Disabilities Administration 10/26/22 8 4
Administration U
Behavioral Health Administration
 Behavioral Health Administration
and Medical Care Programs
 Medical Care Programs Administration
3 Administration - Administrative 10/25/22 9 2
Administrative Service Organization for
Service Organization for Behavioral
Behavioral Health Services
Health Services U
 Holly Center
Intellectual Disabilities Residential  Potomac Center
4 10/24/22 4 0
Centers  Secure Evaluation and Therapeutic
Treatment Program
 John L. Gildner Regional Institute for
Regional Institutes for Children and Children and Adolescents
5 07/13/22 5 1
Adolescents  Regional Institute for Children and
Adolescents – Baltimore
Office of the Chief Medical
6 Office of the Chief Medical Examiner 05/12/22 0 0
Examiner
 Prevention and Health Promotion
Administration
Prevention and Health Promotion  Office of Population Health Improvement
Administration - Office of  Office of Preparedness and Response
Population Health Improvement -  Office of Provider Engagement and
7 02/23/21 3 2
Office of Preparedness and Regulation – Office of Controlled
Response - Office of Provider Substances Administration
Engagement and Regulation  Office of Provider Engagement and
Regulation – Prescription Drug Monitoring
Program
 22 Health Professional Boards and
8 Regulatory Services Commissions 01/19/21 7 3
 Office of Health Care Quality
9 Vital Statistics Administration Vital Statistics Administration 11/10/20 4 1
Pharmacy Services for
 Medicaid Managed Care Program
 Maryland Medicaid Pharmacy Program
 Kidney Disease Program
10 Pharmacy Services 08/31/20 7 1
 Maryland AIDS Drug Assistance
Program
 Breast and Cervical Cancer Diagnosis
and Treatment Program
① - The count of repeat findings does not include cybersecurity findings since State Government Article Section 2-1224(i) of the Annotated
Code of Maryland requires that any cybersecurity findings be redacted from public reports.
U - This audit had an unsatisfactory rating.
49

--- Page 52 ---
Exhibit 2
Listing of Most Recent Office of Legislative Audits
Fiscal Compliance Audits of Maryland Department of Health Units
As of September 2023 (Page 2 of 2) (
Number of
Most Recent Total
Name of Audit Areas Covered Repeat
Report Date Findings
Findings
Spring Grove Hospital Center
11 Spring Grove Hospital Center 04/22/20 4 1
Medical Care Programs Managed Care Program, known as
12 Administration - Managed Care HealthChoice including oversight of the nine 04/22/20 5 1
Program private Managed Care Organizations
Laboratories Administration
13 Laboratories Administration 04/10/20 1 0
Clifton T. Perkins Hospital
14 Clifton T. Perkins Hospital Center 03/17/20 2 0
Center
Medical Care Programs
15 Medical Care Programs Administration 11/07/19 11 2
Administration
 Maryland Health Care Commission
 Health Services Cost Review Commission
16 Health Regulatory Commissions 04/05/19 1 1
 Maryland Community Health Resources
Commission
17 Thomas B. Finan Hospital Center Thomas B. Finan Hospital Center 03/26/19 1 0
18 Springfield Hospital Center Springfield Hospital Center 12/06/18 1 0
19 Eastern Shore Hospital Center Eastern Shore Hospital Center 11/19/18 1 0
Total 77 20
① - The count of repeat findings does not include cybersecurity findings since State Government Article Section 2-1224(i) of the Annotated
Code of Maryland requires that any cybersecurity findings be redacted from public reports.
50

--- Page 53 ---
APPENDIX
October 16, 2023
Mr. Gregory A. Hook, CPA
Legislative Auditor
Office of Legislative Audits
The Warehouse at Camden Yards
351 West Camden Street, Suite 400
Baltimore, MD 21201
Dear Mr. Hook:
Enclosed, please find the responses to the draft audit report on the Maryland Department
of Health – Office of the Secretary and Other Units, for the period beginning February 12, 2019,
and ending June 30, 2022.
The Department is concerned about the severity of the audit findings contained in this
report, especially in light of recent audit findings related to the fiscal 2022 closeout and the
Medical Care Programs Administration. To that end, we have engaged an external accounting
firm to support the Department’s efforts to improve fiscal practices in several areas identified by
the Office of Legislative Audits (OLA) in this report, particularly as it relates to properly
leveraging federal funds. Similarly, there are a number of findings that highlight opportunities to
improve the Department’s procurement processes. As a first step, MDH has centralized
procurement into one office. However, the Department will continue to identify areas for
improvement in procurement and modify policies and procedures to ensure compliance with
State law.
Improving the critical findings identified in this report are essential to best serve
Marylanders. We appreciate the diligent work of OLA and look forward to

--- Page 54 ---
Gregory A. Hook
October 16, 2023
Page 2
working with your team as we correct these findings. If you have any questions, please contact
Frederick D. Doggett at 410-767-0885 or email at frederick.doggett@maryland.gov.
Sincerely,
Laura Herrera Scott, M.D.
Secretary
Enclosure
cc: Erin K. McMullen, R.N., Chief of Staff, MDH
Marie Grant, Assistant Secretary for Health Policy, MDH
Bryan I. Mroz, Deputy Secretary, Operations, MDH
Frederick D. Doggett, Director, Internal Controls, Audit Compliance &
Information Security, MDH
Deneen Toney, Deputy Director, Audit & Compliance, MDH
2

--- Page 55 ---
Maryland Department of Health
Office of the Secretary and Other Units
Agency Response Form
Federal Funds
Finding 1
MDH did not have procedures to ensure MDH units properly entered all provider
payments into MMIS II and resolved any rejected claims to enable timely and complete
recovery of the funds.
We recommend that MDH
a. establish procedures to ensure that MDH units properly recorded all payments in
MMIS II and subsequently resolved any rejected claims, and
b. report the aforementioned unrecoverable funds to the Department of Budget and
Management (DBM) and the budget committees and develop a plan to cover the related
unfunded liabilities.
Agency Response
Analysis Factually Accurate
Please provide
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 1a Agree Estimated Completion Date: 2/1/2024
Please provide details of MDH engaged an external accounting firm to assist the Department in
corrective action or identifying procedural gaps that led to OLA’s findings related to the
explain disagreement. federal fund accounting process. Through this engagement, MDH will
develop documented processes for reconciling claims and accounting
systems to ensure accurate recording of payments and the timely
resolution of rejected claims.
Recommendation 1b Agree Estimated Completion Date: 12/31/2024
Please provide details of MDH is working to resolve all findings noted in OLA’s October 2022
corrective action or fiscal compliance audit reports on the Developmental Disabilities
explain disagreement. Administration (DDA) and the Behavioral Health Administration
Administrative Services Organization (BHASO). As this process nears
completion, MDH will formally advise DBM and the budget committees
of our progress and will develop a plan for covering any unfunded
liabilities. MDH also notes that the $106.7 million in unresolved claims
cited in the BHASO report has been reduced to $67 million as of
October 2023. However, complete resolution of unresolved BHASO
Page 1 of 16

--- Page 56 ---
Maryland Department of Health
Office of the Secretary and Other Units
Agency Response Form
claims is unlikely to occur until the contract with the incumbent expires
on December 31, 2024.
Finding 2
MDH did not ensure critical quarterly reconciliations were performed, resulting in the
failure to recover $973.3 million of federal funding timely and lost investment income
totaling $6.4 million.
We recommend that MDH establish a formal policy and procedures, including the
appropriate procedural safeguards, to ensure that the critical quarterly reconciliations are
completed properly and timely, and reviewed and approved by a supervisor independent of
the reconciliation process.
Agency Response
Analysis Factually Accurate
Please provide
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 2 Agree Estimated Completion Date: Complete
Please provide details of MDH is performing quarterly reconciliations for all programs to ensure
corrective action or that amounts requested from the federal government through weekly
explain disagreement. drawdowns are agreed to actual expenditures. In response to this finding,
MDH undertook a process to fully document the reconciliation process,
including review and approval, in a Standard Operating Procedure
(SOP). This was completed in January 2023.
Page 2 of 16

--- Page 57 ---
Maryland Department of Health
Office of the Secretary and Other Units
Agency Response Form
Finding 3
MDH did not have procedures to ensure federal funds requested for reimbursement of
State payments were subsequently received.
We recommend that MDH establish a documented procedure to ensure that all federal
funds requested were received.
Agency Response
Analysis Factually Accurate
Please provide
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 3 Agree Estimated Completion Date: 2/1/2024
Please provide details of MDH has engaged an external accounting firm to assist the Department
corrective action or in identifying procedural gaps that led to OLA’s findings related to the
explain disagreement. federal fund accounting process. Through this engagement, MDH will
develop documented processes to ensure the receipt of requested federal
funds.
Finding 4
MDH did not have procedures to ensure all federal fund reimbursements were properly
allocated to the appropriate expenditure accounts resulting in a lack of assurance that
account balances were accurate and the inability to determine whether all federal funds
had been recovered.
We recommend that MDH
a. establish procedures and controls to ensure federal funds are allocated properly and
timely, and that the related transactions are subject to supervisory review and
approval;
b. ensure clearing accounts have either a positive or zero balance;
c. investigate and resolve the aforementioned account balances; and
d. given the magnitude of the year-end closing deficiencies noted in this and other
findings, consider engaging a qualified third-party consultant to assist in the
development of appropriate corrective procedures and controls.
Agency Response
Page 3 of 16

--- Page 58 ---
Maryland Department of Health
Office of the Secretary and Other Units
Agency Response Form
Analysis Factually Accurate
Please provide
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 4a Agree Estimated Completion Date: 2/1/2024
Please provide details of MDH has engaged an external accounting firm to assist the Department
corrective action or in identifying procedural gaps that led to OLA’s findings related to the
explain disagreement. federal fund accounting process. Through this engagement, the
Department will develop and document reconciliation procedures for
proper allocation of federal fund reimbursements to expenditure
accounts.
Recommendation 4b Agree Estimated Completion Date: 2/1/2024
Please provide details of MDH has engaged an external accounting firm to assist the Department
corrective action or in identifying procedural gaps that led to OLA’s findings related to the
explain disagreement. federal fund accounting process. Through this engagement, the
Department will develop and document reconciliation procedures for
proper allocation of federal fund reimbursements to expenditure
accounts.
Recommendation 4c Agree Estimated Completion Date: 2/1/2024
Please provide details of MDH has engaged an external accounting firm to assist the Department
corrective action or in identifying procedural gaps that led to OLA’s findings related to the
explain disagreement. federal fund accounting process. Through this engagement, the
Department will document reconciliation procedures for the proper
allocation of federal fund reimbursements to expenditure accounts. Once
that has occurred MDH will investigate and resolve the account balances
that OLA mentioned in their report.
Recommendation 4d Agree Estimated Completion Date: 2/1/2024
Please provide details of MDH has engaged an external accounting firm to assist the Department
corrective action or in identifying procedural gaps that led to OLA’s findings related to the
explain disagreement. federal fund accounting process. Through this engagement, the
Department will document reconciliation procedures for proper
allocation of federal fund reimbursements to expenditure accounts.
Budgetary and Year-End Closing
Finding 5
MDH used an automated script to record year-end revenue entries without verifying that
the amounts recorded were valid and collectable.
Page 4 of 16

--- Page 59 ---
Maryland Department of Health
Office of the Secretary and Other Units
Agency Response Form
We recommend that MDH
a. ensure that all year-end revenue transactions are properly supported,
b. analyze the balances in the federal fund accounts to determine the collectability of any
deficit balances and proper disposition of any surplus balances, and
c. properly report any amounts determined to be uncollectable and work with DBM to
resolve any related deficits.
Agency Response
Analysis Factually Accurate
Please provide
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 5a Agree Estimated Completion Date: 2/1/2024
Please provide details of MDH has engaged an external accounting firm to assist the Department
corrective action or in identifying procedural gaps that led to OLA’s findings related to the
explain disagreement. federal fund accounting process. Through this engagement, the
Department will document reconciliation procedures for verification of
the validity and collectability of year-end automated revenue entries.
Recommendation 5b Agree Estimated Completion Date: 2/1/2024
Please provide details of MDH has engaged an external accounting firm to assist the Department
corrective action or in identifying procedural gaps that led to OLA’s findings related to the
explain disagreement. federal fund accounting process. Through this engagement, the
Department will document reconciliation procedures for verification of
the validity and collectability of year-end automated revenue entries.
Recommendation 5c Agree Estimated Completion Date: 2/1/2024
Please provide details of MDH has engaged an external accounting firm to assist the Department
corrective action or in identifying procedural gaps that led to OLA’s findings related to the
explain disagreement. federal fund accounting process. Through this engagement, the
Department will document reconciliation procedures for verification of
the validity and collectability of year-end automated revenue entries.
Procurements and Disbursements
Finding 6
MDH used an emergency contract originally procured for COVID related purposes for
unrelated services without sufficient documentation that the services were received and the
Page 5 of 16

--- Page 60 ---
Maryland Department of Health
Office of the Secretary and Other Units
Agency Response Form
related payments were proper. As a result, we could not determine services were received
or the propriety of MDH payments totaling $60.4 million.
We recommend that MDH
a. conduct a review of this contract, which includes obtaining the detailed staffing
information required by the contract, determine the extent of the services that were
provided in relation to payments made, recover any payments determined to be
improper, and disclose this information to BPW; and
b. ensure that future emergency contracts are procured and documented in accordance
with State procurement regulations and are properly monitored to ensure services were
received and the related billings are adequately supported.
Agency Response
Analysis Factually Accurate
Please provide
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 6a Agree Estimated Completion Date: 12/31/2023
Please provide details of MDH has initiated a review of this contract, including all modifications.
corrective action or This review includes a detailed examination of selected invoices. For each
explain disagreement. invoice, the review team will determine whether amounts charged,
including time charges for contract staff, were sufficiently documented
and can be associated with specific assigned work or deliverables.
Members of the review team were not associated with the contract and
will report findings directly to the MDH Secretary, who will determine
next steps, as appropriate.
Recommendation 6b Agree Estimated Completion Date: Complete
Please provide details of In order to ensure compliance with State procurement laws and
corrective action or regulations, MDH has reorganized all procurement officers into a single
explain disagreement. office - The Office of Contract Management and Procurement (OCMP).
This reorganization has facilitated increased oversight over all Department
procurement activities. This includes: ensuring all emergency procurement
files are full and complete; that we are procuring goods and services in
accordance with State procurement regulations; and properly monitoring
to ensure services were received and the related billings are adequately
supported.
Page 6 of 16

--- Page 61 ---
Maryland Department of Health
Office of the Secretary and Other Units
Agency Response Form
Finding 7
MDH did not always comply with State procurement regulations when procuring goods
and services via sole source and emergency contracts and did not always publish contract
solicitations and awards as required.
We recommend that MDH ensure that
a. sufficient documented justifications exist for sole source (repeat) and emergency
procurements;
b. documented price negotiations are conducted as appropriate (repeat);
c. BPW is notified of emergency procurements, including the one noted above (repeat);
and
d. solicitations and awards are published on eMMA as required (repeat), including the
ones noted above.
Agency Response
Analysis Factually Accurate
Please provide
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 7a Agree Estimated Completion Date: Complete
Please provide details of In order to ensure compliance with State procurement laws and
corrective action or regulations, MDH has reorganized all procurement officers into a single
explain disagreement. office - OCMP. This reorganization has facilitated increased oversight
over all Department procurement activities, including ensuring sufficient
documented justifications exist for sole source and emergency
procurements. MDH continues to identify areas for improvement in
procurement and modify policies and procedures to ensure compliance
with State law.
Recommendation 7b Agree Estimated Completion Date: Complete
Please provide details of In order to ensure compliance with State procurement laws and
corrective action or regulations, MDH has reorganized all procurement officers into a single
explain disagreement. office - OCMP. This reorganization has facilitated increased oversight
over all Department procurement activities, including ensuring price
negotiations occur and are appropriately documented as required. MDH
continues to identify areas for improvement in procurement and modify
policies and procedures to ensure compliance with State law.
Page 7 of 16

--- Page 62 ---
Maryland Department of Health
Office of the Secretary and Other Units
Agency Response Form
Recommendation 7c Agree Estimated Completion Date: Complete
Please provide details of In order to ensure compliance with State procurement laws and
corrective action or regulations, MDH has reorganized all procurement officers into a single
explain disagreement. office - OCMP. This reorganization has facilitated increased oversight
over all Department procurement activities, including ensuring timely
notification to the Board of Public Works for any emergency
procurements conducted by the agency. MDH continues to identify areas
for improvement in procurement and modify policies and procedures to
ensure compliance with State law.
Recommendation 7d Agree Estimated Completion Date: Complete
Please provide details of In order to ensure compliance with State procurement laws and
corrective action or regulations, MDH has reorganized all procurement officers into a single
explain disagreement. office - OCMP. This reorganization has facilitated increased oversight
over all Department procurement activities, including ensuring timely
publications of solicitations and awards on eMMA. MDH continues to
identify areas for improvement in procurement and modify policies and
procedures to ensure compliance with State law.
Page 8 of 16

--- Page 63 ---
Maryland Department of Health
Office of the Secretary and Other Units
Agency Response Form
Information Systems Security and Control
The Office of Legislative Audits (OLA) has determined that the Information Systems Security
and Control section, including findings 8 through 12 related to “cybersecurity”, as defined by the
State Finance and Procurement Article, Section 3.5-301(b) of the Annotated Code of Maryland,
and therefore are subject to redaction from the publicly available audit report in accordance with
the State Government Article 2-1224(i). Although, the specifics of the following findings,
including the analysis, related recommendations, along with MDH’s responses, have been
redacted from this report copy, MDH’s responses indicated agreement with the findings and
related recommendations.
Finding 8
Redacted cybersecurity-related finding.
Agency Response has been redacted by OLA.
Finding 9
Redacted cybersecurity-related finding.
Agency Response has been redacted by OLA.
Finding 10
Redacted cybersecurity-related finding..
Agency Response has been redacted by OLA.
Finding 11
Redacted cybersecurity-related finding.
Agency Response has been redacted by OLA.
Page 9 of 16

--- Page 64 ---
Maryland Department of Health
Office of the Secretary and Other Units
Agency Response Form
Finding 12
Redacted cybersecurity-related finding.
Agency Response has been redacted by OLA.
Accounts Receivable
Finding 13
MDH was eight months behind on billing for services rendered at MDH inpatient facilities,
which based on MDH assertions could total approximately $45.4 million at the time of our
review.
We recommend that MDH take formal action to address the backlog in unbilled services
and ensure future services are billed in a timely manner.
Agency Response
Analysis Factually Accurate
Please provide
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 13 Agree Estimated Completion Date: Complete
Please provide details of MDH took action to address the backlog in unbilled services as a result
corrective action or of the network security incident, as soon as HMIS was restored to the
explain disagreement. network. Unfortunately, HMIS was not available or operational for the 8
months cited in OLA’s finding due to the network security incident. The
recovery team regularly maintained procedures to work with the billings
team to create back billings as soon as HMIS was restored and
operational.
Page 10 of 16

--- Page 65 ---
Maryland Department of Health
Office of the Secretary and Other Units
Agency Response Form
Payroll
Finding 14
MDH had not established adequate controls to ensure the propriety of biweekly payroll
adjustments, leave balances, and timesheets.
We recommend that MDH
a. independently verify pay and leave balance adjustments to ensure that only
authorized adjustments have been processed and take appropriate corrective action
when errors are noted (repeat);
b. retroactively verify that the time recorded on timesheets approved by payroll unit
employees were actually worked, including those noted above (repeat); and
c. reconcile total payroll as reflected in CPB payroll registers each pay period with
SPS payroll summary reports, investigate any differences, and ensure that those
reconciliations are documented (repeat).
Agency Response
Analysis Factually Accurate
Please provide
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 14a Agree Estimated Completion Date: Complete
Page 11 of 16

--- Page 66 ---
Maryland Department of Health
Office of the Secretary and Other Units
Agency Response Form
MDH has implemented a comprehensive verification process for
Please provide details of employee pay and leave balance adjustments, which is documented in
corrective action or SOPs/guidelines governing the review process.
explain disagreement.
Pay Adjustments: Managers within OHR’s Payroll and Timekeeping
Unit review pay adjustments (inputs) submitted by MDH payroll
coordinators each week to ensure that they are accurately reviewed,
verified, and recorded and confirm that only authorized adjustments are
processed and paid. As required by DBM, payroll adjustments are
submitted by the payroll manager through an Input Request form. Input
Files are one-time fixed amounts that add to or reduce an employee's
gross payroll amount initiated by authorized time entry and
compensation change events in Workday. If pay adjustment errors are
noted during processing, the appropriate corrective actions are taken, to
include manual review of input forms, coordination of error resolution
with the assigned Payroll personnel, and final submission of inputs to
DBM.
Leave Balance Adjustments: OHR’s Payroll and Timekeeping Unit
instituted a leave adjustment review process to confirm the accuracy
and proper recording of leave adjustments to prevent and/or correct the
processing of unauthorized adjustments. If errors are noted upon
review, appropriate corrective actions are taken. OHR’s corrective and
preventative measures include an internal review and audit of a
randomized selection of 10% of records to ensure compliance with
leave adjustment standards.
Recommendation 14b Agree Estimated Completion Date: Complete
Page 12 of 16

--- Page 67 ---
Maryland Department of Health
Office of the Secretary and Other Units
Agency Response Form
MDH has revised its timesheet certification process in response to this
Please provide details of audit finding. The revised process outlines the review and verification
corrective action or procedures for merit and contractual timesheets that are approved by
explain disagreement. OHR’s timekeepers. After the identification of timesheets submitted by
MDH’s timekeepers (due to missing initial entries), OHR obtains email
confirmation from supervisors of missing timesheet information. This
process is completed weekly on Thursdays by assigned Payroll
personnel at the conclusion of the Office’s weekly standard payroll
activities. Two weeks after the initial email, the assigned payroll
personnel reports to the Chief of payroll those supervisors who have yet
to confirm entries approved by OHR timekeepers. The Chief sends out
follow-up emails to each supervisor to complete the certification
process.
Recommendation 14c Agree Estimated Completion Date: Complete
MDH has revised its processes in response to this finding. The bi-
Please provide details of
weekly payroll reconciliation process instituted by OHR requires the
corrective action or
comparison of SPMS Payroll Summary Reports in Workday to the
explain disagreement.
Central Payroll Bureau (CPB) Payroll Register. The assigned Payroll
personnel completes a review for discrepancies between the reports to
identify incorrect data. Upon the completion of the initial review,
discrepancies are addressed by reviewing internal reports, Workday
transactions, timesheets, and the Payroll Online Service Center (POSC)
to identify dissimilar data. Once the erroneous result is correctly
identified, the necessary corrections are made by the assigned Payroll
personnel. The results and corrections are documented on the SPS
Payroll Summary and CPB Payroll Register that is maintained in the
OHR Payroll Manager shared files.
Page 13 of 16

--- Page 68 ---
Maryland Department of Health
Office of the Secretary and Other Units
Agency Response Form
Finding 15
MDH did not have procedures to ensure that employees who were terminated or left State
service were promptly removed from the payroll, resulting in improper payments to at
least 45 former employees totaling $151,000.
We recommend that MDH
a. implement procedures to ensure timely posting in SPS of employees who are terminated
or leave State service; and
b. investigate payments to employees after they left State service, including those noted
above, and in consultation with legal counsel pursue recovery of any improper
payments as deemed appropriate.
Agency Response
Analysis Factually Accurate
Please provide
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 15a Agree Estimated Completion Date: 12/31/23
Please provide details of MDH has identified areas of opportunity for additional knowledge
corrective action or transfer for supervisory and managerial employees as it relates to timely
explain disagreement. and efficient notification of impending employee terminations and
resignations. This includes additional information on protocol and
procedure, as well as the centralization of HR resources for ease of
access and usage for those who need it. Further, MDH will optimize
report usage to create an alternative means of finding instances of
employees no longer working with the agency. This includes more
effective and proactive usage of various available reporting tools (SPMS
No Time Entered and Less the 80 Report) to proactively identify and
address potential areas of concern. This should create a significant
reduction in instances of the need for backdated or processing delayed
termination in SPS Workday.
Recommendation 15b Agree Estimated Completion Date: 12/31/23
Please provide details of MDH is modifying its processes to address this finding. OHR will utilize
corrective action or termination reports to audit the same time period assessed by the audit
explain disagreement. team (beginning February 2019) and extend it to the end of fiscal year
2023 to identify those employees, both during the audited time frame
and beyond, who may have been terminated with a backdated effective
date. Using this list, all identified employees’ records will be further
Page 14 of 16

--- Page 69 ---
Maryland Department of Health
Office of the Secretary and Other Units
Agency Response Form
audited to identify any potential improper payments and undergo what
corrective action can be taken to resolve the issue. Moving forward from
7/1/2023, the above noted measures will be implemented to mitigate any
further potential occurrences of this issue.
Cash Receipts
Finding 16
MDH did not sufficiently control collections including the untimely endorsement and
deposit of collections, a lack of independent verification that collections were deposited, and
a failure to require large payments to be submitted electronically.
We recommend that MDH
a. restrictively endorse collections immediately upon receipt,
b. deposit collections within one business day of receipt,
c. ensure that independent deposit verifications are documented for all collections, and
d. consider requiring large payments to be made electronically to enhance control over the
funds.
Agency Response
Analysis Factually Accurate
Please provide
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 16a Agree Estimated Completion Date: Complete
Please provide details of MDH has implemented a procedure for restrictively endorsing
corrective action or collections immediately upon receipt. MDH has updated written
explain disagreement. procedures accordingly.
Recommendation 16b Agree Estimated Completion Date: Complete
Please provide details of MDH has implemented this recommendation and has updated written
corrective action or procedures accordingly.
explain disagreement.
Recommendation 16c Agree Estimated Completion Date: Complete
Page 15 of 16

--- Page 70 ---
Maryland Department of Health
Office of the Secretary and Other Units
Agency Response Form
Please provide details of MDH resumed independent deposit verifications in July 2022 by having
corrective action or a staff member review and attach the Previous Day Composite Report to
explain disagreement. the daily deposit.
Recommendation 16d Agree Estimated Completion Date: 12/31/2023
Please provide details of MDH will study this issue and prepare a documented analysis. We
corrective action or caution, however, that the use of electronic ACH transfers could create
explain disagreement. confusion and complicate reconciliation of expenditures to revenues.
Executive Oversight
Finding 17
MDH did not ensure that appropriate corrective actions were implemented to address
prior findings from our Office’s fiscal compliance audits of the other MDH units.
We recommend that MDH ensure that appropriate correction actions are implemented to
address Office of Legislative Audits report findings.
Agency Response
Analysis Factually Accurate
Please provide
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 17 Agree Estimated Completion Date: 12/31/2024
Please provide details of MDH has engaged an outside accounting firm to help MDH address
corrective action or prior audit findings made by OLA, including those identified in this
explain disagreement. report, and recent reports on Medicaid, DDA, and the 2022 closeout
audit. MDH is also actively recruiting and filling vacancies. The
additional resources will assist with reconciliation of the data between
FMIS, MMIS, PCIS2, any other related external systems. MDH is also
exploring hiring recent retirees to support our fiscal staff with training
and best practices.
In addition, MDH meets regularly with DBM to review and evaluate
ongoing corrective actions addressing prior OLA findings. These
meetings will continue until all identified actions are deemed complete.
Page 16 of 16

--- Page 71 ---
A T
UDIT EAM
Edward A. Rubenstein, CPA
Audit Manager
R. Brendan Coffey, CPA, CISA
Edwin L. Paul, CPA, CISA
Information Systems Audit Managers
David R. Fahnestock, CPA
Data Analytics Manager
Menachem Katz, CPA
James J. Podhorniak, CPA, CFE
Robert J. Smith, CPA
Senior Auditors
Michael K. Bliss
Matthew D. Walbert, CISA
Information Systems Senior Auditors
Ian T. Pontius
Data Analytics Senior Auditor
Matusala Y. Abishe
Jordan T. Duke, CFE
Keli R. Edmonds
Dorian A. Fournier
Chau D. Mai
Paul A. McGrew
Nga T. Nguyen Simmons
Staff Auditors
Joshua A. Nicodemus
Charles O. Price
Information Systems Staff Auditors