Title: Maryland Department of Health - Medical Care Programs Administration
Date: 11/02/2023
Type: Fiscal Compliance
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=65493b15a1ce58050072412c
Extracted: 2025-06-19T23:09:16.356207
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Audit Report
Maryland Department of Health
Medical Care Programs Administration
November 2023
Public Notice
In compliance with the requirements of the State Government Article Section
2-1224(i), of the Annotated Code of Maryland, the Office of Legislative Audits
has redacted cybersecurity findings and related auditee responses
from this public report.
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Senator Clarence K. Lam, M.D. (Senate Chair) Delegate Jared Solomon (House Chair)
Senator Joanne C. Benson Delegate Steven J. Arentz
Senator Paul D. Corderman Delegate Nicholas P. Charles II
Senator Katie Fry Hester Delegate Andrea Fletcher Harrison
Senator Shelly L. Hettleman Delegate Steven C. Johnson
Senator Cheryl C. Kagan Delegate Mary A. Lehman
Senator Cory V. McCray Delegate David Moon
Senator Justin D. Ready Delegate Julie Palakovich Carr
Senator Bryan W. Simonaire Delegate Stephanie M. Smith
Senator Craig J. Zucker Delegate M. Courtney Watson
To Obtain Further Information
Office of Legislative Audits
The Warehouse at Camden Yards
351 West Camden Street, Suite 400
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Phone: 410-946-5900
Maryland Relay: 711
TTY: 410-946-5401 · 301-970-5401
E-mail: webmaster@ola.state.md.us
Website: www.ola.state.md.us
To Report Fraud
The Office of Legislative Audits operates a Fraud Hotline to report fraud, waste, or abuse involving State
of Maryland government resources. Reports of fraud, waste, or abuse may be communicated anonymously
by a toll-free call to 1-877-FRAUD-11, by mail to the Fraud Hotline, c/o Office of Legislative Audits, or
through the Office’s website.
Nondiscrimination Statement
The Department of Legislative Services does not discriminate on the basis of age, ancestry, color, creed,
marital status, national origin, race, religion, gender, gender identity, sexual orientation, or disability in the
admission or access to its programs, services, or activities. The Department’s Information Officer has been
designated to coordinate compliance with the nondiscrimination requirements contained in Section 35.107
of the United States Department of Justice Regulations. Requests for assistance should be directed to the
Information Officer at 410-946-5400 or 410-970-5400.

--- Page 3 ---
November 2, 2023
Senator Clarence K. Lam, M.D., Senate Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Delegate Jared Solomon, House Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Members of Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Annapolis, Maryland
Ladies and Gentlemen:
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the Maryland Department of
Health (MDH) – Medical Care Programs Administration (MCPA) for the period
beginning August 1, 2018 and ending March 31, 2022. MCPA administers the
Medical Assistance Program (Medicaid), which provides low-income Maryland
residents with access to a broad range of health care benefits that are financed by
State and federal funds. During fiscal year 2022, MCPA expenditures totaled
approximately $14.1 billion, of which the majority related to Medicaid.
This audit includes MCPA’s primary functions such as monitoring of recipient
and provider eligibility, the Medicaid Management Information System (MMIS
II) security and controls, third party insurance recoveries, and payments for
Medicaid recipients in hospitals, nursing facilities, in-home and community-based
settings. This activity accounted for approximately $4.3 billion in expenditures
for fiscal year 2022. Our Office conducts separate audits of MCPA’s Managed
Care Program, the Behavioral Health Administration’s Administrative Service
Organization, and the Maryland Pharmacy Program, which collectively account
for the majority of the State’s $14.1 billion in Medicaid expenditures.
Our audit disclosed that referrals of potential third-party health insurance
information were not investigated and recorded in MMIS II, which could result in
MCPA improperly paying claims that should have been paid by a third party. For
example, we found that only 180,000 (12 percent) of the 1.5 million referrals
received from MCPA’s third-party liability vendor during the period from January
2021 through June 2022 were recorded in MMIS II. As a result, claims paid for
the recipients represented by the remaining 1.32 million referrals were not subject

--- Page 4 ---
to MCPA review to determine whether any portion of the claim should have been
paid by another entity.
MCPA did not have effective processes to identify, prevent, and recover
questionable Medicaid payments. Specifically, MCPA did not refer instances of
questionable Medicaid recipient eligibility to the Department of Human Services
and Local Health Departments (LHDs) for investigation and did not have
effective processes to identify and investigate payments made on behalf of
incarcerated and deceased recipients. For example, we identified approximately
18,000 claims totaling $3.6 million paid on behalf of 5,615 recipients for which
the date of service occurred after the recipient’s date of death. MCPA also did not
ensure that changes to recipient eligibility information were processed timely and
accurately.
Our audit disclosed that MCPA did not perform adequate oversight of hospital
claims, nursing facilities, the in-home Community First Choice (CFC) program,
and the community-based Medical Day Care program. For example, MCPA did
not ensure that recipients in the CFC program received personal assistance
services in accordance with their plans of service. LHDs are responsible for
performing nurse monitoring visits to evaluate the quality of personal assistance
services provided. However, as of November 2022, 19 percent of CFC recipients
were more than 60 days overdue for a nurse monitoring visit, including 901
recipients who were more than one year overdue.
MCPA also did not monitor the contractor responsible for ensuring that Medicaid
recipients receiving services from nursing facilities required the level of care
rendered and did not have a process to ensure that patient-related ventilator claims
submitted by nursing facilities were valid. In addition, MCPA did not adequately
monitor its hospital claims audit contractor and had not pursued recovery of
improper claims identified by the vendor totaling $6.9 million. MCPA also did
not conduct required audits of Medical Day Care and Supports Planning
providers.
Our audit also disclosed certain deficiencies relating to information systems
security and control. However, in accordance with the State Government Article,
Section 2-1224(i) of the Annotated Code of Maryland, we have redacted the
findings from this audit report. Specifically, State law requires the Office of
Legislative Audits to redact cybersecurity findings in a manner consistent with
auditing best practices before the report is made available to the public. The term
“cybersecurity” is defined in the State Finance and Procurement Article, Section
3.5-301(b), and using our professional judgment we have determined that the
redacted findings fall under the referenced definition. The specifics of the
2

--- Page 5 ---
cybersecurity findings were previously communicated to those parties responsible
for acting on our recommendations.
As further explained on page 11, MDH experienced a broad security incident
resulting from a ransomware attack. Although we were generally able to obtain
information needed to satisfy our audit objectives and related conclusions, certain
records related to 4 of the 10 findings in this audit report were not available at the
time of our review due to this incident. Additional comments can be found in the
respective findings, which include recipient eligibility and program oversight
functions.
Finally, our audit also included a review to determine the status of the 11 findings
contained in our preceding audit report. For the non-cybersecurity-related
findings we determined that MCPA satisfactorily addressed 3 of those 9 findings.
The remaining 6 findings are repeated in this report.
We determined that MCPA’s accountability and compliance level was
unsatisfactory, in accordance with the rating system we established in conformity
with State law. The primary factors contributing to the unsatisfactory rating were
the significance of our audit findings and the number of repeat findings. As noted
in Figure 2, MCPA had a 14.1 percent vacancy rate. Although our audit did not
attempt to identify the specific impact of this vacancy rate on MCPA operations,
we believe that it may have contributed, at least in part, to the findings in this
report (including one finding where MCPA specifically cited limited staff
resources as a contributing cause) and the resulting rating.
MDH’s response to this audit, on behalf of MCPA, is included as an appendix to
this report. We reviewed the response and noted agreement to our findings and
related recommendations and while there are other aspects of the response which
will require further clarification, we do not anticipate that these will require the
Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee’s attention to resolve. In addition,
consistent with State law, we have redacted the elements of MDH’s response
related to the cybersecurity audit findings.
3

--- Page 6 ---
We wish to acknowledge the cooperation extended to us during the audit by MDH
and MCPA. We also wish to acknowledge MDH’s and MCPA’s willingness to
address the current audit issues and implement appropriate corrective actions.
Respectfully submitted,
Gregory A. Hook, CPA
Legislative Auditor
4

--- Page 7 ---
Table of Contents
Background Information 7
Agency Responsibilities and Audit Scope 7
Ransomware Security Incident 11
Potential Liability to the Federal Government 11
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report 12
Findings and Recommendations 14
Third Party Liability
* Finding 1 – The Medical Care Programs Administration (MCPA) 14
did not ensure that all referrals of potential third-party health
insurance information were investigated and recorded in the
Medicaid Management Information System (MMIS II), which
could result in MCPA improperly paying claims that should have
been paid by a third party.
Review of Questionable Activity
* Finding 2 – MCPA did not have effective processes to identify, prevent, 16
and recover questionable Medicaid payments, including $7.1
million in payments on behalf of incarcerated and deceased
recipients.
Recipient Eligibility
Finding 3 – MCPA did not ensure that changes to recipient Medicaid 19
eligibility information were processed timely and accurately.
Program Oversight
* Finding 4 – MCPA had not established adequate oversight to ensure that 20
all Community First Choice program recipients received personal
assistance services in accordance with their plans of service.
* Finding 5 – MCPA did not monitor the utilization control agent 22
contractor to ensure continued stay reviews of Medicaid recipients
receiving services from nursing facilities were performed timely.
 Denotes item repeated in full or part from preceding audit report
5

--- Page 8 ---
* Finding 6 – MCPA did not have an established process to ensure 23
costly recipient ventilator care claims submitted by nursing
facilities were valid, as required by State regulations.
* Finding 7 – MCPA did not conduct the required audits of Medical Day 24
Care and Supports Planning providers, and the related audit policy
and procedures were not sufficiently comprehensive.
Finding 8 – MCPA did not adequately monitor the hospital claims audit 25
contractor and had not collected or recovered improper claims
identified by the contractor totaling $6.9 million.
Information Systems Security and Control
Finding 9 – Redacted cybersecurity-related finding 27
Finding 10 – Redacted cybersecurity-related finding 27
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology 28
Exhibit 1 – Listing of Most Recent Office of Legislative Audits Fiscal 32
Compliance Audits of Maryland Department of Health Units as of
September 2023
Agency Response Appendix
 Denotes item repeated in full or part from preceding audit report
6

--- Page 9 ---
Background Information
Agency Responsibilities and Audit Scope
The Medical Care Programs Administration (MCPA) of the Maryland
Department of Health (MDH) operates under both Title XIX of the federal Social
Security Act (Medicaid) and State law. Medicaid is a joint federal and state
entitlement program for low-income individuals (recipients). The program is
administered by the states, which are required to provide healthcare coverage to
all applicants who meet the program’s eligibility criteria.
In its capacity as Maryland’s administering agency, MCPA is responsible for
enrolling the healthcare providers (such as physicians), establishing program
regulations, setting provider payment rates, reviewing and paying provider claims,
and obtaining federal reimbursement for eligible costs. MDH has agreements
with the Department of Human Services (DHS) and the Maryland Health Benefit
Exchange (MHBE) delegating its responsibility to them for Medicaid recipient
eligibility determinations.
According to State records, as of June 30, 2022, Medicaid enrollment totaled 1.7
million recipients and MCPA’s expenditures during fiscal year 2022 totaled
approximately $14.1 billion (see Figures 1 and 2), of which the majority related to
Medicaid services (see Figure 3).
Figure 1
MCPA Expenditures and Medicaid Recipient Count
(Fiscal Years 2015 to 2022)
Source: State accounting records, MCPA records
7

--- Page 10 ---
However, as explained in Figure 3, the majority of these expenditures are subject
to review and testing in three other OLA audits.1 As noted in Figure 2, $9.3
billion (66 percent) of these expenditures were federally funded.
Figure 2
MCPA Positions, Expenditures, and Funding Sources
Full-Time Equivalent Positions as of June 30, 2022
Positions Percent
Filled 531 85.9%
Vacant 87 14.1%
Total 618
Fiscal Year 2022 Expenditures
Expenditures Percent
Salaries, Wages, and Fringe Benefits $ 55,824,164 0.4%
Technical and Special Fees 5,339,864 0.0%
Operating Expenses 14,086,320,037 99.6%
Total $14,147,484,065
Fiscal Year 2022 Funding Sources
Funding Percent
General Fund $ 4,003,763,613 28.3%
Special Fund 718,980,211 5.1%
Federal Fund 9,337,698,527 66.0%
Reimbursable Fund 87,041,714 0.6%
Total $14,147,484,065
Source: State financial and personnel records
Individuals qualifying for cash assistance through either the Temporary Cash
Assistance program or the federal Supplemental Security Income program
automatically qualify for Medicaid benefits. Those eligible for Medicaid through
these programs make up most of the Medicaid population and are referred to as
“categorically needy” although there are other individuals that are considered
categorically needy due to other circumstances (such as children residing in foster
care). The remaining individuals are referred to as “medically needy,” meaning
they cannot meet the cost of needed medical care but are generally self-supporting
1 The increase in the number of Medicaid recipients and the related expenditures is primarily due
to Medicaid eligibility determinations being suspended during the COVID-19 public health
emergency.
8

--- Page 11 ---
in other respects. Individuals may apply for Medicaid in person, through the mail,
or online.
MCPA uses a federally certified computerized system, the Medicaid Management
Information System (MMIS II), implemented in 1995, to pay provider claims and
to process paid claims for federal reimbursement. According to MCPA records,
during fiscal year 2022, MMIS II was used to process transactions totaling
approximately $13.4 billion. This Medicaid activity is currently covered under
four separate audits2 as depicted in Figure 3.
Figure 3
MCPA’s Fiscal Year 2022 Medicaid Expenditures
Processed via MMIS II, by OLA Audit
($ in billions)
PS
$0.6
4%
MCP
$7.3 MCPA
55% $3.6
27%
ASO-BHA
$1.9
14%
Source: MMIS II records
The audit scope for this audit included MCPA’s primary administrative functions,
including expenditures for $4.3 billion of MCPA’s activity during fiscal year
2022 (approximately $3.6 billion processed through MMIS II, as noted in Figure
3, and $699 million in expenditures processed outside of MMIS II). In this
regard, this audit of MCPA excluded the following Medicaid services that are
reviewed under three separate OLA audits (See Exhibit 1 on page 32):
2 In addition to the other three audits, the recovery of the federal share of program costs is
reviewed during our audit of the MDH Office of the Secretary and Other Units.
9

--- Page 12 ---
 Managed Care Program (MCP) – MCPA contracts with Managed Care
Organizations to provide a wide variety of services to enrolled Medicaid
recipients in exchange for specified capitation payments.
 Administrative Service Organization for Behavioral Health Services
(ASO-BHA) – MCPA contracts with an ASO that is responsible for providing
benefit management services to Medicaid recipients enrolled in the Behavioral
Health System.
 Pharmacy Services (PS) – MCPA provides pharmaceutical benefits to
Medicaid recipients.
Specifically, we reviewed procedures and controls over activities that would
impact all MCPA expenditures including MCPA’s monitoring of MMIS II
security and controls, recipient and provider eligibility, and third-party insurance
recoveries. In addition, based on our assessments of significance and risk, we
reviewed procedures and conducted testing unique to nursing facilities, hospital
services, and the in-home Community First Choice and community-based
Medical Day Care programs, which collectively accounted for $2.5 billion of the
fiscal year 2022 expenditures processed in MMIS II for the scope of this audit
(see Figure 4).
Figure 4
Fiscal Year 2022 Medicaid Expenditures
Processed via MMIS II
by Service Type
($ in millions)
Hospital
Services
$750
Nursing
21%
Facilities
$1,213
Community
34%
First Choice
$438
12%
Other Service
Types
Medical Day
$1,046
Care
29%
$122
4%
Source: MMIS II records
10

--- Page 13 ---
Ransomware Security Incident
In December 2021, MDH experienced a broad security incident resulting from a
ransomware attack3. This incident affected the entire MDH computer network and
disrupted information technology operations for all MDH servers and end user
computers, resulting in substantial impact on all MDH business operations
including MCPA. MDH notified the Department of Information Technology’s
(DoIT) Office of Security Management, which initiated incident response
measures. Various other parties were informed of this incident or engaged for
recovery efforts. DoIT concluded that no evidence existed indicating that
sensitive or regulated information had been improperly acquired. In June 2022,
MDH received $40.4 million from the State Reserve Fund to cover the costs of its
remediation, recovery, and security modernization efforts related to the incident.
The incident, response measures, and related controls were subject to review as
part of our recent audit of the MDH Office of the Secretary and Other Units.
Although we were generally able to obtain information needed to satisfy our audit
objectives and related conclusions, certain records related to Findings 2, 3, 7, and
8 in this report were not available at the time of our review due to the incident
(see additional comments in the respective findings).
Potential Liability to the Federal Government
In our January 26, 2023 special report on Statewide Review of Budget Closeout
Transactions for Fiscal Year 2022, we noted that MDH had a potential federal
liability of approximately $52 million4 for which State general funds may be
needed. MDH reported the potential federal liability to the Comptroller of
Maryland – General Accounting Division during the fiscal year 2022 closeout
process.
The obligation relates to unspent funds for the Rebalancing Fund Demonstration
which is associated with the MCPA Money Follows the Person (MFP) program.
By participating in the Rebalancing Demonstration, the State agreed to accept
federal funds covering 75 percent of its MFP program expenditures, with the
3 As defined by the federal Department of Homeland Security’s Cybersecurity and Infrastructure
Security Agency, ransomware is an ever-evolving form of malware designed to encrypt files on a
device, rendering any files and the systems that rely on them unusable. Malicious actors then
demand ransom in exchange for decryption.
4 The closeout report identified total potential liabilities to the federal government of
approximately $86.2 million as of June 30, 2022, which also included $34.2 million in
unresolved longstanding disallowed federal fund claims related to the MDH Developmental
Disabilities Administration.
11

--- Page 14 ---
remaining 25 percent supported by State funds, instead of the more traditional 50
percent federal and 50 percent State funding arrangement used in many other
federal assistance programs. However, the 25 percent savings that the State
realized from the enhanced federal reimbursement rate is required to be spent on
additional MFP program expenditures.
The aforementioned $52 million potential liability represents this enhanced
funding received for which the required additional MFP expenditures had not
been made as of June 30, 2022. The Rebalancing Fund Demonstration was to end
September 30, 2020; however, the federal Centers for Medicare and Medicaid
Services extended the program until September 30, 2025.
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report
Our audit included a review to determine the status of the 11 findings contained in
our preceding audit report on MCPA dated November 7, 2019. As disclosed in
Figure 5 on the following page, for the non-cybersecurity-related findings, we
determined that MCPA satisfactorily addressed 3 of those 9 findings. The
remaining 6 findings are repeated in this report.
12

--- Page 15 ---
Figure 5
Status of Preceding Findings
Preceding Implementation
Finding Description
Finding Status
MCPA did not sufficiently address errors noted in medical
necessity determinations made by its utilization control agent Repeated
Finding 1
vendor and did not ensure the vendor conducted timely (Current Finding 5)
continued stay reviews of nursing facilities.
MCPA did not monitor the vendor responsible for conducting
credit balance audits of hospitals and nursing facilities to
Finding 2 ensure the audits were conducted timely and properly, and the Not Repeated
contract did not include provisions to assess liquidated
damages for noncompliance with contract requirements.
MCPA did not require nor obtain comprehensive, independent
reviews of the automated systems used by two vendors to
Finding 3 ensure sensitive data, including personally identifiable Status Redacted5
information and protected health information, were properly
safeguarded.
MCPA did not sufficiently document its review of
investigations of questionable recipient eligibility and did not Repeated
Finding 4
take adequate follow-up action when errors were identified in (Current Finding 2)
changes to critical eligibility information.
MCPA did not ensure that all referrals of potential third-party
Repeated
Finding 5 health insurance information were timely and properly
(Current Finding 1)
investigated.
MCPA had conducted virtually no audits of hospital claim
Finding 6 Not Repeated
payments since calendar year 2007.
MCPA had not established appropriate oversight to ensure that
Repeated
Finding 7 all Community First Choice program recipients received
(Current Finding 4)
required daily living assistance services.
MCPA did not audit all Medical Day Care program providers
Repeated
Finding 8 as required by its policy, and the related audit policy and
(Current Finding 7)
procedures were not sufficiently comprehensive.
MCPA did not have an established process to ensure ventilator
Repeated
Finding 9 care claims submitted by nursing facilities were valid, as
(Current Finding 6)
required by State regulations.
Claims that were suspended by automated edits within the
Medicaid Management Information System (MMIS II) and
Finding 10 Not Repeated
subsequently reviewed and paid were not subject to sufficient
supervisory review and approval.
MCPA did not have sufficient procedures and controls to
restrict access to MMIS II. For example, 727 MMIS II active
Finding 11 Status Redacted5
users could view the names and social security numbers of 3.5
million active and inactive Medicaid recipients.
5 Specific information on the current status of this cybersecurity–related finding has been redacted
from the publicly available report in accordance with State Government Article, Section 2-
1224(i) of the Annotated Code of Maryland.
13

--- Page 16 ---
Findings and Recommendations
Third-Party Liability
Finding 1
The Medical Care Programs Administration (MCPA) did not ensure that all
referrals of potential third-party health insurance information were
investigated and recorded in the Medicaid Management Information System
(MMIS II), which could result in MCPA improperly paying claims that
should have been paid by a third party.
Analysis
MCPA did not ensure that referrals of third-party health insurance information
were investigated and recorded into MMIS II, which could result in MCPA
improperly paying claims that should have been paid by a third party. Federal
and State regulations provide that Medicaid shall be the payer of last resort and
that it shall only be used to pay costs not covered by others, such as third-party
insurers.
MCPA receives referrals of other potentially liable parties from several sources
including its third-party liability vendor, Managed Care Organizations (MCOs),
the Department of Human Services (DHS), and the Maryland Health Benefit
Exchange (MHBE). Referrals from the third-party liability vendor are to be
recorded directly in MMIS II so that claims submitted for these individuals will
be suspended for manual review and approval. Federal regulations require MCPA
to follow up on the potential third-party insurance information obtained within 60
days. Our review of MCPA’s procedures for processing referrals received from
the third-party liability vendor and the MCOs disclosed the following:
 MCPA did not verify that all referrals received from the third-party liability
vendor were recorded in MMIS II. Third-party insurance coverage identified
by the vendor was automatically interfaced into MMIS II monthly. Although
MCPA advised that it verified that all of the referrals were interfaced, it could
not document these efforts, and our review disclosed that only 180,000 (12
percent) of the 1.5 million referrals the vendor submitted between January
2021 and June 2022 were actually recorded in MMIS II. For example, the
insurance information for 84,672 recipients provided by the vendor in January
2022 was not interfaced into MMIS II as of November 2022.
14

--- Page 17 ---
Our analysis6 of fee-for-service claims for these recipients with dates of
service between February and December 2022 identified 431,443 claims
totaling $103.1 million that were paid entirely by MCPA. Since the
recipients’ insurance information was not properly recorded in MMIS II, these
claims were not subject to review by MCPA to determine whether any portion
of the claim should have been paid by another entity. We judgmentally
selected 5 claims from this period totaling $78,000 and requested MCPA to
determine whether the claim should have been paid by the recipient’s third-
party insurance. MCPA had not yet investigated these claims as of September
11, 2023.
 MCPA could not document that it investigated all MCO referrals of possible
third-party insurance, including 64,700 referrals noted in our prior report.
Specifically, MCPA did not track the referrals and could not readily determine
the number of referrals received from the MCOs or whether they had been
investigated and recorded in MMIS II. Based on records submitted by the
MCOs, we identified approximately 176,000 referrals from the MCOs during
fiscal year 2022. Our judgmental test of 135 referrals received during two
months (September 2021 and February 2022) disclosed that 86 referrals were
not investigated and recorded in MMIS II as of November 2022.
In addition, MCPA could not document that it had investigated and resolved
the backlog of 64,700 referrals from the MCOs older than 60 days noted in
our preceding audit report. MDH’s response, on behalf of MCPA, to that
report indicated that it planned to eliminate the backlog by December 31,
2020. During our current audit, MCPA advised that, as of October 2022, the
backlog had decreased to 5,700 referrals. However, we could not verify the
accuracy of this assertion due to MCPA’s inability to determine the number of
MCO referrals recorded in MMIS II and the failure to track the resolution of
the noted referrals. Compounding the issue are the aforementioned results of
our current testing that again demonstrated that all recently reported referrals
had not been recorded in MMIS II.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that MCPA ensure that
a. all third-party health insurance information provided by its third-party
liability vendor are interfaced with MMIS II, and
b. all MCO insurance referrals are recorded into MMIS II timely (repeat).
6 Our analysis was based on recipients with open insurance spans and excluded recipients who
only had vision and/or dental insurance coverage.
15

--- Page 18 ---
Review of Questionable Activity
Finding 2
MCPA did not have effective processes to identify, prevent, and recover
questionable Medicaid payments, including $7.1 million in payments on
behalf of incarcerated and deceased recipients.
Analysis
MCPA did not have effective processes to identify, prevent, and recover
questionable Medicaid payments, including $7.1 million in payments on behalf of
incarcerated and deceased recipients between July 2018 and April 2022. MCPA
has several automated and manual processes to identify questionable Medicaid
activity such as benefit recipients who are deceased, are missing social security
numbers, or are receiving benefits in another state. Instances of questionable
recipient eligibility information or activity are to be investigated and resolved by
DHS or the Local Health Departments (LHDs) upon referral from MCPA, or in-
house by MCPA employees. MCPA is responsible for overseeing the resultant
investigative efforts to ensure the proper corrective actions were taken, such as
removing eligibility for continued participation in Maryland’s Medicaid program
or recovering erroneously paid benefits.
Missing Social Security Numbers
As of July 2022, MCPA had not referred instances of recipients with missing
social security numbers (SSNs) to DHS and the LHDs for investigation since
November 2021 and could not document the results of those entities’
investigations, including the specific supporting documentation that had been
reviewed, for pre-November 2021 referrals. A similar condition regarding the
lack of supporting documentation was commented upon in our preceding audit
report.
MDH’s response to that preceding audit report indicated that, effective May 2019,
it had implemented an automated system to track and document investigations.
However, during our current audit MCPA management advised that the
ransomware security incident previously mentioned in this report disrupted its
access to the above referenced automated system. Accordingly, MCPA was
unable to generate reports of recipients with missing SSNs for DHS and LHD
review and could not support the results of the investigations that may have been
performed prior to November 2021. As of July 2022, MCPA could not
reasonably estimate when it would resume these reviews.
16

--- Page 19 ---
Recipients Receiving Benefits in Other States
MCPA did not review DHS and LHD investigations of recipients who were also
receiving Medicaid benefits in other states to ensure the proper corrective action
was taken (such as recovery of improper payments). A similar condition was
commented upon in our preceding audit report. MDH’s response to that
preceding audit report indicated that, effective May 2019, it implemented an
automated system to track and document investigations. However, as previously
noted, the ransomware security incident disrupted access to the automated system.
While MCPA advised us that DHS and the LHDs continued to investigate these
recipients, MCPA was unable to access the aforementioned automated system to
obtain support for the results of the investigations.
MCPA did not pursue an alternative method to pursue the results of these reviews
and could not readily provide us with the number of recipients identified by this
process. However, based on a report we obtained from MCPA, there were 11,376
instances requiring investigation during April 2022 alone. The need for MCPA to
monitor these reviews is evidenced by our October 2022 audit report of DHS’
Family Investment Administration (FIA) which noted that FIA did not take timely
or appropriate corrective action for 43 of the 46 questionable Medicaid-eligible
recipients we tested, including recipients receiving Medicaid benefits in another
state.
Fee-for-Service Payments for Incarcerated Recipients
MCPA did not have a process to identify, prevent, and recover fee-for-service
payments related to incarcerated recipients, resulting in approximately $3.5
million in such payments during fiscal years 2019 to 2022. Under federal and
State regulations, Medicaid only covers certain fee-for-service claims (primarily
inpatient hospital care) while a recipient is incarcerated7.
Our Data Analytics Unit independently obtained incarceration records8 (including
the periods of incarceration based on dates of inmate intake, transfer, and release)
from the Maryland Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services
(DPSCS) for the 4-year period of fiscal year 2019 to 2022. We then matched this
data to MMIS II claims with service dates between July 2018 and April 2022 and
identified fee-for-service payments (excluding inpatient hospital claims which are
7 These individuals’ healthcare costs are generally paid by the Maryland Department of Public
Safety and Correctional Services (DPSCS). In addition, incarcerated individuals are allowed to
maintain Medicaid eligibility during periods of incarceration; however, these recipients are
required to be disenrolled from Managed Care Organizations (MCO) and payments for ineligible
services should be prevented. Capitation payments to MCOs are included within the scope of
our audit of MCPA’s Managed Care Program.
8 We determined that the incarceration records we received from DPSCS were sufficiently reliable
for the purposes of our OLA match.
17

--- Page 20 ---
eligible to be covered by Medicaid) totaling $3.5 million for 1,954 recipients who
were incarcerated at the time of service. MCPA had not previously identified or
investigated these payments and as of November 2022 had taken no action to
recover these funds.
Payments on Behalf of Deceased Recipients
MCPA could not document its efforts to identify and remove deceased individuals
from Medicaid. MCPA advised that it performed a monthly match of Medicaid
recipient records to the federal Social Security Administration (SSA) and MDH
Vital Statistics Administration (VSA) death records. MCPA forwards these
results to DHS and LHDs to verify the recipients are deceased and disenroll the
recipient from Medicaid to prevent future payments on behalf of these
individuals. Our review disclosed that as of July 1, 2022 MCPA could not
document that this match was performed from August 1, 2018 through March 31,
2022, and that it monitored the related DHS and the LHD investigations. MCPA
attributed the lack of documentation to the aforementioned ransomware security
incident.
Furthermore, MCPA did not investigate payments where a date of service was
after the recipient’s date of death
Figure 6
according to SSA or VSA
Medicaid Payments with a Date of
records. We performed a match
Service after Date of Death
between MMIS II claims with
Number Number
service dates between July 2018 Claim Payment
of of
and April 2022 and the VSA Type Amount
Recipients Payments
death records as of May 2022.
Capitation 1,270 2,505 $2,343,523
Our match identified
Fee-for-
approximately 18,000 claims 4,345 15,205 1,219,509
Service
totaling $3.6 million associated
Total 5,615 17,710 $3,563,032
with 5,615 recipients which we
Source: OLA match using MMIS II and VSA records.
believe warrant further
investigation to determine if the payments should be recovered (see Figure 6).
At our request, MCPA investigated 20 of these recipients with potentially
improper claims totaling $317,000 and determined that 15 recipients were
deceased prior to the medical service represented by the claims, but were still
actively enrolled in Medicaid as of January 2023. MCPA had not yet investigated
potentially improper payments totaling $245,000 associated with these 15
individuals as of January 2023.
18

--- Page 21 ---
Recommendation 2
We recommend that MCPA establish effective processes over questionable
Medicaid payments. Specifically, MCPA should
a. ensure that instances of recipients with missing SSNs are referred to DHS
and the LHDs for investigation;
b. sufficiently document its reviews of investigations of questionable
recipient eligibility (including instances of recipients missing SSNs or
receiving Medicaid benefits in other states) to support that proper
corrective action was taken (repeat);
c. establish a process to identify, prevent, and recover improper fee-for-
service payments related to incarcerated recipients; and
d. document its efforts to identify and remove deceased recipients from
Medicaid and to investigate and pursue the recovery of improper
payments after the recipients’ dates of death, including those noted in the
analysis.
Recipient Eligibility
Finding 3
MCPA did not ensure that changes to recipient Medicaid eligibility
information were processed timely and accurately.
Analysis
MCPA did not ensure that changes to recipient Medicaid eligibility information
were processed timely and accurately. MCPA is notified via automated reporting
processes when recipient information in MMIS II differs from information on
DHS’ and MHBE’s own recipient systems, and MCPA staff manually update
MMIS II with the correct information based on its investigation. Our review
disclosed that approximately 93,000 (58 percent) of the 161,000 notifications
received between February 2022 and January 2023 had not been resolved as of
February 2023. MCPA advised that this condition occurred as a result of the
aforementioned ransomware security incident.
MCPA also did not ensure that errors in changes made to recipient eligibility
information were subsequently corrected. MCPA’s supervisory review of 1,957
changes made to eligibility information between May and October 2021 identified
239 changes that were not consistent with supporting documentation and
consequently required correction. However, our test of 25 of these changes
disclosed that 5 were not subsequently corrected in MMIS II after MCPA’s
supervisory review.
19

--- Page 22 ---
Recommendation 3
We recommend that MCPA ensure recipient eligibility information is
updated timely and accurately, and that errors to recipient eligibility
information in MMIS II are corrected.
Program Oversight
Background
MCPA is responsible for ensuring that Maryland Medicaid recipients receive high
quality services and for verifying the propriety of the related provider payments.
Based on our assessment of significance and risk we reviewed MCPA’s oversight
of nursing facilities, hospital services, Community First Choice (CFC), and
Medical Day Care, and its oversight of contractors that assist in the administration
and monitoring of these programs.9
Specifically, we reviewed MCPA’s oversight of the contractors that it uses to
conduct audits of hospital claims to identify overpayments (such as from
duplicate bills and unauthorized charges) and to conduct patient credit balance
audits to identify amounts due to the State for claims paid to hospitals and nursing
facilities by both the State and third parties (such as insurance companies). We
also reviewed MCPA’s oversight of the contractors that it uses to conduct nursing
facility cost settlements to identify underpayments or overpayments, and to
conduct utilization reviews (including continued stay and medical eligibility
reviews) of Medicaid recipients receiving services from hospitals and nursing
facilities.
Finding 4
MCPA had not established adequate oversight to ensure that all CFC
program recipients received personal assistance services in accordance with
their plans of services.
Analysis
MCPA had not established adequate oversight to ensure that all CFC program
recipients received personal assistance services in accordance with their plans of
services. CFC is a community-based Medicaid waiver program in which elderly
or disabled individuals who would otherwise live in a nursing facility are able to
live in their own homes. CFC recipients receive assistance with daily living
9 The CFC program provides services to eligible recipients that are intended to enable them to
remain at home, while the Medical Day Care program provides various support services to
functionally disabled adults which provides individuals the opportunity to receive medical care
during the day in a community-based setting.
20

--- Page 23 ---
activities from personal assistance providers, under agreements with MCPA, in
accordance with a plan of service. LHDs are responsible for evaluating the
quality of personal assistance services provided to the CFC recipients with the use
of nurse monitors under contract to the LHDs. According to State records,
during fiscal year 2022, MCPA paid CFC providers approximately $432.2
million, of which $387.1 million and $6.6 million were for personal assistance
and nurse monitoring providers (through the LHDs), respectively.
Our review disclosed that MCPA had not established a process to ensure that
nurse monitors were properly evaluating the quality of personal assistance
services provided. According to MCPA records, there were 10,082 recipients
receiving personal assistance services as of November 2022. Our analysis of
recipient data in MDH’s Long Term Services and Supports system disclosed that
1,873 recipients (19 percent) were more than 60 days overdue for their nurse
monitoring visit, including 901 recipients who were more than one year overdue
for a visit. According to MCPA’s records, the Baltimore City LHD was
responsible for 821 of the 901 one-year overdue recipients, and at least 10 percent
of recipients at 9 other LHDs were more than 60 days overdue.
A similar condition was noted in our preceding audit report, including the long
overdue monitoring visits by the Baltimore City LHD. In response to that report,
MCPA advised that it implemented a process to follow-up with LHDs that had a
significant number of recipients who were more than 30 days overdue for a
monitoring visit. However, MCPA could not document that it had addressed the
issue of untimely monitoring visits with the responsible LHD (including the
Baltimore City LHD), and we found the follow-up process implemented was not
effective because the monitoring report that MCPA relied on for this purpose was
not focused on recipients who were more than 30 days overdue, as it did not
identify the length of the delays (just that there was a delay). Consequently,
MCPA did not identify that the aforementioned 1,873 recipients were
significantly overdue.
Recommendation 4
We recommend that MCPA
a. establish a process to ensure that all CFC recipients are monitored by
nurses (repeat), and
b. develop a plan to address the longstanding instances of non-compliance
for the aforementioned LHD.
21

--- Page 24 ---
Finding 5
MCPA did not monitor the utilization control agent contractor to ensure
continued stay reviews of Medicaid recipients receiving services from
nursing facilities were performed timely.
Analysis
MCPA did not monitor its utilization control agent (UCA) contractor to ensure
continued stay reviews (CSRs) of Medicaid recipients receiving services from
nursing facilities were performed timely. CSRs ensure that recipients required the
level of care provided and ultimately billed to Medicaid by nursing facilities. The
contract required the UCA to perform quarterly CSRs of recipients during their
first year in a nursing facility and annually thereafter. MCPA did not track the
CSRs performed for each recipient to ensure the UCA completed all required
reviews.
Our analysis of 13,930 Medicaid recipients, who resided in nursing facilities and
should have received at least one CSR during calendar year 202110, disclosed that
2,387 recipients (17 percent) had not received a CSR anytime during calendar
year 2021. As a result, MCPA did not have assurance that these recipients
required the level of care provided and that the related payments were proper.
According to MCPA records, MCPA made payments totaling $165.2 million to
nursing facilities for these 2,387 recipients for nursing facility services during
calendar year 2021.
Since MCPA did not monitor the UCA for timely completion, it was not aware of
the missing CSRs and therefore could not properly determine whether to assess
liquidated damages against the UCA. The current contract at the time of our audit
provided MCPA the ability to assess liquidated damages up to 0.5 percent of the
monthly invoice amount.
A similar condition was commented upon in our preceding audit report in which
we noted that MCPA did not sufficiently address errors in medical necessity
determinations made by the UCA or ensure the UCA conducted timely CSRs of
nursing facilities. MDH’s response to that report indicated that it would
implement the recommended corrective actions by the end of calendar year 2019.
Although MCPA implemented procedures to address errors in medical necessity
10 Specifically, our analysis focused on recipients with a first date of service between January and
August 2021 and at least four months of claims during calendar year 2021. In this context, the
first date of service represents the earliest date in calendar year 2021 that the recipient received
services from the nursing facility; many of these recipients also received nursing facility services
prior to January 2021.
22

--- Page 25 ---
determinations, it still did not have a process to ensure that CSRs were conducted
timely at nursing facilities.
Recommendation 5
We recommend that MCPA monitor the UCA vendor to ensure CSRs are
performed timely and assess liquidated damages as permitted by the contract
(repeat).
Finding 6
MCPA did not have an established process to ensure costly recipient
ventilator care claims submitted by nursing facilities were valid, as required
by State regulations.
Analysis
MCPA did not have a process to ensure nursing facility recipient ventilator care
claims, which totaled approximately $54.7 million in calendar year 2021, were
valid. According to MCPA records, as of January 2022, 16 nursing facilities were
authorized to provide ventilator care services to Medicaid patients at an average
daily reimbursement rate of $797. MCPA did not validate the ventilator care
claims submitted by these facilities to ensure they were supported and proper.
State regulations require MCPA to periodically validate that the days paid for
ventilator care recipients are supported by medical records and to recoup
payments for days that are not supported. At our request, MCPA obtained and
reviewed 10 ventilator claims from 5 nursing facilities totaling $243,000 and
concluded that the claims were properly supported.
A similar condition was commented upon in our preceding audit report. Although
MDH’s response to that report indicated that it planned to include ventilator care
validations in the scope of its next UCA contract, MCPA had neither awarded the
new contract during our audit period nor conducted its own validations.
Recommendation 6
We recommend that MCPA establish procedures to periodically validate
ventilator care claims submitted by nursing facilities, as required by State
regulations, and recoup any claim payments that are determined to be
unsupported or improper (repeat).
23

--- Page 26 ---
Finding 7
MCPA did not conduct the required audits of Medical Day Care (MDC) and
Supports Planning providers, and the related audit policy and procedures
were not sufficiently comprehensive.
Analysis
MCPA did not audit all MDC and Supports Planning providers as required by its
policy, and the MDC audit policy and procedures were not sufficiently
comprehensive. MDC is a community-based group program that offers eligible
Medicaid recipients health, social, and personal support in a day-care setting in
accordance with their individualized plans of care as an alternative to institutional
care. Supports Planners develop service plans for recipients in the CFC program
that identify the personal assistance services each recipient requires with daily
living activities. According to MCPA records, during calendar year 2021, MCPA
paid 115 MDC and 27 Supports Planning providers approximately $126.7 million
and $37.8 million, respectively, for these services.
MDC Provider Audits
MCPA did not conduct all of the required biennial audits of MDC providers as
required by its policy. The audits either confirm program compliance by
providers or identify issues, such as allegations of conditions affecting the health
or welfare of recipients that had not been reported to the appropriate authorities as
required. According to its records, MCPA made payments to 97 of the 115 MDC
providers in each year during calendar years 2018 through 2021. Our review
disclosed that MCPA had not conducted the two required audits for 79 (81
percent) of the 97 providers over the four years. Specifically, the two required
audits were not conducted for 18 providers and one of the required audits had
been conducted for the other 61 providers.
In addition, we determined the audits that were performed were not sufficiently
comprehensive. We reviewed 12 of the 46 audits conducted between calendar
years 2018 and 2021 for which documentation was readily available.11 Our
review disclosed that 8 audits excluded at least 1 year of claims activity, including
1 audit performed in November 2020 that excluded claims activity for the 6-year
period from December 2011 through December 2017. We also noted that MCPA
could not explain the basis of selection for claims tested during the 12 audits,
including 7 audits for which MCPA also did not document the number of claims
tested. Finally, MCPA did not have a process to expand testing when the audits
identified program compliance issues or overpayments.
11 Although MCPA records indicated that 111 audits were performed during this period, as of
October 2022, MCPA could not provide documentation for 65 of these audits due to the
ransomware security incident previously mentioned in this report.
24

--- Page 27 ---
Similar conditions were commented upon in our preceding audit report. MDH's
response to that report indicated that it would audit at least half of the MDC
providers each year (and thus audit each provider once every two-year period) and
would update its audit procedures to address the noted deficiencies by June 30,
2020. As noted above, MCPA had not completed the required number of audits
or implemented the recommended enhancements to its audit procedures.
Supports Planning Provider Audits
As of October 2022, MCPA had not audited any Support Planning providers since
fiscal year 2019. MCPA policy provides for annual audits of these providers and
that non-compliant providers submit quality improvement plans and monthly
updates on their progress to address the deficiencies identified by the audits. Our
review of the 2019 audits found that they had identified deficiencies (such as the
providers’ failure to perform required criminal background checks of employees)
and resulted in 10 providers being deemed non-compliant.
Recommendation 7
We recommend that MCPA
a. audit MDC providers (repeat) and Supports Planning providers in
accordance with its policy;
b. ensure that all MDC provider claims since the previous audit are subject
to testing (repeat); and
c. enhance its MDC audit policy to establish audit scope requirements and
testing methodology, including a requirement to expand audit testing
when significant deficiencies are identified (repeat).
Finding 8
MCPA did not adequately monitor the hospital claims audit contractor and
had not collected or recovered improper claims identified by the contractor
totaling $6.9 million.
Analysis
MCPA did not adequately monitor the Medicaid hospital claims audit contractor
and did not pursue recovery of $6.9 million in improper claims identified by its
contractor. Hospital claims audits are required by the federal Patient Protection
and Affordable Care Act (enacted in 2010) and provide assurance that hospital
services provided to Maryland Medicaid recipients were necessary and not
excessive. In June 2019, MCPA procured a contractor to perform these audits
that would be paid a percentage of the improper payments recovered. According
to MCPA records, hospital services totaled approximately $787.5 million in fiscal
year 2021, and as of July 2022, the audit contractor had been paid $477,000.
25

--- Page 28 ---
 MCPA did not obtain certain deliverables required by the audit contract. For
example, the contract required the vendor to provide a plan detailing steps
MCPA should take in order to reduce the occurrence of future improper
hospital claims payments. As of August 2022, MCPA had not obtained this
plan. We noted that the contract did not specify a separate fee for this
deliverable, and therefore, it would appear to have been included in the
aforementioned fee paid to the vendor.
 MCPA did not always pursue recovery of overpayments identified by the
audit contractor. Specifically, as of August 2022 MCPA had not pursued
recovery of improper payments totaling $6.9 million that were reported by the
contractor between 2 months to 2 years prior. MCPA advised us that the
reason that it had not initiated collection actions over these funds was because
of limited staff resources and the impact of the aforementioned ransomware
security incident.
Recommendation 8
We recommend that MCPA
a. adequately monitor the hospital claims audit contractor, including
obtaining all deliverables as required by the contract; and
b. pursue recovery of overpaid claims identified by the audit contractor in a
timely manner.
Information Systems Security and Control
We determined that the Information Systems Security and Control section,
including Findings 9 and 10 related to “cybersecurity”, as defined by the State
Finance and Procurement Article, Section 3.5-301(b) of the Annotated Code of
Maryland, and therefore are subject to redaction from the publicly available audit
report in accordance with the State Government Article 2-1224(i). Consequently,
the specifics of the following findings, including the analysis, related
recommendations, along with MDH’s responses, have been redacted from this
report copy.
26

--- Page 29 ---
Finding 9
Redacted cybersecurity-related finding.
Finding 10
Redacted cybersecurity-related finding.
27

--- Page 30 ---
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the Maryland Department of
Health (MDH) – Medical Care Programs Administration (MCPA) for the period
beginning August 1, 2018 and ending March 31, 2022. The audit scope for this
audit included MCPA’s primary administrative functions and excluded the
procedures and controls over the Managed Care Program, the Behavioral Health
Administration’s Administrative Service Organization, and the Maryland
Pharmacy Program, which are reviewed under three separate audits (as previously
explained in the Background Information Section of this report).
The audit was conducted in accordance with generally accepted government
auditing standards except for certain requirements related to obtaining sufficient,
appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and
conclusions based on our audit objectives. Specifically, as described on page 11,
certain records related to four findings were not available at the time of our
review due to a ransomware security incident (additional comments are included
in the respective findings).
Generally accepted government auditing standards require that we plan and
perform the audit to obtain sufficient, appropriate evidence to provide a
reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives.
Except for the records that were unavailable as described above, we believe that
the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and
conclusions based on our audit objectives.
As prescribed by the State Government Article, Section 2-1221 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, the objectives of this audit were to examine MCPA’s financial
transactions, records, and internal control, and to evaluate its compliance with
applicable State laws, rules, and regulations.
In planning and conducting our audit, we focused on the major financial-related
areas of operations based on assessments of significance and risk. The areas
addressed by the audit included Medicaid Management Information System
(MMIS II) and other information systems security and controls, recipient and
provider eligibility, third party insurance recoveries, nursing facilities, hospital
services, Community First Choice, and Medical Day Care. We also determined
the status of the findings contained in our preceding audit report.
Our audit did not include certain support services provided to MCPA by MDH.
These support services (such as payroll, purchasing, maintenance of accounting
records, and related fiscal functions) are included within the scope of our audit of
28

--- Page 31 ---
the MDH – Office of the Secretary and Other Units. Our audit also did not
include an evaluation of internal controls over compliance with federal laws and
regulations for federal financial assistance programs and an assessment of
MCPA’s compliance with those laws and regulations because the State of
Maryland engages an independent accounting firm to annually audit such
programs administered by State agencies, including MCPA.
Our assessment of internal controls was based on agency procedures and controls
in place at the time of our fieldwork. Our tests of transactions and other auditing
procedures were generally focused on the transactions occurring during our audit
period of August 1, 2018 to March 31, 2022, but may include transactions before
or after this period as we considered necessary to achieve our audit objectives.
To accomplish our audit objectives, our audit procedures included inquiries of
appropriate personnel, inspection of documents and records, tests of transactions,
and to the extent practicable, observations of MCPA’s operations. Generally,
transactions were selected for testing based on audit judgment, which primarily
considers risk, the timing or dollar amount of the transaction, or the significance
of the transaction to the area of operation reviewed. As a matter of course, we do
not normally use sampling in our tests, so unless otherwise specifically indicated,
neither statistical nor non-statistical audit sampling was used to select the
transactions tested. Therefore, unless sampling is specifically indicated in a
finding, the results from any tests conducted or disclosed by us cannot be used to
project those results to the entire population from which the test items were
selected.
We also performed various data extracts of pertinent information from the State’s
Financial Management Information System (such as revenue and expenditure
data). The extracts are performed as part of ongoing internal processes
established by the Office of Legislative Audits and were subject to various tests to
determine data reliability. We determined that the data extracted from this source
were sufficiently reliable for the purposes the data were used during the audit.
We also extracted data from MMIS II (such as claims payments and recipient
information) for the purpose of selecting test items and performing data analytics.
We performed various tests of the relevant data and determined that the data were
sufficiently reliable for the purposes the data were used during the audit. Finally,
we performed other auditing procedures that we considered necessary to achieve
our audit objectives. The reliability of data used in this report for background or
informational purposes was not assessed.
29

--- Page 32 ---
MCPA’s management is responsible for establishing and maintaining effective
internal control. Internal control is a process designed to provide reasonable
assurance that objectives pertaining to the reliability of financial records;
effectiveness and efficiency of operations, including safeguarding of assets; and
compliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations are achieved. As
provided in Government Auditing Standards, there are five components of
internal control: control environment, risk assessment, control activities,
information and communication, and monitoring. Each of the five components,
when significant to the audit objectives, and as applicable to MCPA, were
considered by us during the course of this audit.
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate.
Our reports are designed to assist the Maryland General Assembly in exercising
its legislative oversight function and to provide constructive recommendations for
improving State operations. As a result, our reports generally do not address
activities we reviewed that are functioning properly.
This report includes findings relating to conditions that we consider to be
significant deficiencies in the design or operation of internal control that could
adversely affect MCPA’s ability to maintain reliable financial records, operate
effectively and efficiently, and/or comply with applicable laws, rules, and
regulations. Our report also includes findings regarding significant instances of
noncompliance with applicable laws, rules, or regulations. Other less significant
findings were communicated to MCPA that did not warrant inclusion in this
report.
State Government Article Section 2-1224(i) requires that we redact in a manner
consistent with auditing best practices any cybersecurity findings before a report
is made available to the public. This results in the issuance of two different
versions of an audit report that contains cybersecurity findings – a redacted
version for the public and an unredacted version for government officials
responsible for acting on our audit recommendations.
The State Finance and Procurement Article, Section 3.5-301(b), states that
cybersecurity is defined as “processes or capabilities wherein systems,
communications, and information are protected and defended against damage,
unauthorized use or modification, and exploitation”. Based on that definition, and
in our professional judgment, we concluded that certain findings in this report fall
30

--- Page 33 ---
under that definition. Consequently, for the publicly available audit report all
specifics as to the nature of cybersecurity findings and required corrective actions
have been redacted. We have determined that such aforementioned practices, and
government auditing standards, support the redaction of this information from the
public audit report. The specifics of these cybersecurity findings have been
communicated to MCPA and those parties responsible for acting on our
recommendations in an unredacted audit report.
As a result of our audit, we determined that MCPA’s accountability and
compliance level was unsatisfactory. The primary factors contributing to the
unsatisfactory rating were the significance of the audit findings and the number of
repeat findings. Our rating conclusion has been made solely pursuant to State law
and rating guidelines approved by the Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee.
The rating process is not a practice prescribed by professional auditing standards.
The response from MDH, on behalf of MCPA, to our findings and
recommendations is included as an appendix to this report. Depending on the
version of the audit report, responses to any cybersecurity findings may be
redacted in accordance with State law. As prescribed in State Government
Article, Section 2-1224 of the Annotated Code of Maryland, we will advise MDH
regarding the results of our review of its response.
31

--- Page 34 ---
Exhibit 1
Listing of Most Recent Office of Legislative Audits
Fiscal Compliance Audits of Maryland Department of Health Units
As of September 2023 (Page 1 of 2)
Most Recent
Name of Audit Areas Covered
Report Date
 Deer’s Head Center
1 Chronic Care Hospital Centers 05/10/23
 Western Maryland Hospital Center
Developmental Disabilities
2 Developmental Disabilities Administration 10/26/22
Administration
Behavioral Health Administration and
 Behavioral Health Administration
Medical Care Programs
 Medical Care Programs Administration
3 Administration - Administrative 10/25/22
Administrative Service Organization for
Service Organization for Behavioral
Behavioral Health Services
Health Services
 Holly Center
Intellectual Disabilities Residential  Potomac Center
4 10/24/22
Centers  Secure Evaluation and Therapeutic
Treatment
 John L. Gildner Regional Institute for
Regional Institutes for Children and Children and Adolescents
5 07/13/22
Adolescents  Regional Institute for Children and
Adolescents – Baltimore
6 Office of the Chief Medical Examiner Office of the Chief Medical Examiner 05/12/22
 Prevention and Health Promotion
Administration
Prevention and Health Promotion  Office of Population Health Improvement
Administration - Office of Population  Office of Preparedness and Response
Health Improvement - Office of  Office of Provider Engagement and
7 02/23/21
Preparedness and Response - Office Regulation – Office of Controlled
of Provider Engagement and Substances Administration
Regulation  Office of Provider Engagement and
Regulation – Prescription Drug
Monitoring Program
 22 Health Professional Boards and
8 Regulatory Services Commissions 01/19/21
 Office of Health Care Quality
9 Vital Statistics Administration Vital Statistics Administration 11/10/20
32

--- Page 35 ---
Exhibit 1
Listing of Most Recent Office of Legislative Audits
Fiscal Compliance Audits of Maryland Department of Health Units
As of September 2023 (Page 2 of 2)
Most Recent
Name of Audit Areas Covered
Report Date
Pharmacy Services for
 Medicaid Managed Care Program
 Maryland Medicaid Pharmacy Program
 Kidney Disease Program
10 Pharmacy Services 08/31/20
 Maryland AIDS Drug Assistance
Program
 Breast and Cervical Cancer Diagnosis
and Treatment Program
 Office of the Secretary
 Deputy Secretary and Executive
Director for Behavioral Health
 Deputy Secretary for Developmental
Office of the Secretary and Other
11 Disabilities 07/14/20
Units
 Deputy Secretary for Public Health
 Deputy Secretary for Health Care
Financing and Chief Operating Officer
 Deputy Secretary for Operations
12 Spring Grove Hospital Center Spring Grove Hospital Center 04/22/20
Medical Care Programs Managed Care Program, known as
13 Administration - Managed Care HealthChoice including oversight of the nine 04/22/20
Program private Managed Care Organizations
14 Laboratories Administration Laboratories Administration 04/10/20
15 Clifton T. Perkins Hospital Center Clifton T. Perkins Hospital Center 03/17/20
 Maryland Health Care Commission
 Health Services Cost Review
16 Health Regulatory Commissions Commission 04/05/19
 Maryland Community Health Resources
Commission
17 Thomas B. Finan Hospital Center Thomas B. Finan Hospital Center 03/26/19
18 Springfield Hospital Center Springfield Hospital Center 12/06/18
19 Eastern Shore Hospital Center Eastern Shore Hospital Center 11/19/18
33

--- Page 36 ---
APPENDIX
October 27, 2023
Mr. Gregory A. Hook, CPA
Legislative Auditor
Office of Legislative Audits
The Warehouse at Camden Yards
351 West Camden Street, Suite 400
Baltimore, MD 21201
Dear Mr. Hook:
Enclosed, please find the responses to the draft audit report on the Maryland Department of
Health – Medical Care Programs Administration (MCPA) for the period beginning August 1,
2018, and ending March 31, 2022.
The report identifies a number of areas for improvement in MCPA policies and procedures. As
the report notes, some of the findings can be attributed to staffing challenges and challenges
relating to the 2021 network security incident. As you will see from our responses, MDH and
MCPA are taking a number of actions to address these findings and strengthen MCPA.
If you have any questions, please contact Frederick D. Doggett at 410-767-0885 or email at
frederick.doggett@maryland.gov.
Sincerely,
Laura Herrera Scott, M.D., Secretary
Maryland Department of Health
Enclosures
cc: Erin K. McMullen, R.N., Chief of Staff, MDH
Marie Grant, Assistant Secretary for Health Policy, MDH

--- Page 37 ---
Ryan B. Moran, Dr. P.H., Deputy Secretary, Health Care Financing, MDH
Tricia Roddy, Deputy Director, Medicaid, MDH
Frederick D. Doggett, Director, Internal Controls, Audit Compliance & Information
Security, MDH
Deneen Toney, Deputy Director, Audit & Compliance, MDH
Warren Waters, Jr., Chief of Staff, Health Care Financing, MDH
2

--- Page 38 ---
Maryland Department of Health
Medical Care Programs Administration
Agency Response Form
Third Party Liability
Finding 1
The Medical Care Programs Administration (MCPA) did not ensure that all referrals of
potential third-party health insurance information were investigated and recorded in the
Medicaid Management Information System (MMIS II), which could result in MCPA
improperly paying claims that should have been paid by a third party.
We recommend that MCPA ensure that
a. all third-party health insurance information provided by its third-party liability vendor
are interfaced with MMIS II, and
b. all MCO insurance referrals are recorded into MMIS II timely (repeat).
Agency Response
Analysis Factually Accurate
Please provide
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 1a Agree Estimated Completion Date: 1/1/2024
Please provide details of MDH is actively working on a plan of correction with a third party
corrective action or liability vendor and information technology staff to address the carrier
explain disagreement. text file interface. MCPA staff requested and received a master code file
that was reviewed and sorted before being sent to the vendor for
additional reviews. Any data discrepancies will be reconciled. MCPA
staff have also requested a master file of codes that the vendor utilizes to
have them added to the system. When the file is updated, MDH will
conduct testing to ensure the interface is working as expected.
Recommendation 1b Agree Estimated Completion Date: Complete
Please provide details of MCPA has hired and trained three contractual employees to address this
corrective action or finding. The backlog for 2019-2021 has been addressed, and the 2022
explain disagreement. backlog was resolved by September 30, 2023. Continued progress on
automating the referral process using the 270/271 format should resume
once the carrier code file referenced above is resolved.
Page 1 of 11

--- Page 39 ---
Maryland Department of Health
Medical Care Programs Administration
Agency Response Form
Review of Questionable Activity
Finding 2
MCPA did not have effective processes to identify, prevent, and recover questionable
Medicaid payments, including $7.1 million in payments on behalf of incarcerated and
deceased recipients.
We recommend that MCPA establish effective processes over questionable Medicaid
payments. Specifically, MCPA should
a. ensure that instances of recipients with missing SSNs are referred to DHS and the
LHDs for investigation;
b. sufficiently document its reviews of investigations of questionable recipient eligibility
(including instances of recipients missing SSNs or receiving Medicaid benefits in other
states) to support that proper corrective action was taken (repeat);
c. establish a process to identify, prevent, and recover improper fee-for-service payments
related to incarcerated recipients; and
d. document its efforts to identify and remove deceased recipients from Medicaid and to
investigate and pursue the recovery of improper payments after the recipients’ dates of
death, including those noted in the analysis.
Agency Response
Analysis Factually Accurate
Please provide MCPA Policy experienced a work stoppage due to significant system
additional comments as disruptions, which were caused by the MDH security incident on
deemed necessary. 12/4/21. During the security incident, MCPA was not able to complete
normal operations and was without system access until April 2022. Once
access was reinstituted, workaround processes commenced to identify,
prevent, and recover questionable Medicaid payments as appropriate.
Recommendation 2a Agree Estimated Completion Date: Complete
Please provide details of Once the security incident was resolved, MDH resumed the review
corrective action or process. MCPA completed a comprehensive review of recipient cases
explain disagreement. with missing SSNs prior to the system incident. MCPA is now
reviewing the missing SSN cases on a monthly cycle, and cases are
being sent to the local health departments and the Department of Human
Page 2 of 11

--- Page 40 ---
Maryland Department of Health
Medical Care Programs Administration
Agency Response Form
Services for corrective action. MCPA continues to monitor the corrective
action cases on a monthly basis.
Recommendation 2b Agree Estimated Completion Date: 03/30/2024
Please provide details of Once the security incident was resolved, MCPA began implementing a
corrective action or workaround process. MCPA will utilize a standalone platform that will
explain disagreement. be implemented in March 2024 and will allow document reviews of
investigations of questionable recipient eligibility to support that proper
corrective action is taken timely.
Recommendation 2c Agree Estimated Completion Date: 03/31/2024
Please provide details of Since the last audit, MDH has continued to improve efforts to identify
corrective action or and prevent questionable Medicaid payments on behalf of incarcerated
explain disagreement. recipients by adding a weekly manual review process of near-matches
for DOB and SSN. Moreover, MCPA is actively working with DPSCS to
receive comprehensive incarceration data to accurately identify all
incarcerated recipients. The ability to prevent improper fee-for-service
payments related to incarcerated recipients remains challenging for the
current MMIS infrastructure. MDH is the process of procuring a new
modular MMIS. Therefore, the ability to identify, prevent, and recover
Fee For Service payments to incarcerated individuals can be
incorporated into the requirements for the new claims and /or eligibility
modules.
Recommendation 2d Agree Estimated Completion Date: Complete
Please provide details of MCPA runs the Death Match Report monthly and shares it with DHS,
corrective action or which investigates and initiates the closing in the system of record.
explain disagreement. Monthly, MCPA reviews a sample of cases. Cases needing to be closed
are sent to DHS and the Local Departments of Health to initiate closing.
MCPA monitors the corrective action plans monthly to ensure the
closings are initiated. The process was stopped during the security
incident but resumed on 07/2022.
Additionally, due to the Public Health Emergency, the Centers for
Medicare & Medicaid Services would not allow MCPA to close cases on
households where the primary household member was deceased, as it
would close the entire household. Redeterminations on these households
have recommenced, and the primary deceased member is being removed
from the household at their redetermination.
Of the 15 cases that OLA identified that were deceased prior to medical
services being rendered or capitation payments made on behalf of the
Page 3 of 11

--- Page 41 ---
Maryland Department of Health
Medical Care Programs Administration
Agency Response Form
consumer, MCPA determined two of the consumers remain alive and
active. One case was unable to be closed because there was a minor child
in the household and per COVID-19 Public Health Emergency rules, the
case was required to remain active. This case is marked for further
review during the household’s next renewal cycle. 12 cases were found
to be deceased and to date, all payments made after the consumer’s date
of date have been successfully recouped.
Recipient Eligibility
Finding 3
MCPA did not ensure that changes to recipient Medicaid eligibility information were
processed timely and accurately.
We recommend that MCPA ensure recipient eligibility information is updated timely and
accurately, and that errors to recipient eligibility information in MMIS II are corrected.
Agency Response
Analysis Factually Accurate
Please provide
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 3 Agree Estimated Completion Date: 12/31/23
Please provide details of MCPA experienced work stoppage due to significant system disruptions,
corrective action or which were caused by the MDH security incident on 12/4/21. During
explain disagreement. the security incident, MCPA was not able to complete normal operations
and was without system access until April 2022, at which time the
certification turnaround document (CTAD) review resumed. MCPA will
continue to ensure recipient eligibility information in MMIS is updated
timely, and that errors to recipient eligibility information in MMIS II are
updated to reflect current recipient statuses. Additionally, MCPA has
developed remote working protocols that will allow staff to continue
conducting Medicaid services and reviews during adverse working
conditions.
MCPA continues to work under Standard Operating Procedure #18-07,
Revised 7/16/2021, to detail the process for reporting and processing
CTADs. To determine that CTADs are completed accurately,
management is responsible for reviewing and evaluating a minimum of
Page 4 of 11

--- Page 42 ---
Maryland Department of Health
Medical Care Programs Administration
Agency Response Form
20 case samples each month. Additionally, reports are used in the
Division of Recipient Eligibility Programs (DREP) to track the number
of CTAD documents sent to the unit and processed on a monthly basis.
Program Oversight
Finding 4
MCPA had not established adequate oversight to ensure that all CFC program recipients
received personal assistance services in accordance with their plans of services.
We recommend that MCPA
a. establish a process to ensure that all CFC recipients are monitored by nurses (repeat),
and
b. develop a plan to address the longstanding instances of non-compliance for the
aforementioned LHD.
Agency Response
Analysis Factually Accurate
Please provide
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 4a Agree Estimated Completion Date: 12/31/23
Please provide details of This finding is specific to CFC participants who are receiving personal
corrective action or assistance services and are therefore required to also receive nurse
explain disagreement. monitoring at the minimum frequency noted in COMAR 10.09.84.20
(twice annually, with at least one in-person visit).
MCPA has established a process to ensure that eligible participants
receive the nurse monitoring service at the minimum frequency. As of
October 2023, approximately five percent of eligible participants had not
received the service, which was a significant decrease from the previous
audit findings released in 2019.
Since the time of the original finding, MCPA developed and
implemented a Nurse Monitoring Agreement, which establishes clear
standards for the service, its delivery, and its continuous monitoring both
Page 5 of 11

--- Page 43 ---
Maryland Department of Health
Medical Care Programs Administration
Agency Response Form
the Local Health Departments (LHDs) providing nurse monitoring and
MCPA. Since the original finding, new tools were also developed and
implemented in the Department’s data management system,
LTSSMaryland, to focus specifically on the population of participants
that had not received the service of nurse monitoring, despite being
eligible.
Recommendation 4b Agree Estimated Completion Date: Complete
Please provide details of The Nurse Monitoring Agreement, written in collaboration with the
corrective action or LHDs, is completed and has been implemented. The LHDs are currently
explain disagreement. following the standards established in the Agreement while the
Department is pursuing signed agreements from all LHDs.
Finding 5
MCPA did not monitor the utilization control agent contractor to ensure continued stay
reviews of Medicaid recipients receiving services from nursing facilities were performed
timely
We recommend that MCPA monitor the UCA vendor to ensure CSRs are performed
timely and assess liquidated damages as permitted by the contract (repeat).
Agency Response
Analysis Factually Accurate
Please provide
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 5 Agree Estimated Completion Date: Complete
Please provide details of
corrective action or MCPA agrees with the recommendation and will continue to monitor the
explain disagreement. UCA vendor.
A three-point plan was developed to improve CSR timeliness and
completion has been in place since 2019. Specifically, MCPA developed
improved approaches for assuring CSRs get completed by the UCA,
scheduled joint (UCA & MCPA) meetings resulting in a revised
standard operating procedure, and wrote more targeted and active
approaches to CSRs into the RFP for the next UCA to prevent similar
issues under future procurements. The new contract with these
approaches was awarded in June 2023 and its operations will begin in
2024.
Page 6 of 11

--- Page 44 ---
Maryland Department of Health
Medical Care Programs Administration
Agency Response Form
Finding 6
MCPA did not have an established process to ensure costly recipient ventilator care claims
submitted by nursing facilities were valid, as required by State regulations.
We recommend that MCPA establish procedures to periodically validate ventilator care
claims submitted by nursing facilities, as required by State regulations, and recoup any
claim payments that are determined to be unsupported or improper (repeat).
Agency Response
Analysis Factually Accurate
Please provide
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 6 Agree Estimated Completion Date: Complete
Please provide details of MCPA agrees that ventilator audits should be conducted, and
corrective action or recoupment should occur for any claims that are unsupported. The UCA
explain disagreement. will begin conducting these audits in early to mid-2024. As a short-term
solution, the Department began conducting ventilator audits internally in
September 2023.
Upon the prior finding, MCPA wrote the ventilator audit process into the
new requirements for the UCA contract. The award for the new contract
was announced in June 2023 and is currently undergoing
implementation; operations are due to begin in early 2024.
Page 7 of 11

--- Page 45 ---
Maryland Department of Health
Medical Care Programs Administration
Agency Response Form
Finding 7
MCPA did not conduct the required audits of Medical Day Care (MDC) and Supports
Planning providers, and the related audit policy and procedures were not sufficiently
comprehensive.
We recommend that MCPA
a. audit MDC providers (repeat) and Supports Planning providers in accordance with its
policy;
b. ensure that all MDC provider claims since the previous audit are subject to testing
(repeat); and
c. enhance its MDC audit policy to establish audit scope requirements and testing
methodology, including a requirement to expand audit testing when significant
deficiencies are identified (repeat).
Agency Response
Analysis Factually Accurate
Please provide
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 7a Agree Estimated Completion Date: 12/31/24
Please provide details of MDH agrees with this finding. Unfortunately, longstanding staff attrition
corrective action or and insufficient resource capacity challenges, in addition to prioritizing
explain disagreement. program operations during the COVID-19 public health emergency
resulted in a delay in annual audits. The next steps related to specific
audits are as follows:
Supports Planning Providers - The next annual audit of the 27 Supports
Planning Agencies will commence on January 1, 2024, and will
conclude on or before December 31, 2024. MCPA will ensure that
annual audits are conducted each year thereafter in accordance with its
policy.
MDC Audits - Identical to the aforementioned challenges, the MDC
program will leverage next year’s schedule of audits to ensure each
provider is audited for compliance.
Recommendation 7b Agree Estimated Completion Date: 12/31/24
Page 8 of 11

--- Page 46 ---
Maryland Department of Health
Medical Care Programs Administration
Agency Response Form
Please provide details of Supports Planning Agency (SPA) - Review of submitted claims is
corrective action or included in the annual audit process. MCPA will ensure that claims are
explain disagreement. tested during the next audit cycle and thereafter. The audit timeframe
will be clearly documented to help prevent an overlap in claims testing
or any associated data integrity issues.
MDC - The MDC Program has updated its auditing tool to require all
auditing staff document the time period of the previous attendance audit
and resume attendance auditing from that period to ensure no time
periods are skipped or missed while auditing each provider. The standard
operating procedure (SOP) was also updated. The MDC team has
received updated training and will continue to engage in monthly audit
meetings to ensure competency and employ standardization among staff,
reinforce best practices, discuss findings, auditing progress, technical
assistance, and any other feedback from the team.
Recommendation 7c Agree Estimated Completion Date: Complete
Please provide details of Since this audit, the MDC program established an SOP that directs an
corrective action or expansion of audits (i.e., extrapolation) based on specific deficiencies
explain disagreement. (e.g., instances or trends of noncompliance with requisite attendance and
reimbursement policies). Findings, risk controls, mitigation strategies,
and best practices are discussed during audit meetings.
Finding 8
MCPA did not adequately monitor the hospital claims audit contractor and had not
collected or recovered improper claims identified by the contractor totaling $6.9 million.
We recommend that MCPA
a. adequately monitor the hospital claims audit contractor, including obtaining all
deliverables as required by the contract; and
b. pursue recovery of overpaid claims identified by the audit contractor in a timely
manner.
Agency Response
Analysis Factually Accurate
Please provide
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 8a Agree Estimated Completion Date: Complete
Page 9 of 11

--- Page 47 ---
Maryland Department of Health
Medical Care Programs Administration
Agency Response Form
Please provide details of MDH has a report that includes recommendations from the vendor for
corrective action or reducing and preventing improper payments issued on claims and
explain disagreement. establishing a criterion for identifying error prone providers for
heightened scrutiny. In addition, the Department has recovered
overpayments identified by the contractor. The Department has already
set up regular monthly meetings with the hospital audit contractor, with
one quarterly meeting to include the Office of Inspector General for
Health.
Recommendation 8b Agree Estimated Completion Date: Complete
Please provide details of Once the security incident was resolved MCPA recouped these payments
corrective action or in full.
explain disagreement.
Page 10 of 11

--- Page 48 ---
Maryland Department of Health
Medical Care Programs Administration
Agency Response Form
Information Systems Security and Control
The Office of Legislative Audits (OLA) has determined that the Information Systems Security
and Control section, including findings 9 and 10 related to “cybersecurity”, as defined by the
State Finance and Procurement Article, Section 3.5-301(b) of the Annotated Code of Maryland,
and therefore are subject to redaction from the publicly available audit report in accordance with
the State Government Article 2-1224(i). Although the specifics of the following findings,
including the analysis, related recommendations, along with MDH’s responses, have been
redacted from this report copy, MDH’s responses indicated agreement with the findings and
related recommendations.
Finding 9
Redacted cybersecurity-related finding.
Agency Response has been redacted by OLA.
Finding 10
Redacted cybersecurity-related finding.
Agency Response has been redacted by OLA.
Page 11 of 11

--- Page 49 ---
A T
UDIT EAM
Edward A. Rubenstein, CPA
Audit Manager
R. Brendan Coffey, CPA, CISA
Edwin L. Paul, CPA, CISA
Information Systems Audit Managers
David R. Fahnestock, CPA
Data Analytics Manager
James J. Podhorniak, CPA, CFE
Robert J. Smith, CPA
Senior Auditors
Eric Alexander, CPA, CISA
Michael K. Bliss
Information Systems Senior Auditors
Charles H. Hinds, IV, CPA
Data Analytics Senior Auditor
Paul A. McGrew
Andrew W. Mills
Nga T. Nguyen Simmons
Staff Auditors
Vickey K. Micah
Information Systems Staff Auditor