Title: Presentation to the Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee - Maryland Department of Health - Office of the Secretary and Other Units


Related Report Dated (10/19/2023)

Video Presentation (Maryland Department of Health - Office of the Secretary and Other Units starts at 4:20)
Date: 11/14/2023
Type: Presentations to the Legislature
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=6553bd25a1ce581d54854322
Extracted: 2025-06-19T23:09:50.798244
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Maryland Department of Health (MDH) -
Office of the Secretary and Other Units
Report Dated October 19, 2023
Presentation to Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Gregory A. Hook, CPA
Brian S. Tanen, CPA, CFE
Stephen P. Jersey, CPA, CISA
Edward A. Rubenstein, CPA
R. Brendan Coffey, CPA, CISA
Edwin L. Paul, CPA, CISA
November 14, 2023

--- Page 2 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Report Overview
 MDH is responsible for promoting the health of the public and for
strengthening partnerships between State and local governments,
the business community, and all health care providers in
Maryland.
 The audit report covers the period from February 12, 2019 to June
30, 2022. The report contains 17 findings, including 2 repeat
findings from the prior audit report.
 We determined that MDH’s accountability and compliance level
was unsatisfactory in accordance with the rating system we
established in conformity with State law. The primary factors
contributing to this rating were the number and significance of the
audit findings.
MDH – Office of the Secretary and Other Units Page 2

--- Page 3 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Key Findings
 Finding 1 – MDH did not ensure provider payments were entered
into the Medicaid Management Information System (MMIS II) and
resolved rejected claims to enable timely and complete recovery
of federal funds.
 Finding 2 – MDH did not ensure critical quarterly reconciliations
were performed, resulting in the failure to recover $973.3 million
of federal funding timely and lost investment income totaling $6.4
million.
 Finding 3 – MDH did not have procedures to ensure federal funds
requested for reimbursement of State payments were
subsequently received.
MDH – Office of the Secretary and Other Units Page 3

--- Page 4 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Key Findings (continued)
 Finding 4 – MDH did not ensure federal funds were properly
accounted for, resulting in a lack of assurance that account
balances were accurate and the inability to determine whether all
federal funds had been recovered.
 Finding 5 – MDH recorded year-end revenue entries without
verifying that the amounts were valid and collectable.
 Finding 6 – MDH used an emergency contract for unrelated
services without ensuring that the services were received and the
related payments were proper.
 Findings 8 to 12 – Information Systems Security and Control (see
confidential addendum)
MDH – Office of the Secretary and Other Units Page 4

--- Page 5 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
MDH Federal Funds Overview
 MDH’s FY 2022 federal fund expenditures
totaled $10.6 billion, of which $10.2 billion
(96 percent) were made by the Medical Care
Programs Administration (MCPA), the
FY 2022
Behavioral Health Administration’s Federal
Expenditures
Grant
Administrative Service Organization (BHA –
($ in millions)
ASO), and the Developmental Disabilities Medicaid $ 9,957
Administration (DDA). MFP 4
MCHIP 250
 Virtually all these units’ federal fund
Other 1
expenditures related to the Medical
Total $10,212
Assistance Program (Medicaid), the
Source: State accounting records
Maryland Children’s Health Insurance
Program (MCHIP), and the Money Follows
the Person Program (MFP).
MDH – Office of the Secretary and Other Units Page 5

--- Page 6 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
MDH Federal Funds Overview (Continued)
• MDH units (MCPA, BHA, and DDA) pay providers (such as physicians) for services
rendered to eligible individuals.
Pay • Units record payments in MMIS II for federal drawdown.
• MDH submits weekly reimbursement requests to the federal government based on
claims recorded in MMIS II.
• Quarterly reconciliations are performed to ensure that all payments were requested
Request
from the federal government.
• Funds received from the federal government are credited to the Medicaid clearing
account by the Office of the State Treasurer.
Receive
• MDH allocates funds from the clearing account to the related expenditure accounts.
Allocate
MDH – Office of the Secretary and Other Units Page 6

--- Page 7 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
MDH Federal Funds Overview (continued)
MDH – Office of the Secretary and Other Units Page 7

--- Page 8 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Federal Funds (Finding 1)
MDH did not have procedures to ensure MDH units properly entered
all provider payments into MMIS II and resolved any rejected claims
to enable timely and complete recovery of the funds. As a result,
certain claims were not entered into or were rejected by MMIS II, and
therefore the related federal funds were not recovered.
 Four of our most recent five DDA audit reports have noted
instances in which federal funds were not recovered because the
payments were not recorded in MMIS II. Most recently, our
October 26, 2022 report noted that $8.8 million was not recorded
in MMIS II and the funds are no longer recoverable.
 Our October 25, 2022 BHA – ASO report disclosed that BHA had
unresolved denied claims totaling approximately $106.7 million
that had not been investigated as of September 2021.
MDH – Office of the Secretary and Other Units Page 8

--- Page 9 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Federal Funds (Finding 2)
MDH did not ensure critical quarterly reconciliations were performed,
resulting in the failure to recover $973.3 million of federal funding
and lost investment income totaling $6.4 million.
 In August 2022, we noted that MDH had not conducted
reconciliations for activity during the period from October 2019 to
June 2022. These reconciliations ensure that amounts requested
from the federal government agreed to MDH’s actual expenditures
and are used to adjust subsequent reimbursement requests.
 After bringing this to MDH’s attention, MDH performed the
reconciliations and identified and recovered $973.3 million.
 We estimated the failure to recover these funds timely resulted in
lost investment income of $6.4 million.
MDH – Office of the Secretary and Other Units Page 9

--- Page 10 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Federal Funds (Finding 3)
MDH did not have procedures to ensure requests for federal fund
reimbursement were subsequently received.
 MDH did not verify the receipt of federal fund reimbursements for
the Medicaid, MCHIP, and MFP grants that collectively accounted
for 96 percent ($10.2 billion) of MDH’s $10.6 billion in federal
fund expenditures in fiscal year 2022.
 Although our testing did not identify any instances in which federal
fund reimbursement requests were not received, given the
significant amount of federal funds associated with these grants,
MDH should establish a documented procedure to ensure each
federal fund request is received.
MDH – Office of the Secretary and Other Units Page 10

--- Page 11 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Federal Funds (Finding 4)
MDH did not have procedures to ensure federal fund reimbursements
were properly allocated to the appropriate accounts and could not
determine whether all federal funds had been recovered.
 MDH allocated federal funds from the Medicaid clearing account to
the related expenditure accounts without considering the amount of
revenue available for distribution. As of June 30, 2022, the
Medicaid clearing account reflected a $1.1 billion deficit balance.
 As of June 30, 2022, federal fund revenues totaling $2.8 billion had
not been allocated from the DDA, MCHIP, and MFP subsidiary
accounts to the related expenditure accounts.
 MDH did not update its procedures to reflect changes in the DDA
federal fund accounting process. While federal funds totaling $301
million were likely allocated to non-DDA expenditure accounts (such
as Medicaid), MDH could not determine the disposition of the funds.
MDH – Office of the Secretary and Other Units Page 11

--- Page 12 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Federal Funds (Finding 4 continued)
MDH could not determine the extent to which numerous positive and
negative account balances were related. Our analysis disclosed that
33 percent of the 2022 FY-end account balances were identical to
balances in one or more prior years dating back to FY 2015.
MDH – Office of the Secretary and Other Units Page 12

--- Page 13 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Budgetary and Year-End Closing (Finding 5)
MDH used an automated script to record year-end revenue entries
without verifying the amounts recorded were valid and collectable.
 At the end of fiscal year 2022, MDH recorded 1,250 accrued
federal fund revenue entries totaling approximately $10.2 billion.
 517 entries (41 percent) related to accounts that had no
expenditure activity recorded during fiscal year 2022.
 361 of the 517 entries (70 percent) were identical to entries
made in one or more prior fiscal years dating back to 2015.
 The lack of current year expenditures and the age of these entries
raises concerns that federal reimbursement for previous State
payments may not have been requested and may no longer be
available.
MDH – Office of the Secretary and Other Units Page 13

--- Page 14 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Procurements and Disbursements (Finding 6)
MDH used an emergency contract for services unrelated to the
original procurement without sufficient documentation that the
services were received and the payments were proper.
 MDH could not justify three contract modifications that increased
the scope and cost of the contract by $62 million.
 MDH could not document that it requested, reviewed, and
approved the work the vendor performed.
 MDH did not obtain statements of work for each vendor employee
as required by the contract.
 Vendor invoices did not include documentation that would allow
MDH to verify the billings were proper.
MDH – Office of the Secretary and Other Units Page 14

--- Page 15 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Other Financial-Related Findings
Finding 7 – Procurements and Disbursements (Repeat Finding)
MDH did not always comply with State procurement regulations
when procuring goods and services via sole source and emergency
contracts and did not always publish contract solicitations and
awards as required.
Finding 13 – Accounts Receivable
MDH was eight months behind on billing for services rendered at
MDH inpatient facilities, which could total approximately $45.4
million.
MDH – Office of the Secretary and Other Units Page 15

--- Page 16 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Other Financial-Related Findings (continued)
Finding 14 & 15 – Payroll
 MDH did not ensure the propriety of biweekly payroll payments,
leave balances, and timesheets. (Repeat Finding)
 MDH did ensure that employees who were terminated or left State
service were promptly removed from payroll, resulting in improper
payments to at least 45 former employees totaling $151,000.
Finding 16 – Cash Receipts
MDH did not timely endorse and deposit collections, verify collections
were deposited, and require electronic submission of large payments.
Finding 17 – Executive Oversight
MDH did not ensure that appropriate corrective actions were
implemented to address prior findings from our Office’s fiscal
compliance audits of the other MDH units.
MDH – Office of the Secretary and Other Units Page 16

--- Page 17 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Information Systems Security and Control (Findings 8 – 12)
Redacted cybersecurity-related findings.
See confidential addendum
MDH – Office of the Secretary and Other Units Page 17

--- Page 18 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Conclusions
MDH should establish comprehensive policies and procedures to:
• ensure all federal fund expenditures are recorded, recovered, and properly
accounted for;
• ensure year-end revenue transactions are properly supported;
• ensure emergency contracts are procured in accordance with State
procurement regulations and properly monitored, and document and publish
solicitations in accordance with State procurement regulations;
• address the backlog in unbilled services and bill future services timely;
• ensure appropriate information systems security and controls are in place;
• verify adjustments to employee pay and leave balances and remove terminated
employees from payroll timely;
• establish controls over cash receipts; and
• ensure that corrective actions are implemented to address OLA report findings
for other MDH units.
MDH – Office of the Secretary and Other Units Page 18