Title: Presentation to the Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee - Maryland Transportation Authority - Data Analysis of Electronic Tolling and Customer Service Processes


Related Report Dated (3/22/2023)

Video Presentation (Maryland Transportation Authority - Data Analysis of Electronic Tolling and Customer Service Processes starts at 2:22)
Date: 12/13/2023
Type: Presentations to the Legislature
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=657a28f29a1f0fb1a51e682d
Extracted: 2025-06-19T23:10:34.370045
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Maryland Transportation Authority (MDTA)
Data Analysis of Electronic Tolling and
Customer Service Processes
Report Dated March 22, 2023
Presentation to Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Gregory A. Hook, CPA
Matthew L. Streett, CPA
David R. Fahnestock, CPA
Ian T. Pontius
December 13, 2023

--- Page 2 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Report Overview
 MDTA is responsible for managing Maryland’s electronic tolling system and
customer service processes for the State’s nine toll collection facilities, which
had toll collections of $702.6 million in fiscal year 2022.
 Our Special Review was initiated based on various allegations and concerns
we received through our fraud, waste, and abuse hotline and from
constituent concerns conveyed to us by several members of the Maryland
General Assembly.
 Our Special Review covers the period from April 13, 2021 to February 13,
2022. Our analysis included over 430 million detailed transactions,
representing over 115 million unique tolling transactions related to over 5
million customers.
MDTA – Data Analysis of Electronic Tolling and Customer Service Processes
Page 2

--- Page 3 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Objectives and Conclusions
 Objective 1 – To determine if MDTA improperly charged tolls to Thomas J.
Hatem Memorial (Hatem) Bridge discount plan customers.
 Our analysis of Hatem Bridge tolls identified approximately $435,000 in
potentially improper toll charges related to 10,474 Hatem discount plan
customers that warrant further follow-up by MDTA.
 Objective 2 – To determine if MDTA improperly charged customers for the
same toll twice.
 Our analysis for all MDTA toll facilities identified 82,847 customers that
were potentially charged more than once for a single trip through a toll
facility. The toll charges (including both potential duplicate tolls and
correct tolls) totaled approximately $645,000.
MDTA – Data Analysis of Electronic Tolling and Customer Service Processes
Page 3

--- Page 4 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Electronic Toll Collection Process
 In February 2018, the Board of Public Works approved two separate contracts
totaling $359.4 million to replace MDTA’s prior contractor that provided both the
toll collection system and the customer service center.
 MDTA’s transition to the new toll collection system started in May 2019 and
MDTA made a final transition to the new tolling system and customer service
center in April 2021.
• Collects tolling information including reading transponders, capturing images
Tolling of the vehicle license plates.
Contractor • Prepares tolls from the tolling information, performs manual review of issues
with images or incomplete tolls.
• Transfers prepared tolls to the Customer Service Contractor.
• Posts tolls to customer accounts after identifying the correct customer
Customer
and determining the toll amount, including applying customer discount plans.
Service
• Handles collection of customer payments and applying payments to accounts.
Contractor
• Provides customer service, including addressing customer complaints
and determining if tolls should be dismissed.
MDTA – Data Analysis of Electronic Tolling and Customer Service Processes
Page 4

--- Page 5 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Objective 1 Analysis
Background:
 MDTA provides two discount plans for the Hatem Bridge under which
customers pay $20 per year for unlimited trips over the Hatem Bridge for
two-axle vehicles.
 If the customer transponder associated with the plan is properly mounted
in the vehicle and read by the tolling equipment, no toll will be charged.
 Therefore, if a Hatem Bridge discount plan customer is charged a toll, it
represents a problem with either the tolling equipment (MDTA error), the
customer not having the transponder properly mounted in the vehicle
and/or maintaining a positive account balance (customer error), or a
combination of both.
MDTA – Data Analysis of Electronic Tolling and Customer Service Processes
Page 5

--- Page 6 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Objective 1 Analysis (continued)
Analysis Objective: To identify Hatem Bridge discount plan customers with
potentially improper transactions, we filtered the Hatem Bridge toll transactions
that met all four of the following criteria:
 The customer had an active Hatem Bridge discount plan at the time of the
toll.
 The vehicle was two-axle based on the tolling data.
 The same vehicle, based on the license plate, received the discount on
other tolls at the Hatem Bridge on the same customer account.
 The discount plan customer did not receive the expected zero dollar toll
transaction when traveling the Hatem Bridge, as would be the case if
MDTA properly applied the discount plan.
MDTA – Data Analysis of Electronic Tolling and Customer Service Processes
Page 6

--- Page 7 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Objective 1 Analysis Results
 Our analysis of the Hatem Bridge tolling data (April 13, 2021 through January
30, 2022), identified about 68,000 potentially improper tolls totaling
$545,000 related to 11,488 discount plan customers.
 No MDTA proactive analysis to
identify if Hatem Bridge discount
plan customers were erroneously
charged tolls.
 MDTA had not investigated or
dismissed potentially improper tolls
totaling $435,000 related to
10,474 customers.
 The remaining $110,000 in tolls
were previously dismissed based
on customer-initiated disputes.
MDTA – Data Analysis of Electronic Tolling and Customer Service Processes
Page 7

--- Page 8 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Objective 1 Analysis Results (continued)
 Our analysis identified a
significant spike in tolls
charged to Hatem Bridge
discount plan customers
during the three-week period
from December 24, 2020 to
January 15, 2021.
 During this period, 4,465 of
the 11,488 customers were
charged 7,813 tolls totaling
$62,595, for which MDTA had
only dismissed $12,552 based
on prior customer-initiated
disputes.
MDTA – Data Analysis of Electronic Tolling and Customer Service Processes
Page 8

--- Page 9 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Objective 1 Analysis Test Examples
Testing Methodology:
As part of our analysis, we tested 37 of the approximately 68,000 potentially
improper tolls. This test included identifying if the customer had a transponder
visible and properly mounted based on tolling images.
 No Visible Transponder  Transponder Properly Mounted
MDTA – Data Analysis of Electronic Tolling and Customer Service Processes
Page 9

--- Page 10 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Objective 1 Tolling Image Review Results
MDTA – Data Analysis of Electronic Tolling and Customer Service Processes
Page 10

--- Page 11 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Objective 2 Analysis
Analysis Objective:
To determine if MDTA improperly charged customers for the same toll twice, our
analysis was designed as follows:
 Identified scenarios based on consideration of the complaints received
through our fraud, waste, and abuse hotline, and review of the data.
 Developed specific criteria to apply for each scenario to identify potential
duplicate tolls, and performed testing of the potential duplicate toll groups
and reviewed detailed account and related information for each toll tested in
MDTA’s source systems.
• Scenario A: The customer was charged twice based on the same
information for the toll.
• Scenario B: The customer was charged twice based on MDTA misapplying a
separate vehicle’s toll transaction to the customer.
• Scenario C: The customer was charged twice based on MDTA overlapping
toll for a single trip in one direction on the Intercounty Connector (ICC).
MDTA – Data Analysis of Electronic Tolling and Customer Service Processes
Page 11

--- Page 12 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Objective 2 Analysis Results
 Based on our analysis, we identified approximately $645,000 in tolls
comprised of 135,495 transaction groupings (for example, one correct
transaction and one apparently incorrect transaction for the same customer
at a facility) with potential duplicate tolls related to 82,847 customers across
all MDTA tolling facilities.
 Our random test of
65 of these
customers disclosed
62 of the customers
(95 percent) were
improperly charged
more than once for a
single trip through a
toll facility.
MDTA – Data Analysis of Electronic Tolling and Customer Service Processes
Page 12

--- Page 13 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Objective 2 Analysis Examples
Scenario A Example: The customer was charged twice based on the same
information for the toll (vehicle, time of day, and toll facility).
MDTA – Data Analysis of Electronic Tolling and Customer Service Processes
Page 13

--- Page 14 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Objective 2 Analysis Examples (continued)
Scenario B Example: The customer was charged twice based on MDTA
misapplying a separate vehicle’s toll transaction to the customer.
MDTA – Data Analysis of Electronic Tolling and Customer Service Processes
Page 14

--- Page 15 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Objective 2 Analysis Examples (continued)
Scenario C Example: The customer was charged twice based on MDTA
overlapping toll for a single trip in one direction on the ICC.
MDTA – Data Analysis of Electronic Tolling and Customer Service Processes
Page 15

--- Page 16 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Conclusion
 We believe MDTA should proactively perform similar data analysis periodically
to ensure the continued accuracy of its systems and processes and the
appropriateness of customer toll charges.
 Corrective actions taken by MDTA regarding customer tolling accuracy will be
subject to review during our next fiscal compliance audit of MDTA scheduled to
begin in 2024.
 We note that our analysis showed a marked improvement in timeliness of
transaction posting from an average of 279 days pre-April 2021 to a 20-day
average after that date. Untimely transaction posting had been a source of
frustration expressed by the motoring public when we initiated our review.
MDTA – Data Analysis of Electronic Tolling and Customer Service Processes
Page 16