Title: Presentation to the Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee - Maryland Department of Health - Medical Care Programs Administration


Related Report Dated (11/2/2023)

Video Presentation (Maryland Department of Health - Medical Care Programs Administration starts at 1:43)
Date: 12/13/2023
Type: Presentations to the Legislature
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=657a28f19a1f0fb1a51e682c
Extracted: 2025-06-19T23:10:42.845274
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Maryland Department of Health (MDH) -
Medical Care Programs Administration (MCPA)
Report Dated November 2, 2023
Presentation to Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Gregory A. Hook, CPA
Brian S. Tanen, CPA, CFE
Edward A. Rubenstein, CPA
Robert J. Smith, CPA
December 13, 2023

--- Page 2 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Report Overview
 MCPA administers the Medical Assistance Program (Medicaid),
which provides low-income Maryland residents with access to a
broad range of health care benefits that are financed by State
and federal funds.
 The audit report covers the period from August 1, 2018 to
March 31, 2022. The report contains 10 findings, including 6
non-cybersecurity-related repeat findings (Findings 1, 2, 4, 5, 6,
and 7) from the prior audit report.
 OLA determined that MCPA’s accountability and compliance
level was unsatisfactory, in accordance with the rating system
OLA established in conformity with State law. The primary
factors contributing to this rating were the significance of the
audit findings and the number of repeat findings.
MDH – Medical Care Programs Administration Page 2

--- Page 3 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Report Overview (continued)
 This is the primary MCPA audit, accounting for $4.3 billion in
expenditures in FY 2022. Separate audits are conducted of the
Managed Care Program, Behavioral Health Administration’s
Administrative Services Organization, and the Maryland
Pharmacy Program.
 MCPA’s expenditures have mirrored the growth in Medicaid
enrollment since FY 2015.
MDH – Medical Care Programs Administration Page 3

--- Page 4 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Key Findings
 Finding 1 – MCPA did not ensure that all referrals of potential
third-party health insurance were investigated and recorded in its
claims information system, MMIS II, which could result in MCPA
improperly paying claims that should have been paid by a third
party.
 Finding 2 - MCPA did not have effective processes to identify,
prevent, and recover questionable Medicaid payments, including
$7.1 million in payments for incarcerated and deceased
recipients.
 Finding 4 - MCPA did not ensure that all Community First Choice
(CFC) program recipients received personal services in
accordance with their plans of service.
MDH – Medical Care Programs Administration Page 4

--- Page 5 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Key Findings (continued)
 Finding 5 – MCPA did not monitor the utilization control agent
contractor to ensure continued stay reviews of Medicaid
recipients in nursing facilities were performed timely.
 Finding 8 – MCPA did not adequately monitor the hospital claims
audit contractor and had not collected or recovered improper
claims identified by the contractor totaling $6.9 million.
 Findings 9 and 10 - Information Systems Security and Control (see
confidential addendum)
MDH – Medical Care Programs Administration Page 5

--- Page 6 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Third-Party Liability (Finding 1) Repeat Finding
MCPA did not ensure that all referrals of potential third-party liability
health insurance information were investigated and recorded in
MMIS II. As a result, certain claims were not reviewed to determine
if any portion should have been paid by a third party.
 Only 180,000 (12 percent) of the 1.5 million referrals received
from MCPA’s third-party liability vendor between January 2021
and June 2022 were recorded in MMIS II. For example, the
January 2022 referrals for 84,672 recipients were not recorded
and claims paid entirely by MCPA for these recipients between
February and December 2022 totaled $103.1 million.
 MCPA did not document its investigation of MCO referrals. Our test
of 135 MCO referrals received during two months of fiscal year
2022 disclosed that 86 referrals had not been investigated and
recorded in MMIS II as of November 2022.
MDH – Medical Care Programs Administration Page 6

--- Page 7 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Questionable Activity (Finding 2) Repeat Finding
MCPA did not have effective processes to identify, prevent, and
recover questionable Medicaid payments.
 Recipients with missing social security numbers were not referred
to the Department of Human Services (DHS) and Local Health
Departments (LHDs) for investigation. In addition, MCPA did not
review DHS and LHD investigations of recipients who were also
receiving Medicaid benefits in other states.
 We identified claims totaling $3.5 million paid by MCPA between
FYs 2019-2022 for 1,954 recipients who were incarcerated at the
time of service.
 MCPA could not document its efforts to remove deceased
individuals from Medicaid and did not investigate payments after
the recipient’s death. We identified claims totaling $3.6 million
with dates of service that were after the recipient’s date of death.
MDH – Medical Care Programs Administration Page 7

--- Page 8 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Program Oversight – CFC (Finding 4) Repeat Finding
MCPA did not ensure that all Community First Choice (CFC) program
recipients received services in accordance with their plans of
service.
 CFC recipients receive assistance with daily living activities from
personal assistance providers in accordance with a plan of
service. LHDs contract with nurse monitors to evaluate the quality
of personal assistance services provided to CFC recipients.
 As of November 2022, 1,873 (19 percent) of the 10,082
recipients receiving personal assistance services were more than
60 days overdue for a nurse monitoring visit, including 901
recipients who were more than one year overdue.
 Baltimore City LHD was responsible for 821 of the 901 one-year
overdue recipients.
MDH – Medical Care Programs Administration Page 8

--- Page 9 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Program Oversight – Nursing Facilities (Finding 5) Repeat Finding
MCPA did not monitor the utilization control agent (UCA) contractor
to ensure continued stay reviews (CSRs) of Medicaid recipients
receiving services from nursing facilities were performed timely.
 CSRs ensure that recipients required the level of care provided by
the nursing facilities. The UCA was required to perform quarterly
CSRs of recipients during their first year in a nursing facility and
annually thereafter.
 Our analysis of 13,930 recipients who should have received at
least one CSR during CY 2021 disclosed that 2,387 recipients (17
percent) had not received a CSR anytime during that year. During
calendar year 2021, MCPA payments to nursing facilities for these
2,387 recipients totaled $165.2 million.
MDH – Medical Care Programs Administration Page 9

--- Page 10 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Program Oversight – Hospital Claims Audits (Finding 8)
MCPA did not adequately monitor the hospital claims audit
contractor and had not collected or recovered improper claims
identified by the contractor.
 MCPA uses a contractor to audit hospital claims to ensure that the
services provided to Maryland Medicaid recipients were necessary
and not excessive.
 MCPA did not obtain certain deliverables required by the contract,
including a plan detailing steps MCPA should take to reduce the
occurrence of future improper hospital claims payments.
 As of August 2022, MCPA had not pursued recovery of improper
payments totaling $6.9 million that were reported by the
contractor between 2 months to 2 years prior.
MDH – Medical Care Programs Administration Page 10

--- Page 11 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Other Financial-Related Findings
Finding 3 – Recipient Eligibility
MCPA did not ensure that changes to recipient Medicaid eligibility
information were processed timely and accurately.
Finding 6 – Program Oversight (Repeat Finding)
MCPA did not have an established process to ensure costly recipient
ventilator care claims submitted by nursing facilities were valid.
Finding 7 – Program Oversight (Repeat Finding)
MCPA did not conduct the required audits of Medical Day Care and
Supports Planning providers, and the related audit policy and
procedures were not sufficiently comprehensive.
MDH – Medical Care Programs Administration Page 11

--- Page 12 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Information Systems Security and Control (Findings 9 and 10)
Redacted cybersecurity-related findings.
See confidential addendum.
MDH – Medical Care Programs Administration Page 12

--- Page 13 ---
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Conclusions
MCPA should:
• ensure that third-party insurance information is timely
investigated and recorded in MMIS II;
• establish effective processes to identify, prevent, and recover
questionable Medicaid payments;
• update recipient eligibility information timely and accurately;
• ensure CFC recipients are monitored;
• ensure that CSRs are performed timely;
• periodically validate ventilator care claims;
• audit Medical Day Care and Supports Planning providers; and
• monitor the hospital claims audit contractor and pursue recovery
of identified overpayments in a timely manner.
MDH – Medical Care Programs Administration Page 13